CATA-BAPTISM: OR New Baptism, waxing old, and ready to vanish away.

In Two Parts.

The former Contains LVIII. CONSIDERATIONS, (With their respective Proofs, and
Consectaries) Pregnant for the healing of the common scruples touching the
subject of Baptism, and manner of Baptizing.

The latter, contains an Answer to a Discourse against Infant Baptism, published
not long since by W. A. under the Title of, Some Baptismall Abuses Briefly
Discovered, etc.

In both, sundry things, not formerly insisted on, are Discovered and Discussed.

By J. G. a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

-- And were all Baptized into Moses, etc. 1 Cor. 10. 2. I indeed Baptize you
with water Unto Repentance. Mat. 3 11. Baptismus est lavacrum regenerationis,
sed non ita, ut regenerati tantum illo debeant obsignari, sed etiam
Regenerandi. Musc. in Mat. 22. 41. 42. Baptizantur Infantes in futuram
poenitentiam and fidem. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 16.. 20. London, Printed for H
Cripps, and L. Lloyd, and are to be sold at their shops near the Castle in
Cornhil, and in Popes-head-Alley. 1655.

To the Sons and Daughters of God walking in the Way, best known by the Name of
Ana-Baptism; growth in Grace, and the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord.
BELOVED, I speak it as in the. 1.
sight of God: I am in a great strait how to temper my speech for your best
advantage, in this my solemn* address unto you. Very loath I am on the one hand
to deal so unfaithfully or un-Christianly with you, as, upon such an
opportunity, not to speak the truth unto you in such things, wherein I either
certainly know, or else have weighty grounds to judge, that it most nearly
concerns you to know and to consider it: and on the other hand, very unwilling
I am also to speak any thing, for which, either weakness, or uncharitableness
it self, shall be able to judge me your enemy. I well know it becomes me not to
say of you, as Nabal'^ servant spoke of his Master; He is so wicked that a man
cannot speak to him. 1 Samuel 25. 17.
[meaning, without offending, or provoking him] yet my Experience importunes me
to speak this, that some of you, yea some of those, whom I have cause to judge
the strongest amongst you, are so weak, that words as innocent, as inoffensive,
as the greatest Christian tenderness, or caution, can lightly indite, have
notwithstanding, been a burden and offense unto them. I could readily instance
in sundry particulars, as well of words, phrases, and passages of this harmless
import, as of persons among you, who nevertheless have turned their innocence
into guilt, and made themselves agrieved at them; but that I fear lest this
also should be an offense unto you.

I call God for a record upon my soul, that I have. 2.
not the least touch of any malignancie or frowardness of spirit against any of
you, but can freely serve the meanest of you in love, yea, and stoop to loose
the latcher of his shoe, who is the most jealous amongst you of the candor and
simplicity of my heart toward you. Yea I have upon occasion, and this more
than once, given a very passeable account of my unpartiall respects unto all of
your way and practice worthy the repute of godliness, by girding my self, and
ministering with all my might to some particulars of you. But I know how hard a
thing it is not to be offended with him, that shall touch the Apple of a man's
eye, or that shall attempt to change the glory and height of his confidence
into the shame of guilt and error. And the truth is, that you have much
obstructed the way of your return, and regainment unto the Truth, by an
importune and undue magnifying of your error. If you could have been content,
in estimating your new Baptism, and the want or non-practise of it in others,
to contain you selves within those bounds of Reason and Truth, which the Holy
Ghost prescrib's in a like (or rather indeed in a far better) case, saying,
That Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping
the Commandments of God; 1 Cor. 7. 19.
and again, In Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith, which works by Love, Gal. 5. 6.
and yet again, If the circumcision keep the righteousness of the Law, his
un-circumcision shall be counted for circumcision; Romans 2. 26. See these
passages argued and opened. Water-Dipping, p. 78. 79. 80. etc.
If, I say, you could look upon your Baptism as availing you nothing, without
Faith working by Love, and keeping the Commandments of God; and again, upon the
want of your Baptism, as no ways prejudicial unto those, who under another
Baptism believe unfeignedly in Jesus Christ, and walk holily and humbly with
their God, this would be an effectual door of hope opened unto me, that you
were yet within call, and might be reduced and brought back again in your
judgments unto the truth (as some of the best of those, who through humain
frailty, and immaturity of consideration, had embraced your way, from time to
time have done.)

What a man moderately or soberly valueth, may. 3.
be purchased of him at a reasonable rate. But whilst God's Nothing (yea that
which is less then that Nothing of his we now speak of) is your, All things;
whilst you judge your tything of mint, anise, and cummin (or rather indeed of
nettles, thistles, and unprofitable weeds) to be the practice of mercy and
judgment, and the weighty things of the Law, your reconcilement with the
Truth, though advancing in the front of my desires, yet keeps in the rear of my
expectations. For when a man prizeth any thing he possesses, at an
unreasonable rate, he is so much the more like to keep possession of it still;
unless (happily) the thief digs through the house, and violently takes it away.
Some of your Churches esteem all others no better then Heathen and Publicans,
who refuse to cast in their lot with them in their venturous practice of new
Baptism Ad forum f^cto concurcu, clamorem tollunt, and omnes non baptizatos
jubent interfici* tanquam paganos, and impios. Joh. Sleidan. de Anabaptistis
Comment. lib. 10.
, refusing all Christian communion with them, though otherwise they be the
glory of Christ, and of the Gospel, when as many of themselves are the shame
and reproach of both. And if my intelligence fails me not, other of your
Churches are lifting up their hearts to a like zealous exaltation of your way,
as by proscribing or evacuating all the Faith, Love, Zeal, Holiness, Meekness,
Humility, Wisdom, and Knowledge, shining in the Christian world, which shall
not approve themselves unto you, by falling down before the golden image which
you have set up.

But in this your humor of making such sacred 4.
treasure of your new Baptism, you declare your selves to be the true heirs and
successors of those in all ages, who have unduly, and without cause, broken the
bands of Unity, Love, and Peace, wherein they had sometimes been bound up in the
same bundle of Christianity with other Churches, to walk in some by-way of
particular choice by themselves, to the offense, grief, and reproach of those
Churches from which they rent themselves, and renounced Communion with, upon
such an account. It has always been the manner of persons of that character,
to magnify above measure that opinion, or practice, of what slender
consequence, nay of what evil consequence soever it was, wherein they dissented
from, and for the non-profession, or non-practise whereof, they rejected the
communion of other Churches. The History of the Church since the Apostles days
affords us instances without number of that import we speak of: some of these
are presented to the Readers consideration in the ensuing discourse page 8, 9,
10.
. By these instances, and many more of like signification, which might readily
have been added to them, it clearly appears, that when men make any defection,
or rent, from the main body of sound Christians, in any thing, whether opinion,
or practice, they are strongly tempted by the spirit of this separation, to
speak, how extravagantly or causlesly soever, glorious things of that, wherein
they differ (be it opinion or practice) lest otherwise their departure from the
household of Faith, should seem causless, and (so) highly censurable. And that
men of your judgment and practice have not been behind the Patrons of the
Errors specified in the said page and section of the present Discourse, in
crying Hosanna in the highest to your way, appears sufficiently from the best
records that are extant, of those times, wherein this way first got footing in
the Europoean parts of the Christian world. John Sleidan in his historical
Commentaries, amongst many other sad relations of your Predecessors, reports of
one, who ran up and down the City of Munster, as if he had been inspired from
God, crying out, Repent, and be rebaptized; if ye will not, the wrath of God
will presently overwhelm you. Hereupon the common sort of people began to make
a tumult: and whosoever was rebaptized, clamoured out the same things which
the other did, and after the same manner. Many, fearing the wrath of God, which
these men so loudly boasted [would fall upon all those that would not be
re-baptized] being through their simplicity circumvented (men otherwise not
evil) did as they would have them [and were re-baptized] some also, that they
might keep their estates. For the Anabaptists, having first contumeliously
handled their adversaries, threw them out of possession of their estates, etc.
Ex ipsis quidam velut afflatus numine, per Vrbem discurrit, and poenitentiam
(inquit) agite, and rebaptizamini: sin minus, jam ira Dei vos obru^t. Hinc
coeptum est vulgo tumultuari: and quicunque rebaptizarentur, eadem, quae ille,
codemque modo declamabant. Multi, quod iram Dei metuerent, quam isti tantopere
jactabant, simplicitate circumventi, homines alioqui non mali, iis morem
gerebant: alii etiam, quo suas fortunas conservarent: adversarios enim
Anabaptistae male mulctatos, possessionibus dejiciebant. Joh. Sleid. C^m. l. 10
an. 1535.
And there are at this day amongst us not a few of your judgment and way, who
speak not much short of these Munster-Anabaptists, concerning the high
necessity of your way of baptizing. This passage extant p. 18. of the Discourse
examined in the ensuing Treatise, [ That both Repentance, and the declaration
of it by Baptism He means only that kind of Baptism which himself owneth:
otherwise the passage relates little to his purpose.
, is required on man's part, to interess him in remission of sins, and
sanctification of the Spirit, the things covenanted or promised on Gods part,
is too evident to be denied by any, but those that will not see, from Acts 2.
38, 39.] This passage (I say, which has several other confederate with it in
the Discourse) is of the same inspiration with the Munster-Divinity lately
recited, exposing all those to the eternal wrath of God, who shall not be
baptized, secundum modum Authoris, after the manner of the Authors own
Baptism. And if your Scribes and Wisemen speak thus gloriously of your way,
can we think that your vulgar proselytes are beneath them in their thoughts
about it? But I look upon these high thoughts which you take unto your selves,
as also those great words, wherein you express your selves unto others,
concerning your way, like the men of Ephesus concerning their Diana, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians; not as arguments or grounds of any regular or rational
conviction upon your judgments and consciences, that there is any such either
weight or worth in your way; but rather as studied and strained Apologies, to
excuse your selves, as well unto your selves, and your own consciences, as unto
others, for your otherwise inexcusable separation, and offense hereby given
unto the Churches of Christ.

But what, or how high soever, or how occasioned 5.
soever, your thoughts are concerning your Baptism, I trust you retain so much
savor of that anointing with the spirit of wisdom and meekness, which you
received under that Baptism (for so we judge of it, and as yet are not
apprehensive of any sufficient ground to judge otherwise) wherewith you were
baptized after the manner practiced in other Churches, as not to stumble at
that stone which the Apostle has faithfully endeavored to remove out of your
way, by demanding thus of the Galathians, Am I therefore become your enemy,
because I tell you the truth? Gal. 4. 16.
Doubtless this Apostle did not bewray the least touch or tincture of any
enmity, either against the Church of the Philippians, or against the persons
themselves of whom he spoke, when he said; Many there are, of whom I have told
you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are enemies of the cross of
Christ, etc. Phil. 3. 18.


And my hope is, at least concerning you whom I style the sons and daughters of
God, that what I shall out of an unfainedly compassionate soul toward you,
with truth speak unto you, whether relating to your selves, or others of your
judgment and way, only in order to your spiritual good, shall not be wrested
or drawn aside by you to any sinister or hard Interpretation, as if I were a
man, who rather sought your discredit and disparagement in the world, then your
edification in the truth. I well understand that the dear interest of my
comfort and peace stands, not in the pulling down, but in the building up the
comforts and peace of other men. Nor have I any Tower of Name or Reputation to
build for my self in the world, that I should stand in need of the ruins, or
demolished stones, either of yours, or any other men's, to advance my building.
As I have none, so neither do I seek or desire any other honor, then that
which comes from God only. I have given sufficient hostages unto the world,
that I shall never war upon it, or be troublesome unto it, for neglecting me,
or laying my honor in the dust. He, who (it seems) believes that I was
tempted into a way of Schism, by men's intemperate zeal against my Treatise of
Justification, is a stranger unto me, and thinks accordingly. But that which
he calls Schism, is schism only so called; unless to separate from
iniquity, be schism. But however, the most intemperate zeal of men against me,
Person, Name, or Books, is a temptation of a very faint influence upon me to
turn me out of any way of Truth, yea, or to make me their enemy. Only when the
Truth is offended, I confess I burn; and in case I find any strength in my hand
to redress the injury done to it, I have no rest in my spirit until I have
attempted the Vindication. By Truth, I do not mean mine own opinion (as you
seem frequently to understand the word, in reference unto yours) for as for
that which is no more then so, I shall neither trouble my self much, nor any
other man at al, about it. But by Truth I mean, such a doctrine or notion, one
or more, which I certainly know that I am able to demonstrate either from the
Scriptures, or from clear principles and grounds in Reason, or both, to be
agreeable to the mind of God. And of this sort is the Doctrine concerning the
subject of Baptism, and the mode of the administration thereof, avouched in
the Aphorisms, and vindicated in the Answer ensuing, against the most plausible
Arguments (I believe) that have yet appeared on your side.

Some particulars there are, relating to your judgment. 6.
and practice about Baptism, which, as you desire to be judged loyal and
faithful unto Jesus Christ, true to the dear interest of your own comfort and
peace, friends to the comforts and peace of the Churches of Christ throughout
the world, I earnestly desire you will please to take into your closest and
most Christian consideration. As,

1. Whether, in your rejecting all children from the Baptism of Christ, you do
not forsake the ducture and guidance, as well of the fair and goodly stream of
religious and learned Antiquity, as of the main current of the signal
abilities, gifts, parts, judgment, piety, zeal, practice of modern times, to
turn into the by-notions, conceits, and ways of men, who are, and still have
been, children in understanding, (at least comparatively) inexpert in the word
of righteousness, through the weakness of their sight not able to see things
afar off, or to discern or discover the mind of Christ, if it be but
spiritually expressed; I mean, in such phrase or words, wherein the holy Ghost
delights, and not put into terms and words of their prescription, and such as
they judge meet it should have been, had he intended to convey it unto men by
the Scriptures? Or whether any one man, of any considerable note, or name, for
might in the Scriptures, in all the golden Regiment of Reformed Divines, or
amongst persons of any other capacity, since the Reformation, has given the
right hand of fellowship unto you in the way of your judgment (such only
excepted, who upon second and better thoughts withdrew it again from you) yea
or has so much as at unawares, or in any traverse or debate of any other
subject in Christian Religion, asserted any thing, or let fall a word, in
countenance of that your judgment, of which I speak? Yea, whether they have
not (generally) upon occasion, most solemnly and seriously declared against
your opinion and practice, showing and proving the inconveniences, and evil
consequences of them; And whether, the affirmative in all their demands
supposed, it does not plainly argue, 1. That your opinion about Baptism, is of
a very ignoble and obscure race and parentage. 2. That it carries nothing at
all in it, stands upon no principles or grounds any ways necessary or useful,
either for the proof, illustration, or clearing of any Doctrine in Christian
Religion?

2. Whether Errors and Heresies have not their 7.
certain seasons of growth and infection, as wherein they are with greater
diligence and industry dispersed, and more readily learned and drunk in by the
generality of people; even as some hurtful Plants See Patrimony of Christian
Children, by M. Robert Clever, with the joint consent of M. John Dod ( Printed
an. 1624.) in the Preface to the Reader.
have their set months for springing up, budding, blooming, seeding, whereas
before they lay hid in the earth, and afterward have their stalks dried up and
withered? Or whether men's minds are not in this case subject to be seduced, as
their bodies are to be infected with contagious maladies, some years, and in
some places, the small Pox raging, in others, the Pestilence, sometimes one
disease being general, sometimes another? And whether the errors and heresies of
the Nicholaitans, of Cerinthus, Manes, Macedonius, Arrius, Eutyches, and others
both of former and of later times, have not prevailed (respectively) in those
times and ages, for which the righteous Providence of God judged them meet
trials and scourges for his Churches? And further, whether, as once the
Christian world, was on a sudden, and to its own admiration, under a deluge of
Arrianisme, Miratus est Orbis se factum Arrianum.
which notwithstanding was, through the gracious Providence of God, not long
after dried up again; so it be not extremely probable, that the face of these
parts of the Christian world, at present overspread and covered with a
Land-flood of Anabaptisme, to the wonderment, not only of intelligent and
considering men, but (I suppose) of the persons themselves also led aside with
the error, will, notwithstanding the great prevailing of these unwholesome
waters hitherto, through the merciful Providence of God toward his Churches
and Servants in this Nation, be discharged of them, and that he will cause them
to return and fall back again into that Mare Mortuum, or lake from whence they,
and all other waters of like danger and annoyance with them, issue forth into
the world.

3. Whether the generality, or far greater part of 8.
those, who take upon them to be guides and teachers in your Congregations, and
Assemblies, be not utterly incompetent and unmeet for such an undertaking, as
being deplorably ignorant of the mystery of Christ, not able to divide the
word aright, nor to wield and manage the Scriptures, especially where the deep
things of God are treasured up, but with unspeakable detriment and loss to the
Faith and Holiness, and consequently to the solid peace and comfort, of those
who depend upon them.

4. Whether the Doctrines, or at least the greatest part of the Doctrines, that
are handled and taught in your Congregations, be not raised upon mistaken
senses, and perverted meanings of the Scriptures, unto which they pretend; yea,
and managed upon weak, irrelative, and impertinent grounds, and either wholly
mis-applyed, or else so weakly and loosely applied, that they leave no weighty,
no effectual or lively impression of their truth, or import, upon the spirits
and consciences of the hearers?

5. Whether, the now-named deficiences, with 9.
several other disorders too frequent amongst you, considered, there be any
great presence of Jesus Christ at any time in your holy Assemblies, or such as
is frequently manifest in the assemblies of other Churches, or whether you have
any countenance from heaven, either in gifts, or graces, comparable to other
Churches of the Saints? And whether the principal, if not the only cement and
band, that keeps and holds your Churches and Congregations together, be not the
simple conceit that you are, by means of your new Baptism, gotten nearer to
God, and deeper in his favor then other men, how holy or worthy soever
otherwise above your selves?

6. Whether the bulk and main body of persons, whether men, or women (for I
hope better things of some of you, and which accompany Christian sobriety, and
true mortification) but whether the generality or far greater part of persons
of your judgment and practice, in the Nation, be not so far from that
Christian sweetness, humility, and meekness of spirit which becomes those, who
profess themselves baptized into the death of Christ, and buried with him in
Baptism, toward all men, that they scarce retain the moral principles of
common Civility; but are heady, rash, fierce, despisers of others (yea of good
men) self-conceited, arrogant, quarrelsome, clamorous, captious, vain boasters,
unjust defamers of men dissenting in judgment from them, still upon all
disputes between men of their judgment, and others, about Baptism, how weakly
soever their cause has been pleaded by her Patrons, and how potently and
manifestly soever overthrown by her Adversaries, yet ringing the great Bell of
Ephesus for joy of the victory, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Great is the
Doctrine of Ana-baptisme and prevails; Cumque passim isti [Anabaptistae] de
victoria ab Oecolampadio reportata gloriarentur, edidit ille Colloquii cum
Anabaptistis habiti acta. Scultet. Annal. Dec. 1. An. 1625.

Vt primum Constantiam venit [Balthasar Anabaptista] apud ministros verbi sic
nos calumniatus est, victoriamque suam de Catabaptismo jactavit, ut nesciam an
nillos in odium nostri traxerit. Ibid.

In disputatione autem supra modum erant vehementes, parati mori potius quam
cedere.

Balthazar quidam Anabaptista, literis ad Senatum. Tigurinensem pollicetur se
Zuinglium suis Scripturis superaturum de Baptismo. Ibid.


Anabaptisme (it seems) being more hardy, then God supposed the King of Tire
would be ( Ezekiel. 28. 9.) and daring to say in the hands of him that slays
her, I am God, I am a divine Truth?

7. Whether any person, man or woman, who 10.
have turned Proselyte to your way, has ever given, or at this day can give,
any competent satisfaction unto men, by any sensible growth in grace, in
knowledge, in faith, in love, in humility, in fruitfulness, etc. that their
Proselytism in this kind has added so much as one cubit, nay so much as one
hairs breadth, to their spiritual stature, or that their souls have prospered to
any degree, by means of their new Baptism? Nay,

8. Whether a very great number (at least) of those, who have done homage to
your way, and have bowed down their judgments and consciences unto it, have
not been spiritual losers by the change, sensibly declining and decaying in
their graces, in those Christian and worthy principles and dispositions, which
at first they brought with them unto your way, waxing much worse after their
new Baptizing, then they were before; as if their new Baptism had not been
into Christ, or into his death, but rather into old Adam, and into his life?
And whether you your selves, in several of your Congregations, are not
experimentally sensible of such a frequent declining and putrefying of your
Members, as this, casting out, and cutting off, great numbers of them from day
to day? I was somewhat more particularly re-minded to put you upon consideration
of these two particulars (last mentioned) by occasion of some of my
acquaintance formerly, who since have stumbled in the dark into your way. These
(I confess) are not many: only this I have observed concerning them (and must
needs upon this occasion testify) that not any one of them, as far as an
estimate can be made by what is visible, or discernable in point of
conversation, profecit hilum, has gained so much as the making of one hair
either black or white, by the exchange of his Baptism: but sundry of them have
lost many degrees of that sweet Christian savor, and love, wherewith they
excellently adorned the Gospel before, I will not positively say, by, but upon,
after, and since, the translation of their judgments into your way.

9. Whether amongst men and women, whose 11.
Consciences have at any time been surprised with a conceit of more goodness in
your way then in the contrary, and so have betaken themselves unto it, such who
have been either the most Christianly meek and humble on the one hand, or the
most judicious, sober, learned, and best composed on the other hand, have not
upon a little experience of your way, grown cool, and very indifferent in their
thoughts about it; yea, and many repented of their weakness and surprisal, and
forsaken your tents, as (about Luthers time) Oecolampadius, Johonnes Gaster,
Pfistermeierus, Johannes Denkius (persons of great learning, worth, and
humility) with several others; and of late years, many of like character among
our selves, whom, if I judged it convenient, I could name. Only I may be free
(I presume) to mention that concerning Mr. Richard Baxter (a man as like as any
man I know, to make a crooked generation straight, if it be possible) which
himself has published of himself, viz. that his foot was once very near to be
taken in this snare. Huldericus Zuinglius a man of most signal worth likewise
in his times, makes the like acknowledgement, in these words: Wherefore I my
self (that I may ingenuously confess the truth) some years ago, being deceived
with this error, thought it better that childrens Baptism should be delayed
until they came to full age.

10. Whether since the first invention and practice of your way in later times,
which according to Scul^etus, who wrote the History of the Reformation of
Christian Religion by Luther, and other his Assistants (partakers of the same
grace with him therein) was in the year 1521. Origo fanaticae ^nabaptistarum
sectae ^^ic Anno deb^tur. Scultet. Annal. Dec. 1. in Anno 1521. Nicolaus
Ciconia, Marcus Stubnerus, Martinus Cell^rius, Thomas Muntzerus primi hujus
sectae nominantur Authors. Ibid.
men of your judgment, wherever (almost they have come, have not
obstrustructed the course and proceedings of the Gospel, opposed, troubled,
defamed, the most faithful and worthy Instruments of Christ, in the work of
Reformation, and upon this account been complained of by them. Cursum Evangelii
remorata sunt in Germania, and extra Germaniam, bellum rusticanum and
Sacramentarium: in Helvetia and Moravia, secta Anabaptistica. Sc^ltet. Annal.
Dec. 1. Anno 1525. Sangallensis Ecclesia vavarie per Anabaptistas fuit
excercita. Idem page 262, 263.

In Suevia, Vlmensibus and Augustanis vel maxim molesti erant Anabaptistae.
Dolet mihi (ait Zuinglius) fideles a Cata-baptistis esse seductos. Et paulo
post. Efficient [Anabaptistae] ut aliquandiu rem Christianam remorentur: at
nihil solidi ad maturitatem perducent. Idem Annal. Dec. 2. p. 92. Vicessimo
septimo Anno fervent Bella Anabaptisticum and Sacramentarium, magno Ecclesiarum
Evangelicarum malo. Idem in initio Anni 1528. J^hannes Leydensis, Anabaptista
vehemens, privatim r^ga^ ex Evangelii Doct^ribus initio, cum in eorum serm^n^^^
familiariter se insinuass^t, number arbitr^^t^r pa^vul^s recte baptizari? Cum
affirmaren, ill^, qui totus erat dedi^u^ contrariae opinioni. coe^^t^^i^^re,
and contemnere. Joh. Sleidan. Comment lib. 10. P^^lo^p^st. S^na^us interea,
priusquam e s^^s illi [Anabaptist] latibul^^d^nuo prodi^ent, o^nia tem^^a
cla^dit, uno solu^ aperto. Nam metus erat ne Anaba^tist^, quorum i^d^e^ au^es
c^bat nu^erus comitati suis doctoribus. Evangelii praecones e templ^^
ext^rbar^nt. Jam nemini sobrio ambiguum sore arbitror, quam temere Ecclesiam
Christi c^nturbent, qui rixas ac contentiones movent ob paedo-baptismum.
Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 16.. 32. Hypocrisi veritas ac sinceritas Evangelicae
pietatis insensiorem hostem non habet. Tria hominum genera sunt, in quibus hoc
apparet; Pharisaei, Monachi, Anabaptistae. De nobis not^s l^quor. Musculus in
Mat. c. 16. 6. Ita solent and hodie Adversarii veritatis, Papistae and
Anabaptistae. Idem in Mat. c. 17. Anabaptistas aliquot punierunt nostri
Principes, non quod ea dicerent quae sentirent, neque ut vi cogerentur ad veram
amplectan dum Religionem, sed quod totius humanae sccietatis vinculum
abrumperent, quod perfidiosi essent Apostatae, quod verbum Dei manifestissime
corrumperent, quod Ecclesiae Authoritatem haberent ludibrio, quod civium
consensum factiose lacerarent. Beza de Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis. p.
163. Minime ergo Audiendi sunt Anabaptistae, quibus non satis est Ecclesiae
ordinem turbasse, nisi Rempublicam quoque adorti, Magistratus omnes ex soli^s
deturbent etc. Sunt hi, non solum Reipublicae and Magistratuum hosts, verum
etiam pestes humani generis etc. Lavater. in Fsther. c. 10. 1, 2, etc. Meum
ergo fuit (testor) consilium, pi^s omnes non satis adhuc excercitatos admonere,
quam lethale venenum sit dogma Cata-baptistarum, and advers^s illud verbo Dei
tanquam certissimo antidot^ eos praemunire, ne misere pereant. Calvin adversus
Anabaptistas in praefat. Nunc vero (ut jam dixi) sufficient omn^s veritatis
studi^sos, monuisse, quicquid miseri isti homines communi consensu pro
inexpugna^ili fundamento fidei suae habent lethalem imposturam esse, a qua,
tanquam a p^st^, omnes cavere oportet. Ibid. Ex quibus omnibus manifestum est,
impugnationem poedo-baptismi non esse leve erratum, sed impium dogma, verbo Dei
and consolationi Ecclesiae adversum. Quo magis vitanda sunt haec and similia
d^liria Sectae Ana-baptisticae, quae sine dubio a Diabolo est excitata, and
monstrum est execra^ile, ex variis haeresibus and blasphemiis conflatum, Vrsin.
Catech. Part. 2. Qu. 74. De poedobaptismo. These Quotations are (for the most
part) englished in the fiftieth of the Considerations ensuing.




11. Whether those great enemies of the Protestant 12.
and pure Religion, and of the true Worship of God, the Papists, and many
subtle Agents for the advancement of the Interest of the Romish Religion, have
not from time to time, upon all occasions, insinuated themselves into persons
of your opinion and practice, secretly encouraging you in your way, in order to
the sore disturbance, and, if possible, the utter ruin and subversion of the
Protestant Religion? Anabaptistae, cum disputationibus, nihil profici viderent,
and non de essent a quibus Evangelii Doctrinam prorsus exterminatam volentibus,
in furore suo confirmarentur etc. Scultet. Annal. Dec. 1. p. 257.
Yea have there not been of late in this Nation; nay, are there not at present,
men of that character at work amongst you, who by the opportunity of that
troublesome and fiery spirit, which haunteth your way, hope to create some
mischief of distraction and confusion, either in the Religious, or in the
Politic affairs thereof, or in both?

12. Whether it be not a matter of frequent observation and report amongst
Protestant Writers of best authority and credit, that persons carried away with
your error, about Baptism, have still embraced and been infected with several
other erroneous opinions, of a worse and more dangerous consequence then it?
See proof made of the affirmative. Consider. 51.
yea and whether this observation of former times be not attested by the
experience of the present?

13. Whether it can be proved out of any good Author, that there ever was a
society of your way, which proved not wicked, and this within no long time,
after their first knotting? See page 85. Yea, and whether any person of note,
and active for the promoting of your way, unless he either repented hereof, or
died very timously, ever went out of the world, without some visible character
of Gods displeasure on him? Or if it can be proved, or found, that any such
person died upon terms of more grace, then so, as I am glad for his sake,
whoever he was, who obtained that mercy from God, so am I sorry for all those,
if any such were, or now be, who have been confirmed and hardened in their way
by such an example.

Brethren, (though many of you will not reciprocate 13.
the salutation with me) I desire to show all tenderness in Christian respects
unto you; and, if it be possible, to relieve, without offending you. And
therefore I most earnestly, and with an enlarged heart entreat you (for your
own sake) that you will seriously ponder the particulars now presented unto
you, until you find your judgments and consciences charged home with the just
and full weight of them. Let not your confidence of the goodness of your way be
a snare unto you. Paul, when a Pharisee, THOUGHT VERILY within himself, that he
ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth and did
accordingly. Acts 26. 9.
You also know, who they were, that demanded of the Lord Christ, ARE WE ALSO
BLIND? And who again d Jon, 9. 40.
demanded, SAY WE NOT WELL, that thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil? Joh.
8, 48.
And yet again who He was that demanded of the Prophet, Which way went the
spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee? 2 Chro. 18. 23.
You very well know likewise, of what sort of men he is, of whom the Apostle
gives this Character, (...), rashly [or, conjecturally] puffed up by his
fleshly mind. Col. 2. 18.
Nor are you ignorant, that they were not the worst of men, to whom the Apostle
said, your glorying is not good. 1 Cor 5 6.
Truth is seldom, or never, forsaken, but upon a strong presumption and
conceit, in those who forsake her, of being an error; nor is an error at any
time embraced, but upon a like presumption of being a Truth. Your keen
pertinacy, and high resolvedness in your way, the grounds on which you build,
duly considered, is neither in any Christian, nor in any rational construction,
any argument that you are in the Truth, but rather of the contrary. For as the
Apostle upon his experience of men, said, All men seek their own, not the
things which are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 3. 21.
so is it matter of daily observation, that when men have notions and conceits
of their own, they exalt these upon Thrones, and charge men with an high hand,
to give homage and reverence unto them, as Divine Truths; and in the mean time
suffer the truths of God, and of Christ, to shift for themselves as well as
they can in the world. Yea it were well (comparatively) if they did not fight
against the truths of God in the quarrel of their own fond opinions and
conceits.

For my self, if my satisfaction touching the Doctrine 14.
and practice asserted in both parts of the ensuing discourse, were not rich
indeed, and built upon such foundations of evidence and Truth, which I
certainly know cannot fail, either me, or any other, that shall build on them;
yea if I did not see quite through and through all that yet you have showed
unto me for the support of your cause, I should much rather have chose my
lodging in the Chambers of death, then to have touched it by way of opposition
with the least of my fingers. To fight against truth, being interpreted, is
little less then to fight against God: and a madness it is for any man to think
that ever his soul should prosper by such wars. My God and my conscience, have
deeply engaged me in a warfare very troublesome and costly, even to contend (in
a manner) with the whole Earth round about me, and to attempt the casting down
of high things, and imaginations in men, which exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God. And daily experience shows, that men's imaginations, as well
those which lift up themselves against the knowledge of God, as those of a
better and more blessed import, are their darlings, and that he that touches
them, touches the Apple of their eye, and appears, upon the account, in the
shape or likeness of an enemy unto them. The truth is, that to bear the hatred
and contradiction of the world, as God has made it my portion to do, is no
whit more pleasing unto me, then the drinking of that cup, which the Lord
Christ prayed thrice unto his Father might pass from him, was unto him.
Notwithstanding as that, which was (in it self) bitter and grievous unto him,
in this respect was not grievous at all, but acceptable, viz. that by suffering
it, he might open an effectual door of life, and salvation unto the world; so
does the vehemency and zeal of desire, which possesses my reins, heart and
soul, of doing some service to the world, whilst I am a sojourner in it, in
making some of the crooked things thereof, straight, and leaving it at my
departure from it, upon somewhat better terms for the peace and comfort of it,
then I found it at my coming to it, swallow up much of that offensiveness and
monstrousness of taste, wherewith otherwise the most unreasonable and horrid
measure, I receive from many in it, would affect and afflict my soul. But to
bear the burden of the hatred of men out of an affection of unfeigned love to
them, is nothing more then what I know is my duty to do: and for his sake, who
bear the burden of my sins upon the Cross, out of an unfeigned love to me, and
through his grace, I shall willingly do it.

I know not whither you will vouchsafe a perusal 15.
of the papers here presented to you, or no. It is not long since I heard of
some stirrings and mutterings of that perverse spirit amongst some of you,
which about the time when your way first began to be occupied in Germany,
tempted men to burn all their other books and writeings, but the Bible only.
Post h^c Idem propheta [Johannes, Martheus, Anabatista] mand^bat, ne quis ullum
deinceps librum haberet, aut sibi servaret, praeterquam sacra Biblia: reliquos
omnes in publicum deferri jubet and aboleri: hoc se mandatum divinitus
accepisse dicebat. Itaque magno numero libri comportati, flamma fuerunt omnes
absumpti. Joh. Sleidan, Comment. l. 10.
If you be resolved to read no other book but the Bible, and judge your selves
wiser then he, who being demanded whether he understood that which he read [in
the Scriptures,] made answer, How can I, except some man guide me Act. 8. 31.
: I confess that by such a resolution, you will make an escape from me, and
convey your selves out of my reach. But if you wilfully turn your back upon
those means which God affords you, for the knowledge of the truth, take heed
lest this turns to a root of bitterness unto you in the end. They who measure
themselves by themselves, (says the Apostle) and compare themselves with
themselves, are not wise 2 Cor. 10. 12.
. Yet if you will make it matter of conscience to read the Scriptures with a
single eye, and not bring your way with you, unto them, you will never find it
here. Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Musculus, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Ursin,
Zanchie, Perkins, Dod, with a thousand more of like diligence, faithfulness,
and sharpness of discerning, who have searched the Scriptures every whit as
thoroughly, as narrowly as you have done, yet could never find your way here.
The Consideration whereof (me thinks) should give you some stop in your
carrier, and cause the greatest confidentiary amongst you, to turn himself
about, and enquire of himself: Is there not a lie in my right hand Isa. 44. 20.
. It will be no good account in the day of the Lord Jesus, to pretend, or say,
we verily thought, we were highly confident, that we did both Thee, and thy
Gospel, service, in opposing Infant Baptism, in disturbing, rending and tearing
thy Churches to promote our way of Rebaptizing in the world; especially
considering that God sent so many Scribes and wise men unto you, and this in a
way of righteousness, to establish you against those puffs of new Doctrines,
which notwithstanding have driven you like unballassed vessels, quite off from
the truth. Our Savior foretells his Disciples of a generation of men, who
when they should put them out of the Synagogues, yea, should kill them, would
THINK that herein they did God good service Joh. 16. 2.
. There is little question to be made, but that these men had as high thoughts
of that wicked thought of theirs here mentioned, as you have of yours touching,
Rebaptizing; yea and that they pretended the same divine Authority for the
justification of it, which you pretend for yours. You have no more express
Scripture for your thought, then they had for theirs: and as it appears that
they were not infallible in arguing or concluding from the Scriptures, so
neither (I presume) will you assume to be. They miscarryed, because they
hearkened not unto them, who plainly declared the truth unto them: Oh, stumble
not you at this stone.

I have detained you with somewhat an overlong Epistle; but I trust there is
nothing in it, except it be the length, that can offend you. My hope is the
same concerning the treatises ensuing, drawn up with equal respects, to the
regaining (at least of some) of you, from your error, as for the establishing
of others in that way of truth, wherein they stand. Only I was willing to cast
the honor of the Dedication (if there be any such thing as honor in it)
appropriately upon you. If you will please to read them with a like candid and
Christian mind, as that wherewith they were drawn up for your service, I
little question but that through the blessing of God, they will recompense your
time and labor bestowed on them. If their access to your judgments and
consciences be obstructed with prejudice and conceit, you will will have much
more reason to complain of your selves, then of them, in case your reading turn
to no account of satisfaction unto you. Disingenuity is the great partition
wall, which at this day separates between a world of men, and a world of truth.
That Mr. Baxter's book of plain Scripture Proof for Infant Baptism, should have
been so long extant in the world, and yet Anabaptism still alive, is to me a
plain demonstration that the world is sadly defective in point of Christian
ingenuity. Weakness of capacity, slowness of apprehension, darkness of
understanding, aversness to consider, might be all (at least to a very great
measure) redeemed by an ardent love unto the Truth. But it is the coming of
Daniels 1335. days that will bring this blessedness upon the world. In the mean
time, they who through the Grace of God are prevented with the great happiness
of an ingenuous spirit, and have an heart given them willing to lie large and
free before the truth, must be content with patience to bear the heavy
burdens of the importunity and waywardness of other men.

You are all heartily recommended to the Grace of that God, who is light, and
in whom there is no darkness at all, to be made by him like unto him, according
to your capacities of so glorious a similitude, by

Your Servant, and Fellow Servants in the Gospel, JOHN GOODWIN.
Coleman-street, London, May* 29. 1655.
To the Reader.
GOOD READER,
IT is a true Observation of worthy Mr Baxter, that the opinion of
Re-baptizing, In the Preface to his Admonition to Mr Air, etc.
or not Baptizing Infants, has been strangely followed with spiritual
judgments. The main cause hereof he supposes to be, because it opens a door
to separations, contendings, and so to contempt of the Ministry that is against
it. It is considerable likewise which he further adds: It is hard to see in
the nature of the mere opinions, such heinous evils, as we have seen attend
them. Notwithstanding I conceive that the reason of the mischiefs attending
these opinions, lies not, or not so much, in the nature, or natural tendency,
of the opinions themselves, but rather in the unhappy conjunction between the
opinions, and the injudiciousness and conceitedness of the far greatest part of
those, who entertain them. For as amongst men walking in the way of
Presbytery, we find a clear ground for that distinction, which divides them
into high, and low, or modest Presbyterians; the latter being a passable and
harmless generation (at least* comparatively) the other, next to insupportable:
so amongst those of the Anabaptismal persuasion, some there are, the illness of
whose temper teaches them to make fire and sword of their persuasion; others
again, the soberness and sweetness of whose spirit preserves them from
annoying the world, or Churches of Christ, with any misuse of their opinion.
This obvious difference between men and men, of the same persuasion (as to the
point of Ana-Baptism) induces me to believe, that the great evils which so
frequently attend it, are not so much sourced in the nature or complexion of
the persuasion it felf, as in the moral constitution of the greatest part of
those who are entangled with it. Such of the persuasion, who 1. Are inclined to
gratify and please others, that are pre-ingaged to other tenants or practices
beyond the said perperswasion. 2. Who are over tender in conscience, through
weakness in judgment, and apt to fear sin, whereno sin is, or to suspect duty,
where no duty is. And 3. Who count it an honor to them to put to rebuke the
gifts and abilities of worthy men, by dissenting from them, and pretending to
see where they are to seek. 4. (And lastly) who take pleasure in Magistrality,
and had rather make heads for Images of wood, then arms or legs for Statues of
gold; all these characters of men (I say) being Anabaptismally engaged, are apt
to imagine and conceit, that they hear their opinion, say unto them; Ascend yet
higher, make me but your footstool to conveigh you up to such a Throne of
glory, and perfection, from whence you shall behold the whole Christian world
under you, walking but as shadows, and the greatest of them not worthy to come
under the Roof of the meanest of your Sanctuaries. Whereas other persons, free
from those impressions of weakness and unworthyness, although of the same
Anti-pedo-paptismal faith and engagement, pretend not to hear so much as the
least air, or whisper, of any such exhortation, from such their persuasion.

It is not long since my thoughts stood within me never 2.
to meddle (in print) with these Baptismal controversies. I was deeply engaged
in others, which were of a much more desirable resentment with my genius, and
in which I judged my labors might have served the world upon terms of better
advantage. Nor had I (I believe) ever taken Pen in hand for the defense of
Infant Baptism, had not the untimely birth of that discourse, unto which I give
answer in the latter part of the book now in thy hand, imposed a most unhappy
necessity upon me thereunto. Notwithstanding herein I am a little relieved
under this so un-acceptable an engagement (for the kind of it) that I shall
deal with my adversary (Anabaptism) in the glory of his strength; and
consequently upon sucb terms, that (I trust) he will never be able to recrute
more, or take the field again with any force considerable. For (doubtless) Mr
Tombs, and Mr Fisher, who are counted Pillars of that way, have (comparatively)
but trifled in their undertakings for the Rebaptizing cause. W. A. in his
Baptismal Abuses, what execution soever he has done upon his Adversaries, has
quite foiled the pens of his fellow-combatants, by overarguing their line: yea
and in his discourse against Infant Baptism, has overargued his own line, in
what he has written against Church Communion with Churches, or persons by him
called, unbaptized. But the truth is, that the former cause will much better
take colors of artifice and wit, then the latter. And our Rebaptizers (I
presume) would willingly enough give a bill of divorce unto this cause, did
they know how to exalt and magnify to their minds, the cause of Rebaptizing,
without it.

Amongst many other unhandsome and unpleasing streins wherein (generally) the
Anabaptismal spirit utters it self in the world, I have both formerly (in
part) and more particularly of late, observed in persons led by it, a kind of
tedious and effeminate tenderness, or frowardness, which disposes them to
exceptions and complaints, even where there is not so much as the least
appearance of any just cause given for complaining. They cannot allow unto
sober men, and those who are far from wishing, and much farther from doing,
them the least harm, their natural genius, or gift of expression, which they
have received from God, without quarrelling and censuring them for it, if it
does but touch, though never so lightly, the copyhold (as the common Proverb
is) of their way. This Grasshopper of expression (in the Title Page of my
Water-Dipping) after the new mode of dipping, was (it seems) an heavy burden
to the wisdom and patience of some in that way, who for the word mode, made me
a a transgressor of no light demerit. Some Grandee's of the way made themselves
agrieved, that p. 19. of that discourse, I term a certain water, or pool,
commodiously contrived, and much frequented and delighted in, by many about the
City, dip-wise minded, by the name of a watery Paradise. Yea, and in their
Sermons, represent it to their Disciples, as an high strain of persecution,
that p. 31. of that discourse, I mention them by this expression, Brethren of
the Dip; yea and exhort them very zealously to stand to their tackling,
notwithstanhing such affronts and horrid indignities put upon them. Whereas the
truth is, that in that expression I intended them not the least touch of
disparagement; but having spent my store of other expressions whereby to
distinguish them, and wore many of them third ba^e, by an over frequent use of
them, by reason of the ( all most) continual occasions I had to mention them,
the s^id expression did occur my pen in the course of it; and being concise and
short, I gave intertainment to it without seeking further. But touching the
inoffensiveness of this, and worse expressions then this, I am content to
appeal to Mr Sam. Fisher, (who I am confident) will justify me in it: or if he
will not, I am certain that twenty pages and ten in his Baby-Baptism, will.

Some of them, are not (I confess) so much offended, as triumphantly apaid, yet
quarrelsom-wise too, that because Mr A. my Antagonist uses the word, Such,
where he has occasion, yea and a kind of necessity to use it in his writing, I
do not use it in mine where I have no occasion at all to use it, yea, where it
would make little better then nonsense to insert it. And because I charge the
six Booksellers with dis-ingenuity in transcribing a passage of mine without
the word, Such, being a word of an emphatical import in the sentence, the men I
speak of, admire the just hand of providence lifted up against me, that I
should be left to omit the word, Such, not in transcribing the words of my
Antagonist (for here I express it, as often, and as plainly, as himself; but in a
passage of mine own, where (it seems) they fancy, I should have expressed it;
when as to a man of ordinary understanding, and who knows any thing belonging
to the regular structure of a sentence, the mention of it would have been
needless, frivolous, and importune. The Reader, if he please, may see all that
is to be seen, of the hand of Providence lifted up against me in the case
specified, page 82. of my Water-Dipping etc. in the two last lines of the page.
Nor is it true, that I quarrelled or censured the Booksellers simply, for
leaving out the word, Such, in their transcription of my words, (for this might
have been only an oversight) but that being privately informed by me of such
their omission, and desired to repair me by a public acknowledgement of the
same, they, instead hereof, gave me Gall and Vinegar to drink, in an answer in
writing, full of bitter, and un-Christian Invectives, and forged Imputations.
So that in case I had omitted the word, Such, in transcribing the words of my
Adversary, yet unless upon admonition, I should have justified it, or upon
request, refused to acknowledge it, in order to his vindication, there had been
no ground for the parrallel, which these men make between me and the
Booksellers.

Some great doers for the way in Ireland, where Anabaptism has, or at least of
late had, its Throne, are (I understand) offended at this innocent passage, p.
37. of the same discourse, There is a strong tide of report both from Ireland
and Scotland, that as far as the interest and power, so far the insolency and
importune hautiness of that generation we speak of, extends in both these
Nations. Yet this report (so far as it concerns Ireland), has since, by
sober and grave Authors (worthy credit in greater matters then this) who have
lived for several years upon the place, and have had (with many others) too
much experience of the truth hereof, been confirmed over and over. So that they
that go about to wash their hands from the guilt specified in the report, do
but wash in foul water. Mr W. A. himself in his Answer to my forty Queries
about Church Communion, etc. makes it matter of exception and complaint, that
I sometimes style his way of Rebaptizing, New Baptism. And yet heretofore in
discoursing with a grave Minister of Mr A's. judgment in the point of
Rebaptizing, and the most ancient that I know walking in that way, finding him
not so well satisfied that his way should be styled Ana-baptism, I desired to
know of him what other term would please him. His answer was, New Baptism. So
hard a thing is it for him that shall speak or write against the way of these
men, not to offend them in terms and expressions, when as the best and most
sober of them scarce know how to speak among themselves without offending one
another. Mr Tombs upon this account, picks holes without number in Mr Baxters
Coat, which occasioned him to say, that men are so tender of their own names,
through pride, that they think him a railer, that does but name their faults:
and they look to be stroaked, and smoothed, and reverented, whilst they speak
most wickedly: so did the Popish Bishops when they were condemning the Martyrs.
Plain Scripture proofs for Infants Church Membership, etc. Page 201.
This strain of spirit in the men we speak of, fully sympathizeth with the
observation of a learned man, which gives us to understand, that the way of
Ana-baptism seldom or never prospers or thrives, but only when it is indulged,
countenanced, and made much of, especially by the Powers of this world; whereas
the Truth on the other hand has flourished most under opposition and
persecution from the world. But so critically and capriciously tender are these
men over their way, that they judge it criminal in those that shall call it
Anabaptism, or by any other name then Anti-pedo-baptism; by which (it seems) Mr
Tombs has baptized it, as it were to amuze the common sort of people, and to
put it out of their reach so much as to name it amongst them. But though
Anti-pedo-baptism be a name of a sufficient length, yet is it too short in
signification for that practice, or way, on which Mr Tombs, like a Parens
^ustricus, has imposed it. For whereas there are two grand errors, or evils,
in this way; the one, an opposing the baptizing of children; the other, a
second baptizing of those baptized already; the Name, Anti-pedo-baptism,
expresses it only by the former, and so is but a kind of half-name to it.
Whereas the word Anabaptism, although it formally signifies only the latter,
yet it does withal connotare, or implicitly import the former also. For he that
persuades to re-baptize at age, consequently persuades that Baptism in
Infancy is. or was, a nullity, and so a practice not warrantable. Therefore
Ana-baptism, of the two, is not only a word of a more easy and ready
pronunciation, a word by reason of the long accustomed use of it in the
Baptismal controversies, more passable with men, but more commensureably
significant also of that practice or way, which is sufficiently known amongst
us by this name, and super-sufficiently otherwise. Besides, though it should be
supposed that the word Anabaptism, is not a name or term so properly at first
imposed on their way; yet the use and end of names and words, being to convey
things from one man's mind and understanding to another, the word we speak of,
best performing this service, in reference to the matter or thing signified by
it, ought not to be stumbled at, or excepted against, unless men desire that it
should not be understood, when their way is spoken either for, or against.
Loquendum ut vulgus, sentiendum ut sapientes, was an old rule: and I know no
sufficient reason why it should be antiquated, or cashiered: and some wise men
have said, that in civil affairs, malum been positum non debet moveri.

When Mr Fisher, with his fellow-subscribers, in their late representation,
style themselves the baptized Churches of the Nation, no man can tell by the
signification, or import of the word Baptized, what Churches they mean: only
by the importune assuming and arrogant appropriating of the word to themselves,
the meaning of the men may be conjectured. For in calling themselves and their
Churches, The baptized Churches in this Nation, they represent and call (in
effect) all the rest of the Churches of Christ in the Nation, by the odious and
reproachful Epithites, of Pagan and Heathen. Yea, the truth is, that the
expression, as it is arrogant in the highest, and swelling with vanity, so it
is very exasperating and provoking to all sorts of people in the Nation, and
enough to alarm both Magistrate and people to stand upon their guard, and to
await the consequence of so bloody and threatening a charge. But the very self
same spirit, which wrought so effectually in the Donatists of old, works at
no whit a lower rate in these men. For they importunely affirmed that the
Churches of Christ, and true Baptism was amongst them only, and not to be
found in all the world besides Donatistae volebant latitudine^ regni Christi
coarctare in Angulum Affricae, ita ut extra sectam suam, quae obtinuerat in
Africa, negarent esse uspiam Christianos. Musc. in Mat. 8. 11. Donatistae a
multis Patribus and ab Augustino praesertim coarguuntur, quod Ecclesia^
Catholica^ in angulu^ Africae ad se contrax^^sent affirman^es alibi Ecclesia^
non r^periri. Pet. Mart. L^c. Clas. 4. c. 6. 6. Donatus capitis sui somnium
sequutus, solum Christi Ecclesiam in Africa esse dicebat, neque usquam alibi,
nisi ist^i^, veram esse baptismum: cujus vesanie multi adhaerentes, magnam
cal^mit(...) Africanis Ecclesiis attulerunt, quum impii and crud les homines,
non minus ferro, quam impiis v^cibus circunq^aque in obsistentes desaevirent.
Prat^olus de Haeresibus, page 149. Item dicere soletis, quod nos Christi
baptismum non habeamus, and quod praeter vestram communionem nusquam sit*
August* Epist. 172. Ad Crispinum Donatistam.
. But whereas, both in the front, and in the rere of this their representation,
they give the pre-eminence to their Messengers (a kind of Officer of their own,
for such they seem to make them, and which Christ, when he Ascended up on high,
never gave Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.) above their Elders, the Elder being an Officer
given and appointed by Christ, do they not prefer the Officers of their own
Election, above the Officers of Christ. We read only of two, (for expositors
generally make their number no more) who are styled (...), Apostles, Legates,
or Messengers of the Churches, when as now a considerable part of the world was
planted with Christian Churches, where as Mr Fisher, and his, salute us mith a
greater number of their Messengers, then Elders,, and name unto us no fewer
then thirteen, belonging to I know not how few of their Churches. Besides, it
cannot be proved that these Messengers, though the Apostle (as Musculus upon
the place well hinteth) for modesty sake, does not insist upon his Apostolic
Authority, or term them his Messengers, but cast's honor upon the Churches,
calling them their Messengers; yet it cannot (I say) be proved that the
Churches did by any power or Authority vested in them, erect such a kind of
ordinary or standing Officer amongst them, as a Messenger is, especially that
should be more honorable then their Elders and Teachers (Officers expressly
given and appointed by Christ) or that they ever met together about the
business of such a choice. It is much more probable that the Apostle himself,
according to the emergent exigencies of the affairs of the Churches, with
which, upon occasion, he conversed, did commend unto them the two persons,
termed by him, the Messengers of the Churches (which are s^pposed to have been
Barnabas, and Luke) to serve them in the nature of Messengers, or Internuncii,
and that the Churches did generally accept and approve of them for such
services, as recommended unto them by their great and faithful Apostle: and
that in this respect only they are termed, the Messengers of the Churches. But
these men can fancy any thing, and practice these fancies accordingly, to be
deemed singularly Primitive, and Apostolical.

Many both judicious, learned, and godly, have publicly 5.
appeared in the maintenance and defense of Infant Baptism: but not many of
these characters, against it, although it be true, that much ink and paper have
of late been levied by some in opposition to it. What Mr J. Tombs has essayed
for the support of Anabaptism, has been examined by many, and upon proof,
found all face, and no heart. That of his Writings which escaped the sword of
the Spirit in Mr Baxters hand (whose memorial throughout all Ages may well be
Malleus Anabaptismi, The Maul of Anabaptism) has been since slain by the same
sword in the hand of Mr J. Horn. Mr Fisher is the last man I know, whose
thoughts have tempted him to believe, that the Ethiopian may yet be made white
by washing, and that water enough of his drawing will do the feat. But the man
in his Baby-baptism is too indulgent to his Wit and Fancy, to do any great
service to his Cause. Affectation in Writing, affects only those that are weak,
except it be to the disparagement of the Writer, and disadvnatage of his cause.
I confess that at some turns he does out-wit his Ashford Disputants, at least,
if he deals honestly in his Transcriptions, and not like Mr Kendall, or Mr
Underhill (with his fiery squadron of Booksellers, who instead of Firing a
Beacon, would set both City and Country on fire, if they should meet with a
Parliament of no wiser an inspiration, then their own.) But when he comes to
grapple with Mr Baxter, the encounter seems to be like that of young Troilus
with Achilles,

Infoelix p^er, atque impar congressus Achilli!
Unhappy st^ipling, no meet combatant
For Great Achilles! --
For in this encounter, he betakes himself to that un-hallowed Refuge of evil
speaking, as men being over-mated with the truth are wont to do. Arbitror te
(said Jerome of old to an Opposer of the Truth, and who withal gave ill
language) a veritate superatum, ad maledicta confugisse. i. I suppose that
being vanquished by the Truth, you flee for succor to opprobrious language.
When men's intellectuals are too short or scant, they commonly piece and ecke
them out with their patheticals. There is no man that understands any thing of
Mr Baxters worth, for parts of learning, and Christian ingenuity, that can hear
such sayings as these concerning him, but in the notion of contumelies and
revilings. A shril sound, but an empty barrel: such is Mr Baxters Book indeed,
especially his twofold Fardle, about Murder and Adultery, in which, whether
there be more noise, or nonsense, I know not: but sure I am, that there is ten
times more twittle-come-twattle, then Truth. Mr Fishers Baby-baptism, page 408.
If the man by twittle-come-twattle, means any thing contrary to the Truth (as
his opposing it to the Truth imports) he falls altogether as foul and heavy
upon himself and his own sayings, and these near at hand, in charging ten times
more of it, then of Truth, upon Mr Baxter, as upon him. For in the very next
page he charge him, and this over and over, that in all his Discourse (which
he makes to be very large) to prove naked-dipping to be a breach of the seventh
Commandment, an intolerable wickedness, an immodest action, etc. He proves
nothing but what is acknowledged by himself, and universally by all his party:
Yea, he demands; Quorsum haec? to what purpose does he with such prolixity
proceed to prove, what no sober minded man of either party does deny? Is that
which he and his party hold, twittle-come-twattle, or that which is contrary to
the Truth? Another charge of a like contradiction to his former of
twittle-come-twattle, he presently subjoyneth, as viz. where he challenges
him, as most simply and sinisterly concluding against them, in a matter of four
or five Arguments, that the chlidren of Christians may not be baptized when
they come to years, professing himself and his to be of the same mind. As for
us (says he) we say as much, etc. A little after the shame of the former
words, he subjoyneth those which are worse, and more maledictory: I must needs
confess (says he) that this is matter of weight indeed, and a stone is heavy,
and the sand weighty, but a FOOLS wrath is heavier then them both. This SOON
SHOT-BOLT is big enough to hurt, where it hits, etc. Afterward he insinuates
his reports to be empty of Truth; and full of falsehood: and a little after this,
his arguings against them to be silly Sophistry, his discourse against their
dipping naked, to be a piece of paultry, a mess of balder dash, etc. But the
best is for matter of report, Mr Baxters yea, is of as good (if not better)
Authority, as Master Fishers, Nay. Page 206. He vilifieth him with a being so
childish. In the same page, he tells him that he abounds and sinks himself over
head and ears in absurdities: and again, that he thinks the man had not his
wits well about him, Page 208. He says Mr Baxter dreams, and page 210. O the
wisdom! He that being in the fire would not come out to hear how bravely Mr
Baxter brings about, and about again his business -- it is pity but he should
be burnt. Page 79. He tells his Reader, that he cannot but note by the way how
egregiously Mr Baxter peddles in a long prate to Mr Ts. etc. Page 362. and 363.
(to let pass many other vilifying and reproachful expressions) speaking of Mr
Baxters Book, and indeed (says he) the whole is but a certain three-legged
stool, which he has made for people to sit at rest upon in their vain worships
and servings of God, etc. And again, p. 419. the truest verdict which he can
give (as he says) of this book, is, that it is a three-footed Stool, the legs
of which are all lame add decriped, made by Mr Baxter for the people of
Kederminster and Bewdly, to sit at ease on, in that popish posture and
practice, etc. A little after, p. 363. He drives on beyond the bounds of
modesty, truth, sense and reason, as far (I dare say) to the full, as God would
suffer the Devil to direct, and drive him. Soon after: And so it seems to me,
he [God] has left Mr Baxter, as godly as he is; or else there could never have
issued from him such inconsiderate crudities, such rank, venomous, viperous,
ulcerous fluxes of folly, flesh, fierceness, fictions, falseness, fiery
invectives, to the madding of the very Magistracy, if it would be any longer
blinded by the bawling of a mistaken Ministry, etc. Domine, Deus meus! Anne
haec est loquela filii tui? Ah, Lord my God, is this the language of a Son of
thine? But alas! all this is but a small first fruits of that large Harvest of
those rank, venomous viperous, ulcerous, fluxes of folly, flesh and fierceness,
(expressions of his own Genius) which out of the abundance of his heart he has
poured forth upon the head of a person, of signal worth and honor, and who is
a shining and burning light in his generation; yea and has done (I verily
believe) more real service unto Jesus Christ, and the precious souls of men,
then all the Anabaptists, as such, and whilst such, in the Land; that I say
not, in the world* But with such stuff as this, he evinceth Mr* Baxters reports
to be full of falsehood, and his arguments to be sophistical and silly. And as
for the notions, grounds and principles upon which he asserteth his
Ana-baptismal cause against him, are they not very importune and burdensome to
any intelligent and considering man? Or are not these some of them, and their
fellows like unto them?

1. That the true way of Baptism (which we must suppose to be that way of
Baptism, wherein Mr Fisher 6. Mr Fishers Principles.
and his party are engaged) is the strait and narrow way which leads unto
life, and which few find Page 414.
. Does not this evidently imply, that Mr Fs. sense is, that when our Savior
admonished his Disciples and others to enter in at the strait gate, yea to
strive to enter in at it* because wide is the Gate, and broad is the way which
leads to destruction, etc. his meaning was, that men should strive to be
water-baptized, and this by dipping; and that by the wide Gate and broad way,
he meant, either baptizing by washing without dipping, or want of baptizing at
all* It is a wonder of the first Magnitude unto me, how such a conceit as this
should ^ver clime up into his fa^cy, that by the strait and narrow way, which
leads unto life, and which few find, should be meant his way of baptizing;
Considering 1. That no man needs strive at all to be thus baptized: all comers
are entertained by the men of this way, and all are freely admitted to walk in
it who desire it. 2. That this way can in no respect lightly imaginable by a
s^ber man, be termed strait, or narrow. Not 1. In respect of any great trouble
or offensiveness to the flesh, in the entrance into it; at least not in
reference to many constitutions, especially in the hotter seasons of the year,
when both men and boys are wont to disport themselves by ducking* and diving
under water; least of all in the hotter climates of the Earth, where going into
cool waters, is matter of solace and pleasure, as some of Mr Fishers own party
do inform us. And (doubtless) the narrow and strait way of which our Savior
speaks, is one and the same in, and unto all Nations, and their respective
Inhabitants. Nor 2. Can this way be termed strait or narrow, in respect of any
disparagement or civil danger, or disadvantage, that is like to attend it, at
least, when and where it is more generally practiced, as it was in our Savior,
and John Baptists days: when Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Region round
about Jordan, came unto John, and were baptized of him. Which notwithstanding,
it seems that Christ made and baptized more Disciples then John; yea John's
Disciples themselves complained unto him, that all men came unto Christ
[meaning to be Baptized.] Least of all can it be attended with any matter of
dishonor or dis-esteem, when, or where it is countenanced by the Civil
Magistrate, and places of honor, trust, and profit, indifferently, if not more
frequently, conferred upon men of this way, as well as upon others; which
lately was, and still is (in part) the condition of it in this State and
Nation. Considering 3. that it cannot be said of Mr Fisher's way of Baptism,
that few there are that find it, at least if it be supposed to be the same way
with that wherein John and Christ baptized. For we lately heard, that about the
time when Christ spoke the words, Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region
about Jordan, with vast multitudes besides, had found the way of their
Baptizing. 4. That neither does this way lead unto life, otherwise then in
conjunction with, and by the mediation of Faith and Holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord: and in conjunction with, and by the initiation of
these, Infant Baptism and Baptism without Dipping, will lead to life, as well,
if not better, then Mr Fisher's way of Baptizing. Therefore (however) his way
is not the strait and narrow way, which leads unto life, and which so few
find. Besides, by his asserting such a principle as this, he adjudgeth the
whole Christian world ever since the days of Christ, and his Apostles; (a very
inconsiderable number only excepted) unto the vengeance of eternal fire. For
how few of all that lovely and blessed generation, I mean, of Saints, and holy
men, Martyrs, and others, have found, entered, or walked in Mr Fisher's way of
Baptizing? But it is no new thing for men, who have a fancy of their own, to
lift up to Heaven, to throw down whatsoever stands in their way unto hell.
But the saying of Mr Baxter to Mr Tombs is very considerable at this turn: It
is (says he) no small degree of evil that a man is fallen to, when he dare
slander or make infamous, the whole or greatest part of all the holy Churches
on Earth, to maintain the reputation of his opinion. Plain Scripture Proof of
Infants Church m^mbership, etc. p. 199.


2. Another Principle or Notion, upon the credit 7.
whereof, with importune confidence, he builds his Anabaptismal Fabrique,
against Mr B. and whosoever, is this That the children of the unbeleeving Jews
are not broken off, and excluded with their parents [from Church and Covenant]
upon the account of their parents unbeleif only, but for want of faith in their
own persons, etc. Baby-Baptism. p. 110.
How little truth, yea, or reason, or sense there is in this Assertion,
especially if he intends it (as he pretends to do) in opposition to his
Adversaries argument, drawn from the Consideration of the breaking off of the
Jews Children from the Covenant, is evident from hence, viz. that the children
[i. e. the Infants or young children, for of these only his Adversaries speak]
of the Jews, who were dis-covenanted by God, had no more want of faith in their
own persons, then either Isaac or Jacob themselves, whilst they were Infants
like unto them, and all the the children generally of this Nation, whilst it
remained upon the best and firmest terms in Covenant. Therefore if their
children were not cut off from Church or Covenant by God, for want of Faith in
their own persons, neither is it Christianly reasonable to think, or say, that
children of the latter Jews, whose parents were dis-covenanted for their
unbeleif, were dis-covenanted with them for want of faith in their own persons.
Besides, want of Faith, (in Mr Fishers sense) in Infants, is no sin: how then
should God punish it, or deprive of any privilege inconsideration of it?

So that what he subjoyns for proof of his assertion, is extremely impertinent.
And children (says he) when at years, are the natural seed of their Parents, I
hope, as well as in Infancy it self, if being the children of such or such
Parents alone, would either ingraft, or exclude; if I say, unbeleeving Jews
children do believe, the promise is so made to them that their Parents unbelief
cannot exclude them, etc. Quorsum haec: The question between him and his
Adversaries, neither is, whether children at years be not the natural seed of
their parents, as well as in Infancy, or yet whether the promise be so made,
that the unbeleeving Jews children, when they come to believe, shall
notwithstanding be excluded through their parents unbelief, but whether the
unbeleeving Jews children in their Infancy, were not together with their
parents, excluded through these their parents unbelief. Mr Fisher gives this
question ago-by, as being too hard for him to resolve with the honor and
safety of his cause.

3. Another Notion or ground, by the Authority 8.
whereof he sentenceth Mr Bs. Book, for being a threefooted stool, the legs of
which are all lame and decreped, Page 419.
is this, that the greater depth of Hell men fall into, that fall from them,
proves the height of their Churches to be nearer Heaven, then that of those
Churches, which Mr Ba. or any other Anti-pedo-baptist approves. But this
principle or Notion, that the greater wickedness found in an Apostate, argues
the greater height of excellency in that Order, or way, from which he
Apostotizeth, is a Notion or ground, like unto the rest, on which the An^
baptismal faith is founded. Or if it were true, the height of that Christian
Church, of which Julian was a member before his Apostasy, whether it was the
Church of Constantinople, or of Nicomedia (for of both these the Ecclesiastical
History makes him a member, though of the latter more immediately before)
should have been nearer to the Heavens then Mr Fishers, or any the Anabaptismal
Churches; for that either of these were in Julians days Anabaptismal, I suppose
was never yet so much as dreamed by any man. So also the height of that way,
and of that order of men, from which Nero fell, when of a sober and moral Pagan
Idolater, he became the first born Son of Belial, and justified all the workers
of abominations under the whole Heavens in his days, must needs be supposed,
according to Mr Fishers principle, to have been much nearer the Heavens, then
his way of Baptism, or any of those Churches to which he signs his Magnificat.
For I cannot think, that any who have fallen from him, or his way of
Churchship, have fallen into a greater depth of Hell, then these Monsters of
men. For my part, I have both read of some, and know some others, who have
fallen from his way, that I presume took no spiritual harm at all by their
fall, however they might inconvenience themselves in worldly respects hereby.
Yea I wish for the honor of the Gospel, and prosperity of the souls of the
persons themselves, that the generality of those, who at present continue
walking in his way, were as near to Heaven as many that have fallen from it. 9.


Such Notions and principles as these, are the Oracles which strengthen Mr
Fishers hand against Mr Baxters Doctrine of Infant Baptism. Doubtless there was
never ab urbe condita, nor yet ab orb condito, a generation of men, in whom
confidence upon such contemptible terms, ever raged at that tedious and
importune ra^^ and height, as it does in these men, for the asserting (...)
appropriating of all Baptismal glory and acceptance ^^to themselves, and their
way of baptizing. All th(...) yet they have proved substantially from the
Scriptures, or (I fully believe) ever will be able to prove from them, against
Infant Baptism, is, 1. That such Believers, who had not been baptized in their
Infancy, were baptized at more maturity of years. 2. That ordinarily the
Scripture Baptists did admonish those who came unto them to be baptized, to
repent and believe. But neither of these are denied by their adversaries: nor
have either of them the least shadow of an inconsistencie with the lawfulness
of Infant Baptism; Their conjectures that no children were baptized in Christ's,
John's, or the Apostles days, are so inconsiderable, that even before they be
weighed in the Balance, they may be discerned to be too light; although if
this also* were given in unto them, they could make small earnings of it for
their cause (as I demonstrate in the second part of the ensuing treatise, 15.
16. etc.)

Reader, I might acquaint thee with more of the crazy and shaken pillars of Mr
Fs. Anabaptismal faith; amongst which he lays the greatest stress, and (upon
the matter) the whole, weight of his cause upon this, that circumcision under
the Law, was neither sign nor seal of the righteousness of faith unto any man,
but unto Abraham only. Page 18. 19 24. 154. 369.
The crookedness of this principle I detect in the ensuing Treatise, by
applying to it a straight rule. Part 2. 61. 62. 63. etc.
He makes a like treasure of this Notion, that Baptism is indeed a sign, but
not a seal. Page 154. 155. 156, etc.
The absurdity and self-inconsistencie of this conceit, together with the fiery
contradiction it carries in it to the general sense of the wisest of his own
party, I likewise make evident in the ensuing discourse.

Sundry other the Apochryphal secrets of his faith and 10.
practice, in the point of Baptism, are discovered briefly and discussed in the
tract now in thy hand, especially in the latter part of it, where I have to do
with several the best colors (I believe) with which the face of that cause
has yet been painted, and set forth unto the world. In the former part of the
discourse, I do not levy a Methodical or formal dispute, either for the
necessity, lawfulness or validity of Infant Baptism, nor yet against the Tenet
or practice of Ana-baptizers, many discourses of this nature being already
published; but only lay down and briefly prove certain Theses or
Considerations, which (I conceive) are of a leading import, toward
satisfaction in, and about the Baptismal controversies. However, as when
several hills lie round about a City, there is no part or quarter of this City,
but may be viewed from one or other of them: In like manner, I suppose, the
entire prospect of the Baptismal controversy in all the respective parts or
branches of it, may be taken from one or other of these Considerations. I have
digested them under six several heads, according to the notice given in the
Marge^, against the first under every head (respectively.)

I cannot promise unto my self the satisfying or regaining of many that are
wandering in, or wondering after, the Re-baptizing way, by any thing argued or
offered to them in these Papers.

Non est medico semper relevetur ut aeger.
Interdum docta plus valetarte malum.
The best Physician cannot always give
Health to his Patient sick: the malady
Oft-times surmounts his skill, and to relieve
His learned Art he finds but vanity.
The name of the evil spirit that haunteth that way (especially in England) may
be called in greek (...), and in English, Self willed, or Self affecting; which
kind of spirit is very stubborn and stiff-necked, and (for the most part) has*

Pelidae stomachum cedere nescii; Achilles stomach stout, who knew not how to
yield.

For in Germany I read of several companies or societies of Ana-Baptists, who
being in public disputations, convinced by learned and grave men, of the
error and evil of their way, abandoned it immediately, and retreated with
honor and peace. But the generality of our English Ana-baptists may (I fear)
too truly say:

Aetas Parentum, pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Our Parents age, a bird full bad enough,
Yet brought forth us a worser Progeny,
Who ('it is no otherwise like) shall leave behind
A see^ yet greater in impiety. 11.

Some few I know amongst us and have heard of more, who within the compass not
of many years, have outlived those great and high thoughts of this way which
were the Orators that once persuaded them into it: and finding little but
formality and pretense in it, excepting pride, conceit and contention faced
about toward that good old way of the Churches of Christ, which they had, upon
an unjustifiable account, forsaken. But these are a vein of men* Queis meliore
luto finxit praecordia Titan: but the far greater part of them, are of that
kind, which David likeneth unto a deaf Adder that stops her ear: which
will not hearken to the voice of the charmer, charming never so wisely a But as
Aaron did good service by standing between the dead, the living with his
censer, and incense on it, in staying the plague from spreading further*
although he did not restore unto life any of those that were dead; so if by the
interposure of these papers between persons drowned in Anabaptism, and those
whose heads are yet above water, I shall be able (through God) to preserve
these from sinking, although I be not able to workmiracles in recovering any of
the other, yet shall I do service acceptable unto my dear Lord and master
Christ, and to many of his Churches, and servants. Or however God shall please
to dispose of my labor herein, as to matter of success or event, liberavi
animam meam, I have discharged my conscience. Notwithstanding I confess, that
consulting with my Genius and spirit, I am apt to think that I should not have
appeared in print in these Baptismal controversies, had there not been a fire
of Anabaptism kindled in that house of God, which he has committed to my
inspection and charge, and this by one of the household; a man I acknowledge of
a sober and grave temper, but of somewhat too passive a disposition from
melancholique and superstitious impressions, and upon which his company (it
seems) had, and has, a stronger influence, then his Teachers. So hard a thing
is it to watch Satan so narrowly, but that at one time or other he will
insinuate and convey himself in the likeness of an Angel of light into the
Temple of God. It is an observation of Luther (as I remember) that no Church of
Christ ever continued in the native purity and intireness of it for twenty
years together. But oportet esse haereses, etc. and the Christian Commonwealth
is no loser upon the whole, by the disturbances occasioned in it by Sects and
Schisms, and by opinions at enmity with the Truth. For (as the common saying
is) ex malis moribus bonae leges nascuntur, evil manners beget good Laws; in
like manner, many the truths of God have been more fully discovered, and
commended to the judgments and consciences of men at the higher rate of
beauty, lovelyness, and worth, by occasion of those engagements with her
competitors (I mean, errors) unto which she has been necessitated from time to
time, and in which she has always sooner or later, triumphed, or will triumph,
in due time.

Nevertheless I could very heartily have wished to have been excused from
serving in that warefare, whereunto my friendly Adversary has compelled me by
his Baptismal Abuses, as well practiced, as Printed. For I had rather be at the
expense of seven years labor and travail in an expedition against those, who
will not suffer the Lord Jesus Christ quietly to inherit the glory and praise
of his ever blessed work of Redemption in the just compass and extent of* it,
who presume to set bounds and bars to the grace of God, which he never set, who
preach this (in effect) for Gospel unto the world, that God never bare any good
will to the far greatest part of them, but decreed peremptorily from eternity,
eternally to torment them with the vengeance of eternal fire, how innocently,
blamelesly, spotlesly soever they should live in the world all their days; who
preach also, that those whom they call Elect, though they prove the first born
Sons of Belial, and provoke the God of Heaven to his face with the height of
all abominations, may yet be true believers in God, may, nay do, abide all this
while in his love of Election, and by means hereof are in no danger, no
possibility of miscarrying in the high concernment of salvation (with twenty
things more of a like hideous confederacy with these) yea and reproach those,
who are any otherwise minded then themselves in these matters, with names of an
odious and hateful import, as* Arminians, Socinians, Pelagians, with other
Apochryphal diabolisms, which the great enemy of the truth puts between their
lips, whilst they sleep with their mouths open; I had much rather (I say)
serve seven years hard service against the Notions and Conceits of these men,
so broadly and importunely injurious both unto God and men, then serve so many
weeks, though with more ease, and less hardship, against the lighter dreams of
persons led aside by the Ana-baptismal spirit. But the Providence of God must
be complied with by men, whether that comports with men, or no. In the mean
time.

(...),
(...), i. e.
Well may King Priam, and his Sons ^e jolly,
When they shall hear of your contending folly.
Mr Kendal, and Birds of his feather, make mirth of these sad differences and
distractions raised by Satan in that Church, where both their Interest and his,
were like to have sustained so much damage, had not the danger been, in part,
reprized by those unhappy and unkind breaches, that have been made upon it. But
I trust that he that was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
devil, will in due time be above him in that, wherein (I believe) he much
magnifieth himself; and build up again in this Church of his, with advantage,
what the other has pulled down with both his hands.

But not to over-charge thy patience (Good Reader) with the burden of an
Epistle (if it be not too much discourtesied already) I here take my leave,
most heartily and humbly beseeching the God of all grace to anoint thee with a
rich anointing of a discerning spirit, and to give thee a sound understanding
in all things which concern thine own peace, and the peace of the Churches of
Christ, and the whole Israel of God; that thou may find a way to thine
eternal rest and glory, without treading and trampling under thy foot, as thou
go along, the peace and comfort of thy Brethren, partakers of like precious
Faith with thee, and who with much singleness of heart and soul, love, worship,
and serve the same God, and the same Lord Jesus Christ, whom thou servest;
although thou should suppose that God has not revealed unto them the truth
in all those matters of doubtful disputation, wherein thou presumest that he
has revealed it unto thee. He that fervently prays this Prayer for thee, is

Thy assured Friend in Christ, JOHN GOODWIN.
From my Study in Swan-Alley, December. 21. 1654.
An Admonition to the remainder of the Flock and Sheep of Christ, yet under my
hand and charge.
DEar Souls, for whom I exspect none other but to be called, and this very
shortly, to give an account to the great Shepherd of the Sheep, for the time
you have already been, and shall yet continue (respectively) under my hand;
that I may give this account, with joy and not with grief, is the sum of all
that either now, or ever hereafter, I shall desire of you. Nor do I, nor shall
I, desire this great thing of you, so much (by many degrees) for mine own sake,
as for yours. For as the faithful Ministers of the Gospel are (in the Apostles
Doctrine) unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in
them that perish; so is God unto them a sweet savor of reward through Christ,
as well for their labor, care, and faithfulness toward those who perish from
under their hand, as toward those that are saved. Every man (says the same
Apostle, speaking of the same men) shall receive his own reward, (...), i. e.
according to his own labor, not, according to the success or fruit of his
labor. Nevertheless this very Apostle, was very richly apaid and highly
pleased with the Christian towardliness and tractableness of those, to whom he
preached the Gospel, and as much affected the contrary way, when the children
of his nurture and teaching, behaved themselves frowardly, and unworthy the
Gospel in any kind. Unto the Thessalonians he writes these things: Therefore
Brethren, we are comforted over you in all our affliction and distress, by your
faith: For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. For what thanks can we
render unto God again for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes
before our God 1 These. 3. 7, 8, 9.
. Not long before, he had said unto them; For what is our hope, our joy, or
Crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at
his coming? For ye are our glory and joy [meaning, in respect of their constant
adhering to the Gospel, as he had delivered it unto them, and their
conversations excellently answering hereunto.]

On the other hand, how great a sufferer in spirit was he, under the weaknesses
and undue deportments of the children of his Ministry? Who is weak (says he)
and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11. 29.
meaning, that when any professor of the Gospel did bewray any doubtfulness of
the truth of it in any material point, or did shrink aside from the profession
of it, for any carnal end whatsoever, he was weakened in his comfo^t and peace
thereby, and much pained and aggrieved in his soul, until they were
strengthened and recovered. To the same persons elsewhere, thus. And lest when I
come again, my God will abase me among you, and that I shall bewail many which
have sinned already, and have not repented, etc. 2 Cor. 12. 21.
importing. 1. That the sinful miscarriages of this people, amongst whom he had
preached the Gospel, were just matter of sorrow unto him, and were like,
through the wise permission of God, to turn to his great disparagement in the
eyes of many, To the Galathians, having charged them with the superstition of
observing days, and months, and times and years, he professes thus unto them;
I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain Gal. 4. 11.
Fear (the Apostle John says) has torment. And though perfect love unto God,
casts out the fear of rejection or condemnation by him, yet them or e perfect
and sincere our love is unto men, the greater is both our fear and torment for
them, when we apprehend them in any great danger.

Concerning my self, what my behavior and conversation has been among you
from the first day of your gathering under my hand, you well know, and are
ready (I doubt not) upon all occasions, to testify. What my heart has been
toward you, my heart it self knows; but he that is greater then my heart
knows much better, and will declare in due time. I have spent the best and
most serviceable part of my days with you, and have endeavored with all my
might (humane infirmities excepted) to train you up like Saints, and Heirs
apparent to an Heavenly Kingdom.

And now not being like long to continue with you in the world, (the keepers of
my house, in Solomon's phrase, beginning to tremble, and they that look out at
the windows, to be darkened) nor to publish many, if any, more Books then this
before my change; I was desirous (the argument and subject matter of the work
in hand, so well comporting with the design) to take the present opportunity,
whilst I am yet with you, of being your Remembrancer of some few things, a
conscientious minding and observing, whereof (I question not) will do you
Christian and worthy service, and help to bless you, when I am gone.

1. Remember, and I say again, Remember often 3.
and seriously, that it is much more easy to begin in the spirit, then to
continue, end, and be perfected in the spirit; to run well for a time, then
perseveringly to obey the truth; to interess your selves in the love of Christ,
then to continue in his love unto the end. There were four several grounds that
had good seed sown in them, and three of them bare profession; but only one of
them yielded perseverance. It is the observation of an Hebrew Doctor, that they
were six hundred thousand men that came out of Egypt: but there were only two
of this vast number that entered into the Land of Canaan. So (says he) shall it
be in the days of the Messiah. Afterward, when God set harvest men on work to
cut down and gather this Nation, being now (in all likelihood) much more
numerous, there were very few ears of the corn that escaped them, their
vintage afforded few Grapes for the gleaner: their Olive Tree, though full of
fruit, being shaken, all the berries thereof dropped off to the ground, two or
three only excepted in the top of the uppermost bough, and four or five in the
outmost fruitful branches [meaning, that there were very few found amongst the
great ones, and not many amongst the ordinary or meaner sort amongst them, whom
God could judge meet to be spared in the judgment.] The New Testament likewise
gives frequent notice, that the generality of persons, who should for a time
engage solemnly in a Christian profession, would be like unto the Prophets
Fig Trees with their first-ripe Figs: if they be shaken, they will even fall
into the mouth of the Eater. Nah. 3. 21.
Many that are first (says our Savior himself) shall be [or will be] last. So
again, (speaking of those, who should be professors of the Gospel, as well as
others) he foretells that when times of persecution should come MANY would be
offended: And again: that many false Prophets should arise, and would deceive
MANY: and that, because iniquity should abound, the love of MANY should wax
cold. Mat. 24. 10. 11. 12.
A little before he had declared, that many would come in his name, and would
deceive MANY. The Scriptures of the New Testament, are full of such Items and
forewarnings as these, as likewise of Instances and examples of hot and zealous
professors for a time, who in the progress of their course, turned aside, some
into one byway, some into another, and so lost the things which they had
wrought, and perished eternally. Such as these may be fitly compared to such
horses, which are fierce and full of mettle at the Stable door, capering and
prauncing, as if no ground would hold them; who yet after a few Miles travel,
either tire or founder, grow jadish or resty, and neither by fair means nor
foul, can be gotten anend. Yea, how many of your selves (I mean of your
Churchbody, though for number of members but small, not to mention the like
deplorable doings in other Churches) have within the compass of a few years
(for you have not been imbodyed many) broken their ranks, and turned aside,
some on the right hand, and others on the left, into dark and dangerous
by-ways, where the light of life either shines not at all, or very
malignantly, like unto a dusky twilight, wherein many travelers lose their
way? Yea, how many are there not yet separated from your Body, whose spiritual
pulse beats very faintly, and concerning whom the ground of jealousy is great,
that they have fallen, and are falling daily more and more, from their first
love. What between spiritual wickednesses (I mean, Sects, ways, and opinions,
pretending to the Truth) on the one hand, and fleshly wickednesses, the love of
ease, pleasure, and other the contentments of this world, on the other hand,
the trees of Christ's forest (in his respective Churches) are made few from day
to day, that (in the Prophets phrase) a child may tell them, and the glory of
his Carme^ is consumed. Therefore if you mean so to run, as to obtain, it
mightily concerns you, not only, or simply, to take care how to believe, or
how to live holily, but (that which is of a far greater undertaking, and more
difficult achievement) how to do both perseveringly. You must imitate those,
who intending a long Voyage by Sea, freight their Ship with provisions
accordingly. A little oil will serve to make your Lamps blaze and burn for a
while; but it must be a full Vessel that will keep them burning till midnight,
or until the time of the Bridegrooms coming.

2. The Apostle Paul re-minds the Corinthians in 4.
his time, that the ends [or latter times] of the world were come upon them;
and withal informs them, that God, in consideration of the dangerousness of
these times through the extraordinary activeness of Satan (perfectly
fore-known unto him) had caused many transactions and passages of former times
to be recorded; by the study, knowledge, and due consideration whereof, they
might be admonished to look about them with so much the more care and
watchfulness, and thus be able to redeem the season, how evil soever the days
should be. Brethren, I may say to you, that the ends of those ends of the world
are come upon you, and that you, with the present generation of the Saints with
you, and if there be another yet future, are like to feel the power of the
wrath of Satan, for the endangering of your eternal peace (and most probably,
your temporal and civil peace also) above what all former ages have done. You
must expect to be tempted, and tempted ten times over, to be very violently and
restlesly haled and importuned by him, to turn aside out of, and to exchange
that good and safe way of God, wherein at present you walk, for some or other
of those crooked and bypath, which he has devised, and prevailed with some
unstable and unlearned, with some proud and self-conceited men, who think they
know more then all the world besides, and that the spirit of revelation has
forsaken all flesh besides, to invest them, to broach and set on foot in the
Christian world. Yea you must expect that the Enemy of your peace will knock
with Authority, and after the manner of an Angel of light, yea, or of the
Spirit of God himself, at the door of your hearts and consciences, imperiously
commanding that it be opened unto him, thundering and threatening, like God
himself, the loss of salvation, the vengeance of eternal fire, if it be not
opened unto him. Be therefore (I beseech you) admonished, and know for a
certain, that importunity of an inward solicitation is no argument that the
persuasion, unto which you are solicited, comes from God. 5.


3. You may reasonably expect, that before seven years more shall have passed
over the head of the world, sundry of those Sects, and by-ways of Profession,
which at present lift up their heads on high, and reign both in credit, and
numbers of Proselytes and followers, will be crest-fallen, and become like
Bottles in the smoke (in David's phrase) withered and mis-seasoned, and which
few, or none, will (in those respects) care to use; but withal, that Satan
will soon recruit himself, and build up his wast places, and raise up new Sects
and by-opinions amongst Professors, instead of those that are fallen. For as
the wisdom of God is (...) (Ephesians. 3. 10.) i. e. Various, or manifold, so is
Satan's cunning also: He knowing (at least in the general) the tempers, humors,
weaknesses, and great instability in the judgments of the generality of men
and women, is still forging and forming new opinions and conceits, new methods
and ways of worshipping and serving God, such as he knows are likely to fall
in, and take with the hearts and fancies of some or other of them, if he can
but find Instruments or Factors (who are seldom far to seek) to publish and
commend them unto the world. For as Livie reports it to have been the policy
of the old Romans, to make many other shields like unto that, which fell from
heaven (as they supposed) in the days of Numa Pompilius, with this Oracle
accompanying it, that in what City soever that Shield should remain, it should
be the most flourishing and prosperous in the world, that so this fatal Shield
might not easily be discerned from the rest, in case any person should attempt
to steal it away: in like manner the Devil knowing that God has revealed from
Heaven, and commended unto the children of men one way of life and salvation,
he sets his wits on work to invent and form many other methods and ways of some
semblance with this, that so he may amuse, distract, and confound the reasons,
judgments, and consciences of men (at least of the generality of them) and
cause them strongly to imagine, that one or other of those ways, which he has
devised, and procured a recommendation of, by some Pretenders to Religion, or
others, unto the world, is that only true and living way, wherein God himself
has commanded men and women to walk, if ever they mean to be saved. This is
evident in that late Diabolical Sect, commonly known amongst us by the name of
Quakers, and so likewise in the Sect of high Anabaptism, and several others.
And the truth is, that the Truth can by no Artifice or Method be more
dangerously resisted or undermined, then by setting up counterfeit Tenants and
practices by it of some plausible similitude, and correspondencie with it.
Jannes and Jambres are said to have withstood Moses, (2 Timothy 3. 8.) because, by
sorcery they wrought false miracles, yet like unto those, which Moses wrought
by the finger of God. Exodus 7. 11. 22. After the same manner (says the
Apostle) do men resist the Truth. Thus because the true Messiah was, according
to the Scriptures, and the common belief of true Christians, born of a Virgin,
therefore Simon Magus (the firstborn of Satan, as one of the Fathers styles
him) who affected the honor of being reputed the Messiah, gave out to his
followers (as the Ecclesiastical history reports) that he also was born of a
Virgin.

4. Take heed of minding or looking too narrowly, 6.
on that which is pleasing and taking in a new way, or Sect, without minding
and considering altogether as narrowly, that which is dangerous and threatening
in it. For as Wine has that in it, which is very pleasant and enticing, as
viz. his color in the cup, and his sparkling and springing motion in the glass
(Prove. 25. 31.) and yet again, has that in it also, which is baneful and
terrifying, viz. that it bites like a Serpent, and stings like an Adder (ver.
32.) and he that only minds the former, without thinking seriously of the
latter, is apt to be ensnared by it to his ruin: in like manner every Sect and
by-way, Anti-nomianism, Ana-baptism, Seeking, Quaking, Ranting, etc. have
somewhat in them (respectively) of an insinuating nature into the minds and
affections even of pious and well-meaning men, as on the other hand they have
that also which is spiritually dangerous, and portending much evil to the soul:
and they that only mind and consider the former, without laying their reasons,
judgments, consciences, and considering abilities as close to the latter, are
in danger of being carried away with them, some with one, and others with
another, to the eminent endangering, if not to the utter undoing, them in their
spiritual estate.

4. Remember (and remember it again) that the 7.
holy Ghost as well reckons (...), i. e. contentions, emulations, divisions,
sects, [or heresies] amongst the works of the flesh (yea amongst such works of
the flesh, which are manifestly so) as he does adultery, fornication,
wantonness, idolatry, drunkenness, etc. Gal. 5. 19, 20. yea the lusting,
following after, and taking up, new forms and ways of worshipping and serving
God, by the people of God, or (which differs little) the following after new
and strange Gods, is by a frequent metaphor in the Scriptures, termed
fornication, whoredom, and adultery. The reason may be (and probably is, at
least in part) because a man or woman never forsakes the true and right way of
worshipping God, to worship him in a false, but it is to gratify the flesh, or
some sensual principle or other; yea, although this new and by-way seems never
so grievous or afflicting to the flesh. The Apostle pronounces such a person
(...), rashly, or vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, who teaches men a
voluntary humility [i. e. any such way of worshipping God, which carries an
outward show of humbling, mortifying, or abasing the flesh, and yet is not
prescribed by him] as the worshipping of Angels, abstinence from certain meats,
from Marriage, etc. Col. 2. 18. 21, 22, 23. The Popish penances, of going
barefoot, wearing sackcloth, whipping themselves, etc. as ill-pleasing to the
flesh as near at hand they seem to be, are notwithstanding remotely subservient
unto it, and very indulgent to the Interest of it, by strengthening the hand of
those who practice them, to take up sin with more boldness upon a new score, as
having discharged the old.

5. Take heed of Satan turning himself into an 8.
Angel of light. When he shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or, lo he is
there (inwardly pointing you to one way, or another, differing from that
wherein at present you walk, and have found Christ with you) know for certain
that he does it to delude you, either by seeking to draw you from Christ where
he is, by putting you into a fools paradise of hoping to find him, where he is
not; or else by tempting you to conceit more highly of your selves, only for
putting on a new garb or outside of profession. By this artifice he draws many
into the like sad inconveniences, which Eutrapelus in the Poet projected to
bring those into, against whom he intended mischief, by presenting them with
costly and gorgeous apparel to put on and wear. When (says he) men see
themselves richly and gorgeously attired, their thoughts will importunely work
and swell, they will be lifted up to hopes of great matters, and will put
themselves upon great and high projects, the prosecution of which will be their
ruin. I fear that Satan has drawn many into a like snare of misery, by
investing them with new habits of Religion, specious (it may be) and rich to an
undiscerning and injudicious eye: as of Seeking, Quaking, Anabaptizing,
Super-Ordinancing, with sundry other forms and fashions of professing Christ,
which he has devised to please the humors and fancies of unstable persons in
these latter days.

6. Beware especially of the Notions and. 9.
Doctrines of those, who to magnify (as they suppose) the inward teachings,
enlightenings, and workings of God, or of the Spirit of God, in, or upon, the
hearts and minds of men, vilify his Ordinances and outward administrations,
judging these to be but impertinencies, and things which may without loss; yea
and (as the profane madness of some utters it self) with no spiritual
disadvantage, be laid aside. For though neither he that planteth be any thing,
nor he that waters, any thing; and so neither preaching any thing, nor
hearing any thing viz. comparatively, or in respect of God, who gives the
increase] yet he that speaks this, says also (though with a modest
expression) to Philemon, that he owed unto him even his own self. Philemon v.
19. And elsewhere, gives thanks unto God, who always caused him to triumph in
Christ a [meaning in respect of the great success of his Ministry in the
conversion of men unto Christ, where ever he came preaching the Gospel] yea and
ascribes unto Timothy the saving of the souls of those, who should hear him, 1 Timothy 4. 16. All which (with very many more like unto them) clearly assert a
Sovereign necessity of the Ministry. Yea where he that planteth and he that
waters, are despised, it is not God, but the Devil that gives the increase.
For we read of no increase, at least ordinarily, given by God, but upon, and by
means of the planting and watering by men. Yea if there were nothing but mere
sacramentality in the preaching of the Gospel and other Ordinances, the
teachings and inspirations of God and of his Spirit, cannot upon any competent
ground be expected without them; no more then Naaman had ground to expect a
cleansing from his leprosy, without washing seven times in Jordan; or Moses
and the Israelites, that the waters of the Red Sea, would have been divided,
and afforded them a passage thorough on dry Land, had not Moses lift up his Rod
over them, as God had directed him, and so divided them, Exodus 14. 16. 21.

7. If you shall at any time be by the Providence of God, seated and settled
under such a Ministry, where the words of eternal life are preached unto you
with power, and (as the Apostle speaks) in the evidence and demonstration of
the spirit, know that you cannot better your selves by changing your Station;
but you may by such a change endamage your selves in the things of your eternal
peace exceedingly. Lord (says Peter) to whom shall we go? Thou have the words
of eternal life, Joh. 6. 68. There is no removing or going from before the face
of the Gospel, where the glory of it, from time to time shines out in the face
of the inner man, but with imminent danger of spiritual loss upon the remove.
For though there are that are called Preachers of the Gospel, whether in one
form of a Religious profession, or of another (as there are Preachers of the
Gospel many, and Teachers many) yet to those who have a true and lively taste of
the Gospel, and of the spirit thereof, the able and faithful Preachers thereof,
are very few. Nor will, nor can, the practice of any carnal Rite or Ceremony,
one, or more, (especially by others, least of all when not only the necessity,
but even the lawfulness of the practice of them, is matter of doubtful
disputation) balance the loss that is like to be sustained by exchanging the
Sun for the Moon; I mean, a lightsome, spiritful and lively Ministry, for that
which is cloudy, flat, and of small execution.

8. You can hardly enter into, and walk in any of 11.
those many by-ways, or new-devised forms of profession, which are at this day
occupied and used by men and women pretending highly to Religion amongst us,
but there is signal cause of fear that your spirits will receive some ill
tincture or other even from the best of them, and that your hearts will be
disordered, and levened with some un-Christian impression by means of them.

Amongst those known by the name of QUAKERS, who are at present the rising and
growing Sect, or Faction, and whose way has in a short time (welnigh)
swallowed up quick the way of Ana-Baptism, which till of late magnified it self
above all its fellows, there is little question to be made but that the Devil
dwells (...), bodily, and subjecteth the Proselites of this way unto his own
most inhumane tyranny, under the pretense and show of mortification,
self-denial, austerity of life, etc. teaching them to give heed unto, and
follow the light (as they term it) which is within them, without any
examination or search, whither this light be darkness or no, which the Lord
Christ supposes it may very possibly be. If therefore the light that is in
thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! Mat. 6. 23. Such a Doctrine as
this, viz. to forbid all examination or trial, when as God expressly counsels
us to try all things, is the express Character of the great enemy of the
precious souls of men.

Another Sect we have amongst us (borderers upon the former) whom I know not
yet how to call by any appropriate name; but the way of their folly is, to cast
behind their back, or trample under their feet, all the Ordinances of God,
unless it be such a kind of preaching which strengthens their hand thereunto;
teaching that God, or the Spirit of God, does all; with a total exclusion of
man's care, study, thoughts or endeavors whatsoever. A Doctrine exactly
calculated for the Meridian of Hell, and serves with an high hand, for the
advancement of the Devils Kingdom amongst men. Amongst these men you will learn
to honor every Spirit, that shall at any time enter into you, though never so
frantique, and fanatique, though never so lying or unclean, with the worthy
name of the Spirit of God. Yea, you will learn negligence, sloathfulness, and
profaneness, as matters of duty, and regular submission unto God.

Amongst the Ana-Baptists (I mean those of the 12. Ana-Baptists.
high form) you will be tempted to build upon the water, instead of the Rock,
and to rejoice in a thing of naught. You will be apt to learn pride,
peremptoriness, self-conceitedness, unquietness and turbulency of spirit, the
despising of those that are good: the magnifying of a minute of will worship,
against, or above, the divine Nature it self in men, above Faith, Love,
Holiness, Humility, Mortification, Self-denial, Fruitfulness in well doing, and
whatsoever do most unquestionably commend both men and women unto God, and
sober men.

Antinomianism, is a Schole of Lawless Liberty, wherein is taught how without
the least regret of conscience, to turn the grace of God into wantonness; and
where the progymnasmata, or impure Elements of Ranting (the dregs and retriment
of all Sects, and where men and women are taught to turn head upon conscience;
yea and upon whatsoever is commendable in Nature it self) are plainly laid
under the Notions and names of most worthy Truths, and such wherein the glory
of the Gospel confisteth. The truth is, that a Ranter is nothing but an
Antinomian sublimated.

Amongst the Virgin-Livers, you will be taught, or 13. Virgin-Livers.
tempted to stop the course and current of Nature, until it breaks over, not
only the dam wherewith you shall obstruct it, but even all the banks and bounds
which God himself has prefixed to it. Here also if you be easy of belief and
tractable under a spirit of delusion, you will be provoked to make a breach upon
all the Laws and Precepts of God, which concern the Christian management of
Relations, and this under a pretext of sovereign devotion, and of signal
sequestration from the world.

Those commonly known by the name of Seekers, are a generation who think they
do God a most Seekers.
choice service in overlooking all that is written, upon pretense of looking
after somewhat higher, more mysterious, and sacred, then any thing that is
written; as if God, who (as the Apostle teaches us) has in these last days
spoken unto the world by his Son, intended to reveal unto, and speak by these
men somewhat beyond, and of greater import then any thing he has spoken unto
the world by him. Amongst these this snare of death will be spread in your way,
you will be tempted to seek after another Jesus, with the neglect and contempt
of him, besides whom there is no Savior of souls.

Amongst the Quinto-Monarchians, or persons 10.
best known by the name of the fifth Monarchy men, Quinto-Monarchians.
not so much from their opinion touching the said Monarchy, as by that fierce
and restless spirit which works in them, to bring it in into the world by
uncouth and unhallowed methods and ways, and this before the times of the other
Monarchies be fulfilled, you will learn to speak evil of those that are in
dignity, to curse the Ruler of your people, to entertain darkness in stead of a
vision, (...), i. e. to advance your selves with confidence into the things
which you have not seen, and to please your selves most, when you neither
please God, nor sober minded men.

Amongst the Behemites, or Mysterialists, you Behemites, or Misteryal
will learn little but uncouth and affectate words and phrases, under which you
may intend and mean what mysteries you please, but nothing to the edification
of any man, nor scarce of your selves; together with an art or faculty to
allegorize quite away the vivifique spirit, power and Authority of the
Scriptures, and this under a pretense of teaching Repentance, Mortification,
Humility, Self-denial, Resignation, etc. after a new and more excellent way,
then has been formerly taught or known. Here though you shall meet with strange
and unheard of terms and expressions in a sufficient number to fill the world
with new notions and secrets of truth, such as the hearts and minds of men,
have been strangers unto until now; yet will the whole Encyclopedy of this
learning hardly bless or enrich you so much, as with one distinct notion, veyn,
or streyn of truth, which is not already abroad in the world amongst
intelligent men, yea and this in a far more scientifical garb or habit of
expression. Here you will be taught to comment upon the light with darkness.

Contra-Remonstrancie (as it is commonly taught 14.
amongst us) is a model of divinity, or of Christian Contra-Remonstrants.
Religion, drawn quite besides the platform, or pattern in the Mount, I mean,
the mind of God revealed in the Scriptures. The appropriate principles of this
way may reasonably be conceived to lead unto most (if not all) other sects, and
those evils, whether of opinion, or of practice, that are found in them.
Amongst the sons and daughters of this Divinity, you will learn such a Faith,
which instead of working by love, will work by carelessness and security, and
which will give such large quarter unto the flesh, that its own Life and Being,
will be sorely endangered, if not utterly overthrown thereby, besides many most
unworthy and hard thoughts and sayings of him, who is Grace, Love, Goodness and
Bounty it self, and who is not willing that any should perish, but that al
should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
and be saved 1 Timothy 2. 4.
.

Among the Arians, and Anthropomorhites, the life of godliness in you, if you
carry any such thing with Arians and Anthropomorphites.
you unto them, will be in danger of poisoning with dunghill notions and conceits
of God, and of Christ. For here the abominable Idolatry of the old Heathen, who
changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image ma^e like to
corruptible man, which (as the Apostle informs us) God most severely
punished, is in the clear and plain pri(...) les o^ it taught as a great and
unquestionable truth. And He, who the Holy Ghost styles, God blessed for ever
Romans 9. 5.
, (I mean Christ the Lord) is allowed this Godhead in a diminutive sense
only, and such, which dissolveth the glory of the mystery of the Gospel into a
piece of odd and savour-less projection, without any length, or breadth, depth,
or height of wisdom in it.

Amongst the High-Presbyterians, and men baptized into their spirit, you must
submit your faith to the test of men, and be content to be at a classical, or
Synodical allowance for what you shall believe. And yet here you will be taught
to sacrifice the peace liberties, and comforts of other men, and these (it may
be) better, more righteous, yea and sounder in the faith, then your selves,
upon the service of such a faith, which is formed and modeled by the fancies,
or weak understandings of men, and these superintended (for the most part) and
influenced by some politic or corrupted interest or other.

These are the principal Sects, and by-ways of Christian profession at this day
on foot amongst us (as far as my knowledge and memory at present serve me to
recount them unto you) into which (I mean, into one or other of which) if you
be not thoroughly established with the knowledge of the truth, and of the good
word of God, and withal, watchful in prayer unto God to keep you in the good
old way of truth and peace, your foot will be in danger of sliding, and in so
much the more danger, because these ways of errors (at least some of them)
have deceived great, numbers of men and women, and are at this day occupied by
many; according to that of Christ to his Disciples themselves: Take heed that
no man deceive you: For MANY shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and
shall deceive MANY. Facile transitur ad plures (is the saying of Seneca) i. A
little consideration serves a man to make one in a multitude, or throng.
Besides, there are reports abroad very credible, and not without arguments
otherwise to confirm the truth of them, that there are cunning Emissaries of
the Romish faction, Jesuits, and others, and these not a few, who secretly,
and in a disguise, insinuate themselves with all, or most, of the prementioned
Sects amongst us. These being the most exquisite and expert Artists in the
world in glosses and colors, know how of plausible Arguments and Pretenses, to
make fair faces to set upon every Sect and by-opinion, whereby to allure the
fancies of injudicious and inconsiderate people unto them, and to set every
party agog with a conceit of their own way, and notions; their most wicked and
dangerous design being to distract, rend, and tear the Nation, into factions,
parties, and sects, especially all those in it, who seem to pretend with any
zeal to conscience, or Religion, that so they may upon better terms of
advantage commend the Romish Church and Religion for that unity which is found
in them, unto the generality of weak and carnal men amongst us (being the bulk
of the Natioan, and whose Sovereign grievance it is not to have a National or
State Religion, wherein all must gree) and hereby have the bro ader and larger
opportunity, either to work the Nation back again unto Rome, or otherwise to
bring the misery of confusion, if not ruin it self, upon us.

9. As the English Proverb, that a rolling stone 16.
gathers no Moss, imports, that persons who often remove, and change either
their dwellings, or employments, do not (ordinarily) prosper, or thrive in the
world; so neither do the souls of such persons (usually) prosper, who are of
desultory and light dispositions, easily and without great weight and evidence
of argument, persuaded out of one form or way of worpshiping God into another,
or out of one Church into another. Upon this account it is that the Apostle
makes an opposition between being carried about with diverse [or various] and
strange doctrines, and having the heart established with grace: Be not carried
about with various [(...)] and strange Doctrines; for it is good that the heart
be established with grace, not with meats, which have not profited them who
have been occupied therein Heb. 13. 9.
, clearly implying, that such professors, who are apt to be hurryed or carried
round from one opinion to another, which are various and strange, not depending
on, nor consistent with, one the other, or such, wherewith the Church of Christ
have not been acquainted (for these are properly strange Doctrines) are never
like to attain the great blessing of having their hearts and consciences well
balanced or established, either with any excellent work of grace or holiness
in them, or with the sense or sound belief of the rich Grace of God in the
Gospel. The reason whereof might be given, but that the Law of brevity
forbids it. It was the confession of one who had some years before turned
aside into the way of Ana-Baptism, at the time of his execution for the horrid
sin of murder committed in this City (of which confession one of you, if I
mistake not, was an ear witness) that from the time of his going under water,
he sensibly found God departing from him.

10. If it be a duty solemnly charged by God upon 17.
you, as far as lies in you, and if it be possible, [i. e. if you can compass
or admit of it, without sinning; for unto Saints, all sin by the Law of their
profession, is made and declared an impossibility Joh. 3. 9. Romans 6 2. 2 Cor.
13. 8. G^^ 39. 9.
] to have peace with all men, how much more ought you to judge your selves
bound by engagements of the highest, to have and keep peace amongst your
selves, and one with another? your Church and Christian fellowship, will be as a
first fruits of that New Jerusalem, which is now coming down apace from Heaven
unto you, if you be careful and diligent to knit your selves together in love,
standing fast in one spirit, with one mind and one judgment, and so continue.
Be of one mind: live in peace: and the God of love and peace shall be with you,
2 Cor. 13. 11. your God shall be your glory, and you shall be the glory of all
the Churches of the Saints round about you, if you shall carefully endeavor to
keep the unity of the spirit in the band of peace. Behold, how good, and how
pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in unity! It is as the Dew of
Hermon, yea as that which descends upon the Mountains of Sion: for there the
Lord commanded the blessing and life for evermore. Psalm. 133. 1. 3. As on the
contrary, where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work
(Jam. 3. 16.) and consequently, God must needs behold persons and societics of
this unworthiness, a far off. And to those, whom he thus beholds, misery and
ruin must needs be near at hand. Therefore if differences at any time arise
amongst you.

1. Let every man remember that he knows but in part, and consequently that
the error, or mistake, may possibly lie on his side.

2. Let him heartily, and with an unfeigned desire of being overruled, though
contrary to his present sense, into the truth, especially when love and peace
are like to be gained and maintained withal, weigh and consider the grounds
and reasons of him, or them, who dissent from him.

3. Let him that has any thing suggested to him, under the notion of a truth,
contrary to the present sense of his Brethren, not over-hastily entertain it,
but rather suspect, and expostulate with the suggestion. And if he cannot thus
satisfy or free his conscience, let him argue and debate with himself the
grounds of it upon such terms, as he would oppose or counterargue the Tenent of
an Adversary. If this will not yet deliver him, let him by frequent and fervent
prayer, seek an intemerate and chaste judgment at the hand of God. If this
notwithstanding, he shall remain doubtful and unsatisfied.

4. In case the matter of his suggestion supposed to be a truth, be somewhat
about the verge, or outworks of Religion, and not near the center or heart, (as
matters of doubtful dispute amongst Christians, for the most part, are) let him
(as the Apostle advises in somewhat a like case) either have his faith to
himself, and not trouble his Brethren, or the Church with it; Or else, let him
declare and propose it like it self, I mean, with an acknowledgment that it is
a point of inferior concernment, and for which he shall contend with no man to
the breach of love or peace; especially let him not strayn or bend himself,
(...), to hyperbolize or over-speak the consequence or concernment of it. In
which kind of misdemeanor, the high Ana-Bap^ist is the firstborn of offenders,
yea though his notion for rebaptizing, or (as himself would fain have it pass)
for baptizing, should be yielded unto him for a truth. He that contendeth not
as well, yea and as much, for love and peace, as for truth, is no good soldier
of Jesus Christ, or of the truth.

5. If such a person cannot be delivered from his conceit of (...), some great
thing in his new notion, 20.
or private opinion, let him declare himself before his Brethren in public,
simply and plainly, that such is his judgment. By this means he shall give
testimony unto that, which he conceives to be a truth, and so acquit himself
in point of conscience both toward God and man, without making a breach upon
the Church of Christ, or his godly Brethren, by separating or rending himself
from them; as Peter Martyr, sometimes here in England did, and several other
worthy and conscientious men have done else where in like cases.

6, (And lastly, for this) because men of unsound and strange notions, and
separating principles, have frequently as the Apostle gives warning, Ephesians. 4.
14.) a slight and cunningness of craft, whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
and the generality of professors are weak, and easy to be ensnared, where the
snare, especially with a plausible ba^t, is spread in their way; therefore
admit not, without some special cause or providence leading you unto it, of
much familiarity or intimateness of converse with such men, no not though they
seem conscientious, yea or high, or hot spirited for God, and be of plausible
behavior otherwise. For as the Tragoedian said long since, venenum in auro
bibitur, Poison is commonly drunk out of a cup of gold; so is an error, or
by-notion, soonest taken into the judgment and conscience of a well-meaning
person, from persons of fair carriage, and smooth conversation, especially when
they are familiar and frequent with them, and of their bosom acquaintance. And
if the ways of an angry man, which at first must needs be harsh and unpleasing
to a person of a quiet and meek spirit, are yet apt by the advantage of a
familiar converse with such a man, to insinuate themselves into him; much more
are the principles and practices of men seemingly religious, and of loving and
friendly behavior, otherwise like to gain upon the minds and affections even
of well-disposed persons, if they converse intimately and frequently with them.
As for your occasional communion, let it be Christian, honest, fair, and civil
toward all men.

11. (...) (as the Apostle exhorts. Heb. 12. 15.) i. Act ye every man
(respectively) the part of a Bishop, Watchman, or Overseer, one toward, or
over, another, lest any man fail of, or fall from, the grace of God, lest any
root of bitterness spring up amongst you, and many be defiled. The exhortation
implies, that a member of a Church body, cannot lightly putrify or miscarry,
but through the negligence of the body it self, or of its fellow members, as
well as through the weakness or unworthyness of the member miscarrying. It is
reported as the frequent saying of Matthias the Apostle in his days, (...); If
the neighbor of an Elect person [meaning of a Christian or Beleever] sins,
it argues that the Elect person himself has sinned, [meaning in being wanting
unto him in such means, which might have preserved him.] Let every man's heart
therefore be deeply set within him to take all his present company all along
with him (if it be possible) in his way to Heaven, not suffering any person to
straggle, or wander from his fellows in any by-way of sin or vanity. For it
seldom happens, in case so much as one member in a Church Society breaks
his rank, or turns after Satan in any way of ungodliness, but that the
example will propagate, yea and occasion many fruits of bitterness and
disturbance in the body otherwise. Therefore let every man of you labor to
possess his soul with this apprehension, that it very narrowly concerns the
interest of his own comfort and peace, to look diligently about him, and to
bestir himself, that every member of his Church-brotherhood keep a Christian
decorum all along his race, as well as himself.

12. Take heed of falling in your esteem of any the ways and Ordinances of God;
and so of cooling 19.
or languishing in your zeal toward the enjoyment of them. You can want none
of them, if the want be voluntary, but with certain detriment and loss in your
spiritual estate. They are like the hollow Trunks or Pipes, which lying between
the full fountain or River, and the dry and empty Cistern, join them together,
and supply the emptyness of the one, out of the native fullness of the other.
God is a fountain full of all grace, goodness, light, life, strength, wisdom,
knowledge, etc. And his good pleasure is to derive and communicate of his
fullness in all these, unto the poor, barren indigent creature, man. But his
pleasure is withal to make this derivation (at least, ordinarily) by certain
Ordinances and Administrations, which lie like golden Pipes fastened in the one
end to his own heart and soul, and in the other, to the heart and soul of man.
And as they dissolve and destroy the communion between the fountain and
Cistern, who either obstruct, or cut off the Pipe, by which the water is
conveyed from the one unto the other: so do they estrange themselves from God,
and stiffle their Communion with him, who without necessity or justness of
occasion, forsake his Ordinances, and separate themselves from them. Most
certain it is, that he that has appointed them for the sons and daughters of
men, has not appointed them in vain: therefore they who forsake them, sin
against, and forsake, their own mercies. The best means to preserve you in
honorable and worthy thoughts of them, is to use and improve them
conscientiously and carefully, and upon every enjoyment of them respectively,
to take a steady account what you have spiritually gained by them. The loose
and negligent use of them, deprives men of the benefit and blessing of them:
and when men and women find themselves no ways blessed by them, they are at the
next door to a despising and forsaking them.

I have hitherto been your remembrancer of such 13.
things, which more particularly relate to the keeping of your judgments
sound, and untainted with error, and to the regulation of your behavior and
dep^rtment in your Church Communion. I shall only subjoyn (with much more
brevity) a few directions, more proper for the manageing of your private and
secret converse with your selves and your own souls. Therefore

12. When you reason, or commune, with your hearts, either about the worth, or
worthlesness, of of the world that now is, or the good things hereof, or about
the worth and consequence of the things of that world, which is to come, let
the discourse both of the one, and the other, be managed, maintained and
carried on, as much as may be, in the language, phrases and term^ of the
Scriptures. For God (doubtless) has sanctified the words and expressions of
the Holy Ghost, to make both more adequate and lively impressions of the things
signified by them, upon the hearts and spirits of men, then any other.

13. Amongst such Scripture terms and expressions, wherein the Holy Ghost
speaks either of Earthly, or Spiritual and Heavenly good things: delight most
(in your said secret discourses) to use those which are most emphatical, and
nearest to Hyperboles. Such words and expr^ssions as these frequently used in
your Soliloquies, will by degrees habituate your minds to think very
ind^fferently and meanly, of temporal good things, and most highly of the
things of Jesus Christ, and of the world to come. The Scripture in some
expressions makes the greatest and most desirable things of this world next
unto nothing, yea nothing it self, and appropriates reality, substance, truth,
worth and excellency of being, unto the things of the world to come. Let such
expressions as these, be of choice esteem, and of daily use with you. It is the
observation Amat tal^^s compositione Paulus Hug. Grot. In Romans 5. 20.
of one, that the Apostle Paul delights much in words compounded of the
Preposition (...), the import whereof is to advance and raise the signification
of the word compounded with it, as (...) *to omit many others.) The use of such
words, or of the notions imported by such words, in your meditations of
spiritual and Heavenly things, will be of rich concernment unto you to work in
time and by degrees, your judgments and apprehensions of matters relating to
both worlds, to a steady conformity with the judgment of God himself,
concerning these things, as it is declared in the Scriptures; and so to mold
and form your lives and ways accordingly.

14. Know no accommodation, no gratification 21.
whatsoever to the flesh against the lightest or softest motion of the spirit
within you, nor against the least jot or tittle of any the commands of Christ.
If you shall deign to take any knowledge of them, you will run an extreme
hazard of being ensnared and overcome, and so dtawn into greater inconveniency
and danger in the end, then you can readily imagine in the beginning.

15. You have opportunity of a fourfold variety of Christian employment. You
may meditate that which is good with your heart: You may do that which is good
with your hand: You may speak that which is good with your tongue: You may hear
that which is good with your ears. It is pity but that one or other of these
ploughs should still be kept going: you can hardly be cast under any such
disadvantage at any time, but that you may serve the dear interest of your
souls, and better your accounts and reckonings at the great day, by exercising
your selves in one or other of these worthy engagements.

16. Remember that all time lost, or misspent, though never so truly repented of
by you, though never so freely and fully pardoned by God, yet will
(occasionally, and in a sense not to be despised by considering men) turn to
loss unto you all the days of eternity. For though God, upon the said
suppositions, will not punish you in the least for your miscarriages in either
kind, nor once mention them unto you, yet you cannot expect that he will reward
you for them. The highest privilege that sin, or any unworthyness, is capable
of, is pardon: reward is appropriate unto righteousness, Whereas had the time,
which you spend idly, or mis-imploy, been sown with the good seed of
righteousness, and well-doing, he that gives to every seed its own body, would
have made your harvest of blessedness and glory in the world to come, so much
the greater and more plentiful. Therefore be diligent and careful to improve
the smallest shreds, or broken ends of time.

And what shall I say more? For the time would 22.
fall me to set before you, or to recommend unto you, all that is in my heart
for the Christian, comfortable, and safe steerage of your course through the
world. I trust that without any recognition, through the grace of God that is
given you, you retain in mind many things more of this blessed concernment,
which God has heretofore at several times given in (direction-wise) unto you,
by my Doctrine; and that having so much Heavenly light shining round about you,
you will not venture your dear souls upon any peradventure, upon any light or
loose presumption whatsoever. Ye are in our heart, as the Corinthians sometime
were in Paul's, to dye and live together: and I trust I am not upon upon
inferior terms in yours. And my hope is rich and precious concerning you, that
you will fulfill my joy in being like minded, having the same love, being of
one accord* and of one mind, in doing nothing through strife or vain glory, but
in lowliness of mind each esteeming others better then themselves, looking not
every man upon his own things, but every man also on the things of others, etc.
Phil. 2. 2. 3. If you shall continue walking in this way, you will find the
issues of it, life and peace: And the God of all grace will dwell amongst you
for ever. Farewell my Joy, and Crown of rejoicing, in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at his coming; at whose right hand my hope is to meet you all at
the Great Day.

Yours to serve you freely and faithfully, in the work of an under Sheep-heard.
JOHN GOODWIN.
From my Study in Swan-alley, Colman-steeet London. April 3. 1655.
The Contents of the former Part.
1. Colorable arguments for the defense of Error, are more likely to take with
men, then solid arguments for the truth, together with the reasons why, page 1,
2, 3 2. God requires both faith and practice, upon grounds more remote, yea
upon secr^t insinuations, p. 3 3. Many practices may be lawful, yea necessary,
for which there is neither expresness of precept, nor of example, in the
Scriptures, 5, 6, 7 4. The greatest part of such actions, which oug^t out of
conscience to God, be to performed, are not either enjoined by expresness of
precept, nor commended by expresness of example, 7, 8 5. Schismatics always
have been extravagantly excessive and importune in magnifying their private
opinions, and practices, 8, 9, 10, 11 6. No practice or example in Scripture is
obliging unto imitation, but such as are grounded upon some precept or law, 11,
12 7. The less experienced, or skilful persons are, in drawing or framing
regular consequences, the more ignorant they are like to be of the mind of God
in many things, yea and in the greater danger to oppose it, 12, 13 8. To
multiply bands of conscience above what God has made them, is (constructively)
to d^ny the Scriptures sufficiency, etc. 13, 14 9. Things plainly taught in the
Old Testament, are more sparingly delivered in the New, 14, 15 10. To reject
good consequences drawn from the Scriptures, is to reject the authority of the
Scriptures themselves, 15, 16 11. One sound argument is sufficient for the
eviction of a truth, 16 12. That way of worshipping God wherein a man's soul
has prospered, and prospers yet daily, is not lightly to be forsaken or
exchanged, 17, 18 13. To make any thing necessary which God has not made such,
is to Lord it over the consciences of men, and to usurp divine Authority, page
19 14. The subject of an Ordinance is no part of this Ordinance, 19, 20 15. The
Law of Nature and personal accommodation, is to super-intend and overruled
Ordinances and Institutions, 20, 21 16. Some things being ex^ra-essential to
the nature, and end of an Institution, though observed in the first
administration, may be lawfully (yea and commendably in some cases) omitted in
after administrations, 21, 22 17. Every defect in the administration of an
Ordinance does not void the effect of it, 23, 24 18. The same ground which
gives right to an Ordinance unto any one person, or persons, gives the same
right unto all, in whom it is found, 24, 25, 26 19. It is not necessary that
Signs, Seals, or Sacraments should correspond in any natural similitude, 26,
27, 28 20. Institutions may be regularly used and observed, without the
observation of any circumstance not enjoined, 28, 29 21. He is superstitious
and a wil-worshipper, who places Religion in any circumstance, or
observationont prescribed by God, 29, 30 22. Sacramental engagements the more
early imposed, or taken up, are so much the more improveable, and binding also,
30, 31 23. Adult Baptism a seminary of contentions in constituted Churches, 31,
32 24. Infant Baptism more edifying both to the Church, and to the baptized
themselves, when come to years of discretion, 32, 33 25. Children admitted unto
Baptism in the days of Christ and of the Apostles, 33 26. Baptism a Seal under
the Gospel of the righteousness of Faith, as Circumcision was under the Law,
33* 34 27. Church Membership a gracious privilege vouchsafed by God unto
Children under the Law, 35 28. The Children of the Jews were involved together
with their Parents in their rejection from God, 36, 37 29. The Jewish children
were baptized into Moses, as well as their Parents, 37, 38, 39 30. The door of
entrance into the Christan Church is more easy and accommodate for children,
then it was into the Jewish Church, page 39 31. The Baptism of Children born of
Christian Parents, was not deferred until adultness of years in the Apostles
days, 40, 41 32. Infant-church-membership was no Levitical ceremony, nor
abolished by Christ, 42, 43, 44 33. Infant Baptism was practiced by such
Christians, who conversed, if not with the Apostles, yet with their disciples,
46, 47 34. The word (...), to baptize, frequently signifies any kind of
washing, or rinseing even where no dipping is, 47 35. The derivative verb
(...), is never in the New Testament used to signify the act of dipping, but
the primitive (...) only, page 47, 48. As on the other hand the Sacramental act
of baptizing is never expressed by the primitive (...), but by the
frequentative or derivative, (...), ibid. 36. The administration of
water baptism is very frequently expressed by a baptism with water, seldom, or
not at all, by a baptizing into water, 48, 49 37. No Baptismal administration
can regularly be performed, either in whole, or in part, by the person who is
baptized, 50, 51 38. The water wherein the Eunuch was baptized was not deep
enough for dipping, 51, 52 39. Baptizing with the Holy Ghost, and baptizing
with Water, expressed in the Scriptures by one and the same preposition, 52, 53
40. To pour water on the body of the person baptized, does more significantly
resemble burial, then the d^pping into water does, 53, 54 41. The nature of
Baptism represents the gracious act of Christ applying himself unto us, 54,
55 42. No kind of washing is performed or made only by the application of the
thing to be washed, unto the water, but of the water unto it 55, 56 43.
Dipping, either naked, or clothed, inconvenient 56 44. To dip or wash all
over, was the practice of Idolatrous nations, 58 45. It cannot be proved that
any Baptismal Administration recorded in the Scripture was performed by
dipping; but is exceeding probable that many were performed without it, 59, 60,
etc. 46. The baptizing children of Christians (ordinarily) at years of
discretion, is inconsistent with the Gospel rule for baptizing, 70, 71 47. The
custom of adult Baptism amongst th^se born in the Church, first entered into
the Church by unhallowed door, and was entertained, when practiced, upon
unwarrantable and Popish grounds, 73, 74 48. The generation of men commonly
known by the name of Ana-baptists, have always been injurious to the Gospel,
75, 76, etc. 49. The wrath of God has been from time to time revealed from
heaven against the way of Ana-baptism, and those who unrepentingly have walked
in it, 80, 81, etc. 50 It has very seldom been known, that any opinion or
practice, though never so wicked, uncouth, or absurd, was ever set on foot
amongst Christian Professors, but that it gathered a considerable number of
Proselytes to it, 89 51. By-opinions and practices, which bear, or seem to
bear, hard upon the flesh, are apt to take with four sorts of persons, 90 91
52. No kind of Sect have (more generally) been more hardened in the way of
their error, or more un-perswasible out of it, then those who have been able
to pretend the plain Letter of the Scripture, though misunderstood, for their
opinion or practice, especially when a letter of like plainess cannot be
produced against them, 91, 92 53. When men and women are inordinate in valuing
or prizing an erroneous, whether opinion, or practice, there is the less hope
of reclaiming them from either, 92, 93 54. A^ the Scripture sometimes under the
word MEN comprehends Women as well as Men, yea and sometimes Children also,
so under the expression MEN AND WOMEN, it more frequently comprehends
Children, 94 55. It is lawful, yea commendable for believers to devote,
separate, and design their children, whilst it is yet early with them, even
from the conception and the womb, to the service of God and Jesus Christ, page
95, 96 56. The truth of an Ordinance, or Gods approving, or allowing of an
Ordinance, as his, cannot better be estimated, or known, then when he blesses
it unto those who receive it, 96, 97 57. Baptism received in Infancy, and this
without d^ppi^g^, is neither a nullity, nor device, or institution of man, 97,
98 58. Baptism, as all types and typical Ordinances, is one of those things
which are (...), and not (...), i. e. which are instituted and given for some
greater things sake than themselves, 98, 99.
The Contents of the latter part of the ensuing Discourse, according to the
respective Sections thereof.
1. STicklers about Baptism now, and about Circumcision of old, compared, Sect.
2 2. The present controversy not properly about Bap^ism it self, sect. 3, 5 3.
The present contest relating unto Baptism, better laid aside by the party's
contesting, then weak consciences disturbed with it. 5 4. Mr. A. does not state
his question clearly so much as to his own sense, 6 5. Mr. A. and his
Scripture-proofs divided about the way to satisfaction, 7. 9 6. God has
authorized the L^w of Nature to overruled administrations of Institutions, 8 7.
Persons not truly repentant may be duly baptized, 10 8. Primitive practices may
be lawfully varyed from, upon exigencie of circumstances, 11 9. (...)eer matter
of fact, no good foundation to prove, eith^r the lawfulness or unlawfulness, of
a practice about an instituted Ordinance, in all cases, 13 10. Conclusio
sequitur deteriorem partem, 14. 48 11. No particular Administration of an
Ordinance, can answ^r the whole mind or counsel of God in, or about, the said
ordinance, 14 12. W^y the Apostles might omit, though not neglect, the
baptizing of children, notwithstanding they might lawfully have done it, 15 13.
How the reasons, upon which the Apostles might forbear Infant Baptism, may, and
may not be binding to the like forbearance now, 16 14. Two reasons why the
Pastors of Churches now, may be in a better capacity of baptizing Infants, then
the Apostles or their Assistants, were, 18, 19, 20 15. How Christ and the
Apostles to be imitated in what they did, and did not, sect. 21 16. The total
silence of the Scriptures about baptizing Infants, what kind of proof, and how
it may be construed, 22, 23 17. How the baptizing of Households in the Scripture
proves Infant Baptism, 24 18. How Christ's laying on hands on Children, etc.
proves Infant Baptism, 25, 40, 132, 157, 158 19. Augustine, a frequent and
constant assertor of Infant Baptism from the Apostles, 26 20. The testimony of
Ancient Writers for the practice of Infant Baptism by the Apostles, upon what
grounds, authentic, 27 21. No History records the original of
Infant Baptism, 28 22. Auxentius an Arrian, the first opposer of Infant
baptism; and Ludovicus Hetzer (another Arrian, and somewhat worse) the first
reviver of the opposition in Germany, 29 23. Mr. A's Baptism a nullitie,
according to his own principles, 29 24. No contests heard of from the Jews
against the Apostles, for excluding their Children from Baptism, an argument
that they were baptized, 30, 31 25. No reason imaginable why the Precept or
Ordinance of Christ about the subject of Baptism should be changed by the
Primitive Fathers, 32 26. Practice of Ana-baptism, stands ^onely upon
foundations, that are either loose, or irrelative, 33 27. A submission unto
Baptism no argument of the great success of the Gospel, 35, 36, 38, 39 28. The
Holy Ghost at lib^rty in drawing up his own records, 36 29. Under the
expression of Men and Women, in the Scriptures, children also are sometimes
comprehended, 37 30. Baptizing of Men and Women no proof of the success of the
Gospel, 38, 39 31. Suffer little children to come unto me, how proves that
Infants were baptized in the Apostles days, 40, 41, 158 32. A non-scriptum
proves not a non-factum, 42 33. Neither the qualifications, nor the persons
described of all that were baptized, 42 34. No firm arguing from order of
expressing, 43 35. To teach, and to make Disciples, how widely differ, 44 36.
When a man's grounds for his opinions are insufficient, and so evicted,
answering of some objections, though never so substan^ially, will not relieve
them, 45, 168 37. Mr. A's second argument, as much against the counsel of God
in circumcision, as against the opinion of his Adversaries in the point of
Baptism* 46, 49 38. The greater serviceableness of a thing in one case, proves
not the unlawfulness of it in all others, 47, 48, 53, 118 39. The manifestation
of Christ to the world, no end of Baptism, 50. 51. nor yet to the baptized
themselves, 53 40. When Baptizing is customary and in fashion, it is no sign or
proof of any man's Faith or Repentance, 54 41. Infant-baptizing, as much, or
rather more, instructing, edifying, quickening, etc. unto spectators, as
men-baptizing, 56, 73, 159, 160 42. How the Priests and Elders rejected the
counsel of God against themselves, not having been baptized of John, 57, 58 43.
Persons duly baptized, do not always take up the Ordinance out of a principle
of Repentance, 60 44. Remission of sins to be looked for, upon Repentance,
without, or before Baptism, 61, 131, 175 45. Circumcision, not a sign and seal
of the righteousness of Faith, unto Abraham only, 61 46. The Verb substantive
often used in a declarative sense, 62 47. What it was that properly constituted
Abraham the father of all that believe, 62 48. Romans 4. 11. thoroughly
understood, gives a great light into the Question about Baptism, 64 49.
Children in a capacity of engaging to the practice of Repentance, as well as
men, 64, 65, 68, 69, 182 50. One end of Baptism better answered or provided for
by mens-baptism, does neither prove the baptizing of children unlawful, nor yet
that another end thereof, may not be better provided for hereby, 67, 98 51. The
end of planting not made frustrate, by the non-fructifi^ation of the tree
immediately upon the planting of it, 69, 152 52. Baptism how needful for
children, Sect. 71. 53. No profession or declaration made unto the world by Mr.
A's. Baptizing, 72. 75. 73. 54. Profession made by Parents at their childrens
baptizing, a^ available unto others, as by other men at their Baptism, 73. 55.
A person duly baptized, is not an Agent, but a patient, in his Baptism, 76. 56.
Whither a man be to sign and seal the Articles of his Covenant with God at the
time of his entering hereunto, before witnesses, etc. 75. 76. 98. 57. Baptism
not to be taken up in order to r^mission of sins, 77. 61 58. Mr. A most
unchristianly taxes the whole Christian world, 79. 59. Arguments, proving that
a Declaration of a man's Repentance by Baptism is not required on his part, to
interess him in remission of sins, 80. 81. 82, etc. 60. Faith and rep^^tance,
according to Mr. A, but dead works, until Baptism quickens them, 81. 89: 61.
Submission to a carnal commandment is not of more accepration with God, then
unto a spiritual, 80. 62. Mr. A. adjudgeth the whole generation of Christians
(a very f^w only excepted) both ancient and modern, as well Fathers, Martyrs,
and Reformers, as others, unto eternal condemnation, 81. 63. Baptism can be no
Declaration of any man's Repentance. 82. 52, 64. The Apostle Paul no where
interesseth Baptism in justification, or in the obtaining of remission of sins,
83. 65. The remission of his sins, who truly repents, or beleev^th, is not
suspended upon what another man may possibly refuse to do unto him, 83. 18.
much less upon what would be sinful in himself to yield unto, 84. 88. 66.
Abraham's spiritual children are justified after the same manner ^ith him, 85.
67. Baptism may relate unto salvation, as some other of the Commandments of God
may do, and yet not unto justific^tion, or remission of sins, 86. 87 68.
Salvation not suspended by God upon any modality of acting not expressly and
precisely determined by himself, but obtruded by men, 87. 69. Mr. A. cannot
substantially prove, that baptizing, Mark 16. 16. is to be understood of
Water Baptism, 88. 70. What remission of sins understood, Act. 2. 37. 90. and
what Baptism,. 91, 92, 93. 71. Protestants (generally) against remission of
sins by Baptism; Papists generally for it, 94. 72. A particular or personal
injunction under some circumstance, not generally obliging upon the same terms,
or in order to the same end, 95. 73. The promise of remission of sins, was made
unto faith and repentance long before Baptism was in being, and so could not be
suspended upon it, 95. 148. 74. The prescription of one means for the obtaining
of an end, is not exclusive of this attainment by all others, 95. 75. The order
of things* as well that of time, as that of nature, is often interchanged in the
Scriptures, 97. 76. No man's public assent unto the terms of the Gospel is
entered by Baptism, 98. 77. The justification of God in the sight of the world
is no effect of Baptism, 99. 100 78. Infant Baptism contributes as much, or
more, to the justification of God in the world, as the baptizing of men and
women, 101. 102. 79. Baptism no part of the Gospel, 102. 80. Gal. 3. 24, 25, 26
opened, 104. 105, etc. 81. Faith under the Gospel different from that under the
Law, 105. 82. When a thing may be don't after done after different manners, they
that do it not after one manner, may d^ it after another, 107. 83. Baptism does
not characterise men to be truly Christ's, 108. 84. Whether, or how, Baptism
makes visible Saints, 109. 113. 52. 85. Baptism is no partition wall between
Saints and the world, 112. 86. Saints visible before baptized, 113. 114. 87.
Mr. A's. simili^ude to prove that men and women receive a relative being ^n
Christ by Baptism, lame, and halting right down, 115. 116. 88. To put on Christ
in Baptism, does not signify, to make an actual declaration or profession unto
the world, that men own and acknowledge Christ to be come in the flesh etc.
118. 89. Infants ^ith as much propriety and truth of speaking, may be said to
put on Christ in Bapti^m, as men, 119. 90. It cannot b^ proved from the
Scriptures, that men put on Christ, ^or are said to put on Christ, by Baptism,
119 91. The Analogy or proportion between Infant Baptism, and
Infant-circumcision maintained, 120. 121. 122, etc. 92. Whether the remaining
of circumcision in the flesh, any ground of a disproportion, etc. 121. 122,
etc. 93. The validity of the testimony of Parents, Neighbors. etc. concerning
men's Baptism, 123. 124. 94. The Jews had no knowledge of their being
circumcised, but from their Parents or others, etc. 123. 95. Little or no
inconvenience in being deceived by Parents, or others, touching a man's having
been baptized, 124. 125. 96. Mr: A's. children left at more uncertainty
touching their Baptism, in case of their parents death, etc. then those
baptized in their Infancy, according to the received manner of the Churches,
where they were born, 125. 97. Circumcision, not profitable without keeping the
Law, 126. 127. 98. The Gospel requires as strict and absolute obedience, as
the Law; but exacteth it not upon the like terms, 128. 99. Children void of
understanding not more capable of holy things, or of the ends or benefi^ of
them under the Law, then under the Gospel, 129. 100. How the Answer or rather,
demand, of a good conscience toward God, saves us, 130. 101. The services of
the Law of no better acceptance with God, without Faith and Repentance, then
the services of the Gospel, 130. 102. That which is promised, and given, upon
the Antecedent, cannot be suspended upon the consequent, 131. 103. Circumcision
was not therefore weak or less spiritual, because administered unto children.
132. 104. Weakness and unprofitableness, comparatively only, imputed to the
Law, 133. 105. Infant Baptism as well reaches the ends of Baptism, as
Infant-circumcision the ends of circumcision, 134. 106. What is less edifying,
is not therefore more suitable to the Legal ministration, 136. 107. The
principal Arguments for Infant Baptism, are not deducted from the example of
circumcision, 137. 108. Mr. A. builds as well upon the rudiments of the
world, as Pedo-Baptists, 137. 109. Circumcision ordered by God in the
administration of it, to the best advantage for the Churches edification, that
such an Ordinance or service could be, 110. In what respect the
Gospel-Ministration, before the Legal, 139. 111. The guidance of the Holy
Ghost, whether, or in what sense, at any time, or in any person fallible. 141.
112. Christ and his Apostles are to be imitated in the methods and grounds of
their arguings, 142. 113. Things of a moral consideration, and of ready
perception from the Scriptur^s, need not the voucher of the extraordinary
Authority of the Speaker, 143. 114. Baptism supposed, with the ends of it, the
baptizing of Infants is of a moral consideration, 144. 115. Whether
Infant Baptism be agreeable, or disagreeable to the Gospel-Ministration, 145.
116. Whether Baptism be a part of the Gospel Ministration, 146. 117. Baptism no
contributer toward the receiving of the Spirit, 147. 118. The mention of two
things for the obtaining of a third, does not allways suppose a necessity of
both for this attainment, 148. 119. The promis^ of receiving remission of sins,
and the Spirit, is an old, Testament promise, and so not made at all unto
Water Baptism, 148. 149. 120. A comparative sense often expressed in a positive
form, 150. 121. A subsequent consent as valid to all ends and purposes, as an
Antecedent, 151, 164. 122. Whether men baptized in unbeleef, ought to be
rebaptized in case of their believing afterward, 151. 123. Words and actions
at present not understood, may do service, and obtain their ends afterward,
152. 124. Why, and how, children capable of Baptism, and yet not of the Lords I
able, 153. 125. Faith not put Gal. 3. 23. 25. for the whole Ministration of the
Gospel, 154. 126. Infant Baptism, to whom an apparent breach of the Laws of the
Gospel mi^istration, 155. 127. That none ought to be baptized, but such who
appear voluntarily willing, etc. refuted by sundry arguments, 156, 157, 158,
etc. 128. Imposition of hands in what respect a greater Ordinance, then
Baptism, 157. 129. Infant-Circumcision was more edifying, then men-circumcision
would have been, 159. 160. 130. Infant Baptism how comporteth with the
exhortation, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, 161. 131. Baptism,
in respect of the baptized, no action, or service performed, though a
submission unto Baptism may be, 163. 132. Profession of Baptism, and
perseverance herein, more rewardable by God, then the act of being baptized, or
of once submitting unto Baptism, 164. 133. No argument of any pregnant import,
to disable Infant* Baptism, 167, 171. 134. Any thing is sufficient to satisfy
some, in some cases, 16^. 135. A cause is not made good by a^swering an
objection. 168. 136. Sonship unto God how accrueth unto Children, 169. 137. Mr.
Tombs, and Mr. Fisher, yea the Rebaptized Churches themselves, at ods in points
nearly relating to the question of Rebaptizing 170. 138. How all children are
capable of Baptism, and how not, 171. 139. Baptism why described, or termed,
the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins, 176. 140. Baptism whether
administrable unto Repentants only, 177. 141. Baptism the more for the good of
man, because Infants capable of it, 178. 142. Baptism how beneficial without
faith, 179. 143. What it must be that qualifieth for it, 180. 144. What love of
God, and in what respect, immediately qualifieth for Baptism, 181. 145. The
faith which was in Christ, was not of the same kind with the faith of other
believers, 183, 184. 146. The sameness of expressions, does not prove the
sameness of thin^s, 184. 147. Whether Christ was baptized upon the account of
his believing him self to be the S^n of God, 185. 186. 148. That faith
qualifieth for Baptism, as it is d^clarative of spiritual Sonship, 188, 189.
and this by the will* or appointment of God, 190. 149. Christ did not make a
dedication of himself to the se^vice of the Gospel, by the solemnity of
Baptism, 191. 150. The reason of Christ's choice of the season, wherein he was
baptized, in reference hereunto, 193. 151. Persons may be baptized in
conformity to a Law of righteousness, and yet not to that Law, by which Christ
was baptiz^d, 192. 152. Christ was not baptized in conformity to the common Law
of Baptism, 194.
CONSIDERATION. I.
C^lourable Arguments and Grounds levied and insisted The first head of
Considera^ion^, being of ^ more gene^al import, and ^elat^ng unto ^her case*
and Controversie^, as well as those about Ordinances, or Baptism.
upon for the defense of Error, are more likely to take with ordinary
capacities and appr^hensions, yea and with those that are somewhat pregnant and
ripe, esp^cially at first, and f^r a season, then those which are sound and
substantial, and d^monstrative of truth.

Proof.
Error befriendeth men's corruptions, comporteth with their lusts, justifies
them in their carnal and sensual ends* and consequently in such ways and
practices also, which are proper and likely to advance and procure them. Upon
this account it comes to pass, that men and women (more generally) having
several corruptions to gratify, worldly* and carnal ends to pursue, etc. have
a secret and inward proneness and propension unto Error, as that which under
the name of Truth pretends to bless them in their way. Now when a person, man,
or woman, secretly wishes that such a Doctrine, or Opinion, were a Truth, or
may be sound to be a Truth, a very slender and weak argument in favor of it
easily fills and satisfies them, and disposes them to cry out with the High
Priest, What have we any more need of wi^nesses? Mat. 26. 65. especially when
their judgments and understandings, are but ordinary and weak. Yea men and
women, for the maintaining of themselves in peace, in ways and practices that
are corrupt and sinful, are of a listening and har^ening disposition, as well
after Teachers, as grounds and arguments which will strengthen, comfort and
support them therein; and when they meet with either, they rejoice over them,
as if they had found great spoils. Whereas the Truth is a most severe enemy to
all worldly lusts, to all sinister and corrupt ends of men; and consequently to
all such methods, ways and practices, which are calculated for the compassing
and obtaining of them, giving men no countenance, rest or peace in such ways.
From whence it comes to pass (neither can it in reason be otherwise) that
persons generally are possessed* with a mavelous aversness and frowardness of
spirit against the Truth, extremely unwilling that such an opinion should be
owned or acknowledged for a Truth, especially by them, the face whereof is set,
and which peremptorily threateneth, to separate between them and their beloved
lusts, or otherwise to shame, trouble and torment them in the fulfilling of
them. By means of this great aversness in men to be convinced of the Truth, it
comes to pass (as frequent expeperience teaches) that Arguments and Grounds
of greatest evidence and power, for the eviction, manifestation, and
demonstration of the Truth, are but as the shadows of the mountains unto them,
clouds without water, and words without weight. And so the Truth it self,
though mightily evinced, is by them respected under the reproachful notion and
name of Error. Both these particulars, as well the incredible aversness in men
to admit of Truth, though coming to them in the clearest* light of Evidence and
Demonstration, as that strange propenseness toward the entertainment of Error
(lately mentioned) are plainly asserted by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4. 3. For the
time will come, when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own
lusts will heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears. The metaphor of
itching ears, implies, 1. The unclean distempers in the hearts and spirits of
men, as the itch (properly so called) is to the flesh or bodies of men. 2. It
implies also the great and impatient desire and propenseness which is in such
persons to be spiritually scratched, i. e. to have these distempers of theirs,
only so touched and handled by Teachers, that it may be matter of pleasure and
gratification unto them; as indeed it is, when such things are delivered in the
Name of God, and as from the Scriptures, whereby they are really comforted, and
seemingly and to their own sense, justified in their evil ways.

Consectary.
If colorable and light arguments, levied and managed for the defense of
Error, be more apt to take and satisfy ordinary capacities and persons
unskilful in the Word of Truth, then arguments of greatest pregnancy and
weight, raised and held forth for the vindication of the Truth, then need it
not seem strange unto any man, that such multitudes should be ensnared and
carried away in their judgments, as daily are, unto the opinion, which fights
against the Baptizing of Children, with such arguments which have little
weight, worth, or substance in them.

CONSIDERATION II.
GOd requires and expects from men, as well to believe, as to practice, not
only upon Grounds plain and near at hand, (such, I mean, which as it were at
the first sight, and by plainness and palpableness of inference, enforce,
either the truth to be believed, or the thing to be practiced,) but even upon
grounds somewhat more remote, yea and secret insinuations, and from which,
neither can the truth that is to be believed, nor the action or thing that is
to be practiced, be evinced, or inferred, but by a diligent exercise and close
engagement of the reason, judgment, and understanding of a man.

Pro^f.
When God spoke thus unto Moses, out of the midst of the burning bush, I am the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, (Exodus 3. 6.) he
expected that men should believe the Resurrection of the dead upon the account
of these words, (and practice accordingly.) This is evident from that of our
Savior to the Sadduces, (Mat. 22. 31, 32.) But as touching the Resurrection of
the dead, have ye not read what was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, etc. clearly implying* that these men (and
others) stood bound in duty, and in conscience toward God, upon the account
and ground of such words as these, to have believed the rising again of the
dead, and that it was their sin, having such a ground of proof for it, not to
believe it. Yet could not the truth be gathered or inferred from the said
words, but by a diligent, close and intense working of the rationative faculty
and understanding, as is evident. No nor can our Saviors own demonstration it
self (in the place ment^oned) of the said truths from the words, be
apprehended, without some considerable engagement of the m^nd and intellectual
powers of the Soul. So likewise he expected that from the example of David and
his men eating the Shewbread, the Pharisees should have understood and known
that it was lawful for men to pluck ears of corn on the Sabbath day, ( Mat. 12.
23.) yet the argument here was not of so ready a perception. The Apostle says
that God has exhibited faith, or given assurance unto all men that he will
judge the World in righteousness by the man whom he has ordained [meaning
Christ,] in that he has raised him from the dead, (Acts 17. 31.) Yet it is a
matter of no obvious conception, how to conceive or make the act of God in
raising Christ from the dead, a sufficient ground of assurance that he will
judge the World in righteousness by him. So when Moses avenged the Israelit* by
smiting and slaying the Egyptian, who oppressed him, he supposed and expected
that h^s Brethren would have understood, and believed, that God by his hand
would deliver them, Acts 24. 25. His supposition and expectation in this kind*
cannot be judged unreasonable; nay certainly they were regular and agreeable to
the mind of God himself* Yet was this fact of Moses in vindicating the
Israelite, and smiting the Egyptian, no such pregnant argument at the first
sight, no ground of a ready or easy conviction unto his Brethren the
Israelites, that God by his hand intended to effect that great Deliverance from
the Egyptian Bondage, which afterward (we know) he did effect by him. Nor did
his Brethren the Israelites, no not so much as any one of them (as far as can
be gathered from the Scriptures, and as is most probable) apprehend or
understand any such thing thereby. The Apostle Paul expected that the
Corinthians (and so, other Christians) should hear, know, and understand, that
it was their duty to afford competent maintenance to the Ministers of the God,
from and by means of, this Mosaical Law, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the
Ox, that treads out the corn, 1 Cor. 9. 8, 9, 10. See also, 1 Timothy 5. 18. And
yet this Law was nothing so obvious and clear a ground for such a duty and
practice, as the Command of God for the Circumcising Children under the Law, is
for their Baptizing, the Commandment of Baptism, or the change of the Ordinance
only supposed, under the Gospel.

Consectary.
If God requires of men, as well to believe, as practice, not only upon plain
and express grounds, such as from whence, that which ought to be believed, or
practiced, may readily, and without the mediation of a Consequence, be
inferred, but upon grounds also more remote, and from which the thing to be
believed, or practiced, cannot be inferred or drawn, but by force of argument,
and by a narrow and through debate of the understanding; then it roundly
follows that Infant Baptism may be a duty, and necessary to be practiced,
though the grounds evincing it should lie much deepe^ in the Scriptures, then
now they do, and not be so obvious to persons incapable (whether through
passion, and shortness of spirit, or through weakness or scantness of
understanding) of a narrow sifting of, and through searching into, matters of a
more difficult consideration.

CONSIDERATION III.
MAny practices may be lawful, yea and necessary, which are neither enjoined by
any expressness of ^recept, nor yet countenanced or warranted by any
expressness of Example, in the Scriptures.

Proof.
1. By expressness of Precept, I mean a Precept or Command of such a Tenor of
words, which does plainly, and according to the literal and grammatical sense
of the words, and without the mediation of any inference, or deduction, require
such or such a practice. So likewise by expressness of example, I mean, an
action or practice every ways, or in all circumstances, semblable unto, or
parallel with, the practice in question. As for example: Children are commanded
to reverence or honor their Parents by expresness of precept in the fifth
Commandment; but they are not upon the like terms (I mean, by expresness of
precept) here commanded to relieve them, when they stand in need, with their
substance; though it be granted, that this may reasonably be understood, to be
here commanded also; because to regard those that are in want, so as to relieve
and support them, is a casting of honor or respect upon them. See 1 Timothy 5. 3.
17. Judge. 9. 9.

2. By necessary, I mean, that which ought to be done, or which a person stands
bound in duty and conscience unto God to do. These terms explained by the way,
we proceed to the proof of the consideration.

It was lawful (yea and in a sense necessary) that the Disciples passing
through the corn fields, though on the Sabbath day, should, being an hungry,
pluck ears of corn, Mat. 12. 1, 2 etc.
and eat; otherwise our Savior would not have justified them in this action,
against those which reproved them. But certain it is, that the Disciples were
not able to produce, either expresness of precept, or example from the
Scripture, whereby to warrant such an action: Nor does our Savior himself
produce either the one or the other, upon this account. So also it was
necessary and matter of duty, from the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel
by men, for those that were instructed and taught therein, to supply their
Teachers with things necessary, and to make them partakers of all their goods
Gal 6. 6. 1 Cor. 9. 14, etc.
. Even so (says the Apostle) has the Lord ordained, that they which preach
the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: yet had they no expressness either of
prec^pt or example, to engage them hereunto, until afterward; as viz. when
this Apostle declared the Ordinance or Institution of God in this behalf (in
the words now cited) and elsewhere; Let him that is taught in the Word,
communicate unto him that teaches, in all good things. Again, when Dav^d, and
they that were with him, being an hungry, ate the Shewbread, they did nothing
herein, but what was very warrantable, yea and (in a degree at least)
necessary, as our Savior himself supposes, Mat. 12. 3, 4. Yet had they
neither plainness nor expressness of precept, nor yet of example, to warrant
them in the action; nor does Christ plead or alledg either of these for the
justification thereof; but only such an example, the warrantableness whereof
stood upon the same or like grounds of reason and equity with this. Many other
instances and cases of like consideration, might easily be added from the
Scriptures.

Consectary.
If many actions may be warrantable, and necessary, for which the Scripture
holds forth, neither expressness of precept, nor of example, then must the
grand Argument and Plea against Infant Baptism, viz. that it has neither
plainness of precept, nor of example in the Scriptures, to justify it, needs
be impertinent and weak. For that the premised Conclusion holds good in matter
of Institution (at least so far as concerns the Baptizing of Infants, and the
main design of this brief discourse) shall be showed afterward.

CONSIDERATION IV.
THe far gr^atest part of such actions, which men and women perform out of
conscience toward God, are not enjoined, or commended unto them, by God,
either by expressness of precept, or particularity of example, in the
Scriptures, but only, eit^er by some general Precept or Rule, or by some
example (one, or more) carrying in it some rational proportion thereunto.

Proof.
When a Minister of the Gospel preaches unto his people out of the Gospel
according to John, seasonably (for example) and faithfully opening and applying
unto them, the 27 or 28 verse of the sixth Chapter (or any other,) he performs
this work out of conscience toward God. Yet has he neither expressness of
command, nor of example, to justify or commend this action or exercise unto
him. But that which he does in this kind, is sufficiently warranted, partly by
those general and indefinite precepts, which are given unto Ministers, to
preach the Word, to preach the Gospel, etc. [2 Timothy 4. 2. Mark 16. 15. etc.]
partly by those examples of worthy and faithf^^ Ministers of the Gospel, and of
the Lord Christ himself, who are reported in Scripture to have preached
accordingly. When a Believer gives a shilling, two, twenty, or more, either by
way of alms, or to promote some charitable and good work, he may well be
presumed to do it out of conscience to God, and according to the exigency of
his duty: yet is not such an act, I mean the giving of a shilling, two or more,
upon that particular occasion, on which he gives it, either imposed upon him,
or warranted unto him, either by any express Command from God, or any
particular example in the Scriptures. There is the same reason of our eating,
drinking, sleeping, recreating our selves, buying, selling, marrying, building,
etc. There is none of all these, but a man and woman may do, yea and ought to
do, according to exigency of circumstance and occasion, out of conscience
toward God: and yet most certain it is, that none of all these actions, with
all those circumstances under which they are, and ought to be performed by men
and women, are any where expressly commanded by God, or warranted by any
parallel example in the Scriptures. But the lawfulness, yea and necessity of
them in case, is left by God to be inferred, gathered and concluded by men, by
the exercise and engagement of their judgments, consciences, and
understandings, from such general precepts and directions as likewise from such
examples upon Scripture record, which concern and relate unto such actions.

Consectary.
If far the greater part of all we do out of conscience toward God, be not in
all particularities of circumstance, warranted, or enjoined, either by
particular expressness of precept, or example, in the Scripture, but only by
the generality of either, it clearly follows, that the application or
administration of Baptism unto Infants, may be warrantable, yea and necessary,
and to be performed out of conscience to God, although it has not the warranty
of any express precept, or particularity of example.

CONSIDERATION V.
IT has still been the manner and practice of men, who have turned aside from
the Communion of other Churches, or from the sense of the generality of Saints,
into any by-way of opinion, or practice, to be extravagantly excessive and
importune in magnifying, ^it^er the necessity, or beneficialness, or both, of
those opinions and practices, for which they have exchanged the Christian
Communion of the Churches and Saints of God.

Proof.
Eunomius, the Heretic, maintained this Doctrine, (by way of dissent from
orthodox Christians) That the Son of God is altogether unlike unto the Father,
and the Holy Ghost unlike unto the Son. And notwithstanding the groundlessness
(indeed the manifest and dangerous erroneousness) of this opinion, yet he
attributes this high Privilege unto it, that Whosoever believed it, could not
possibly perish, how wickedly soever he lived Eunomius desendit ^anc haeresiu,
dissimilem per omnia Patri asserens Filium, and Filio Spiritu^ Sanctum. Fertur
etia^ usque adeo fuisset bonis moribus inimicus, ut ass* veraret, quod nihil
cuique obesset quorumlibet perpetratio ac perseverantia peccatorum, si hujus,
quae ab illo docebatur, fidei particeps effet. Aug. de Haeres. c. 54.
. Jovinian a Monk (with his followers) ascribed such virtue to that which they
called true Baptism, that they who were baptized herewith, could sin no more A
Joviniano quodam Monacho ista haeresis orta est aetate nostra -- Hic omnia
peccata, sicut Stoici Philosophi, paria esse dicebat: nec posse peccare hominem
Lavacro regenerationis accepto, etc. Aug. de Haeres. c. 82.
. The Donatists ascribed all Christian worth and excellency (upon the matter)
to their Sect and Opinions, in denying that there was any true Church of Christ
in all the world, but only amongst them, and despising all other Christians,
but themselves; and yet giving entertainment to most vile and wicked men in
their Communion Nam illi (Donatistae) dicebant universum ^rbem Christianum
Eccl^siam non habere -- Deinde qui praese omnes alios Christianos condemnabant,
severitatem censura in suos relaxaverant, and in suis Caetibus homines
impurissimos, ut Optatos, Gildonianos, Primianosque pati^bantur. Pet. Martyr.
Loc. Class. 4. c. 5. sect. 15.
, as if the giving the right hand of fellowship unto them in their way, rendered
them men holy and religious in the midst of the practice of all wickedness.
Even as some of the Rebaptized Congregations (for I cannot say it of all) judge
no better of the best and worthiest Christians, who refuse to do homage to
their opinion and practice about their new Baptism, then as persons unclean,
and with whom they should pollute themselves to hold Christian Communion in any
part of Gods Worship, though otherwise they be persons countenanced from Heaven
both with gifts and graces, far above themselves: and yet in conjunction with
this their Samaritanizing better Jews then themselves, they reward with the
honor and repute of their Society, persons of unworthy, infamous and scandalous
deportment, if their consciences will but serve them to bow down (or rather, to
be bowed down) before them in the water. Theophanes attributed so much to the
use of Images in Religious Worship, that he censured Constantine the Emperor,
by-named, Copronymus, as an Apostate from God, for opposing Images and
Idol-worship Theophanes Missel. l. 21. c. ult. Et Joseph Mede, Apostasy of the
latter times, p. 131.
. Some Jewish Teachers labored to possess men with such an high opinion of
their Tradition and practice of washing hands before meat, as that they ought
to look upon him that should neglect or not observe it, as one that lies with
an harlot Ainsworth in Levit. 15. 12.
. The Authors and Abettors of that hideous Doctrine, That God sees no sin in
persons justified, pronounce all those Traitors to the Blood of Christ that
hold the contrary P. Gunter Sermon of Justification, printed An. 1615. Preface
to the Reader, p. 3.
. The Monks, who generally were the Compilers of the Histories of this Nation
in former times, placed so much of the very essence (as it were) of Religion in
reverencing the Bishops and Monks of those times, that (as Daniel, a late
English Historian observes) they personated all their Princes, either
religious or irreligious, as they humored, or offended, the Bishops Rochet and
Monks belly. Mr Joseph Mede reports out of the Records of that Idolatrous
Council (the second at g S^ectymnus Vindication, p. 8.
Nice) that one Theodore an Abbot gave this advice to a Monk, who (as himself
informed him) was threatened by the Devil, that he would never cease vexing and
molesting him by temptations unto fornication, until he left worshipping the
Image of the Blessed Virgin; that the said Abbot (I say) gave this advice to
this recluse; that it were better he frequented all the Stews in the City, then
not to worship Christ and his Mother in an Image Apostasy of the latter times.
p. 140.
. Which plainly shows how highly conceited this Abbot was of his opinion and
practice of Image Worship. The Papists are so intoxicated with a conceit of the
Popes Supremacy, and their Subjection unto Subesse Romano Pontifici est de
necessit. te salutis.
him, that they make it no less then the loss of Heaven and of Salvation, for
any person to refuse subjection unto him. Even as many of the
Contra-Remonstrant persuasion amongst us, with others of their fancy in the
Doctrine of Predestination, and extent of the death of Christ, the efficacy of
Grace, etc. although their opinions in these Points be most anti-rational,
anti-Scriptural, and (though they consider it not) as near unto Blasphemy as
Faith is to belief, or a reasonable creature to a man, yet do they begin, and
this with an high hand, to lift them up so near unto Heaven, as to affirm, that
there can be no true work of grace in any man, who is not persuaded of the
truth of them. And thus many Anabaptists of late (as some have done formerly)
commend the practice of their See the Epistle Dedicatory, sect. 2. 3.
way of Baptizing upon such terms, that they profess themselves jealous and
doubtful of the Salvation of all those, whose judgments and consciences do not
jump with theirs in the said practice; yea and seem* to suspect themselves as
over-charitable, for doubting only, and not determining, in the case.

Consectary.
If it be, and always has been, so extremely incident unto by-way men, to
please themselves with high thoughts of the excellency of such opinions and
practices, wherein they choose to walk alone by themselves apart from the
Community of Saints, and holy men, then is it a strong presumption (at least)
against the way (best known by the name) of Anabaptism, that it is a by-path,
and none of the ways of God, because it has this fatal Character engraven upon
it: it is above all measure magnified by those that have separated themselves
into it.

CONSIDERATION VI.
NO practice, or example in Scripture is obliging unto imitation, or
conformity, but such, which were grounded upon some Precept, or Law.

Proof.
Neither need ther^ any great light of argument, whereby to see the truth of
this Consideration. For if there should be any thing done by any person,
commendably, or worthy imitation, not commanded, or commended, unto men by some
divine Precept, or other, the Law of God must needs be imperfect and defective,
as not comprehending in it the whole duty of man. But the Law of God is
perfect, Psalm. 19. 7. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Therefore there is no commendable or worthy
action in one kind or other, which is not in some part or other hereof required
of men.

Consectary.
If no example be obliging unto conformity or imitation, but what is otherwise,
as viz. by some Precept, Exhortation or Command of God, commended unto us, then
are not the Scripture-examples of baptizing in Rivers, or by dipping the whole
body under water (in case any example in this kind could be produced) or of
baptizing Believers only, necessarily binding to like practices, in as much as
these practices are not commended unto Christians by any Precept or Command of
God.

CONSIDERATION VII.
THe more dull, the less experienced and apprehensive m^n are, in arguing,
debating, and evincing proper inferences, deductions and concl^sions, from
their principles and grounds, they are so much the more like to remain ignorant
of the mind and will of God in many things; yea and in so much the greater
danger to oppose them.

Proof.
The truth of this Conclusion shines sufficiently with its own light: yet to
that which has, let it be further given. The Sadduces being dull, and little
exercised in drawing Conclusions out of Premises, were not only ignorant of
the Resurrection of the dead, notwithstanding this was sufficiently enough
declared, or held forth, by God himself in those words (formerly mentioned) I
am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, etc. but even vehemently, and with the
derision of those who asserted it, denied it: Even as many in these days are
not only ignorant of the duty of bringing children unto Baptism,
notwithstanding the grounds of such a practice lie large and fair enough in the
Scriptures; but with all their might, and with an high disdain and contempt of
those who judge it necessary, do oppose it. In like manner the Pharisees being
unexpert in regular argumentations, and less able to discern legitimate
consequences and deductions from such grounds, which naturally bear them, were
ignorant of the lawfulness of plucking and eating ears of corn on the Sabbath
day, for those that were an hungry; although the justifiableness of this
practice was evident enough in that examof David, and those that were with him,
when being an hungry, he went into the House of God, and did eat the
Shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for those that were
with him, but for the Priests only, Mat. 12. 23. And the Reason of this
Conclusion is evident. For if the far greater number, both of matters of Faith,
or things to be believed, and likewise of matters of practice, or things to be
done, be matters of inference, consequence, and deduction from the Scriptures,
and not of literal or express assertion (which is an unquestionable truth* and
has in part been proved already,) it follows with an high hand of evidence and
truth, that they who are more defective, less experienced, less understanding
then others, in drawing Conclusions from Premises, must needs be more ignorant
then others, as well of the one, as the other; I mean, of the mind of God as
well in matters of faith, as of practice.

Consectary.
If the more dull, less experienced, and apprehensive men are, in drawing
regular deductions and conclusion^ out of their premises, they must needs
remain so much the more ignorant of the mind and will of God in many things,
and so be in the more danger also of denying them; then need it not seem
strange unto any man, that the generality or far greater part of those who
oppose Infant Baptism, should be ignorant of the mind of God, as well
concerning Baptism, as many other things, considering that they are inexpert in
the Word of righteousness, and have not through use their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil; I mean, neither legitimate and sound deductions
from the Scripture, on the one hand, nor those that are spurious and mistaken,
on the other.

CONSIDERATION VIII.
TO multiply precepts or bands of Conscience, whether negative, or affirmative,
above the number of those, which God himself in his Word has imposed in either
kind, is (constructively) to deny the sufficiency of the Scriptures, the
perfection of the Law of God, and to usurp his Authority.

Proof.
The truth of this Consideration, is (I presume) every man's notion and sense.
For additionals are not wont to be made to things which are perfect, but to
that which is imperfect. Nor if it be supposed, that the conscience of a man be
sufficiently bound by the Law of God, in all cases whatsoever, need there be
any additional obligations in this kind.

Consectary.
If the binding of men's Consciences with more bands, then those wherewith God
himself has bound them, be a sin of that evil import, which the Consideration
expresses, then do they, who impose it as matter of conscience upon men, to
refrain the baptizing of their Infants, and again to baptize, when they
baptize, with all under water, transgress that great transgression; in as much
as God has no where in Scripture either prohibited the baptizing of children
by any Law, or commanded the baptizing of any person by forcing, thrusting,
dowzing, ducking, or dipping, the whole body under water.

CONSIDERATION IX.
WHat is more fully and plainly taught by God, and delivered unto the world in
the Old Testament, or which may by clearness of deduction be evinced from this,
is more sparingly, and with less expressiveness, delivered in the New.

Proof.
It is a word of soberness and of truth, though found among Philosophers; that
Natura, sicut non deficit in necessariis, sic neque abundat in superfluis. As
Nature is not wanting in things necessary, so neither is it abounding in things
superfluous. This regularness in Nature, being neither penurious on the one
hand, nor prodigal on the other, discovers an answerable property and
perfection in him, who is the God thereof, and has formed her in his own
likeness. So then, what he has with sufficient evidence and clearness,
declared unto us in one part of his Word, he does but like himself, in not
making a like declaration of it the second time. Nor is the New Testament less
perfect then the Old, because such duties, which are to be practiced under this
Testament, as well as they were under the Old, are not as plainly and expressly
enjoined in this, as they are in that. For both Testaments being parts of one
and the same Scripture, and of equal Authority, that which equally respects
the times of both Testaments, and is plainly and without parable, taught in the
former only, is as sufficiently, and to all ends and purposes, taught, as if it
were taught with a like plainness in the latter also. Thus the qualification of
Magistrates, as that they be chosen out of the people [ viz. over whom they are
to bear rule] able men, fearing God, men of truth, hating covetousness Exo. 18.
21
; being thus plainly taught and declared in the Old Testament, there was no
occasion why they should be again thus largely and distinctly mentioned or
required in the New, neither has the Wisdom of God done it. There is the like
consideration of several other Subjects, as concerning the punishment of
Adulterers, some special duties of Kings, the regulation of Wars in sundry
particulars, Oaths before Magistrates, etc. Concerning which, enough being
delivered, and this with clearness enough, in the Old Testament, we hear little
of any of them in the New.

Consectary.
If there be no ground, either in Scripture, or in Reason, why the mind of God
about any particular subject, when discernable enough by the writings of the
Old Testament, should be again particularly revealed in the New, then is there
a plain account to be given, why the New Testament speaks so sparingly,
concerning the mind of God touching the admission of Children into
Church Membership, considering that his mind herein was so sufficiently
declared in the Old.

CONSIDERATION X.
THey who reject, or refuse to be satisfied with evident Consequences, or
Arguments, drawn by reason from the Scriptures, reject the Authority of the
Scriptures themselves, and his that speaks in them.

Proof.
The reason hereof is plain; viz. because whatsoever is substantially deducible
from, or out of, the Scripture, must needs be contained in the Scripture,
before the deduction of it made from thence; otherwise it could not be truly
and substantially deduced from hence. For nothing can be drawn out from thence,
where it never was, nor had any being. Now whatsoever is contained in the
Scripture, is Scripture, and of Scripture Authority. Thus our Savior himself
teaches us to call that Scripture, not only which is expressly, and in so many
words, either affirmed or denied in the Scriptures, but that also which is the
fair and clear result of the Scripture. He that believes on me, as the
Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters John
7. 38.
, the Scripture no where affirming this, but virtually or consequentially only.
So again he charge the Sadduces with ignorance of the Scriptures, because
they held and taught, that there was no See Mr Baxter Plain Scripture proof,
etc. p. 8
Resurrection of the dead; notwithstanding the Scriptures then in being
affirmed no such thing in expressness of terms; especially not in that place,
which yet our Savior judged most pertinent and pregnant for the conviction of
their error, Mat. 22. 31, 32. Suppose the Scripture had only said (as it does,
Mat. 1. 2.) Abraham begat Isaac, and had no where said, that Isaac was Abraham's
son, yet he that should deny this, should deny the Authority or Veracity of the
Scriptures, as well, or as much, as he that should deny the other.

Consectary.
If to reject solid and clear consequences or deductions from the Scriptures,
be to reject the Scriptures themselves, then may they, who oppose
Infant Baptism, because it is not in so many words taught or asserted in the
Scriptures, as much oppose and deny the Authority of the Scriptures, as they
should do, in case it were in so many words here asserted, and they oppose it
notwithstanding.

CONSIDERATION XI.
IF any man should levy, three, seven, ten, or any number of Arguments, to
prove the truth of a Doctrine or Tenent, and only ^n^ of them be found solid
and unanswerable, all the rest upon consideration or debate proving fallacious
and empty, the truth of this Doctrine ought to be acknowledged upon the account
of this one Argument, as well as it ought to have been, in case all the
Arguments besides had been of equal weight and conviction with it.

Proof.
The reason hereof is plain, viz. because an error, or a false doctrine, has
no more communion with any Truth, then light has with darkness, nor can it be
justified or supported by it. No Truth has any right hand of fellowship to
give, but unto its fellow-Truths only. Therefore what Opinion or Doctrine
soever has so much as one Argument, made of clear and shining Truth, to stand
by it, is hereby sufficiently justified. Notwithstanding variety of Arguments
for the eviction of one and the same Truth, is not superfluous; because the
capacities and apprehensions of men being various, that Argument which
corresponds with one man's apprehension and satisfies him, may be less
comporting with the capacity of another, and so not so convincing unto him,
though both may be in themselves of equal pregnancy and strength.

Consectary.
If any one Argument, solid and clear, be sufficient to establish an Opinion,
or Doctrine, though many others insisted on to the same purpose, should be
detected of insufficiency in this kind, then may the Cause of Infant Baptism
stand honorable and just, although it should be granted, that many Arguments,
which have appeared in the defense of it, have been disabled, or taken tardy by
her Opposers.

CONSIDERATION XII.
WHen a man's Soul has prospered, and is yet prospering, in such a way of
worshipping and serving God, wherein by his Providence he has been educated,
and in which he has walked from his youth, it is no wisdom for him to forsake
it, unless it be upon the clearest conviction that is lightly imaginable, that
God is displeased with this way, or that he better approves another contrary
to it.

Proof.
The Sun is not more visible by his own light, then the truth of this
Consideration discernable by the very substance of the matter and purport of
it. For when God has graciously and savingly discovered himself to a person,
walking in such or such a way of serving him, and is still revealing himself in
this way further and further from day to day unto him, this cannot reasonably
be interpreted, but as a Signal Confirmation from God of his approbation of
this way. The Apostle Paul, to reduce the judgments and affections of the
Galathians to the way of the Gospel, from which they began to decline,
remembers them of those spiritual vouchsafements, which they had received from
God* whilst they walked in this way Gal: 3. 2, 5.
, hereby clearly implying, that having experienced the rich Grace and Bounty of
God in this way, ^. 4. 14. 15.
they acted contrary to all principles of reason and sound understanding, in
suffering themselves upon such slender grounds, as they were, to be turned out
of it, especially to walk in such a way, wherein they could have no assurance
of being alike graciously entreated by God, but had rather (indeed) cause to
fear his high displeasure. So the Holy Ghost from place to place insisteth upon
it, as an aggravation of the sinful folly of men, to forsake the worship and
service of God, of whose Goodness, either themselves, or their Fathers, had had
experience, and to fall to the worship of a strange God, whom neither of them
had known: yea and frequently mentions the ignorance, or non-knowledg in men
of that God, whose service they are about, or in danger to addict themselves
unto, as a grand disswasive from such a practice. See ^eut. 2. 6, 13. And Jer.
19. 4. Because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and have
burnt incense in it unto other Gods, whom neither they nor their Fathers have
known, nor the Kings of Israel, etc.

Consectary.
If it be repugnant to the principles, not only of sound reason, but of
Christian prudence also, to relinquish such a way, wherein a man for a long
time together has walked with God, to the great enriching of his Soul with
sound comfort and peace, to walk in a new and strange path, wherein he is
ignorant whether he shall find the presence of God with him, or no; if (I say)
it be folly to relinquish a way of a long experienced peace, otherwise then
upon the clearest and highest conviction, that the way for which he exchangeth,
is a way wherein his Soul shall prosper more then in the former, then are such
persons children of great folly, and inconsiderateness, who having for many
years together thriven spiritually, and enjoyed much of God, under their
Infant Baptism, shall notwithstanding abandon this Baptism, to take up another,
which is (at least experimentally) unknown to them, and whereof, no not so much
as in point of lawfulness, the greatest Patrons of it are not able to give any
competent account to intelligent and considering men; being otherwise also a
way, which in all places where it has been occupied, has been obstructive to
the course of the Gospel See Epist. Dedic. sec. 11
, and wherein more shipwracks, then returns, as far as experience can judge,
have been found.

CONSIDERATION XIII.
THey who make such or such a thing necessary, or matter of The second head of
Considerations, which concern O^dinances and Institution* in general, and are
applicable unto Baptism.
conscience, in or about an Institution, or the Administration hereof, which
God neither by any general Law, nor special, has determined, make themselves
Lords over the consciences of men, and assume the Interest of God himself.

Proof.
The truth of this Consideration also lies near at hand. For it is a royalty
appropriately belonging to the Throne of Divine Majesty, to impose Laws upon
the judgments and consciences of men. And they who attempt to bring men into
bondage, where God has left them free, pretend to more, either wisdom, or
righteousness, or both, then they are willing to allow unto God.

Consectary.
If it be a sinful incroachment upon the Divine Prerogative, to determine or
bind the conscience, where God has left it free, then are they inexcusable,
who press it upon men as matter of conscience, either to withhold their
children from Baptism, or having themselves been infant-baptized, to be
baptized again, or to baptize, or to be baptized, by a total submersion of the
body under water; in as much as God has not determined any of these things by
any Law, either general or special. Nor has any such Law, either in the one
hand, or the other, been as yet produced.

CONSIDERATION XIV.
THe Subject of an Ordinance, or Institution, [i. e. the person unto whom the
Ordinance is administered, or ought to be administered,] is no part of the
Ordinance it self, but really and essentially distinct from it.

Proof.
This Position is sufficiently evident without proof. For if if the Subject of
an Ordinance, were a part of this Ordinance, then in every administration, one
part should be administered unto another. The child appointed to be circumcised
under the Law, was no part of the Ordinance it self of Circumcision. For then
when men were circumcised, the administration should have been defective or
maimed, wanting an essential or requisite part of it. Besides, if the Subject
of an Ordinance were a part thereof, it could not be (for example) the same
Baptism, or the same Ordinance of Baptism, which is administered unto a man, and
which is administered unto a woman. For that which has parts essentially
differing from the parts of another, cannot be essentially the same. Nor (upon
the same ground) should it be the same Baptism, which is administered unto an
hypocrite, or pretended believer only, and which is administered unto a Believer
indeed. For what communion has light with darkness? etc.

Consectary.
If the Subject of an Ordinance be not part of the Ordinance, but somewhat
really distinct from it, then is Baptism, or baptizing only, the Ordinance of
God, not the baptizing of any determinate Subject, whether Infant or Believer:
The baptizing of the one, or of the other, according to circumstance, may be
the Will of God, but the Ordinance of God, if we take the word, Ordinance,
properly, neither the one, nor the other, is, or can be.

CONSIDERATION XV.
THe Law of Nature, and of personal accommodation and safety, is, by the Will
of God, to super-intend and overruled Ordinances and Institutions, and all
things appertaining to these, and to supersede whatsoever in them shall at any
time be found threatening, or destructive, either to the lives, healths, or
well-beings of men.

Proof.
The truth of this Consideration we have sufficiently proved from the
Scripture, and otherwise, partly in the latter part of this Discourse, Sect. 8.
partly also, and more largely in a Treatise not long since published,
entitled, Water-Dipping, etc. p. 5. 6. 7. of the said Treatise. We shall not
need to add any thing upon the account of proof here; but desire the Reader to
repair for his satisfaction in the point, if he needs any, to the places now
directed unto.

Consectary.
If the Law of Nature, and personal accommodation and safety, be according to
the Will of God, to umpire and overrule all things in any Institution, wherein
it is concerned, then, could it be proved, that the Baptismal Administration
was constantly transacted by the Apostles, or other Baptists in their days, in
the warmer Climates of Judea, and the Countries adjoining, by dipping over head
and ears in rivers or ponds of cool waters, etc. yet will not this prove that
therefore the same Administration is to be performed upon the same terms, or
after the same manner, in cold Countries, or under the frozen Zone, nor
(indeed) any where, when the person to be baptized, is, either in a way of
reason, or according to experience in like cases, likely to suffer in his
health or life, by being dowz'd in the water.

CONSIDERATION XVI.
EVen in matters themselves of sacred Institution, some things, extra-essential
to the nature and end of the Institution, have been observed and done,
according to the tenor of the Institut on, in the first Administration, and
(happily) in some few more immdiately succeeding, which have been, and may be,
not only la^fully, but commendably and of conscience, omitted in after
Administrations.

Proof.
In the Institution of the Passover, besides the eating of the Lamb at the time
appointed, these particulars were enjoined (and accordingly observed in the
first Administration.) 1. That the Lamb intended for the Passover, should be
taken and brought home from the flock on the tenth day of the Month. 2. That it
should be here kept till the fourteenth day of the Month. 3. That it should be
eaten in their several houses dispersed in Egypt. 4. That the blood of it
should be struck on their door posts. 5. That they should eat it in haste. 6.
That they should eat it with their loins girded. 7. That they should eat it
standing. 8. With their staffs in their hands, etc. But all these circumstances
were appropriate to the first Administration or Observation of it only; and
were not required of the Jews in after generations, when they they came to
possess the Land of Canaan. Neither were they, nor could they (at least the
greatest part of them, as is evident without proof) be performed or obeyed by
Christ and his Apostles, at that Passover, which he kept with them a little
before his death See Mr Ainsworth ^n Exodus 12. 6. and 11.
. And yet it became him (as himself acknowledges, Mat. 3. 15.) to perform all
righteousness: yea and most assuredly he did perform it. So in the first
Institution of the New Passover (the Supper of the Lord) only men were admitted
unto it: it was kept (...), in an upper loft, or chamber, and toward the
evening: yet these particulars, though recorded in the Institution, and
observed in the first Administration, being extra-essential to the main end of
the Service, were very lawfully, all of them, the first conscienciously, and as
matter of duty; the two latter, prudentially, and for convenience sake, waved
and laid aside by Christians afterward.

Consectary.
If in matters of Divine Institution, some things have been both commanded in
the Institution it self, and accordingly observed in the first Administration,
which notwithstanding, being less relative to the standing and main end of the
Institution, have been lawfully, yea and some of them conscientiously, declined
or forborne afterward, then does it not at all follow, that Baptism must, or
ought, to be always, and in all places, administered in rivers, or with a total
submersion of the body under water, though it be granted that at first it was
administered in rivers, yea and though it should be granted (which yet never was
sufficiently proved, nor ever will be, by the Scriptures now in being) that it
was at first, and for a time, administered with such a submersion; (although I
find this to be the judgment both of many ancient, yea and modern Writers also,
who notwithstanding are constant Assertors of Infant Baptism.) The reason of
this non-sequitur is, because as well a baptizing in rivers, as with a total
submersion, are particularities extraneous to the main end of Baptismal
Institution (of which afterward,) although they might have (and questionless
had) their weight and worth of Consideration, for a season, and whilst they
were continued; at least if we suppose them, or either of them, in respect of
what was determinate and particular in them, to have been practiced for any
season, by virtue of an Institution, or Command. For Baptism may be commanded,
and yet not commanded to be practiced in rivers (no more then not prohibited)
or with a total submersion of the body.

CONSIDERATION XVII.
EVery defect or mistake by men, in the Administration of a Divine Ordinance,
or Institution, does not so pollute this Ordinance to him that receives or
partakes of the Administration, as to render the Counsel or gracious
Intendments of God in the said Ordinance, void, or of no effect, no not in
relation unto such a man.

Proof.
That Table of Divine Ordinances, which God has spread for the benefit and
blessing of the World, for the filling of the children of men with
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost would either prove a Snare,
or at the best but as such a dream unto them, which an hungry man dreameth (as
the Prophet Isaiah speaks) and behold he eats, but he awaketh, and his soul
is empty Isai. 29. 8.
; if every defect, or mistake, in these respective Administrations, should
either pollute those that are partakers of them, or render them as a mere
nullity unto them. For are not the Ordinances and Institutions we speak of,
appurtenances of the Gospel, and so of the same consideration with the Gospel
it self, and the Ministry thereof? Yea is not the Preaching or Ministry of the
Gospel, one of these Ordinances, yea the firstborn and principal of them? And
yet the great Apostle expresses himself in this (whether bemoaning, or
admiring) interrogation; and who is sufficient for these things 2 Cor. 2. 16.
? (speaking of the managing of the affairs of the Gospel by men:) And el^ewhere
he affirms, that we know but in part, and prophecy in part 1 Cor. 13. 9
. If then every defect, error, or miscarriage in the preaching or hearing the
Gospel (and there is the same reason of other Ordinances) should render the
Ordinance of Preaching sinful, or unprofitable unto men, in vain had this great
and blessed Ordinance been vouchsafed by God unto the World. Nor can they who
live under Ordinances, and partake of their Administrations from time to time,
have any sufficient or substantial ground of reaping comfort or edification by
them, if every defect in these Administrations were of such a malignity as to
destroy their usefulness. For what assurance can any man have that he that
performs the Administration, performs the service with all requirements
necessary, and appointed by God thereunto? They who preached the Gospel out of
envy and strife in Paul's days, supposing thereby to add affliction to his bonds
[meaning, that they conceited that he would be much troubled and grieved, that
they should gain credit, and draw away his Interest amongst Christians to
themselves by preaching, whilst he was laid aside by imprisonment, etc.] did
service to the world notwithstanding by their preaching, although they preached
upon such unworthy terms as these; otherwise he would not have rejoiced in such
their preaching, which yet he professes to have done Phil. 1. 18.
. The prayer of Hezekiah for those that are the Passover (in his days)
otherwise then it was written [i. e. then God had appointed] was; The good Lord
pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his
fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purisication of the
Sanctuary: and upon this prayer, it immediately follows; And the Lord
harkened unto Hezekiah, and healed the people Chron. 30. 18. 19. 20.
. How much more will he pardon such irregularities in holy Administrations,
which have been committed through ignorance or want of light, in the
Administration, so as not to make the persons partaking of these
Administrations, sufferers or losers by them, upon their faithful applications
of themselves in prayer unto him, on that behalf?

Consectary.
If every defect, or mistake, in the Administration of a Divine Institution,
depriveth not him, that partakes of such an Administration of the benefit or
blessing thereof, renders not the Administration null or void, then may that
Baptism which has been administered unto, and received by men in their Infancy,
be available unto them for all gracious intents, ends, and purposes
appropriated unto Baptism, though it should be made never so plainly to appear,
that some irregularity cleaved unto, and attended the said Administration.

CONSIDERATION XVIII.
WHatsoever right or title unto an Ordinance or Privilege, a^crueth unto any
person upon a special consideration or ground, the same right and title
appertains unto all those, in whom the same consideration or ground takes
place, or is to be found.

Proof.
The Apostle Peter justifies this principle, Acts 10. 47. and by the Authority
of it, pleads the Lawfulness of baptizing those, on whom the Holy Ghost fell,
whilst he was preaching unto them at Cornelius his house. Then answered Peter,
Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we? So if any person among the Jews had
right to Circumcision, merely as he was, or because he was, lineally descended
in a way of natural propagation from Abraham, it unquestionably follows, that
whosoever in all the world was thus descended, had the same right to
Circumcision also. It is upon the account and credit of this Maxim, or
Conclusion, that believing women are, and ought to be, admitted with
men-beleevers unto the Lords Table, for whose admission hereunto there is
neither precept, nor example (I mean, express, in either kind;) For whereas a
late Defender of the Faith of new Baptists, pretends, by the grammatical
indulgence of the word, (...), 1 Cor. 11. 28. to find a precept for women's
admission in this kind, his finding (according to the Greek Proverb) is no
Treasure, but Coals. The tenor of the place, according to the original, is
this: (...), etc. translated thus: But let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat, etc. The word, (...) (says this Critique) is of the epicoene gender,
and signifies both Sexes, either man, or woman; and therefore signifies so
here. His premises are strong, and not to be withstood; but his inference is
weak and contemptible. For though, (...), does in the general signify either,
man, or woman, yet does it not always signify both; nay very frequently it
signifies the male sex only: Witness Mat. 8. 9. c. 8. 9. 32. Mat. 11. 8. 19.
c. 12. 10. Joh. 1. 6. c. 3. 1. etc. in all which places (to omit others without
number of like import) the word (...), precisely and determinately, signifies,
man, or a person of the male sex only. Therefore if Mr D. will prove, that the
said word includes both sexes in the Text now under consideration, he must
produce some better argument, then the grammatical signification of the word at
large. Otherwise he might with as much reason argue, and undertake to prove,
that because the word (...), pneuma, signifies both the wind and the spirit,
that therefore it signifies both in all passages where it is used; and so raise
a storm of blasphemy, horrid i^ one respect, and ridiculous in another, in
twenty places. Besides the pronoun (...) himself, relating in construction to
the word (...) being not of the epicoene, much less, foeminine gender, but of
the masculine (determinately,) plainly shows that the Apostle did not intend
the female part of the signification of the word (...) but the masculine only.
Notwithstanding it is not to be denied, but that the precept or direction in
hand, does relate unto and concern, women also, though not by force, or any
express signification of the word (...), yet by virtue of that capacity, which
is in this sex, as well as in men, to perform the terms here required of men,
in order to their partaking of the Ordinance here spoken of. So that the
Conclusion last specified is unquestionable; being (indeed) nothing in
substance, but that common Maxim in Reason, A quate^us ad de omni, efficax est
illatio.

Consectary.
If the same right, or title, which accrueth unto any person upon a special
consideration, accrueth unto every person without exception, in whom the same
consideration is found, it undeniably follows, that if persons of riper years
have a right unto Baptism, by virtue of that interest of grace or f^vor in God,
which they obtain by repenting or believing, and declare to have obtained by
the profession of this their repentance or believing (which we have at large
evinced for truth in the subsequent Answer) that then (I say) Children and
Infants have the same right also (I mean unto Baptism) in case it be proved,
and found true, that they have the like interest in the said grace and favor of
God.

CONSIDERATION XIX.
IT is not necessarily required, either in Signs, Seals, or Sacraments, that
they should correspond in any natural similitude or likeness, with the things,
signified, sealed, or Sacra(...)z^d by them.

Proof.
First, (not to speak of natural Signs, between which, and the things signified
by them, nothing is more evident then that no such similitude intercedes, as
between smoke and fire, between a fiery red morning, and a rainy day, etc.) in
Instituted Signs, an agreement, either in quality, or in form, between them,
and the things signified by them, is not at all (at least, in many cases)
regarded or looked after. A bush hanging down from a sign-post, is a sign of
wine to be sold in the house: but what similitude or agreement is there between
the bush, and the wine? A garment of diverse colors was a sign of a Kings
daughter in her virginity, 2 Samuel 13. 18. What similitude was there between the
sign, and thing signified, here? It were easy to instance many particulars of
like kind.

Secondly, It is yet much more evident, that between Seals, and the things
sealed, or confirmed by them, there is no need of any such correspondency, or
agreement, as that of which we now speak. The impression made upon wax, affixed
to an Indenture, or Conveyance, may be of any figure, or form, what ever the
con^ents of the said Indenture, or Conveyance, may be. The great broad Seal of
a State, or Prince, is one and the same, notwithstanding the great variety of
Commissions, Grants, or matters, sealed and confirmed by it. In which respect
there cannot be a similitude or resemblance between this Seal, and all the
respective particular things that are sealed or ratified by it.

Thirdly (and lastly) Concerning Sacraments, or such sacred Ordinances, whereby
God is pleased to signify and confirm matters of Grace, of one kind, or other,
unto us* neither is it necessary that these should be any pictures,
pourtraictures, or resemblances, of the particular things signified or
confirmed by them. The reason is, because God, in the appointment and
vouchsafement of them, graciously intending to apply himself unto men in such
ways and methods, which were familiarly practiced amongst themselves, was no
ways necessitated, or occasioned, to make any other calculation of them, then
only to answer the manner of men in the calculation, institution or appointment
of their signe^ and seals; wherein (as was lately said) they are not won^ much
to mind similitudes or correspondencies. Indeed in Types or Ordinances merely
Typpical, Analogy or configuration is requisite and proper: but in Ordinances
properly and purely Sacramental, it is not necessary, although it be not
denied, but that in some cases, and in some of these Ordinances, it may be
expedient, and has been accordingly observed by God. But that sundry
Sacramentals have been appointed by God without any Typpical resemblance in
them of the things signified by them, or intended to be effected by them, might
be proved from the Scriptures. The Tree in the midst of Paradise, Sacramentally
signified and confirmed unto Adam, that whilst he obeyed God, he should live
(and in this respect, happily, was called, The Tree of Life, Genesis 2. 9.) yet was
there no similitude or resemblance between this Tree, and the Life
Sacramentally signified and sealed by it. There is a like consideration of the
Tree of Knowledge of good and evil: and so of the Rainbow: and again of Moses
his smiting the Waters of the Sea with the rod in his hand; of the Priests
compassing the City of Jerich^ seven days together with blowing Trumpets made
of Rames horns (to omit many others.)

Consectary.
If it be not necessarily required, either in signs, seals, or Sacraments, that
they should correspond in any similitude or likeness, with the things
signified, sealed or Sacramentized by them, then may Baptism by sprinkling, or
any other kind of ablution, as well as by dipping, be a sign, seal and
Sacrament of a being buried with Christ in, or into, his death. However,

CONSIDERATION XX.
What is not expressly mentioned, in an Institution, nor particularly
commanded, in, or about the administration of it, is not of the nature or
essence of the Institution; but the administration hereof may be lawfully and
regularly made without it.

Proof.
The reason of what is laid down and ^endered in this Consideration, is:
because the Law or nature of an Institution, which in all things essentially
requisite to the due Performance, or administration of it, depends upon the
sole Will and pleasure of God, requires that this his Will and pleasure thus
far (I mean, in all particulars essential to it) be clearly made known unto
men. Otherwise (as the Apostle argues in a like case) If the Trumpet give an
uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battle? In like manner, if
the Tenor of an Institution be imperfect, and some things only appertaining to
it, be expressed, and other things of a like relation, suppressed or concealed,
how shall men either prepare themselves to a due observation of this
Institution, or know at any time, whether it be duly administered, observed, or
received, or no?

Consectary.
If an Ordinance or Institution, may be duly and regularly administered without
any such ingredient, whether of Ceremony, or Morality, which God himself has
not prescribed or enjoined, in the Tenor of the Institution, nor otherwise,
then may the Ordinance of Baptism be duly and regularly administered, and
received, without a Total submersion of the body of the person baptized,
inasmuch as this is no where expressly prescribed or enjoined by God.

CONSIDERATION XXI.
JN what circumstance or modality soever (in, or about, the Administration of
an Ordinance) not prescribed by God himself, any person shall place Religion,
or think that in the observation thereof, he performs an act of worship unto
God, he is (in this point) Superstitious, and a will-worshipper.

Proof.
To evidence the truth of this Consideration, the descrip-of Superstition, and
will worship is sufficient. (...) sive superstitio (as Cameron well describes
it) Camer de Eccles.
est cultus Dei, sed qualem sibi praescribit ingenium humanum, i. e.
Superstition is a worshipping of God; but such a worshipping of him as the wit
[or wisdom] of men prescribes unto it self. Another defines it to be, Cultus,
seu modus c^lendi Deum arbitrio humano, sine Dei praecepto susceptus Rivet. in
Exodus 20.
, a worship, or manner of worshipping God according to the will and pleasure of
men, taken up without any precept of God. If this be the nature of
Superstition, or will worship, to worship God, or rather to conceit that a man
does worship God, by any ceremony, gesture or action, which himself has not
prescribed, it is a plain case, that whosoever places religion in any
ceremony, circumstance or modality in the observation of any divine Ordinance,
which God has not enjoined, is in this behalf a son of Superstition, and a
will-worshipper.

Consectarie.
If they who think they do God service, and truly worship him by the
observation of any rite, circumstance, or action in the administration, or
reception, of an Ordinance which God himself has not prescribed, be upon this
account will-worshipers, and Superstitious; it roundly follows, that they who
administer Baptism by dipping all-over, and think that by this mode of that
Administration they worship God, are in the said condemnation of will worship
and superstition, inasmuch as God has no where in his Word prescribed this
mode of the Administration. From the same ground and principle it likewise
follows, that they, who having been once baptized (as suppose in their
Infancy) shall conceit they honor or worship God aright by a second or after
Baptism, are children of the same error, inasmuch as God has no where
prescribed a Baptism upon Baptism, nor yet declared Baptism received in Infancy
to be null.

CONSIDERATION XXII.
SAcramental engagements the more early imposed, are so much the more
improveable, and the more binding also.

Proof.
This Consideration also, is hereafter asserted, and the truth of it cleared,.
161. 163. and elsewhere, in the second part of this discourse. Doubtless
Circumcision under the Law, was never the less, but rather the more, both
improveable by, and binding unto the Jews, because received by them in Infancy.
Otherwise (as has been formerly argued) there is little question but God would
have imposed it, not upon Infancy, but upon maturity of years; nor is it to be
believed, that He that has made this order for men (as we lately heard) Let
all things be done unto edifying, would impose a service, or action upon men,
upon such terms, according to which it should either not not be edifying at
all, or less edifying.

Consectary.
If Sacramental Engagements, be both so much the more binding upon those, who
are under them, and likewise so much the more improveable by them, by how much
the sooner they are imposed, then must Infant Baptism needs be more effectual
for all baptismal ends and purposes, then after Baptism. The Consequence is
apparent.

CONSIDERATION XXIII.
ADult Baptism standingly administered in constituted Churches, and amongst
Believers, cannot lightly but prove a root of bitterness, and occasion
perpetual quarrels, contests, and emulations amongst them.

Proof.
The reason hereof is, because the want of a positive and certain rule, whereby
to adjudge, issue, and determine such cases and questions, which are frequently
incident to any Society or Body of men, must needs, the ordinary temper and
weakness of men considered, engender strife, contention, and discontents
amongst them. If a Church shall pass by the time of Infancy, and not baptize
the children of her Members under this age; by what rule will they baptize,
them afterward? To say they are to be baptized when they shall believe, and
make known their faith to the Church by their lives or works, and withal
desire Baptism, is to speak very inconsiderately, and to prescribe a rule every
whit as dark and questionable, as the case it self that is to be measured and
adjudged by it. For who knows not that the members of a Church are commonly
of different judgments and apprehensions, as about other matters, so about
nothing more then about the signs and properties of a true Faith? So that when
a person shall come to desire Baptism, who (it may be) has satisfied one part
of the Church touching the soundness and sincerity of his Faith, another part
hereof will remain dissatisfied* In this case, here will be Ephraim against
Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim; and both (indeed) against Judah, I mean
the truth* The judgments even of sober and able Christians, for the most part,
are about nothing more divided (nor in reason more like to be divided) then
about the (...), or demonstrative effects of a sound Faith. I confess it is an
easy matter for Master Tombs, or Master Fisher here to interpose their sense,
instead of a rule, to decide such cases, as that specified, and to tell us
Magisterially what they judge meet to be done: but whether their Churches will
agree about the sense and interpretation of what they shall prescribe for a
rule in such cases; or if they shall agree in this, whether they will own and
consent unto the sufficiency of this rule, is very questionable. Yea, rather it
is no question, but that there will be a battle fought by yea's and nay's, if
not by more angry and fierce soldiers, about it. See this Consideration more
amply propounded, and fully vindicated by Master Baxter in his Discourse for
Infant Baptism, p. 130, 131. where likewise he substantially proves that the
ordinary practice of baptizing the children of Christians at age, must needs
run all into confusion.

Consectary.
If the practice of baptizing Christian's children at age in constituted
Churches, be such a method or course of baptizing, The third Head of
Considerations, which more immediately relate unto Infant Baptism, and argue
the lawfulness of it; yea, and more then lawfulness (ordinarily.)
which is apt to fill these Churches with perpetual contentions and strife,
then is it not a Method allowed, much less prescribed, by Christ.

CONSIDERATION XXIV.
THe ordinary practice of baptizing Infants in the Church, is much more
edifying, both to the Church, and to the persons also baptized, when come to
years of discretion, then the baptizing of men, and women, only.

Proofs.
This Consideration, as to point of truth, is demonstratively argued and
asserted, more then once in the latter part of this discourse: and so needs no
traverse here. The Reader is desired for his satisfaction in this to peruse
Sect. 56. 73. 159. 160. of that part.

Consectary.
If Infant Baptism contributes more toward the edification, both of the Body
of the Church, and of the persons themselves also baptized, then the baptizing
of men and women only, then is it the unquestionable Will of God that
Infant Baptism should be practiced in the Churches of Christ, in as much as his
order and appointment is very express in this; Let all things be done to
edification, 1 Cor. 14. 26. And again, Seek, that ye may excel to the
edification of the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 12. (of which Scriptures in the second
part of this Discourse, Sect. 159. 48.)

CONSIDERATION XXV.
CHildren were admitted unto Baptism in the days of Christ, and of the
Apostles.

Proof.
For proof of this, the Reader is only desired diligently to peruse the 22, 23.
and so the following Sections of the latter part of this discourse, to the end
of the 32 Section; as also the 40. 132. 157. 158. Sections, with several other
passages hereof.

Consectary.
If Children were admitted unto Baptism in the days of Christ, and his
Apostles, then can there no sufficient reason be given why water should be
denied unto them in these days that they should not be baptized.

CONSIDERATION XXVI.
AS Circumcision was a Seal of the righteousness of Faith under the Law, so is
Baptism a Seal of the same righteousness under the Gospel.

Proof.
That Circumcision was a Seal of the righteousness mentioned under the Law, and
this simply and indefinitely, and not with any appropriation unto Abraham, or
the righteousness of his faith only, is demonstratively proved in the latter
part of this Treatise, Sect. 61, 62, 63. etc.

That Baptism is a Seal of the same righteousness under the Gospel, cannot
reasonably be denied: and is granted by the more considering persons of the
adverse party. The Author of the Treatise entitled, * Of Baptism, having said,
page 4. That the righteousness which Abraham had by Faith, the acceptance he
had, was sealed up to him* by the sign of Circumcision, etc. immediately
subjoyneth, Now what Abraham had by Circumcision, that the Saints have by
Baptism: for so the Apostle intimates, in Col. 2. 11. 12. Again ( page 18.)
speaking of Baptism, We shall find (says he, beating it out as far as the
Scripture gives light) that as it seals and confirms our union with him, so it
also seals and confirms to us the most desirable thing in the world, which is
the pardon of all our sins. Now we know that the remission or pardon of sin,
and the righteousness of faith, are Termini convertibiles sive aequivalentes,
words importing one and the same thing: And yet again the same Author and
Book, page 20. Now for this God has formed an Ordinance on purpose to confirm
and ratify unto us the remission of sins, and this is baptism: therefore be
not amazed, but repent, and be baptized. The same Author delivers the same
Doctrine in the same discourse ten times over; yea, Master W. A. himself in his
Treatise, styled some baptismal Abuses, etc. (as the Reader will find in the
latter part of this Treatise) is not tender of breaking with his Tutour, (Mr.
Fisher) in this point; although in the mean time he contradicts himself, as
well as his Teacher herein. For if Baptism be a Seal of remission of sins, it
cannot be required on man's part for the obtaining of remission of sins: it is
not the property of a Seal to procure, unless it be the ratification and
confirmation of what is already procured, or done. And indeed, Mr. Fishers
notion, which allows Baptism to be a Sign, but denies it to be a Seal, is
(upon the matter) contradictions to it self. For certainly God signifies
nothing, but what has reality, and truth of being. If so, then by what means
soever he signifies a thing; he must needs seal, ratify, and confirm the
being of it. But for the truth of the Consideration before us, were it not
granted by our adversaries, (in which respect it needs no proof) it might be
clearly argued and evinced from that known Scripture Description of Baptism,
wherein it is styled, The Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.

Consectary.
If Circumcision under the Law, was a Seal of the righteousness of Faith [or,
of the remission of sins,] and Baptism under the Gospel, be a seal likewise of
the same righteousness, then must children under the Gospel needs be as capable
subjects of the latter seal, (I mean, Baptism,) as they were of the former,
(Circumcision) under the Law.

CONSIDERATION XXVII.
IT was a gracious privilege vouchsafed by God unto children under the Law, to
be admitted members of that Church-body, which was most highly favored, and
respected by him, and amongst whom (besides many other most great and precious
promises made unto them) he promised to dwell for ever.

Proof.
Neither should we need to levy any proof of this Consideration, if we had to
do only with reasonable and considering men. For if it were not a gracious
privilege unto children to be admitted members of such a body as that
described, then was the Ordinance of God, enjoining men the Circumcising of
their children, by which they became formal and complete members of this Body,
either a kind of Idol Ordinance, which did neither good nor evil to those who
received and enjoyed it; or else such an Ordinance, wherein or whereby God
intended evil unto them. But as well the one, as the other of those conceits,
are the abhoring of every Christian and considering Soul. Ergo,

If it be said, that C^rcumcision might benefit children in some other way:
though not by immembring them into the Jewish Church? I Answer, 1. It is not
easy to conceive in what other way it should benefit them. 2. What way soever
may be thought upon, wherein it should profit them otherwise; Baptism must
needs be conceived to be as profitable to them in the same. 3. (and lastly) it
is very unreasonable and importune, and not worthy a sober man, to affirm or
think, that children had no privilege or benefit, by being taken into
communion and fellowship with that Church or people, to whom God bare, and
showed from time to time, more and greater respects of Grace and love, then to
any other people under Heaven; especially, considering that the Apostle having
demanded thus, What advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of
Circumcision? returns this answer to his question; much every ways, Rom* 3. 1.

Consectary.
If it were a privilege of Grace unto children under the Law, to be
incorporated with the holy People, and Church of God then in being, then must
it needs be a privilege of like Grace unto children under the Gospel, to be in
like manner incorporated with Gospel Churches. And consequently such Parents,
who are in a capacity of procuring this privilege, or blessing unto their
children, by causing them to be baptized, and yet shall neglect or refuse to do
it, must needs be looked upon as Parents of hard bowels, and un-Christianly
injurious to their Children. And if God should interpose by any prohibition of
his against children in this behalf, under the Gospel he also should be found
by many degrees estranged in his care and affection from children, since the
coming of his own Son Jesus Christ in the flesh, in comparison of his respects
toward them under the Law; especially considering that under the Gospel, he
has not invested them with any other privilege of like Grace and favor, with
that in-Churching them under the Law: neither (indeed) are they investible with
any like to it.

CONSIDERATION, XXVIII.
When the Jews through the just judgment of God, were for their Sins cast off
from being a Church, or people any longer unto him, their children were
involved in the rejection, as well as themselves (I mean, as well as their men
and women, and those who were Parents) and had from henceforth no right to any
Church Ordinance, unless (happily) it be unto Baptism, and this in such
cases, and upon such terms only, as those specified. Part. 2. of this
discourse.. 171.

Proof.
This consideration also may well be numbered amongst those, which carry
self-evidence enough in themselves, and need no labor of proof to commend
their truth: and some of our Re-Baptizers themselves do acknowledge it:
However, most certain it is, that circumcision, with the whole reti^ue of the
Mosaical or Levitical Ordinances depending hereon ( Gal. 5. 3.) is abolished by
the death of Christ, and promulgation of the Gospel: in which respect, no
person, whether Jew, or Gentile, whether Parents or children, are in any
regular capacity of any of these. Therefore if the Jewish Children, under the
rejection of their Nation, or Parents, be not in a capacity of Baptism, they
are in no capacity of any Church Ordinance whatsoever.

Consectary.
If the Jewish children were, together with their Parents, dis-franchised, and
deprived of their former rights and privileges, in respect of
Church Membership, and Church-Ordinances, when their Parents were rejected by
God, and their Church* state dissolved and abolished, then can it not
reasonably, nor with any tolerable accord to the righteousness and goodness
of God, be imagined, but that in case their Parents should repent and return
unto God by Faith, and consequently be re-inchurched by him, they also (the
children I mean) should partake of this Grace, and be together re-invested with
them: and consequently hereunto, should by Baptism be members of the same
Christian Churches (respectively) with them. Yea it is the judgment and sense
of some of our Adversaries (and these not inconsiderable in their tribe) that
when the Jews shall return by faith unto him, whom they have crucified, and
embrace Christian Religion, they will expect, and demand Bapti^m for their
children also. Now there is no reason to think, that the children of Jewish
Believers, as such, should have any privilege in Church affairs, above the the
children of Gentile Believers, who by faith are the children of Abraham, a well
as they. If so, then are the children of these [beleeving Gentiles] regular
subjects of the Ordinance of Baptism at the present. as the children of the
other [the Jews] will be when their Parents shall believe.

CONSIDERATION, XXIX.
THe Jewish children were baptized into [or unto] Moses as well as their
Parents, in the cloud, and in the Sea.

Proof.
This Assertion is the Apostles express Doctrine. Moreover, Brethren* I would
not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our Fathers were under the cloud,
and all passed thorough the Sea. And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud,
and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. Now 1. That by all our Fathers, he means all
the Jewish children at those times in being, whereof he speaks as well as their
Parenrs, is evident. Because, those who were now children at the time of the
Baptizing here spoken of, were Fathers to the Jewish generation in Paul's time,
as well as those who were then men, in as much as this generation descended
from them, who were then children, as well as from their Parents. Besides, if
the Jewish children now in being, were not Baptized into Moses, as well as
their Parents, by the Cloud, and by the Sea, then were they no whit engaged to
obey Moses in his conduct, or government over them during their passage
thorough the wilderness, upon the account either of the miraculous protection,
or direction of the cloud here spoken of, or of their miraculous deliverance
through the red Sea, both being vouchsafed by God unto them under Moses his
conduct for the confirmation of it unto them, as being from himself (I mean
from God.) But this I presume is no man's thought, therefore the children of the
Jews, as well as their Parents, are affirmed by Paul to have been baptized into
Moses by the means specified.

Consectary.
If all the Jewish children were baptized into Moses, by the cloud and by the
Sea, then may all Christian children be by water baptized into Christ. There
can be nothing considerable objected against this consequence. For 1. Moses was
a typical Christ, and his conduct or leading of the people unto Canaan, was a
typical leading of men to Heaven. 2. The children of Christians are altogether
as capable of being baptized by water, into the true Moses [I mean Christ] as
the children of the Jews were of being baptized by the cloud, and by the Sea,
into their typical Christ [I mean Moses] nor can any material difference be
showed between the one case, and the other.

If it be objected, that the Jewish children are metaphorically only, and
improperly said to have been baptized into Moses, when as the baptizing into
Christ is literal and proper; I answer let this difference be admitted, yet it
no ways disableth the consequence in hand. For what can there be required to
give a capacity of a literal or proper baptism, more then is required to give a
like capacity of a metaphorical, typical, or mystical baptism? Nay, in reason
more should be required to qualify for this, then for the other. For things
literally and properly such, are more readily apprehended and conceived, then
things figuratively and mystically a M. Baxter affirms and proves this kind
of baptizing to be no Ordinance of God, but an heinous sin; yea and flat
murder and no better, and upon this account judges that the Civil Magistrate
ought to restrain it, as being destructive to the lives ^f* their people: See
this, and much more t^ like purpose, p. 134. 135. 136. in his Plain Scripture
Proof for Infants Church Membership. etc.
such. Therefore if children were capable of a metaphorical or typical baptism,
much more are they capable of that which is literal and proper. So that the
Scripture now argued, is on the behalf of Infant Baptism, like Solomon's King
upon his Throne, against whom there is no rising up.

CONSIDERATION. XXX.
THe ceremony or door of entrance or admission into the Christian Church, is
less grievous or offensive to the flesh, and more accommodate to the weakness
and tenderness of children, then the ceremony of like import was under the
Law.

Proof.
The Proof, or evidence rather, of this Consideration, is near at hand. For the
entrance into the Jewish Church under the Law, was by blood; which occasioned
Zipporah to tell Moses, that he was an Husband of blood to her. Then she said,
A bloody Husband thou art, because of the Circumcision [which, it seems, she
was necessitated to administer unto her child, to save her Husbands life,]
Exodus 4. 26. Whereas the ceremonial entrance into the Christian Church is by
water, and the washing of the flesh herewith. Indeed as some form, and obtrude
this Ceremony upon the consciences of men, the entrance into the Christian
Church is made more bloody in many cases, I mean, more prejudicial unto health,
and more threatening life, then that under the Law. For though Circumcision was
smarting and painful, yet it made no breach upon the health, nor endangered the
life of any that came under it. Whereas Bptizing in Rivers by plunging or
dipping the whole body under water, in cold climates and seasons, must needs
threaten not the healths only; but the lives also of many infirm and tender
constitutions ^. Yea I am all thoughts made, that upon the account of this kind
of Baptizing, many amongst us at this day are sick and weak, and many also have
fallen asleep. Several instances of persons who have suffered in these kinds,
have been reported unto me, and this upon terms sufficient to secure the truth
of the reports.

Consectary.
If God admitted Infants into his Church, when the entrance hereunto was more
grievous, and not without blood, it is very unreasonable to conceive that he
should now exclude them, having made the entrance hereinto more accommodations
unto them and much better comporting with their weakness.

CONSIDERATION, XXXI.
IT cannot be proved from the Scriptures, that the Baptism of any child born of
Christian Parents, or Bele^vers, was deferred to adultness, or years of
discretion: much less can it be proved that the Baptism of all such children
was thus deferred.

Proof.
If that which in this Consideration is implicitly denied (the deferring of
Baptism to the persons specified* can, or could be proved from the Scriptures,
the proof must be, either first, by some example of an Infant, one or more, of
the relation mentioned, who was not baptized until man's estate. But evident it
is that no such proof as this can be found in the Scriptures. Or else 2. the
said proof must be made, by producing some prohibition of Divine Authority, by
which Believing Parents are restrained, from desiring Baptism for their
children, until maturity of years. But as certain it is that no proof in this
kind neither, can be found in the Scriptures. Or 3. and lastly, the proof we
speak of must be made by producing some reason, or ground otherwise, from the
Scriptures, by which the necessity of such a Dilation is substantially evinced.
But neither do the Scriptures afford any proof of the point in question, in
this kind, as our Adversaries themselves, upon the matter, as far as I
understand, do confess, in that they never yet produced any. If it be objected
and said; though there be no particular or special prohibition in the
Scriptures restraining Christians from desiring Baptism for their children,
whilst they are yet children, yet are their prohibitions in general laid as
well upon them, as others, to restrain them from will worship, and so from
using the Holy things of God, in any manner not directed or prescribed by
himself: and consequently, to restrain Believing Parents from offering their
children, whilst such, unto Baptism, in as much as Infant Baptism is
will worship, or an act or kind of worship not prescribed by him? to this I
answer.

That every usage of the Holy things of God, after a manner not particularly
prescribed by him, is not will worship. To read a Chapter, two or three daily,
is no will worship; yet is it an using of the Holy Scriptures, nor particularly
prescribed by God. To give the Holy things of God in the Administration of the
Supper unto women, is an usage of these Holy things not particularly directed
or prescribed by God himself, yet it is far from Will Worship. To pray about a
quarter, or half, or an whole hour every day, is an usage of the Holy Ordnance
of prayer not particularly prescribed by God, yet is it not Will Worship: many
instances in this kind might be added. Therefore neither is the Baptizing of
Infants any strein of Will Worship upon any such account as this, viz. because
it is an usage of an Ordinance not particularly prescribed by God.

2. Will Worship properly consists in this, when men exhibit or perform that in
the name of worship, or for worship, unto God, which he has not prescribed as
any part of his worship. As they who conceit they worship God by being baptized
men and women, having formerly been baptized infants, do most properly commit
the sin of Will Worship, because it is certain that God has not prescribed any
such things, especially not in the nature of worship. Yea it is a kind of
Will Worship, if Parents-place worship in offering their children unto Baptism,
because God does not require this of them in the nature of worship, but of
obedience and duty otherwise. All duty is not worship: neither is every act not
warrantable by the Scriptures, though supposed such, an act of Will Worship.

3. (And lastly) it has been proved by many arguments and grounds, both in
this discourse and in several others by other men, that the mind and will of
God is, that Christian Parents should devote and consecrate their children by
water, unto his service, upon the first opportunity from the beginning of their
days. Which arguments and grounds, have (it may be) some of them, been replied
unto, instead of answered, or had something said to them, which emphatically
considered amounts to nothing: and others of them may (probably) in time, be
triumphed over in the same kind. However, evident it is in the mean time, that
no Christian Parent is restrained, by any prohibition in the Scriptures,
whether general or special, against will Worship, from desiring Baptism for his
infant, whilst such.

Consectary.
If it cannot be proved from the Scriptures that the child of any believing
Parent remained, or was kept unbaptized, until years of discretion, then do
such Believing Parents who thus practice in these days, herein act besides, and
without, Scripture warrant or example.

CONSIDERATION. XXXII.
JNfant-Church-membership, was no Levitical, or legal Ceremony, nor was it ever
repealed, or abolished by Christ.

Proof.
The former part of this consideration is unquestionable, That Infants were
Members of the Church of the Jews, is given in by our Adversaries with both
hands: otherwise it is ready of proof, and has been substantially proved by
others. M. Baxter Plain Scripture Proof, etc. page 26. 27, etc.
That it was no Levitical ceremony, at least no more a ceremony in this kind,
then the membership of men and women in this Church was, is too evident to be
denied, but only in the case of despair. For what Communion was there between
Infant-church-membership, and a Levitical ceremony, more then between such a
ceremony as this, and the Church Membership of men? Or was there some mystical
or spiritual thing signified by the former, and none signified by the latter?
Or was the former appointed, or ordained by God amongst the Levitical
observations, or rites, more then the latter? Or was the former
Church-member-ship some part of the worship or service of God, and the latter
none? Doubtless none of these things can be affirmed, but with a brow, either
of Lead, or Brass. If then the Churchmembership of Infants was no Levitical, no
legal ceremony, by whom shall we judge it has been abolished? We cannot either
with reason, or with truth, judge it to be abolished by Christ, since it was no
part of the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, and contrary to us;
which is that, which he took out of the way nailing it to his Cross, Col. 2. 14
If it has not been abolished by Christ, it must needs be Satan who so
furiously attempteth the abolition of it. Would the Lord Christ have taken
little children up into his arms, laid his hands on them, and blessed them, if
his heart had been set with-in him to cast them out of his Church? Imposition
of hands is no ceremony of excommunication, or casting out of the Church: nay
it is practiced at this day by many Anabaptists in their Churches, as a
ceremony of receiving into the Church.

To say that the whole policy and frame of the Jewish Church is now dissolved
and taken away, and so Infant-Church-membership is ceased with it, is to say
somewhat, but nothing to the purpose. For by this reason, as well
men-Church-membership, as Infant-Church-membership, should be ceased, in as
much as both were alike dissolved and taken away in the desolation of the
Jewish Church and Nation. Secondly the dissolution or taking away of the policy
or frame of a particular Church, in a way of judgment or punishment for sin
(which was, and is, the case of the desolation of the Jewish Church, and
Nation) proves not that the species or kind of policy, according to which this
Church was constituted and framed, is hereby declared unlawful, either to be
introduced, or continued, by other Churches. For by this reason it should not
be lawful for Christian Churches in these days, to admit of that
Church-constitution and frame, according to which the seven Churches of Asia
were constituted, these, with their Church constitution, being long since
ruined and laid wast.

If it be here replied; But the Jewish Church-constitution, should, and would,
have been dissolved by Christ, and quite abolished out of the world, although
the Members of this Church had not provoked God by sin, either to dissolve it,
or to destroy their Nation; and consequently no part or piece of this
constitution ought to be admitted or entertained under the Gospel, upon the
account of the former establishment of it under the Law, I answer;

1. By concession, That that which was Mosaical, and so additional and
accidental, in the constitution and frame of this Church, would (doubtless)
have been abolished, and taken away by Christ, whether the Nation had provoked
him to its own ruin and destruction, or no. But

2. By way of exception, I answer further that the Jews were a Church not only
before the days of Moses, and before the setting up of the Levitical
Priesthood among them, but even before Circumcision it self; and consequently
were under some Church-constitution, or other: Now it cannot be proved, nor is
it in it self probable in the least, that Christ by his coming did abolish
this original constitution or frame of the Jewish Church, in any part or branch
of it. Somewhat (indeed) of this fundamental Constitution was, for the ease and
benefit of the Church, altered by God, when the Mosaical and Levitical
additions were made to it, according to what we find, Numb. 3, 12. And I,
behold I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel, instead of
all the first born that opens the Matrice among the children of Israel:
therefore the Levites shall be mine. Under the first constitution of the Church
we speak of, the first born male in every family executed the Office of Priest
(as Mr. Ainsworth gathers from, and notes on, Exodus 24. 5.) This in the
super-additions of the Mosaical Economy was altered; the first born in all the
other tribes being discharged from this service, and an entire tribe ( viz.
that of Levi) substituted in their stead. But whatsoever of that primitive
constitution of the Jewish Church, was not changed by the Ministry or Law of
Moses, neither have we any competent ground to judge that it was changed, or
taken away by Christ. Now then Infant-Church-membership being a special branch
of the fundamental constitution of the Church of the Jews, and not being
altered or changed by Moses, nor having any thing typical or significative in
it, but constantly practiced under him, and during his Economy, it is a
groundless conceit to think it was changed by Christ. No marvel if
circumcision were changed and taken away by him, considering that it was a
super-added ceremony to that original constitution mentioned, and so of the
same nature and consideration with the Mosaical Rites and Ordinances.

3. And lastly, suppose the Nation of the Jews had not provoked God by their
unbelief, and rejection of the Messiah, but had received him, and believed on
him, as a remnant did, though their Mosaical Church-constitution should have
been dissolved, and had ceased, yet they should have passed from under this
constitution, into that which is now ordained for Christian Churches. And what?
is it so much as tolerable to imagine, that coming hither, they should have
left their children behind them? especially considering that they had enjoyed
this great consolatory privilege of having their children fellow members with
them, in the Church of God, even from before the days of their Father Abraham.
And if they had been informed, or had apprehended, that in case they should
believe, themselves (indeed) should be numbered amongst the people of God, and
be received as members into his Church, but they must expect no such thing for
their children, these must remain in the condition of aliens and strangers,
notwithstanding their (the Parents) believing, would not this have been a sore
stumbling block in their way, and grand dissuasive and discouragement unto them
from believing; especially considering (as was formerly observed from Act. 21.
21.) how mightily the hearts, even of those, who had begun to believe, was set
upon the circumcising of their children, and how highly they were offended upon
an information, that Paul taught the Jews, who were among the Gentiles, not to
circumcise their children? If it were so great a grievance and offense to the
believing Jews, that circumcision should be denied unto their children, how
irreconcilable may we reasonably think, the spirits of the rest of them must
needs have been with Christian Religion, in case they had understood that
according to the principles hereof, their children must neither be circumcised,
no nor yer baptized; nor have any Character or badge of any relation unto God,
more then the children of Heathen Idolaters, or of those Nations that knew not
God. That we hear of no murmuring or complaining in all the Scriptures of the
New Testament, from any Jew against Christians, or their Religion, about the
non-baptizing of their children, whereas we do hear of complaint made by them,
for their opposing the circumcising of their children, it is an argument to me
of a like unquestionable proof, that children in the times of the New Testament
were as ordinarily baptized, as they were kept from being circumcised.

Consectary.
If Infant-Church-membership was no Levitical ceremony, nor repealed or
abolished by Christ, then is it presumption in men, yea and would be in Angels,
to attempt the abolishing of it. What God has sanctified, that call not thou
common, was an Item given unto Peter by an Oracle from Heaven, Act. 10. 15.

CONSIDERATION, XXXIII.
BY the best and most Authentic Records of Antiquity, it appears that
Infant Baptism was practiced in the Christian Church, by those, who lived and
conversed, if not with the Apostles themselves, yet with their Disciples, and
familiar acquaintance.

Proof.
The truth of this Consideration has been so lately, and so substantially
proved by others, and this in our own language, that I shall only need to
refer the Reader, desirous of satisfaction therein, to these writings; which I
do. 26. 27. of the latter part of this discourse.

Consectary.
If Infant Baptism was practiced by Christians, who either conversed with the
Apostles themselves, or with their Disciples and familiar friends, then 1. It
cannot be reasonably imagined, but that it was practiced by the Apostles
themselves also, inasmuch as 1. Their disciples could not be ignorant what
their practice was about Baptism. Nor 2. Is it in any degree probable, but
that had they seen, or known, any practice, which had been Anti-Apostolical,
rising up, or beginning to be set on foot, (especially of so high a nature as
that in question) amongst their Christian friends, they would have dissuaded
and deterred them from it.

2. It follows from the same consideration, that they do very unworthily and
un-Christianly, who seek to delude simple ignorant people, who are not able to
confute them, by telling them that the Baptizing of children is the Popes
commandment, and that Pope Innocent, by his Decree first brought it into the
Christian world; whereas it is evident by substantial record, that
Infant Baptism was practiced in the Church some hundreds of years before he
was born. See more of this. 32. of the 2d. Part of this discourse.

CONSIDERATION. XXXIV.
THe word, (...), to baptize, frequently signifies any kind The fourth Head of
Considerations concerning the rite of dipping in Baptism, proving the
non-necessity, and in some cases the nonlawfulnesse of it.
of washing, rinsing, or cleansing, even where there is no dipping at all.

Proof.
For the proof of this I desire to refer the Reader to Mr. Edward Leigh his
Critica Sacra, in the word (...); where he proves it, by a numerous quotation
of Texts of Scripture; and withal affirms, that Hesychius, Stephanus,
Scapula, and Budeus, the great Masters of the Greek tongue, make it good by
very many instances and allegations out of Classique Authors, that the said
word (...) imports no more, then ablution, or washing.

Consectary.
If the word (...), to baptize, ordinarily signifies any kind of washing or
cleansing, even where no dipping is, then can there no argument of value be
built upon the signification of this word to prove the necessity of a Baptismal
dipping. Yea it follows that the Baptismal Administration may be regularly made
by any kind of washing.

CONSIDERATION. XXXV.
WHen the Holy Ghost in the New Testament, has ^ccasion to signify or express
the act of dipping, he never uses the frequentative, or derivative Verb,
(...), but always, the primitive, (...): as on the contrary, whenever he has
occas^on to specify the Sacramental act of Baptism, he never uses the
primitive word (...), which properly signifies, to dip, but constantly the
frequentative, (...).

Proof.
The truth of the former part of this Consideration is evident from these three
places, Luke 16. 24. Joh. 13. 26. Rev. 19. 13. to which we may add, Mat. 26.
23. where the compound, (...), is found. The act of dipping is not any where in
the new Testament mentioned, but in these four places only; and in all these
it is expressed (as has been said) by the word (...) only, never by the word
(...). The Original may readily be consulted. The truth of the latter part of
the Consideration, is evident by an induction of all those Texts or places in
the new Testament, where the Sacramental act of baptizing is spoken of, which
in none of these places is expressed by the verb (...), or the word, (...),
which properly signify (as was even now noted) the one to dip, the other, a
dipping, but still by the words (...) and (...): which when the Holy Ghost
expresses common actions by them, never signify to dip, or dipping, but to
wash or washing, constantly; witness these places, Mar. 7. 4. 8. Luke 11. 38.
He^. 9. 10. which I suppose are all the places in the new Testament, where the
said words, or any of them, are used to signify common actions. For brevities
sake, I omit so much as to point at the Texts, wherein the Sacramental act of
baptizing is mentioned, because they are many, and withal obvious to be found
by the guidance of a concordance.

Consectary.
If the Sacramental act of baptizing be never in Scripture expressed by a word,
which properly signifies dipping, but constantly by a word, or words, which in
common acception, and when applied by the Scripture it self unto other acts,
signify washing (indefinitely) then have we no ground to believe that the
Sacramental transaction of baptizing, essentially consists in dipping, or
plunging the whole body under water; considering 1. That the term or word,
whereby this transaction is held forth by God in the Scripture, does not
properly, at least not determinately, import or signify, dipping or plunging.
2. That no other thing relating to this transaction, mentioned in the
Scripture, does enforce us to such a notion or conception of it (as will be
showed ere long.)

CONSIDERATION. XXXVI.
THe administration of water baptism is frequently in Scripture expressed by a
baptizing with water, seldom or not at all by a baptizing INTO water.

Proof.
Luke 3. 16. John answered, saying unto them all, (...), i. e. I indeed baptize
you WITH water. Act. 11. 16. But I remember the Word of the Lord, how he said,
(...), i. e. John indeed baptized WITH water: but you shall be baptized with
the Holy Ghost. And in all those places where baptism is said to be
administered, (...), as Mat. 3. 11. Mar. 1. 8. Joh. 1. 26. 31. 33. the
proposition* (...), signifies, with, and is accordingly so translated in all
these places, and is of like signification in many others, and must be so
rendered likewise. As for that expression (...) ( Mar. 1. 9.) 1. The Preposition
(...), is (as is else where observed) frequently put for (...), he dwelt IN a
City called Nazareth. Mar. 2. 23. (...), and it was noysed that he was IN the
house. Mar. 2. 1. (to omit many others.) 2. If we make any difference between
baptizing, (...) and (...), we must of necessity grant, that there were several
ways or manners of baptizing. For it is expressly said (Mar. 1. 5.) that all the
people that came unto John, were baptized of him, (...), in the River Jordan.
Therefore, (...), and (...), are but the same.

Consectary.
If Baptism may be truly and properly said to be administered, or performed WITH
water, then may it truly and properly be administered, or performed, without
dipping, or plunging, as viz. by washing, or any application of water to the
body of the baptized: Yea it is altogether uncouth and improper, to say that a
man is dipped, or, is to be diped, or plunged WITH water; and so to make John
say, I indeed baptize you with water, if by baptizing, be meant, dipping or
plunging.

CONSIDERATION. XXXVII.
THe Sacramental Act of baptizing, cannot be c^mm^diously, for the
understandings of men signified or expressed, by the verb, (...), if it be
supposed that it properly signifies to dip.

Proof.
The reason of the truth of this Consideration is, because dipping, if this be
requisite in Baptism (as it must be, at least ordinarily, and where the Law of
mercy does not interpose, if (...), properly signifies to dip) does express
but the one half of the Sacramental transaction of Baptism, For he that only
dippeth a person, man or woman, in the water, can hereby perform but one part,
or the one half of the Sacramental act or transaction of Baptism; because this
transaction is not finished or completed, until he who has dipped, has again
undipped, or raised and lifted the person diped out of the water. Now it being
certain that (...), does not signify to undip, or heave out of the water, it
is in no degree probable that the Holy Ghost should express that Sacramental
transaction, which we call by the name of Baptism, by this word, in case it be
supposed, that un-dipping, or lifting out of the water, be a part of it, and
this as material and necessary, and significant as dipping it self is; which I
presume is the sense of those, who are baptized into the conceit, of a
necessity of water-dipping.

Consectary.
If the Sacramental transaction of Baptism, cannot be commodiously, nor with
any tolerable convenience of import, signified or expressed, by the word (...),
in case it be supposed that it properly signifies to dip, then cannot this be
the proper signification of it, or at least it cannot be the signification of
it, when this transaction is expressed by it. For it is in no wise to be
believed, that the Holy Ghost, should give a lame or defective appellation, to
so great an Ordinance or institution, as Baptism is, or such a name, which
should signify or import but the one half of it.

CONSIDERATION, XXXVIII.
NO part of the Baptismal Administration, or transaction, ought to be
performed, or can be performed regularly by the person himself, who is
Baptized, but he is to be passive under the hand of the Baptist, and the
Baptist only to act in the service.

Proof.
All the Baptismal Administrations mentioned and recorded in the Scriptures,
are here represented unto us as managed and performed upon these terms: nor is
it any where to be found, where any party baptized, baptized himself, either in
part, or in whole, but only that they came to be baptized, desired, and
submitted unto Baptism.

Consectary.
If no part of the Baptismal Administration can regularly be performed by the
party himself, who is to be baptized, but the whole business of the
Administration is to be the work, or act, of the Baptizer only; then cannot
dipping, or plunging the body all over in water, be the regular form or manner
of this Administration. The reason is, because he that is baptismally dipped,
dippeth a good part of his body himself by going into the water, and by
standing* there up to the knees, middle, or neck, before the Baptist lays
hand on him. So that that which the Baptist dippeth of his body, is only a
part of it, and this (ordinarily, I suppose) but a small part neither. He that
properly dippeth, must of necessity hold some part of that which is dipped in
his hand, or with some instrument in his hand. Therefore he that is baptized by
dipping, cannot be reasonably thought to be regularly baptized, unless he be
with clean strength heaved and lifted up into the air by the Baptist, and so
gently let down into the water, the hand of the Baptizer not taken off from him
all the while.

CONSIDERATION, XXXIX.
THe water wherein, or wherewith the Eunuch was baptized by Philip, Act. 8. 36.
was not so deep, as wherein he could be dipped or plunged all over.

Proof.
Hierome, who lived several years at Jerusalem (then it seems called Aelia)
and was well acquainted with the country of Judea and parts round about, and
accordingly wrote a book entitled, De Locis Hebraicis, in this Book reports,
that in the Tribe of Juda, about twenty miles from Jerusalem in the Road
toward Hebron, there is a village or Town called Bethsoron: near unto which
there is a Mountain, at the bottom or foot whereof, there is a certain spring
or Fountain, where the Acts of the Apostles relate that the Eunuch of Queen
Candace was baptized by Philip. Et est hodie Bethsoron vicus euntibus nobis ab
Aelia Chebron vicesimo lapide, juxta quem fons ad radicis montis ebulliens, ab
eadem in qua gignitur, sorbetur humo. Et Apostolorum acta referunt Eunnchum
Candacis Reginae in hoc baptizatum a Philippo.
Eusebius before him had affirmed the same, and Bed^ some hundreds of years
after him reports the said village then remaining; consenting with the two
former touching the baptizing of the Eunuch in the said spring, or Fountain.
Our Country man Mr. Sandys, who travaild through these places, mentions his
passage by Bethzur, being in the upper way between Jerusalem and Gaza. Where
(says he) we saw the ruins of an ample Church: below that, a Fountain, not
unbeholding to art, whose pleasant Waters are forthwith drunk up by the earth
that produced them. Here they say that Philip baptized the Eunuch, whereupon it
retains the name of the Ethiopian Fountain. And no qu^stion but that the
adjoining Temple was erected out of devotion to the honor of the place, and
memory of the fact. Sandys Travails, lib 3. p. 142.
The Holy Ghost himself seems to point out the inconsiderableness of that
Fountain, or water, after which we are now inquiring. And as they went on their
way (says he, speaking of Philip and the Eunuch traveling together) (...). i.
e. They came unto ACERTAIN WATER, or (as our English Dialect would best
express it) unto a kind of water. ( Act. 8. 36.) The description or expression
here used, (...), imports the water spoken of, not to have been any river, much
less any deep River, nor other water known by any name, but some small spring,
or fountain only.

Consectary.
If the water wherein the Eunuch was baptized. ( Act. 8. 36.) was so small and
shallow, that he could not be dipped over head and ears in it, it undeniably
follows that then such dipping is of no necessity in, or to, a regular
baptizing.

CONSIDERATION XL.
BAptizing with water, and baptizing with the Holy Ghost, are expressed by one
and the same Praeposition in the Scripture.

Proof.
Mark 1. 8. John, speaking of the difference between his Baptism, or rather of
that administration of Baptism, which he exercised, and the administration of
that Baptism, which is po^ropriate unto Christ, expresses himself thus, (...),
i. e. I indeed have baptized you WITH water; but he shall baptize you WITH the
Holy Ghost. See also Mat. 3. 11. John. 1. 33, were we find both Baptisms in
like manner expressed Tit. 3. 56. God is said to save us by the washing of the
new birth, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which is said to be poured out
upon us; following the resemblance of water poured in the washing of Baptism.

Nor can that phrase rationally admit another construction Act. 1. 5. when our
Savior promises h^s Disciples they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost not
many days after, as John baptized with water.

As they were baptized by the Spirit, so they were baptized with water: for so
the proportian requires. And therefore it is an utter mistake to think that
(...) implies the dipping into the water, when the Preposition [(...)] as most
frequently with the Hebrews, and generally amongst the Grammarians, notes only
the cause or instrument, etc. Mr. ^h: Hooker Survey of sum of Church
Discipline. Part 3. c. 2. p. 31.


.

Consectary.
If both Baptisms, the one with water, the other with the Holy Ghost, be
expressible, by one and the same Preposition, which imports one and the same
manner of their respective transactions, then is that Baptism which is with
water, performable, as well (or rather) by pouring water on the baptized, as by
dipping into the water; considering* that they who are baptized with the Holy
Ghost, are no where said to be dipped, or plunged into the Holy Ghost, but to
have the Holy Ghost poured on them. Act. 2. 17. 18. Act. 10. 45.

CONSIDERATION XLI.
TO pour water upon the body, or flesh of the person baptized, carries in it a
more significant resemblance of the act of burying, then a dipping into water
does.

Proof.
Mr. Thomas Hooker, appeals unto the judgment of sense it self, whether this
Consideration be not a truth. The applying (says he) and casting the water
upon the body, best resembles the nature of burial, as sense will suggest: the
dipping of the body into the dust, does no way so lively resemble burial, as
the casting dust and mold upon it Survey of the sum of Church discipline
Part. 3. c. 2. p. 32.
. And the evident truth is, that the thrusting, or putting, of the body, under
or into the Earth, as (suppose) into the dust, or, into a grave, has little or
nothing of the nature or property of a burial in it, in comparison of a casting
earth upon it. A corpse is not properly buried by being put into a grave, but by
having Earth cast upon it, whether it be put into a grave, or not. Burial does
not consist in an application of the body to the Earth, as in an application of
Earth unto the body.

Consectary.
If the pouring of water upon the body of the person to be baptized, carries
in it a more significant resemblance of the act of burying, then the dipping it
into water does, then is that baptismal administration, which is made by
dipping, less representative of a believers being spiritually buried with
Christ, then that which is performed by pouring, or casting water upon it.

CONSIDERATION, XLII.
THe nature of Baptism, and the Administration hereof answers, or represents,
the gracious Act, or work, of Christ, in his application of himself unto us.

Proof.
It is acknowledged on all hands (at least vertually and consequentially, if
not formally and expressly) that the great end of Baptism, and of the
administration of it, is to confirm and seal the Covenant of grace by Christ.
For he that grants, that Baptism, signifies the death of Christ, and so the
Covenant in his blood, and yet denies that it s^aleth this death, or Covenant,
speaks contradictions. For God cannot signify any thing unto me or any man,
but what has reality and truth of being: and therefore his very signifying of
a thing unto me, is in the proper tendency or import of it, a confirmation or
seal of the reality, truth, and certainty hereof. Now if the nature and end of
Baptism be to seal and confirm unto men the Covenant of grace by Christ, it
must needs be conceived to answer, signify or point out the gracious Act or
Work of Christ in applying himself unto them. And look upon what terms, how, or
after what manner, this Covenant and the Grace in it, is communicated or
imparted unto us, it is reasonable to conceive, that it is sealed or confirmed
unto us accordingly.

Consectary.
If the nature of Baptism, and the Administration thereof, answers and
represents the gracious Act of Christ in applying himself unto us, then ought
water, by which Christ with his washing, cleansing and purging grace, is
represented, be first applied unto the body, or person of the baptized, and not
this to it; in as much as Christ first comes in his promise and grace unto the
soul, and not the soul unto him. So that such an administration of Baptism,
wherein the water is first applied unto the body, as it is in sprinkling, or
pouring water on the baptized, is much more agreeable to the nature and import
of it, then that wherein the body is first applied unto the water; which is
done by dipping.

CONSIDERATION XLIII.
NO kind of washing, if we speak properly, is performed or made only by the
application of the thing to be washed, unto the water, but by the application
of water unto it.

Proof.
A man is not said to wash his hands when he only dipeth or puts them into
the water, but when he applies water to the one hand with the other, until the
soil be dissolved, whether he plungeth them into the water, or no. The
spiritual washing, as well from the guilt, as from the def^lement, of sin, is
not accomplished or made by the application of the heart or soul unto Christ,
or his blood, but by the applying of Christ, and his blood, unto these, Let us
(says the Apostle) draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith,
having our HEARTS SPRINKLED from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed
with pure water. Heb. 10. 22. The sprinkling of the book and the people,
mentioned, c. 9. v. 19. and so the sprinkling of the Tabernacle, and all the
vessels of the Ministry. v. 21. was not effected by any application of the
Book, People, Tabernacle, or vessels, unto the blood wherewith they were
sprinkled, but by the application of the blood unto them, by way of sprinkling.
Semblably when the heart is sprinkled from an evil conscience. [i. e. is
washed, or cleansed, from the guilt, or stain, of sin] this is not to be
conceived as done, by applying the heart unto the blood of Christ, but on the
contrary by an application of this blood unto it. And (to note this by the way)
some conceive (and this not improbably) that the sprinkling with blood under
the Law, did typically prefigure, or correspond with, the Baptismal sprinkling
with water under the New Testament.

Consectary.
If no kind of washing, properly so called, be performed only by the
application of the thing or person unto the water, but of the water, unto
these, then is that administration of Baptism, which is made by dipping only,
Heterodox and unproper, there being no washing of the body, in or by such an
administration.

CONSIDERATION. XLIV.
Dipping naked, and without garments, especially of women, by, or amongst men,
is not only un-Christian, but uncivil also, and repugnant to the Law of
nature. Again, Dipping with garments is repug^ant to the Law of Health and
Self-preservation.

Proof.
Nature it self teaches us the truth of the former part of the Consideration:
and that it is a far greater shame for women Tum quoque cum caderet parts
velare tegendas. Cura fuit, castique decu^ servare pudoris. Ovid. Met.
to be seen of men, naked, then it is to be shorn, or shaven. Reason and
frequent experience teach in like manner, the truth of the latter part. To
persons of weak, sickly, and tender constitutions, to be dowzed in cold water,
must needs be as the shadow of death unto them: how much more when the
coldness of the water shall for a time be (as it were) close bound unto their
bodies, by their clothes full of water. How many are there, who cannot so much
as put their hands into cold water, or touch a wet* linen cloth, without
certain prejudice to their health? And however Baptists of the new order
abhominate the saying, as the Jews did the imputation of murder charged upon
them by the Lord Christ, yet it may truly, at least beyond all reasonable
contradiction be said, that unto many, their burying under water, has hastened
their burial also under earth. Instances not a few, may be given of persons,
who in all probability, laid the foundation of their approaching death in the
waters of a Baptismal dipping, and of many more, who sew the seeds of many
after sicknesses, weaknesses, and distempers, as of coughs, Catarrhs,
Squinancies, Appoplexies, Consumptions, etc. in the same waters.

Nor is it pertinent here to allege, that some upon their Baptismal dipping,
have not only been ^ree, but freed from bodily maladies, etc. For,

1. The common saying is true: That which is one man Physic, may be another
man's bane, or poison. I easily believe, that as the constitution and condition
of the body may be, going into, and under, water, may be a natural and proper
means to cure some infirmities thereof. But this proves not but that the same
course, or means may be threatening, yea destructive to the healths and lives of
others. So that in respect of this different habitude of dipping, in reference
to bodies of different tempers and constitutions, it is every whit as necessary
to consult the Physician, as the Minister or Divine, about the receiving it.
But whatever bodily cures may be wrought (or rather be conceited to be wrought)
by Baptismal dippings, certain I am that Baptism was and is, -- non hos
quaesitum munus in usus, never intended by the great Founder and Father of it,
God, to work the work either of Chirurgian, or Physician. Therefore

2. The fancy, or imaginative faculty in many (I might say in most) of those,
who are now upon the brink of the Baptismal waters, and ready to be cast into
them, being extraordinarily affected, raised, and provoked, in case some
sensible alteration in the state and condition of the body, whether for the
better, or the worse, follow hereupon, it is no more then what is ordinarily
seen, and felt by men and women upon a like occasion; I mean, some high acting
or working the imagination.

3. (And lastly) the practice of Baptismal dipping, being (as was formerly
argued and proved) especially after Infant Baptism, superstitious, and
will worship, it is not otherwise like, but that He, who labors to uphold and
cherish all the superstition in the world, will stretch out his arm to the full
length of it, and do his best, to cause signs, and wonders, bodily cures, and
other strange effects, to be wrought by it, or accompany it, or however to be
ascribed unto it.

Consectary.
If dipping naked, and without garments, and again, dipping clothed, and with
garments, be both repugnant to the Law of nature (in the cases and respects
specified) then dipping cannot be the regular or right manner of the Baptismal
Administration. The reason is, because God has not subjected the Law of
nature, to the Law of any ^eremony or institution whatsoever, but on the
contrary, has subjected the respective laws of all ceremonies and institutions
unto this, See. 8. of the sec^nd part of ^h^ discourse and Wat^r-dipping p. 5,
6, 7


CONSIDERATION. XLV.
^T was the manner and practice of Heathen Nations, and Pagan Idolaters, before
Christ's time, to dip, or wash all over the bodi^s of those, who desired to be
initiated into the superstitious and Idolatrous services of their Idol^^ods.

Proof.
The truth of this Assertion, is asserted by several Authors as well of the
Pagan, as Christian persuasion. They who desire a more particular information
hereof, may please to consult the Commentaries of Hugo Grotius, upon these
words Mat. 28. 19. (...), Baptizing them: where having himself first affirmed,
that the custom we speak of was practiced among the Jews, when any person
turned from the worship of false Gods, unto the true; and again, that it was
used among profane Nations likewise of old, S(...) Ostendi^^us apud Judaeos
moris ^isse, ut Bapti^^ren^u^ q^i se a falsorum Deorum cultu, ad cultum unius
D^i convertebant Sed apud Gentes etiam prophan^s usurpatum antiquitus fuit, ut
qui i^itiari vell^nt, toto corpore prius ablue^entur, etc.
he subjoins the testimony of sundry Authors, for the confirmation of this
latter.

Consectary.
If Dipping, Religion-wise, was by the Jews practiced upon their own account,
and without direction, and command from God, and much more if it were practiced
by Pagan Idolaters, and those who worshipped the Devil, and this before Baptism
was practiced among Christians, then is it at no hand probable that God should
prescribe, or enjoin the same practice unto those that* should worship him, and
believe in his Son Jesus Christ. The reason of this consequence is, because God
has never been wont to learn of men, much less of Satan, or his followers,
how to be worshipped himself, or what services to prescribe unto his
worshippers. It has indeed been observed long since, that the Devil is Gods
Ape, and borrows many things from him, for the regulating, adorning, and
completing of his own worship: but it never entered (I suppose) into any
Christian man's heart to think that God should borrow any rite or ceremony from
Satan, wherewith to accomplish his worship. Yea we read in the Law, that God
expressly forbad his people the use of several rites and practices, used by
Idolaters, and this for this very reason, because they were used by them.
L^vit. 18. 3. Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31. Deuteronomy. 18. 14. Herewith compare, Mat. 6. 31. 32.

CONSIDERATION. XLVI.
IT cannot be proved from the Scriptures, that any Baptismal Administration
recorded there, was performed by dipping: but it is exceeding probable that
many of these Administrations were performed without it.

Proof.
Concerning the first part of this consideration; I freely acknowledge that it
is the sense and opinion of many learned men, both of ancient and modern times,
that in Christ's and the Apostles days, the Administration we speak of was
ordinarily in Judea, and the hot countries neighboring thereunto, performed by
dipping the whole body under water: Yet I am all thoughts made, that whatever
ground they have or may have otherwise for this opinion, they have nothing
demonstrative or firmly concluding from the Scriptures to evince it. That those
metaphorical expressions of the Apostle, Buried with him by Baptism, Romans 6.
4. Col. 2. 12. amount to no such proof, has in two of our preceding
Considerat^ons been argued. That neither of these expressions about the
baptizing of the Eunuch, (...), translated, they went down both INTO the Water,
And when they were come up OVT of the Water, Act. 8. 38, 39. prove the Eunuch
to have been dipped under water in his baptizing, has been in part, if not
sufficiently proved already, where by the testimony of more then two competent
witnesses, as likewise by Scripture insinuation it self, we found the water,
wherein he was baptized, to have been too shallow, to entertain him upon such
terms. But besides, when it is said, they both went down, (...), the
preposition (...), does not always, or necessarily in this place, signify
into, but sometimes unto; which signification is as proper here as the other:
so that the clause may be rendered, and they both went down, to, or UNTO the
water, i.e. to the waters side. The preposition (...), often signifies to, or
unto, and is accordingly translated. (...), etc. i. e. I am not sent but TO [or
VNTO] the sheep, etc. Mat. 15. 24. So, (...), UNTO himself. Colos. 1. 20. So
also, That you may be filled (...) with, [or rather, unto, as Beza renders it]
Vt impleamini A D omnem usque plenitudinem illam Dei.
all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3. 19. Again, (...), They went unto Lydia, as
Beza again translateth. Introierunt A D Lydiam.
Act. 16. 40. Once more, every Scribe which is instructed, (...) UNTO the
Kingdom of He^ven. Mat. 13. 52. (to omit many other places.)

Again for the latter clause, And when they were come up, (...), OVT OF the
Water, the preposition (...), might be as as well translated, FROM as, out of.
For this signification of it is most frequent and obvious in the New Testament,
and our English Translation accordingly owneth it in very many places. They who
doubt hereof, may consult the original in these Texts (with many others) for
their satisfaction. Luke 1. 71, and again v. 7 8. Luke 20. 4. (twice) Joh. 19.
12. Joh. 21. 14. Act. 14. 8. Act. 15. 21, (as Beza renders) and v. 29. Act.
17. 3. and 31. Act. 22. 6. and v. 17 Act. 27. 34. Romans 1. 17. Romans 4. 24. Romans
6. 4. and v. 9. and v. 13. and v. 17. etc. It would be tedious and needless,
so much as to point at all those places, where the preposition, (...), are
found in the signification and import of our English particle from. And being
so translated in the clause in hand, as very commodiously, and without any
hardness at all of construction, it might be, (for it is as proper to say,
when they came up from the Water, as when they came up out of the Water) here
would be no footing, nor color of footing, whereon to argue the Eunuchs diping
when he was baptized.

Yea, own we the two English translations of both the clauses now under
consideration, yet can there no convincing argument be drawn from them, either
divisim, or conjunctim, to prove that Philip dipped the Eunuch when he baptized
him. For supposing the water to have been very shallow (for the proof whereof
more, I believe has been said, then ever will be to prove the contrary) and
the uppermost part of it to have been somewhat lower then the level or surface
of the verge or bank about it (which is not unusual in many waters) there might
be some necessity, or at least a convenience, as well for Philip, as for the
Eunuch, to go down together into the water, that so the former might take up
water with his hand to put, or pour, upon the head or face, of the other.

Besides it is as well said of Philip, as of the Eunuch, that he both went down
into the water, and came up from, or out of, the water. But no man (I presume)
imagines that Philip at this turn dipped himself. Therefore from the said
phrases or expressions, nothing can be concluded for the dipping of the other;
both expressions being indifferently used of, and applied unto, both these
persons.

Again, if the Eunuch went down into the water, he could not be dipped all over
by Philip, and consequently could not regularly be baptized, if it he supposed.
1. That a regular baptizing consists in a total submersion, or dipping of the
whole body under water: And 2. That it is wholly to be transacted or performed
by another. For he that goes into the water dippeth himself in part: neither
can another be said to dip him all over, except he first heaves, or lifts him
up out of, and above the water; and then, still holding his body in, or between
his hands, gently convey, or let it down, into the water again.

To pretend, that the Eunuch might have been duly baptized, without going down
into the water, and without Philips going down likewise, if Baptism could have
been duly administered, either by sprinkling, or by putting a small quantity of
water, upon his head, or face; as viz. by sending a servant to the Fountain, to
fetch a Basin, or like vessel of water from thence, etc. to pretend thus (I
say) amounts to little satisfaction. For,

1. It cannot be proved that either a basin, or like vessel was now at hand;
Basins are not usually carried about in travel, especially not in long
journies.

2. Suppose there had been the opportunity of a Basin, or the like, yet might
there be several reasons (though unknown to us) why Philip, being at liberty,
whether to baptize, at, or in, the Fountain, or otherwise, might prefer the
former. So that there is nothing in the pretense specified, nor in any thing
expressed or recorded in the Scriptures, about the Eunuchs baptizing, which
makes it so much as probable, much less demonstrable, or certain, that he was
dipped under water, when baptized.

Nor is there any whit more in John's baptizing in Jordan, or in Aenon near
Sali^, because much water was here ( Joh. 2. 23.) to prove that John dipped
when he baptized. For

1. There is nothing recorded by the Holy Ghost touching the particular
external manner, according to which John baptized. Which (by the way) is an
argument of much satisfaction unto me, that no one determinate external manner
in baptizing, or of managing, ordering, or using the water in Baptism, is
essential unto the Ordinance, or the due administration thereof. For it is the
firstborn of things incredible unto me, that God should prescribe unto men so
great and weighty an Ordinance, as Baptism (more generally at least) is
conceived to be, yea and which our Adversaries begin of late to say, is
absolutely necessary unto justification (and consequently unto salvation it
self) and yet not signify or declare, and this in the most plain, explicit and
distinct manner, how this Ordinance ought to be administered, in case it be
supposed that there is only one determinate manner of the administration,
which is regular and legitimate; yea and which is so essential unto it, that
without it nothing but a mere nullity, or humane device, can be administered;
especially this determinate manner being such, which the clearest and sharpest
understanding of men of greatest worth in the Church of Christ, and most
diligently and conscienously exercised in the Scriptures, have not been able
for many generations together, to discern or discover.

2. Neither is there the least intimation any where given in the Scripture,
that the reason why John made his first choice of the River Jordan for his
Baptismal station, or residence, or his second of Aenon (where much water, or
rather many waters, was,) that he might have water enough to dip all those,
that came to be baptized of him, over head and ears. Therefore this is but a
matter of humane conjecture only, and this not very probable neither. For 1.
It is not like that a reason of this consequence would have been left to humane
divination, being so worthy of God's own pen, were it, or had it had been, a
truth. 2. Though it be said that in Aenon, where John last baptized, there were
(...), many waters, yet this proves not that there was any place within the
compass of these waters of a sufficient depth for the dipping of a man's body
all over. The expression (probably) imports a confluence or meeting together,
of several rivelets or small currents from several springs near adjoining;
which (it is like) did overspread a great surface of ground, and yet were not
so deep in any place, as to reach up to the knees of a man. We know there are
many places not very far from the City, where there are (...), many waters, in
such a sense and consideration as this; and more particularly in the ordinary
Road to (...), where in several places, when springs are open, there is a larg^
confluence of waters, which spread themselves thin over a great planities or
flat of ground, for several furlongs together, without being so deep in any
place as to afford an opportunity to a traveling horse to drink. But in many
other places of the Nation, there are such prospects of waters, as those we now
speak of, which are to be seen all the year long, and where the waters run
continually. Therefore many waters do not import so much as one man's dipping.
Mr. Fisher is much mistaken, if learneder men be not, in conceiving Aenon to be
a river. (Baby-Baptism p. 334.) Calvin (with some Lexicographers) makes it a
Town, (and Salim another) situate in the tribe of Manasseh. Mr. J. Deodate,
makes them both Cities. Hugo Grotius and Junius, conceive Aenon to be a
Fountain. But Mr. Fisher it seems, though by swimming against the stream, will
have it a deep River, lest his cause, like a crasie vessel wanting water,
should strike upon the ground and founder.

Some who have traveled in those parts, report this Aenon to be a little run
or brook, over which a man may almost step at ordinary times. 3. If John
dipped, when he baptized, either in Jordan or in Aenon, he must be supposed to
have dipped both men and women, either naked, or in their clothes. In some
Authors (I confess) I meet with both sexes naked in their baptizing: but the
greatest part of writers judge it more Christian, and meet to allow them their
apparel for a covering to their nakedness at such a time. And if it could be
proved that John baptized both men and women, naked, and both in the presence
and sight of either* the very retriment and dreggs of all sects at this day
amongst us (the Ranters I mean) might take a plausible occasion to glory in a
very honorable Father and Founder of their Order. Nor can it reasonably be
thought that John should baptize all that came unto him, with their garments
upon them, in case it be supposed that he dipped them all under water, when he
baptized them.

For we do not read of any spare garments brought along with them, by those who
came to be baptized (nor yet of any shifting or changing garments, either
before, or after baptizing) nor is such a thing in it self in any degree
probable: and yet more improbable it is (of the two) that men and women, how
weak and tender soever, should travel several miles in their clothes soaked and
steeped, and as wet as water could lightly make them.

4. It apposeth my reason, yea and imagination it self, to conceive how so many
thousands, such vast multitudes of people, as the Sciptures overtureth had
recourse unto Jo^n, day after day, to receive baptism from him, could be
baptized of him, if it be supposed that they were singly and apart, (...), man
by man, and woman by woman, dipped by him.

If Andrew reasonably judged 5 Barley loaves and 2 small fishes so insufficient
and disproportionable a provision for 5000 men, as to demand, but what are
these among so many? much more have we reason to demand concerning John, what
was John among so many thousands of men and women as came unto him to be
baptized, if he could not baptize them, without dipping them? Upon this
supposition, the task which he performed in baptizing, required the strength
not of a man, but of stones, or of Mountains, to overcome it. Besides must he
not be supposed to have stood deep in water, from morning until night, for
several days together? which that he did, or was able to do, and yet live, I
must borrow the Faith of some easy Believer, to believe. Other circumstances
there are (too many to be insisted upon at present) which make it an
invinceible difficulty to my Faith, to believe that John put under water the
whole bodies of all those whom he baptized. That may be remembered by the way,
that neither do we read, that John's Disciples ever baptized, though the
Disciples of the Lord Christ did; nor that John, in or about his entrance upon
his work of baptizing, when it seems his labor in this employment lay heaviest
upon him, had any Disciples (in that notion and relation of which we now speak)
at all. Nor is this latter in it self so much as probable. 5. And lastly, we
read Joh. 3. 22. that the Lord Christ continued some space of time baptizing in
Judea. Now if we may believe the Geographical descriptions of this land, which
are presented unto us from several hands, there were few or no rivers or waters
in it of any considerable depth, but only brooks, or smaller rivers: Therefore
it is not like (much less certain) that the Disciples of Christ here had the
opportunity of dipping men, when they baptized them; much less that they made
the Administration by dipping. Thus we see how weak and faint the conjecture
is, which presumes, that the reason why John made choice first of the River of
Jordan, and then of Aenon, where many waters are said to have been, for his
Baptismal station, was, that he might have a convenience of deep waters, for
the dipping of those, who came to be baptized.

Nor does the preposition (...), where Christ is said to have been baptized of
John, (...) Mar. 1. 9. at all prove that he was dipped by him into Jordan. For
1. (...), v. 9. signifies no more then (...) v. 5. and Mat. 3. 6. where all
the people that came unto him are said to have been baptized of him (...), in
the river Jordan; unless it shall be said, that Christ was baptized after one
manner, and the rest of the people after another: and so, that Baptism may be
administered, and this lawfully, and without breach of any rule, after more
ways then one, in respect of ordering or using the element of water, in, or
about the said Administration. 2. The preposition (...) is very frequently (and
so acknowledged by Mr. Fisher himself) Mr. Fisher Baby-Baptism. p. 332.
used in the sense and signification of the preposition 'EN (...) etc. he dwelt
in a City called Nazaret. Mat. 2. 23. -- That this is the true grace of God,
(...) IN which, or wherein, ye stand. 1. Pet. 5. 12, Again, Thou will not leave
my soul, (...), IN Hell, Act. 2. 27. Yet again, my children are, (...), IN bed
with me, Luke 11. 7. (to omit others.) Now John's baptizing men IN Jordan, is
no more a demonstration of his dipping them over head and ears in Jordan, then
a man's being in a bathe, or in a river, proves him to be over head and ears in
either. So that the reason assigned why John was drawn to baptize in Aenon, by
reason of the many waters there, and so why he baptized in Jordan, (viz. that
he might have sufficient dippage) is a very uncertain, yea improbable
conjecture. But

3. And lastly for this, the reasons of greatest probability (in my
understanding) why John chose to baptize, where plenty of water was, were these
two (happily amongst others) the one respecting the commodiousnesse of the
external work or act it self, of baptizing; the other, to accommodate the
spiritual design, or purpose of God in Baptism.

For the first, It may well be presumed, that before John entered upon the work
of Baptizing, it was made known to him by God (or otherwise, that he
apprehended the thing very likely to come to pass) that vast multitudes of
people from several parts would from day to day have recourse unto him to be
baptized. In this respect it concerned him to project and find out the best
method and means he could, to accommodate himself in so great a work, as well
in point of ease, as of expedition or dispatch. Now the work of Baptizing being
to be performed with, or by, water, and the numbers very great of persons to be
baptized by him, it was very proper and expedient for him to make choice of
such places for this work, where many persons might with convenience be so
postured and disposed of, that he passing along by them in the water, might,
whether with his hand only, or with some instrument for the purpose, cast
water upon them. In such a way as this, where there are tracts of water
commodious, for any considerable space together, for people so to stand,
whether in the brink or verge of the water, or else near to it, that a person
going along by them in the water, may cast water upon them* many thousands may
be baptized within the compass of a day, or less: Whereas to dip every person
apart, when there are several thousands to be baptized, and but one to baptize,
is (in the ordinary phrase) an endless work.

The common exception which Mr. Fisher, and others of his judgment insultingly
make against this method, or manner of baptizing, in terming it a rantizing,
not a baptizing, is pedantique, and makes only a sound without substance. To
argue, that sprinkling with water, is not a baptizing, because it is a
rantizing, is such a kind of reasoning as this: Socrates cannot be a living
creature because he is a man: Bucephalus is not a beast, because he is an
horse. These are strange kinds of arguings wherein the genus is denied, upon
the account of the species, or because the species is affirmed The Sacramental
rite or Ordinance, best known by the name of Baptism, is therefore in the
Scriptures ordinarily thus called, I mean Baptism, and the administration of
it, a Baptizing, because it is a generical term, and more comprehensive, then
rantizing, or, sprinkling, and imports as has been showed, any kind of
washing, whether by sprinkling, or by pouring on water, or by applying water to
the thing, or person to be washed, after any other manner. And washing being
that externality which was chiefly minded by God, in the administration of
Baptism, it is not material by, or with, what species, or particular kind of
washing it be performed. And Calvin accordingly, though his opinion be, that at
first it was administered with the submersion of the whole body under water, yet
places little in this modality of it, and supposes the administration of it
in another manner [as suppose by sprinkling, pouring on water or otherwise] to
be no digression from the institution and rule of Christ. Ex his verbis
colligere licet Baptismum fuisse celebratum a Johaune et Christo totius
corporis submersione. Quanquam de externo ritu minus anxie laborandum est, modo
cum spirituali veritate ac Domini instituto ac regula congruat. Calvin in Joh.
3. 22. 23.
But besides what the Scripture exhibiteth in favor of Baptismal sprinkling or
pouring on water, as the typical applications of blood, as well to persons as
things under the law, which were made for the most part by sprinkling it, and
sometimes by putting it on, or anointing with it, Exodus 12. 7. Exodus 29. 12.
20. Levit. 4. 7. Levit. 8. 23. 24. Levit. 14. 14. Levit. 16. 18. So again those
prophetical expressions found in those two great Prophets, Esa, and Ezekiel,
the former prophesying of Christ that he should SPRINKLE many nations, Esa. 52.
15. the latter, that God would sprinkle clean water upon the Church, Ezekiel. 36.
25. [or as the former translation read it, I will pour clean water upon y^u]
which expressions are unquestionably allusive unto, or rather expressive of the
manner, wherein Nations should be baptized into the obedience and service of
Christ, besides (I say) all the Scripture affords upon such accounts as these
in countenance of sprinkling, or pouring on water in baptizing, the
difficulties which attend Baptismal dippings are so insuperable and
irreconcilable with the Law of nature, and in this respect with the written
Law of God it self, at least in many cases (formerly specified) that either
sprinkling or pouring on water, must be allowed in the Administration of
Baptism, or else no Baptism administered at all. This for the first reason why
John made choice of such places for his Baptismal quarters, where plenty of
water was to be found: Herein he consulted expedition and dispatch in his work
of baptizing.

The latter reason of such his choice might respect (as we said) the spiritual
and great end of Baptism, which was, and is, to set forth, commend, and confirm
the abundant Grace of God in cleansing men as well from the stain and filth, as
from the guilt of sin, by Jesus Christ. Now this grace of God being
Sacramentally signified or represented by the element of water in Baptism; the
sight or beholding of a fair and large prospect of this element at the time of
their baptizing, might occasion or raise, so much the greater, and more lively
apprehensions within them of the great abundance of this grace of his toward
them.

Whether these, either one or both, be the true reasons, or no, of John's
pitching his Baptismal Tent, so near unto rivers or currents of water; most
certain it is, that both the one, and the other, are of a more reasonable and
probable calculation, then that which makes convenience of dipping the ground
hereof. This is a dull and spiritlesse conceit, as has been showed.

And thus we have given a large and full account of truth in the former part of
the Consideration last propounded, which affirms, that it cannot be proved
from the Scriptures, that any Baptismal Administration recorded here, was
performed by dipping. For I know nothing pleaded by any man to prove the
contrary, beyond what has been now answered.

We shall not need to insist upon any proof of the latter part of the
Consideration, which only bears, that it is exceeding probable that many of
the said Administrations were performed without dipping. For if so be, there be
so little probability, as has been argued, that so much as any one of these
Administrations were performed by dipping; there must needs be a like (or
rather a far greater) degree of probability, that some of them (at least) have
been performed without. More especially where we read of great multitudes or of
several thousands, baptized together, or at one and the same time, it is hardly
reconcilable with the lowest terms of probability, to imagine that they were
all dipped. And those arguments and reasons, by which the dipping of the Jaylour
and his house, when they were baptized, is endeavored to be salved, are not
worthy reasonable or considering men. It was about midnight when they were
baptized. Act. 16. 33. with v. 25. and this (...), strai^way or immediately
upon the washing of Paul and Silas their wounds, or stripes. It is but an
hungry shift to suppose, that the Jailer might be provided with some vessel fit
for bathing and washing the whole body. If this be supposed, it must yet be
super-supposed that there was a sufficient quantity of water at hand to fill
it, or else the former supposition will not do the feat. If this also be
supposed, it must yet further be supposed likewise, that they were dipped,
either naked, or with their garments on them. The former of these is an hard
supposition, and will not (I suppose) down with sober men. If the latter be
supposed, it must be supposed yet again that either they shifted themselves out
of their wet garments into dry, before they spread a Table, and set meat
before Paul and Silas; or else that they performed this Christian service with
their garments full of water, and dropping. To suppose this latter, requires
zeal without knowledge: to suppose the former, requires the faith of those that
can believe what they please, without asking any question for conscience sake.
For the context will hardly allow them so much time between their being
baptized, and the performance of this service, as was necessary for their
shifting. However, we clearly see what a long story of uncertainties yea of
improbabilities, must be compiled, and believed, before we can reasonably come
to believe that the Jailer, and all his, were dipped, when baptized. Nor is it
easy to conceive where so much water should be in or about Jerusalem which
might suffice for the baptizing of 3000 persons within the space of about half
a day (probably in a lesser time) if this be a true saying, no dipping, no
baptizing. How slender and faint the appearance of truth is in that Doctrine,
which teaches the dipping of the Eunuch by Philip, when he baptized him, was
lately under consideration. The amount of the whole is, that it is by many
degrees more probable, that no Baptismal Administration mentioned in the New
Testament was performed with dipping, then that all the said Administrations
here recorded were performed after such a manner.

Consectary.
If this be the fairer probability of the two, then can there no firm argument,
no, nor yet any competently probable, be The fifth Head of Considerations,
rising up against adult Baptism, ordinarily administered, and re-baptizing.
drawn from the Scriptures, to prove dipping essential to baptizing.

CONSIDERATION. XLVII.
THe Baptizing of the children of CHRISTIANS ordinarily at years of discretion,
is utterly inconsistent with the rule of the Gospel for baptizing.

Proof.
The rule of the Gospel concerning the time and season of Baptizing, is, that
Baptism be administered without delay unto persons, when they are first made
Disciples. This to be the Gospel rule for the regulation of the time of
baptizing, is so evident from many express and clear passages of the Gospel it
self, that it is, (I presume) owned in this capacity, and subscribed, by
Ana-Baptists themselves: Or however, it is abundantly evinced by others to be
such. Mr. Baxter Plain Scripture Proof for Infants Churchmembership, and p.
126. 127.
Now that that practice of baptizing, which the Consideration specifieth, is
utterly inconsistent with this rule, is above all reasonable contradiction made
good by this argument, viz. because it cannot ordinarily be known, or however,
is not ordinarily known, when, or at what time, the children of Believers are
first made Disciples, unless that they will grant that they are Disciples from
the womb; which will altogether as much, and as manifestly, endamage their
cause. That the children we speak of do ordinarily profess a believing in God,
and so in Christ, long before they come to any adultnesse of years, many of
them at 3, 4, or 5 years of age, yea and some sooner, is generally known to us;
but when, or at what time a principle of Grace, or Faith, is first wrought in
them, is altogether as unknown. Therefore if the children we speak of
ordinarily be not baptized until years of discretion, it is impossible that
the Gospel rule concerning the time of baptizing, should be observed, or
obeyed, in their Baptism. The Scripture it self gives large and frequent
testimony unto this argument, yea and experience it self super-sufficiently
ratifieth it. If any man yet questioneth the truth of it, he may please to
repair for satisfaction to page 127, 128, etc. of the Discourse lately
mentioned, where there is plenty of it to be found.

Consectary.
If the Baptizing of Believers children, ordinarily at years of discretion, be
utterly inconsistent with the observation of the Gospel rule, concerning the
time and season for Baptizing, then is the practice unquestionable sinful, and
displeasing unto God.

CONSIDERATION XLVIII.
THe way and practice of Re-baptizing, or of baptizing upon those terms, on
which those, who are best known amongst us by the name of ANABAPTISTS, do
baptize, and are baptized, and do most importunately injoin others to be
baptized also, cannot be justified or evinced, so much as lawful, much less,
necessary, by the word of God.

Proof.
It neither yet has been proved, nor is there in the Scriptures, whereof to
make any competent proof, that persons once initiated or consecrated by water
unto the obedience and service of Jesus Christ, ought to be by water
consecrated to the same service the second time. That passage Act. 19. 3. 4. 5.
which some would draw to such a sense as this, is of quite another
interpretation, as has been substantially argued and evinced by many. M.
Rogers Treatise of Sacraments, Part. 1. p. 13 Franciscus Junius. ad. Act. 19.
5. Georgius Konig. Vindiciae S^^rae. Disput. 30. p. 534, 535.
Those words, v. 5. And when they heard this, they were baptized in the name of
the Lord Jesus, are part of Paul's speech to the Ephesine Disciples, in which
v. 4. he opens unto them the purport of John's Baptism, which it seems they
understood not, although they had been baptized by him. And that which he
declares to them in these 2 verses, is this; that John before he baptized
those, who came unto him for that end, admonished them, that his Baptism was
the Baptism of repentance, [ i. e. a baptism, or washing, instituted by God to
engage or oblige men to repentance] and that they should believe not in him,
but in another, who was immediately to follow, or come after him, viz. Christ.
And (says Paul) when they [i. e. the people, who came to John to be baptized]
heard this [i. e. had been instructed by John concerning the nature and intent
of his Baptism] they were baptized [by him] in the name of the Lord Jesus. This
to be the unquestionable sense of the passage, is by sundry arguments from the
context it self proved by several learned men, who have labored in the
interpretation of it, whose discussions are too large to be here inserted, and
are extant in their respective Authors. And if it should be supposed, that the
Disciples here said to have been baptized by John, or with the Baptism of John,
were now by Paul, or by his appointment, baptized, it would rather have been
said, that they were rebaptized, baptized again, or the like, then simply,
that they were baptized; as the Galathians returning to Judaisme, from which
they had been delivered by the Gospel, are said to return AGAIN to those weak
and beggarly Elements, and to desire to be AGAIN in bondage unto them. Gal. 4.
9.
So those Professors spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 20. relapsing to the pollutions of
the world, which they had escaped thorough the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, are said to be AGAIN entangled therein.

To pretend or say, that a consecration of Infants to the service of Christ,
especially by sprinkling, or pouring water upon it, is a nullity, or that a
person is never the more consecrated unto this service, for his being
sprinkled, or washed with water, in his infancy, and that in this respect a
person coming to maturity of years, and believing, ought to be consecrated to
this service, as* if nothing at all had been done unto him upon this account
formerly; thus (I say) to pretend or plead, is to dictate a man's own notion and
conceit, not to speak the words of soberness and truth, or any thing that can
be proved from the Scriptures. These no where determine In^ant-Baptism to be a
nullity, neither in respect of any incapacity in the person baptized, nor in
respect of any mis-application of the element, whether applied by sprinkling,
or affusion. Yea it has been proved elsewhere (I suppose above all reasonable
contradiction) that infant baptism, whether administered by sprinkling, or
affusion (although for my part I never knew any administration in this kind
made by sprinkling) is for all Baptismal ends and purposes, as efficacious and
valid, as the baptizing of men after what manner soever. See Water-dipping,
etc. Consideration 16. p. 24. 25. etc.


Consectary.
If the practice of Re-baptizing cannot be justified by the word of God, then
must it needs be either an humane device, or delusion of Satan.

CONSIDERATION. XLXIX.
THe custom or practice of adult Baptism, or of deferring Baptism unto
maturity of years amongst those, who were born in the Church, and amongst whom
Baptism was used, as in the case of Constantine, Austin, and some others
(mentioned in Church History) first entered into the Church by an unhallowed
door, and was entertained upon unwarrantable and Popish grounds.

Proof.
The truth of this Assertion sufficiently appears by the light of the records
of Antiquity. So that whereas some of the Anti-pedo-Baptistical party,
ridiculously, and contrary to the main current of all sound Ecclesiastical
Records of primitive date, bear poor ignorant people in hand, that I know not
who, what, or which Pope Innocent, should be the first who commanded children
to be baptized, the truth is, that they were Popish grounds (happily) in
conjunction with some others no whit better, which made the first* breach upon
Infant Baptism (formerly practiced, and this generally in the Christian
Churches, as is elsewhere proved) and prevailed with some to put off the
bapt^ing of their children, and with others, their own baptizing, until
maturity of years; yea with some, until the apprehended approaches of death.
Much might be gathered and cited from the writings of the fathers upon this
account. Tertullian seems to have been the first, who persuaded Christians to
delay Baptism, especially the Baptism of their children until afterward;
Itaque pro cujusque condition ac dispositione, etiam aetate, cunctatio
Bap^ismi utilior est, praecipue tamen circa parvulos. -- Quid festinat innocens
aetas ad remissi nem peccatorum. Tertul. de Baptismo. c. 18.
which (by the way) clearly proves that Infant Baptism, was ordinarily
practiced in his times. But the grounds upon which he persuades to such a
practice, are very sandy and loose: and the principal of them, viz. that
Remission of sins, whereof children being innocent, have no need, is obtained
by, or at least conferred in, Baptism, is at this day by those (at least, the
generality of those) who are reputed Orthodox amongst Protestants, adjudged
Popish and erroneous: and besides, seems to suppose, that there is no other
end of Baptism, but only the obtaining forgiveness of sins, or that Baptism
ought not to be administered, except only in such cases, where all the ends
thereof may presently be obtained.

Besides this motion of Tertullian for the delay of Baptism, was (in all
likelihood) much promoted amongst Christians, by means of some impressions
which the consciences of some had taken of the Novatian error, fearing, lest in
case of sin after Baptism, they should be incapable of Repentance, and
consequently of salvation it self. The opinion also which many Professors about
these times had drank in, that all their sins should be remitted in their
Baptism, in conjunction with a corrupt desire, to enjoy the pleasures of sin as
long as they could without danger (as they supposed) together with a persuasion
that they were only once to be baptized, contributed much toward the
entertainment of Tertullians Doctrinal advice, with many; as may be plainly
gathered from several passages in Basil's Exhortation unto Baptism. But
whatsoever his grounds or reasons were for this his Doctrine of Baptismal
delays, the pious and learned fathers after him, especially Basil and
Nazienzen, adjudged them altogether insufficient, zealously exhorting to a
contrary practice. Have thou an Infant (says Nazienzen) let not impiety be
gratified with an opportunity: let it be sanctified from its infancy, let it be
consecrated unto the Holy Ghost from the very first sprouting of the nails of
it: Infans tibi est? ne occasionem improbitas arripipiat: ab infantia
sanctificetur, ab ipsis unguiculis spiritui consecretur. Greg. Nazienzen. Orat.
40. in Sanctum Baptisma.
(with much more to the same purpose.) And Basil expressly taught his hearers,
that the whole life of a man was a time for Baptism; Baptismi vero tempus, vita
horinis tota Basil in Exhort. ad Baptismum.
meaning, that it might be administered, and received at any time from the womb
to the grave. Yea Tertullian himself clearly approves of the Baptizing of
infants in case of necessity.

Consectary.
If the custom of adult Baptism, where children were born of Christian
Parents, was first brought into the Church, and entertained upon Popish and
unwarrantable grounds, then was it not practiced by Christ, or his Apostles,
but is rather Popish and Anti- Christian.

CONSIDERATION. L.
THat Generation of men best known amongst us by the name of ANA-BAPTISTS, have
always been injurious to the Gospel, and obstructive to the course and free
passage of it in the world.

Proof.
Peter, speaking of Christ, says, To him give all the Prophets witness (Act.
10. 43.) As all the ancient Prophets, give testimony unto Christ, so do all, or
very many of the latter Prophets, (I mean those worthy instruments, by whom God
has enlightened the world, in, and since the Reformation began by Luther) given
testimony against that generation of men we speak of, as men by whose
unworthiness in several kinds the interest of the Gospel has deeply suffered
in the world. The course of the Gospel (says Scultetus, Decad. 1. Anno. 1525.)
was this year hindered and obstructed in Zuitzerland and Moravia by the
Anabaptistical sect. Elsewhere speaking of the Church of Saintgal, he says, it
was variously exercised [or disturbed] by the Anabaptists. Elsewhere he writes,
that these Anabaptists were extremely troublesome to the Christians in the two
Cities of Ulme, and Augusta, or Auspurg in the lower Suevia. Again writing of
the year 1527. he says this year, the Anabaptistical and Sacramentary wars or
quarrels, were very hot, to the great damage of the [Reformed, or] Evangelical
Churches, and that the Anabaptists acted the parts of mad, or furious men, in
the Cities of Worms by the Rhine in Silesia, Bavaria, Zuitzerland, and Suevia.
John Sleid^n reports how John of Leiden, a fierce Anabaptist, derided the
Ministers of the Gospel for affirming, That children ought to be baptized. And
a little after; that the Senate, fearing that the Anabaptists, daily increasing
in their numbers, should, accompanied with their Teachers, thrust the Preachers
of the Gospel out of their Churches, to prevent them of such a disturbance,
caused the doors of all the Churches in their Cities, except one, to be shut up.
Zuinglius in an Epistle to Conradius Somius, Minister in the City of Vlm*
expresses the grief of his heart, to see Believers seduced by the
Catabaptists; and declares how that by their lies, their queritations,
[wailings, or complaints] their Hypocrisy, which, he says, is more proper to
this sect of men then any other, they had drawn great numbers of men to a most
bitter hatred both of him, and others. He adds, they will so act their parts,
that for a tims they will obstruct the work of Christ [amongst us] but they
will never go through with any great matter. For they are the most profligate
and debauched persons, that fall in with them, and when their business does
not succeed, they fall off again from their sect, and then bear men in hand,
that all the business of Christ [so much contended about] is but a fable. I
think (says Calvin) it can be no sober man's doubt, how inconsiderately they
disturb the Church of Christ, who set on foot quarrels and contentions because
that children are baptized. The truth and sincerity (says Musculus) of that
[Religion, or] piety, which the Gospel teaches, has no more deadly enemy then
Hypocrisy. There are three kinds of men in whom this appears, the Pharisees,
Monks, and Anabaptists. I speak nothing but what I know* Musculus in Mat. 16. 6.
And elsewhere he joineth, the A^abaptists with the Papists, and terms them
both, the Adversaries of the Truth. Beza has this passage: Our chief
Magistrates have punished some Adversaries, not because they speak what they
thought [or believed to be true] nor to compel them by force to embrace the
true religion, but because they brake in pieces the band of al human society,
because they were perfidious Apostates, because they most notoriously corrupted
the word of God, because they made a laughing stock of the authority of the
Church, because they factiously rent and tare the [concord or] consent of the
Citizens. The Anabaptists therefore (says Lavater) are not to be heard, to
whom it is not enough to disturb the settled order [and peace] of the Church,
unl^sse they fall soul upon the Commonwealth also, and down with all
Magistrates from their Thrones [or seats] etc. These men are not only enemies
to Commonwealths and Magistrates, but even pests [or plagues] also to mankind.
Calvin (in his Tract against the Anabaptists) professes that it was his
purpose and intent, to admonish all that were Godly, and yet not thoroughly
versed [in matters of Christian Religion] how deadly a ^oison the Tenent of the
Catabaptists is, and to arm and fortify, them with the Word of God, as with a
most certain Antidote, l^st they miserably perish. Again [in the same
discourse] But now (as I have said) it shall suffice, that I have admonished all
that are stuaious of the truth, that what these wretched men by common consent
hold and maintain for an impregnable ground of their Faith, is a deadly
imposture, of which it becomes all men to take heed, as much as of the plague
or pestilence.

Vrsin declares his sense also in conjunction with the former, touching the
persons and opinions of the men now under censure. From all which (says he,
having argued many things for Infant Baptism) manifest it is, that to oppose
Infant Baptism, is no light error, but a wicked opinion, contrary both to the
word of God, and to the comfort of his Church and people. a All, or almost all,
of these quotations, the Reader may find in the words of their respective
Authors, in the Epist. Ded. in the marg^nt relating to 11. And he that desires
more testimonies of like import, I mean to prove that the Sect we speak of has
always been a back-friend to the Gospel, may plentifully furnish himself by a
perusal of the 13. chapter of the second par. of Mr. Baxters plain Scripture Proof,
etc. p 139, 140, etc.
By so much the more are these and other the deliriums [or phrensies] of the
Ana-Baptistical sect to be avoided, a Sect which without doubt has been raised
up by the Devil, and is an execrable Monster composed and made up of various
heresies and blasphemies. ^ Bullinger reports that the Anabaptists did quite
root out the Gospel from Waldshut, where Hubmer was Teacher, by banishing many
of the Citizens that were good men and sincere, and drove them from their
possessions (this was their liberty of Conscience) by which means, the Gospel
which did there excellently flourish, was utterly rooted out. The very same
they wanted but a little of doing at Worms.

How deplorable a scandal, to Religion and the Gospel, the generation we now
speak of, have been in England, and how much Satan is beholding to them and
their unworthy deportments, that it has not run, and been glorified amongst us
at another manner of rate, then has been seen hitherto, I can better (I
conceive) express in a few of Mr. Ri. Baxters words and passages, then in many
of mine own; although his soul (it seems) was so full of the bitterness we
speak of, that in the uttering of it, it abounded to a large discourse* Nay I
desire (says he in one place) any sober Christian but to look unpartially
through all the land, and tell me where ever any such Teachers lived, but the
place in general was much the worse for them. Where the Gospel before
prospered, and Christians spent their time and their conference in the edifying
of each others souls, and in heavenly duties, and mutual assistance, and lived
together in unity and love, according to the great command of Christ, they
ordinarily turn all this to vain janglings, and empty windy unprofitable
disputes, which he that is most gracious does taste least sweetness in; and
they turn their unity into divisions and factions, and their amity into
jealousies and contentions; one is for this, and another for that, and they
seldom meet but they have jarrings and contendings, and look one on the other
with strangeness, if not with secret heart-burnings and envyings; studying all
they can how to undermine each other, and every man to strengthen his own
party. And these are the usual fruits of the Doctrine of Anabaptistry where it
comes. Plain scripture Proof for Infants Chu. member-ship, etc. p. 146.


He had said before (and proved it accordingly) that Anabaptistry has never
helped on, but hindered the work of God, where it comes. Nor has God ordinarily
blessed the Ministry of the Anabaptists to the true conversion of souls, as he
has done other men's, but rather they have been instruments of the Churches
scandal and misery. Page 138.
Afterward, But alas! what need we look into other Kingdoms to enquire,
whether the fire be hot, when we are burning in it? or to know the nature of
that poison, that is working in our bowels, and which is striving to extinguish
the life of Church and State: England is now the Stage where the doleful
tragedy is acting, and the eyes of all reformed Churches are upon us, as the
miserable objects of their compassion. Page 143.
A little after; I have had opportunity to know too many of these called
Anabaptists, and to be familiar with them. And having first examined my heart,
lest I should wrong them out of any disaffection through difference in
judgment, as I clearly discover that, I bear no ill will to any one man of
them, nor ever did, nor find any passion, but compassion moving me to say what
I do; so I do impartially and truly affirm concerning the most of them, that I
have conversed with, as follows. 1. That I have known few of them so much as
labor after the winning of souls from sin unto God -- but the main scope of
their endeavors in public and private, is to propogate their opinions. And if
they do preach any plain wholesome Doctrine, it is usually but subservient to
their great design, that the Truth may be as Sugar to sweeten their errors,
that they may be the easilier swallowed, etc. Page 144.
Afterward he compares the Doctrine and practice of those Anabaptists, who
endeavor to persuade the people that it is sinful for them to hear, or join
with their Teachers being unbaptized men, with the most mischievous Doctrine
and insinuation of the Papists, whose only strength (he says) amongst us is,
to make the people believe it is a sin to hear us, or join with us, and then
they are out of all ways of recovery; they may make them believe any thing,
when no body contradicts it. Page 145.
A little after this: Moreover that very scandal of these men's opinions and
practices, has been an unconceivable hindrance to the success of the Gospel,
and the salvation of multitudes of souls. Oh, how it stumbleth and drives off
the poor ignorant people from Religion, when they see those who have seemed
Religious, prove such! And going on, he shows how the Papists are hardened,
the Episcopal party confirmed, the Kings party, which began to stagger at their
cause, now persuaded of the lawfulness of it, merely from the miscarriages of
these men. All this, with much more, the worthy man reports (bewailingly) out
of his own knowledge and experience of the way which is called Anabaptism,
together with those who walk in it, and occasionally all along shows the
impertinency and weakness of whatsoever (can with any color of Reason) be
pretended to ease the burden laid upon them. So that there is little question
to be made, but that the progress of the Gospel in those parts of the European
world, where the late Reformation of Christian Religion, ever set foot, has
been more obstructed and retarded by the unsound Doctrines, and extravagant
practices of Rebaptizers, then by the irregularities or disorders of any other
sect.

Consectary.
If the way of Ana-baptism, with those who uphold and walk in it, have always
been injurious to the Gospel, and obstructors of the course and passage of it
in the world, it is at no hand to be conceived to be from God; because then God
should be divided in, and against himself.

CONSIDERATION, LI.
THe Wrath of God has been from time to time revealed from Heaven against the
way of Ana-baptism, and those who un-repentingly have walked in it.

Proof.
The wrath of God is commonly revealed with an high hand, in one, or more, or
all, of these ways. 1. By deliveing men and women up to an injudicious mind,
or to believe lies and untruths. 2. By delivering them up to vile affections
and practices suitable. 3. And lastly by pursuing them with ruinating
judgments.

That God has plainly witnessed from Heaven, against the way and practice of
Anabaptism, in all these several ways may be sufficiently evinced from the
reports and testimonies of many witnesses (beyond exception) yea (I suppose) by
all persons of worth and conscience, who in all places, where any considerable
numbers of men have been engaged in this way, have been diligent observers of
what has passed between the providence of God, and them, and withal have had
occasion to record what they observed in this kind, for the use of present and
future ages.

For the first, that Anabaptism has been, and is, the ordinary harbinger to
other fond, fantastic, uncouth, and pernicious opinions, and prepares their
way into the minds and judgments (or fancies rather) of men and women, who
suffer themselves to be ensnared with it, has been the observation of former
times, and is the experience of our own.

Calvin in his Preface to his Brief Instruction for the fortifying of Believers
against the Errors of the common sect of the Ana-baptists, gives this account
of this his writing, v^z. that many religious persons came unto him and told
him, that there was a book sent from remote parts, which required his answer,
unless the ruin of many souls were pleasing to him. Nisi multarum animarum
interitus mihi gratus esset.
The Treatise it sel^ he begins in these words. If I should intena to write
against all the errors and opinions of the Anabaptists, I should undertake a
long work, and enter a gulf, from whence I should never get out. For this
rabble of men herein differ from [all] ^ther Sects of Heretics, that they do
not err in some certain points only, but are a kind of immense [or vast] sea
of portentuou^ phrensies: insomuch that it is hard to find the Head of any one
Anabaptist, which differs not in some conceit or other from all the r^st. S^
that th^re would be no end of my discourse, if I meant t^ examine, yea or so
much as recite, all the impious Doctrines and opinions of this Sect. Si
adversus omnes errores and falsas opiniones Anabaptist^rum scribere vellem,
longum opus susciperem, atque ingrederer abyssum u^de mihi exitus non pateret.
Nam ista* colluvies ab alijs haer^ticorum s^ctis in eo diff^rt, quod non tan^um
c^^tis in r^bus errav^rit* verum sitimmensum quod am st^pendor^^ deliri^rum
^^re: adeo utvix ^nius Anaba^tista caput reperiri possit, quod non sit imbutum
aliqu^ opinione diversa a reliquis Itaque nullus esset operi finis, si i^pias
omnes hu^us Sectae* Doctrin^^ excutere, aut etiam recitare vellem.
Soon after distinguishing this sect into two sorts, and acknowledging the one,
though full fraug^t with many impious and pernicious errors, yet to retain more
simplicity then the other, concerning this other he says, that it is as it
were a most intricate and perplexed labyrinth of mad conceits, so absurd, that
strange it is that creatures in the shape of men should be so far berest o^
reason and sense, as to fall into those imaginations, which the bruit beasts
themselves would abhor. Altera est velati implicatissima Labyrinthus
deliriorum, and quidem adeo absurdorum, ^t mirum sit creaturas figuram huma^am
ger^ntes ita ratione and sensu destit^i ut in ^as incidant imaginationes a
quibus bestiae ipsae mutuae abhorrerent.
He that desires to know some of the more horrid and execrable opinions and
Doctrines, held forth and maintained by these men, needs only to peruse the
sequel of the said discourse. That sort or kind of Anabaptist, in which he
observes somewhat more ingenuity and simplicity of heart, then in their
fellows, consists (I suppose) of such of them, who are green (comparatively)
in this profession, coming more lately from under the Ministry of sober and
sound Teachers, and from the acquaintance and converse of good and worthy
Christains. For (as the saying is Nemo repent fuit turpissimus. No man comes
to the height of impiety all at once. And (according to another saying.) Quo
semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem.

Testa di^. --
The cask a long time will retain the scent,
Which was at first by seasoning to it lent.
An Anabaptist is not to be estimated by what he is, or continues to be
(ordinarily) for 5 or 7 years space next after his proselytism ( Neronis
quinquennium was proverbiall amongst the Romans; Nero's goodness held out very
commendably for the first five years in his Empire) for the most part he
reteins somewhat of the spirit of that Christian ingenuity, with which he was
seasoned under the propitious influence of his former (his best, and most
benedict) Baptism, and comes not to his natural Genius, or to be an Anabaptist
indeed, until he has out-worn all the candor and simplicity of his former
profession, and comes wholly to settle upon the lees and dregs of his latter.
But this only by the way in this place. Vrsin (as we formerly heard)
describing the Anabap^istical sect (as he terms it) says, that without doubt
it has been raised up by the Devil, and is an execrable Monster composed and
made up of various heresies and Blasphemies. Melchior Adamus in the life of
Zuinglius, writes to this effect. In the mean time as the Devil always us^th to
sow his tares, the Heresy of the Catabaptists crept in, whilst Zuinglius was
carrying on the work of Reformation. At first they forbad the baptizing of
Infants, and rebaptized themselves. Afterward they brought in a puddle of all
the Heresies that ever were, etc. At Augusta, Basil, and in Moravia, there were
Anabaptists (as Bullinger reports) that affirmed that Christ was but a
Prophet, and that the Devils and wicked men should be saved. This last most
dangerous and pernicious error, viz. that the Devils and all men without
exception, shall at last be saved, has lately taken the Fancy of a great
Female Teacher, and Actress in the cause of Anabaptism, not far from this City,
as I have been lately informed, by a person of her own Baptismal persuasion.
The same grave and pious Author (Mr. Henry Bullinger) further speaking of this
sort of men, says: This no man can deny, that most of them do forsake their
wives and children, and laying by all labor do live idly, and are fed by other
men's labors; and when they abound with filthy and abominable lust, they say
it is the command of their Heavenly Father, persuading women and honest Matrons
that it is impossible they should be partakers of the Kingdom of Heaven,
unless they filthily prostitute their bodies, alleging that it is written
that we must renounce all those things which we love best, and that all kinds
of infamy are to be swallowed by the Godly for Christ's sake, and that
Publicans and Harlots go first into the Kingdom of Heaven. A while after,
having challenged any man to deny the truth of these things, and affirms that
all he has said may be be proved by signed letters and certain testimonies, he
adds: For my part I have in prudence silenced their crimes, and speak less
then they have committed, so much the more does it grieve me, that men are so
blind they do not observe these things, nor lay them to heart; yea that a great
part of men do embrace and follow these erroneous men even as though they came
down from Heaven, and were Saints among mortals, who preach nothing but what is
Divine and Heavenly, when as they far exceed the Nicholaitans and
Valentinians in filthiness.

It were endless to recite all that which approved Authors and of
unquestionable credit, have recorded concerning the most absurd, horrid, and
blasphemous Doctrites and opinions, which in all foreign parts, where that
generation of men we speak of, have had to do, have been held, maintained, and
importunely propagated by them. It is well known that the gravest and most
judicious writers since the late reformation, as Calvin, Bucer, Zanchy, P.
Martyr, Musculus, Beza, Chemnitius, Scultetus, Aretius. (with many others of
like note) do in their writings commonly style the sect of Anabaptists, furious
and fanatique, in respect of the wild, uncouth, and mad opinions held and
vented by them.

But it may be our English soil is more proper for the way, and breeds a more
composed and better-headed kind of Anabaptist, less obnoxious to fumes and
fancies, to strange notions and erroneous conceits, then other countries, or
that God entreats the Anabaptists amongst us more graciously, then to deliver
them up to such enormous and vile opinions, as those found amongst persons of
the same denomination, in other places of the world. The truth is, that Nec
lacte lacti, nec ovum ovo similius, milk is not more like unto milk, nor one
egg to another. Whether this be true, or no I am content shall be adjudged by
the Native result and conclusion, arising from those unquestionable premises,
which are delivered and asserted by Mr. Ri. Baxter, in his book of Baptism (so
oft-mentioned) page 147, 148, 149. In the beginning of that part of his
discourse, to which I now refer, he writes thus: And as Anabaptism has been
no greater friend to men's salvation with us, so every man knows that it is the
ordi^ary inlet to the most horrid opinions. How few did you ever know that came
to the most monstrous Doctrines, but it was by this door? And how few did you
ever know that entered this door, but they went yet further, except they died,
or repented shortly after. I confess that of the multitudes of Anabaptists
that I have known, at the present I cannot call to mind any one, that has
stopped there, etc. Afterward he subjoins many instances for the proof of these
things, from the very books and writings of several persons, after they had
been initiated in the mysteries of Anabaptism. If I judged it convenient, I
could out of mine own knowledge, furnish his stage with more Actors, and name
some others, men of renown amongst the Professors of the Anabaptismal Faith,
whose judgments since their bowing down to take up Anabaptism, have been
ridden by many other corrupt and noisome opinions, unto which they are in
bondage to this day.

So that it is a thing too evident and manifest to be denied, that God has
from time to time witnessed, and does witness at this day, against the
Doctrine and practice of Anabaptism, by delivering up those who entertain them*
to spirits of error and delusion. The equitableness of which judgment on Gods
part, may be considered in this, that it is a righteous and just thing with
him, to leave those, through want of wisdom and man-like understanding to
depart from Christ and the truth, who will not suffer children to come unto
him, when he calls for them.

Concerning those two other kinds of Divine Testimonies, whereby God has
witnessed against the way of Anabaptism, (yea and does witness) as well in
foreign parts, as in our own land; the one, by delivering up those that will
not be reclaimed from it in time, unto shameful, hateful, and vile practices
and ways; the other, unto ruinating jugdements, in one kind or other, I shall
not burden the Readers patience with any long discourse; partly because these
two latter judgments or testimonies from God, must needs follow of course the
former; (erroneous and vile opinions naturally issuing foul and vicious
practices; and these again calling for ruin and destruction from the righteous
God) partly also because various and large stories may be read in many
Authentic Authors for the confirmation of the truth as touching both.

Only thus briefly; Of the lying, Treachery, and sedition (says Bullinger,
speaking of the Anabaptists) wherewith, these disobedient people every where do
abound, there is no end, or measure. A little before: This no man can deny,
that most of them do forsake their wives and children, and laying by all labor
do live idly, and are fed by other men's labors. Somewhat after in answer to an
objector: Nor can you show me ONE MAN of them, who i^ not blemished with some
of the for^said wickednesses; I mean lying, ^r^achery, perjury, disobedience,
sedition, idleness, des^rtion, filthiness, etc. Mr. Tombs himself (it seems)
being pressed unto it by Mr. Baxter, could not name unto him any one society of
Anabaptists, (out of any good Author) that proved not wicked.

But it may be the Anabaptists in these days, do not praise the sayings of
their forefathers in the ages past, by imitating them in the evil of their
ways, but are an holy, humble, and harmless generation, they resist not
evil, but when a man smites them on the one cheek, they turn unto him the
other also: when they are reviled, they revile not again: they love their
enemies, and bless those that curse them, and do good to those that hate them,
and pray for them that despitefully use them, and persecute them: they are poor
in spirit, and peacemakers; they cause no rents, divisions, or offenses
amongst Saints in Christian societies: they are not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good: if their enemies hunger they feed them; if they
thirst, they give them to drink. Their forefathers indeed were a wicked
generation, heathen-like, filled with all unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, etc. but these their posterity, have made all their [forefathers]
crooked things, straight, and their rough things, smooth and plain; and with
both their hands build up the truth, honor, and peace of the Gospel, which
their forefathers pulled down. O that they were the children of such a
testimony as this! or that the one half thereof were true concerning them! How
would it be as a resurrection from the dead unto the world round about them!
How would the Churches of Christ put off their sackcloth, in which they mourn
for these men, and for the great evils they suffer from them, and gird
themselves with joy and gladness for their sakes! But alas! we cannot say,
(...); this blessedness has prevented us. The sad complaints made against
those men with whom we have all this while to do, by the Churches and faithful
servants of God in former days, are taken up upon the same account amongst us
in our days also. For the most part of them I know (says Mr. Baxter) this is
the most discernable judgment upon them of all the rest: what a multitude do I
know that are most notorious for pride, thinking themselve: wiser then the
ablest Teachers, when they have need to be catechized. Some of them ran up into
the Pulpits to preach, and challenge the ablest Ministers to dispute, and
openly contradict, what Ministers preach, when they neither understand
themselves, nor others: and no man can persuade them that they are ignorant,
though it be as palpable as the Egyptian darkness, to all knowing men that
know them. A little after; in a word (says he) let them that have tried them
judge how many of Paul's characters appear upon them. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. In the
latter days perilous times shall come: For m^n shall be lovers of themselves,
covetous, boastars, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankefull,
unholy, without natural affecti^n, Truce Breakers, false-accus^rs, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers
of pleasure, more then lovers of God, having a form of Godliness, but denying
the power thereof. The Apostle (I suppose) did not intend to predict any such
times, which should produce any such generation or body of, men, in all and
every of whose individual members, all and every of these characters of impiety
should be found. No, I do not find my judgment much inclined to think, that in
the description specified, he pointed at any determinate Sect, or sort of
persons, that should in the times he speaks of rise up in the world: but rather
that the spirit by which he spoke, gave notice how dangerously and desperately
the great body of Christian Professors in the world, would in time degenerate
and be corrupted; so that amongst them, all manner of impieties and
abominations would be found. But if I should be persuaded to judge that any
one particular Sect of men in the Christian world, were here eyed by the
Apostle, I could not but single out, and pitch upon that, which re-baptizeth;
because I know no other, amongst whose proselytes there is such an universal
confluence of a^l the enormities here specified by him. And (doubtless) the
times would be less perilous then they are, or are like to be if the persons
we speak of would so far ease the danger and burden of the Christian world, as
to distribute the Apostle black characters amongst them, not by two's or
three's, or greater proportions, to a single person, but resolve every man and
woman of them apart, that it is more then enough that any one of the said
characters be found upon them, and that more then one shall not be found.

By the way, because I would not be mista^en in any thing asserted by way of
proof, either of the present or former Consideration; I here declare, 1. That
whereas there are two kinds of Anabaptism, the one simple, the other compounded
(I mean, by the former, that which rejects not the Christian Communion of
Believers, because not rebaptized, nor places either justification, or
salvation in its own appropriate way of baptizing, but contenteth it self with
a mere exchange of its own Baptism; by the latter, that which separateth it
self from faith and holiness themselves, as impure and unclean, if they cannot
stoop to their prescript about baptizing) I declare (I say) that what has been
said, either concerning the sad sufferings of the Gospel from Anabaptism (in
the former Consideration) or concerning Gods witnessing from Heaven against
Anabaptism, in this, I desire to be understood only of the latter sort of
Anabaptism, and not of the former. For though the former be an error or
mistake, yet being simply and merely such, etc. not accompanied with pride, or
malignity, against the honor or peace of the Churches of Christ, 1. The Gospel
may run and be glorified without any considerable interruption or disturbance
by it. 2. Neither is the God of all grace wont to inflict any exemplary or
signal judgment upon the simple errors or mistakes of men, but covers a
thousand of these, with a covering made of his love and great compassion in
Christ toward men.

2. I declare further, that notwithstanding any thing delivered either in this,
or in the former consideration, yet my sense and belief is, that there are, or
may be, many under the form of the latter and worser kind of Anabaptism, who
are at present the sons and daughters of God. Only my belief is withal, that
they are in a way full of danger unto perseverance, and of enmity unto all
growth in grace, or in the true knowledge of Jesus Christ the Lord, and which
frequently corrupts and imbaseth, yea for the most part un-Christianizeth the
hearts and spirits of those, who for any long time walk in it. Little do they
know (says Mr. Baxter, speaking of good men entered into the way of
Ana-baptism) whither that way leads, nor where it will leave them, unless they
return. And elsewhere ( viz. p. 244.) For my part having diligently obs^rved
what has become of those ^f my acquaintance who have been rebaptized, I have
seen them fall to so many desperate opinions and practices, and some to mak^ a
Religion of Swearing and Blaspheming, none to grow better, and most to grow
presently worse, as if a visible judgment of God did follow that action, that
I cannot believe that men shall be cut off by Christ from his people, for want
of being Rebaptized.

Concerning the third and last testimony, wherein (as it has been said) God
declares himself from Heaven against high Anabaptism; I shall only transcribe
a few lines from Mr. Baxter (page, 143. of his Treatise for Infants
Churchmember-ship and Baptism.) Leaving the Reader to peruse at his leisure,
what other Authors have observed and recorded upon that account. And how they
(says he, meaning the Anabaptists) have withered every where, and come to
naught, is too evident to need proof. So that when the light of the Gospel once
brake forth, and the true work of Reformation was set on foot, [wherein
Infant Baptism was both taught and practised] God pr^spered it so mightily to
the astonishment of the very ^nemies, that in a short space it overspread a
great part of the Christian world. But Anabaptistry which set The sixth and
last head of Considerations, showing how and why the opinion and practice of
Anabaptism may prevail and spread amongst Professors; notwithstanding so
little, either from the Scriptures, or s^und principles of reason can be
pl^aded for them.
out near the same time and place with Luther's Reformation, did only make a
noise in the world, and turn Towns and Countries [where it came] into seditions
and misery, and so died in disgrace, and go out with a stink. And I am all
thoughts made that the same doom is written in Gods books against the high
Anabaptism in this nation, which does little less then magnify it felf,
against all that belong to God amongst us.

Consectary.
If God has time after time witnessed from Heaven, against the way of
Anabaptism, and those who have walked in it, by all those three kinds of
judgments which have been now mentioned, then is it not a way of divine
prescription, or approbation, nor does he take pleasure in those, who embrace
it, and pertinaciously adhere to it.

CONSIDERATION, LII.
IT has very seldom or never been known, that any opinion or practice though
never so unco^th, importune, wicked, or absurd, ever brake forth, or was set on
foot in any p^rt of the Christian world, but that it gathered considerable
numbers of proselites both men and women unto it.

Proof.
There needs be no other proof made of the truth of this consideration, but
only by enquiry into the Church records concerning the rise and progress of
those ancient errors, Nicholaitisme, Ebionisme, Eutychia^isme, Manicheisme,
Eunomianisme, Nestorianisme, Arrianism, (with others more without number) on
the one hand, and by a recognition of those prodigies of opinions with their
practices, which our own days have in great numbers brought forth amongst us,
as viz. the opinions and practices of the Familists of the Antinomians
(diversified into several sects and opinions) so again of those called Seekers,
Ranters, Quakers, Adamites, Anti-Scripturists, Enthusiasts, Anti-Ordinancers,
Super-Ordinancers, Anthropom^rphites, Pneumatomachists, Erastians (with their
Antipodes) High- Presbyterians, Thero Johnnians, Coppian^, (with other names of
a like doleful sound almost without end) all which, though several of them are
most broadly irrational and absurd, yea beneath common sense it self, and some
others, of very pernicious, wicked and hellish consequence, have yet taken the
fancies of great multitudes both of men and women, (all pretenders to religion,
yea to the most excellent way of worshipping God) who at this day go wondering
after them (respectively.)

Consectary.
Then need it not seem strange unto any, that the opinions and practice of
persons known amongst us by the name of Anabaptists, should heap up disciples
to themselves amongst us, as they do.

CONSIDERATION. LIII.
BY Opinions and practices, which bear, or seem to bear any thing hard upon the
flesh and outer man, are apt to take with four sorts of persons. 1. With th^se
that are melancholily devout. 2. With those that are vain gloriously devout. 3.
With those who through a spiritual unthriftinesse, are behind hand with the
things of their eternal peace. 4. (And lastly) With those who secr^tly hanker
after a fleshly liberty otherwise, without check of conscience.

Proof.
The reason why the first sort of these persons are apt to fall in with such
opinions, and practices, is, because their temper being over-obnoxious to
jealousies, and fears, they seek to fortify and arm themselves against them,
or to qualify them, by a conceit that they do more to please God, then the
ordinary sort of Christians do. The reason why the second sort are propense or
apt to be inclined the same way, is, because any strein of devotion which is
singular, is a wind proper to fill their sails, and to gratify that fleshly
humor which works in them. The reason why the third sort are alike obnoxious
with both the former, is, because they finding themselves straightened in their
inward comfort and peace, by doing less in religion then ordinary men, hope to
recover themselves by a contrary course, viz. by doing more then ordinary men.
The reason why the fourth and last sort are apt to be taken in the same snare
with all the former, is, because they who look upon themselves as doing more to
please God then other men, are apt to claim a liberty, as it were by a kind of
right, to please themselves likewise more then other men.

Consectary.
The Premises considered, together with the great numbers both of men and women
engaged in a profession of the Gospel, who fall under one or other of the four
heads or sorts of persons mentioned, it needs be no cumber or trouble at all to
any man's thoughts, to see the way of Anabaptism so pestered and thronged with
Professors.

CONSIDERATION, LIIII.
NO kind of Sects or Opiners, have (more generally) been more hardened in the
way, or found more imperswasible out of the way, of their error, then those
wh^ have been abl^ to pr^tend the plain letter of the Scripture, though
mis-understood, for their opinion or practice, especially when a letter, of a
like plainness, is not to be found, or cannot be produced against them.

Proof.
The Papists (we know) misunderstanding these words of Christ, Hoc est Gorpus
meum, this is my body, ar^ so transported with confidence of truth in their
most absurd and blasphemous Doctrine of Transubstantiation, it being no where
in Scripture said, concerning the same thing, Hoc non est Corpus m^um, this is
not my body, that they resolve with fire and sword to maintain it against all
opposers. So likewise because they find it written. Ye see then ^ow that by
works a man is justified, and not by faith only (Jam. 2. 24.) and no such
words as these, ye see then that a man is not at all justified by works, but by
faith only, found to contradict the other, therefore there is no removing them
from their dangerous Doctrine of justification by works. Thus also the Arrian
goes a way rejoicing with an high hand over his accursed Doctrine, wherein he
denies the Godhead of Christ, because ( Jo^. 14. 28.) he finds Christ
himself speaking thus, My Father is greater then I, and cannot be opposed in
this his rejoicing with any such words as these found in the Scripture, I am as
great as my Father. I shall not need to multiply instances.

C^nsectary.
This Consideration being unquestionably true, it needs the less trouble or
offend any man, to meet with that enormous confidence in many Anabaptists
touching the goodness of their Opinion and practice, wherewith they amuse the
consciences of many weak, unlearned, and unstable souls; although the truth is,
they can no more find any such words as these in the Scriptures, infants are
not to be baptized, then we such as these, infants ought to be baptized; nor
yet again, any such words as these, believers only ought to be baptized, more
then we, such as these -- Believers only are not to be baptized.

CONSIDERATION. LV.
WHen men and women are inordinate in valuing or prizing an erroneous, whether
opinion or practice, there is the less hope of reclaiming them from either.

Proof.
The reason hereof is ready of apprehension. What a man possesses with
contentment, and with an opinion of receiving good by it, or from it, he is
careful, and endeavors to fortify and secure himself in the possession of
it. And the greater the contentment and expectation of good is, in, and from,
that, which a man possesses, he is the more studious and industrous to make
good his possession hereof, and the more unwilling to part with it. Now there
is nothing, which any man, who is not of a mere Atheistical persuasion,
possesses, of which he makes greater treasure, then of his principles,
notions, and apprehensions in things appertaining unto God, and the saving of
his soul; especially of such of these notions and persuasions, without which,
or without the practique of which, he conceives that he cannot, or very hardly,
be saved. That which made the Jews of old so importunely, yea even desperately
tenacious of their opinion and practice of circumcision, that all the Apostle
could say, or argue against them in these things, could not make them to relent
in the least, was their conceit of the absolute necessity of this ceremony to
salvation, according to that Act. 15. 1. And certain men, which came down from
Judea, taught the Brethren, and said; except ye be circumcised after the manner
of Moses, YEA CANNOT BE SAVED.

Consectary.
If there be less likelihood or hope, of recovering men out of the snare of an
error, or erroneous way, when, and whilst they value either at an excessive
rate; then need it not seem strange unto any man, that that spirit, which
works in men and women of the new baptismal persuasion, should (generally) be
so stiff* necked, peremptory, and resolved, that though the truth should arise
upon them like the Sun in his might, yet they would see nothing to make them so
much as to doubt, considering their overgrown, yea monstrous and prodigious
conceit of the worth and goodness of their way.

Postscript.
These two Considerations following were omitted under the third Head of
Considerations.

Postscript CONSIDERATION. I.
AS the Scripture sometimes under the word MEN comprehends women as well as
men, yea and sometimes children also; so under the expression, MEN AND WOMEN,
it more frequently comprehends children.

Proof.
The truth of this discourse is sufficiently evinced. 37. of the latter part of
this discourse; and repetitions, where originals are so near at hand, are
altogether needless. Only that may here be added, that as threescore and
fifteen souls, (Act. 7. 14.) imports women and children as well as men; so
the three thousand souls which are said to have been added [viz. to the Lord]
Act. 2. 41. and implied to have been baptized, consisted of women and children,
as well as men (as Cajetan observes upon the place.) Nor does it hinder that
in the former part of the verse it is said, Then they that gladly received his
word were baptized: For this does not necessarily imply that only they, who
thus received his word, were baptized, or that the three thousand souls
presently said to have been added, did all receive the word gladly; but may
(with much probability) import only this, that the number of those who did
thus receive the word, and were upon this account baptized, did with their
families, who were together baptized with them, make up the number of three
thousand. But though this be very probable, yet the cause of Infant Baptism
abounds in strength without it.

Consectary.
This Consideration being true, it plainly follows, that the frequent mention
found in the Scriptures of men and women baptized, without any express mention
of any children baptized with them, does no ways prove that therefore no
children were baptized with them, but the contrary rather; because more
usually, where men and women are only named, children are also understood and
comprehended; at least when those things, which occasion the mention of Men and
Women, and are attributed unto them, are such, whereof their children also, are
naturally capable, as well as they.

Postscript CONSIDERATION. II.
IT is lawful, yea comm^ndable and worthy, for believers to devote, separate,
and design their children, whil^st it is yet early days with them, even from
the conception and the womb, to the service of God and Jesus Christ.

Proof.
That which is offered in this Consideration, needs no proof with intelligent
and considering men. For by devoting and designing our children from the womb,
to the service of God and of Jesus Christ, we mean nothing but our purposing
and intending, as soon as God gives us children, that as far as in us lies to
procure and effect it, they shall be the faithful servants of God, and of
Christ. And what can with reason be imagined why such a purpose as this should
not be lawful, yea of good acceptance with God? Hannah purposed and vowed,
whilst as yet she had no son, or child, that if God would vouchsafe her the
blessing of a son, she would give him unto him all the days of his life, 1 Samuel 1. 11. when the Lord said that he knew Abraham, that he would command his
children and his household after him, and that they should keep the way of the
Lord, etc. it implies, that even then Abraham had a real purpose and intent,
in case any more children should after this be born unto him, to procure as far
as he was able, that they also should keep the way of the Lord. The like is to
be conceived concerning Joshua, Jos. 24. 15. So that there is little question
to be made, but that for Christian Parents to devote their children even from
the womb, unto the service of God and Jesus Christ, is a devotion well becoming
them, and approved of God accordingly.

Consectary.
If it be commendable and Christian for Christian Parents to devote their
children from the womb, to the service of God and of Christ, then is it lawful
(at least) to make known or manifest this their act, or council, of devoting
them, unto the world. If so, I demand by what means, they can manifest or make
such a thing known unto the world, better or more Christian-like, then by that,
which Christ himself has appointed for a special cognizance of persons devoted
unto his service, I mean, Baptism?

Postscript CONSIDERATION. II. Omitted under the third Head.
THe truth of an Ordinance, or Gods approving or allowing an Ordinance, as
legitimate cannot be estimated or known better, or to more satisfaction, then
when he blesses it unto those who receive it, and causes it to prosper to the
producing of those gracious ends, or effects for which it is appointed.

Proof.
The reason hereof is because the Scripture from place to place, makes this
signal difference between the Ordinances of God, with their regular
Administrations, and the devices and inventions of men; that whereas the former
are benedict, of a gracious and happy influence upon the hearts and souls and
consciences of men, the latter are always, either noxions and destructive, or
else vain and fruitless at the best Peruse, and compare diligently for your
satisfaction herein these texts of Scripture (with others of like Consideration
without number) 1 Samuel 12. 21. Levit. 20. 23. Deuteronomy. 5. 33. Deuteronomy. 12. 13. 25.
28. 30. Deuteronomy. 30. 16. 17. etc. Jos. 2. 5. 1 King. 13. 33. 34. Jer. 2. 5. Jer.
19. 13. 14. etc. Jer. 10. 3. Ezekiel. 20. 11. 13. 25. Ezekiel 33. 25. Hos. 12. 1, 2.
11. Hos. 13. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 15. 9. Nor is it (indeed) reasonable to conceive,
that God, whom the Scripture calls a God of judgment, and who will not
suffer the ungodly to stand in the Congregation of the righteous, nor make the
wicked equal in favor, or reward, with the just, should make the faces of
humane inventions, shine with that oil of joy and gladness, which he has
prepared to anoint the faces of his own institutions. So that Gods blessing,
either accompanying or following an Ordinance, is his countenancing and owning
it from Heaven: and in vain do men labor to abase that, which he will exalt.

Consectary.
If the blessing of God upon an Ordinance, or Administration, or the prospering
of a soul under, and by means of either, be a sufficient and satisfactory
argument, that both the one and the other are legitimate, owned, and attested
by God accordingly, then is that Baptism, with the administration of it, which
has been dispensed unto many in their infancy, regular and legitimate, and
attested by God for such; inasmuch as thousands of souls have spiritually
prospered, and this to an eminent degree, under it, yea and by means of it, at
least with as much or more likelihood and proof, then it can be proved that
ever any soul thus prospered, under, or by means of, that after-dipping, which
is obtruded by many upon the Christian world, as the only Baptism. Mr. S.
Fisher with his fellowcon-subscribers.


Postscript CONSIDERATION IIII. Omitted under the 4th. Head.
BAptism received in infancy, and this without dipping, is neith^r a nullity,
nor d^vice or institution of man.

Proof.
The rule which our Savior delivers ( Mat. 7.) for the dijudication of good
and corrupt trees, and so of true and false Prophets, By their fruits ye shall
know them, is of like service for the discerning of true Baptism from false. A
corrupt or false Baptism cannot bring forth the fruits of a true. For in as
much as no baptism, no more that which is true, then that which is false, can
operate or yield any spiritual or saving fruit, but by the gracious interposure
of God with it, which is the seal of his approbation; it clearly follows, that
in case it appears that Baptism received in infancy, and this without dipping,
yields spiritual and saving fruit, yea such which is proper for true Baptism
to yield, this must be true Baptism, and so approved by God. A corrupt Tree
(says our Savior) cannot bring forth good fruit. Now that the Baptism we
speak of, and for which we plead, yields all the real fruits of true Baptism,
yea and richly accommodates all ends and purposes, which can reasonably, or
upon Scripture grounds, be either expected from, or ascribed unto, true
Baptism, has been demonstratively argued and evinced by us elsewhere.
Water-dipping no firm footing for Church Communion, page 25, 26.
Experience likewise informs us, that great numbers of those, who walk under
their Infant Baptism only, do altogether as conscienciously both own and
discharge, all Baptismal engagements, and withal in every whit as ample manner
enjoy all Baptismal comforts and privileges, as those who glory and please
themselves most in their way of re-baptizing. Yea experience further teaches,
that very many of those, who have gone under water upon an hope conceived of
finding more grace and peace there, then their infant Baptism had conferred
upon them, have lost much of the former by the voyage, and it is exceeding much
to be feared have not at all increased the latter, if not sustained loss in
this also.

Consectary.
If Baptism received in infancy, though without dipping, be neither a nullity,
nor an institution or device of man, then must after-baptism unto those, who
have been infant-baptized, be either the one or the other, I mean either a
nullity, or an instituted device of man. The reason of this consequence is,
because the Scripture, which only has power originally to declare the reality
and truth of a divine Ordinance, has declared nothing in this kind, on the
behalf of a second or after-Baptism.

Postscript CONSIDERATION. V. Omitted under the fifth Head.
BAptism, as all types and typical Ordinances, is one of those things, which
are (...), and not (...), i. e. which have been instituted and given by God for
the sake of, and in reference unto, some other thing of greater and more
weighty concernment unto men, then themselves.

Proof.
This Consideration is greater in evidence then exception, or doubt, even
without proof. For that Baptism is a typical Ordinance, and according to the
counsel and intention of the great father and founder of it, given in
subservience to ends and purposes of higher consequence then it self, is (I
suppose) the sense and joint consent of those, who disturb the peace of the
Christian world about it. Or however, the thing is fully evident from that
known description of it in the Gospel, wherein it is termed the Baptism of
Repentance for the remission of sins, (of which more largely in the latter part
of this discourse.) Now all typical Ordinances are appointed or prescribed, and
given by God unto men, either 1. For the teaching and instructing them in
something that is more spiritual and secret, or 2. For the confirming and
securing them, touching, either the certainty and truth of things already past,
or the enjoyment of good things, according to the promise of God yet to come;
or 3. For the reminding them of something that is absent: or 4. (And lastly)
for the engaging them to some future action, kind, or course, of acting. There
may possibly be other ends of typical institutions, besides these: but these
only at present come to mind. However, when the end, or ends, for which any
such Ordinance, as those of which we now speak, was appointed, be once obtained
and injoied by men (whether by the use of this Ordinance, or without it; for
God is at liberty to work his good pleasure in men, and for men, without any
Ordinance, though men be not left at liberty to omit them in their respective
seasons, nor to neglect or despise them at any time) the use, or further use of
such an Ordinance, is not required by God: nor can it in the use of it, be of
any consequence, benefit, or concernment unto men. Now concerning Baptism, let
the ends of it be supposed, what men reasonably can suppose or imagine them to
be, they are all obtained and enjoyed by many, by means of that Baptism, or
Consecration unto Christ by Water, which was administered unto them in their
infancy, and which they still own, and in the strength and conscience whereof
they still walk, without any other Baptism received by them afterward; as I
have fully demonstrated, page 24, 25, 26, 27. of my Discourse, entitled,
Water-dipping, etc.

Consectary.
If Baptism was not ordained by God for it self, or for the bare letters sake
of it, but for ends and purposes, spiritually beneficial unto men, then cannot
the receiving of it afterward be any ways commodious unto them, who by means
of their Infant Baptism, or otherways, are actually possessed of these ends;
nor does God require a subjection unto it of such men.

The Second Part.
BEING A modest Examination of Mr. William Allen's Arguments, pretending
clearly to prove (as himself expresses it) the Invalidity of the
Administration of Baptism to Infants.

Sect. 1.
I Trust that Mr. A. notwithstanding the great disservice he has done (I
presume not out of a worse Conscience, then what want of light in the
particular, renders it) unto God, in the affairs of Jesus Christ, and the
Gospel, by publishing his Baptismal abuses, has yet so much interest in him,
as to be heard by him in that Christian and worthy Petition (in the close of
his Premonition) viz. that God will give unto his Reader, so much light, as to
discern that which is of him, from that which is but of men. Nor am I without
all hope, but that this prayer of his will unto many of his Readers, turn to a
sovereign Antidote against the danger and infection of his following discourse.
For if God shall vouchsafe so much light unto any man, as to d^scern that which
is of God in this piece, from that which is but of men, there is not much fear
that his judgment will be overruled by the arguments, to espouse the
conclusion commended by them. It is a saying too hard for my spirit, nor of any
good comportment with my respects to the Author, yet was it the saying of a
judicious and sober Christian, both in my hearing and in the hearing of some
others, that they never met with, so many Scriptures within so narrow a
compass, more abused, then those levied by Mr. A. to fight the battle of that
cause, which he labors to assert in his book. But though I cannot with
confidence rise up to the height of such a saying, or censure, yet very
possibly they who spoke the words, might speak them with truth.

Sect. 2.
He enters his Discourse with this Observation; that, That which both busies
the minds, and takes up much time among the servants of God in debates, is that
question about Baptism, viz. which Administration is most agr^eable to the mind
of God whether that which is made to Infants -- or whether that which not made
but unto persons, who either i^deed believe the Gospel, or make profession so
to do.

I confess that the business of Baptism does (indeed) much (if not much too
much) busy the minds of many in these days, as Circumcision also did the minds
of many of old. But as the great Apostle Paul, though circumcised himself
according to the Law of God, yea and upon occasion, an Administrer of it unto
others, yet severely rebuked, yea and wished the cutting off of those, that
stickled for the practice of it by Christians, because of the great disturbance
occasioned hereby in the Churches of Christ: Yea and threatened those with no
less then loss of Salvation by Christ, who should submit to it upon the
terms, on which it was importunely commended, and obtrued upon them by those
who taught it: So if he were now alive amongst us, there needs be little
question but that he would walk in the same steps of Apostolical severity
against those, who are importune and restless in unsetling the minds, and
troubling the Consciences of the people of God, in kindling fires of contention
and strife, and making breaches and divisions in Christian Churches, by their
vehement urging and pressing their new, captious, and insnaring Doctrines about
the adequate subject, the precise mode or manner of the Administration of
Baptism, etc. Yea and would caution all those also, who should entertain these
Doctrines upon these high terms, on which the necessity of their practice is
urged and imposed by their Factors, with the hazard and danger (at least) of
miscarrying in the two grand concernments of men; justification, and salvation.
For the reason why the Apostle fell so heavy upon the fierce Advocates of
circumcision, was not for circumcisions sake, as if he bare any peculiar hatred
against this; or because it was now an obsolete ceremony, and as good as out of
date; we do not find any such reason as this of his behavior in that kind, so
much as whispered, but because being an external rite and ceremony, they sought
to enthrall the judgments and consciences of Christians to the practice of it,
as if they could not have been justified or saved without it. This was that
which made these men's Doctrines as fire and sword among the Churches of Christ.
For otherwise the Prophets of God even under the Old Testament, when Mosaical
Ceremonies and Observations were in the strength of their obligations, yet
poured contempt upon them, as if God little regarded them, when the observers
of them pleased themselves inordinately in them, and upon a confidence of
pleasing God in the practice of them, lift up their hearts to commit much
iniquity otherwise. When ye come to appear before me, who has required this at
your hand to tread in my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, incense is an
abomination unto me -- your New Moons, and your appointed Feasts my soul
hates: they are a trouble unto me: I am weary to bear them, etc. Esa. 1. 11,
12, 13, etc. If Mr. A. were as infallible in his judgment, in all externalties
of Baptism, as Paul, or Peter themselves, or were able to give an account 7
times more passable, then that which he has yet given, of his opinion touching
the appropriate subject of Baptism, yet if he shall idolize his judgment in
this kind, or (which is the same) obtrude a conformity in practice to it upon
the Consciences of men, as necessary for obtaining remission of sins, and
justification in the sight of God (as he does over and over, as will appear in
the progress) or for the bringing of men into the honor and esteem of visible
Saint-ship, as if an holy and blameless conversation of the longest
continuance, yea though joined with the deepest sufferings for Christ's and the
Gospels sake, did not entitle any man to this honor* if (I say) he shall
obtrude this his judgment upon Christian Churches upon such terms as these, he
will certainly be judged by God, yea and by all considering men, as the Author
of al those evils and inconveniences, whatsoever they shall prove to be,
wherewith the Churches of Christ shall be infested and molested hereupon. He
discovers (as he suppofeth) many other abuses of Baptism, which, if such,
certainly are of the smallest moment; whereas himself in the mean time becomes
guilty of one of the highest prophanations of it, that can lightly be imagined,
I mean, of idolizing it, or rather (indeed) of that which is least considerable
in it. Thus whilst he espieth a moat, (or rather the shadow only of a moat)
in the eye of his Brethren, he sees not the Beam that is in his own eye.

Sect. 3.
But that question about Baptism, which he means, rather then expresses
(though immediately he makes it, not properly a question about Baptism, as
indeed it is not, but about the administration of Baptism, which is a thing
essentially distinct from Baptism; no nor yet is it properly a question about
the Administration of Baptism, but about the subject of this Administration,
which is really also distinct from the Act it self of Administration) but the
question he means, with which men of his opinion in the point, have unhappily
disturbed the peace of the Churches of Christ, and obstructed the course of the
Gospel (for this is the loud complaint almost of all the faithful laborers in
the Lords Vineyard, especially beyond the seas since the Reformation) does not
only busy the minds of the servants of God at present, but according to all
that can reasonably be judged, or expected in the case, without some very
extraordinary interposure of God to prevent it, is like to busy them to the
worlds end, or at least until his coming, who will do a way (as the Apostle
speaks) that which is unperfect, and bring perfection, and face to face with
him. For those of Mr. A's judgment are neither able by the Scriptures, or
otherwise, to satisfy the judgments and consciences of those, who are
considering, and understand themselves, in their dissent from them, nor yet
capable of such arguments and grounds from others, which are pregnant and of
strength, sufficient in themselves to reduce them. Many of his persuasion boast
indeed as if they had scattered the darkness of the question, with that light
which they have shined unto the world; and are neither ashamed nor afraid to
say, that all those who in these days do not Anti-paedo-baptize with them, must
needs sin against their own light, yea and are come to the very brow and brink
of this precipitate censure, that those who gather not with them, are like to
scatter; I mean, who are not baptized with their baptism, cannot be saved. Poor
men! the shadows of the Mountains seem men unto them, and men indeed seem but
shadows. But this has been the genius of by-way men in all ages, to make no
less then matter of life and death of their opinions.

Sect. 4.
But what is the Question, which thus busieth the minds, and takes up so much
of the time of the servants of God in debates? It seems it is this: Which
Administration is most agreeable to the mind of God, whether that which is made
to Infants, or whither that which is not made, but unto persons who either do
believe the Gospel, or profess so to do. [I suppose that neither Mr. Allen,
nor men of his mind; busy their minds at all about the Question here
propounded, unless it be in washing the Blackamore side of it, to make it look
white, and dis-colouring the other into blackness and deformity. For
(doubtless) they are all thoughts made that the latter Administration is not
only most agreeable, but only agreeable, to the mind of God. And for those
that are contrary minded to them, at least the greater part of them, neither
are their minds much busied about the said Question, unless it be in making
straight, what the others have made crooked, and ^n drawing out the mind of God
in the Question into the light, which the other labor to bury under darkness.
For these also are fully persuaded, that the former Administration, not made
irregular by circumstance is altogether as agreeable to the mind of God, as the
latter; yea and much more agreeable hereunto then the latter, as (generally)
practiced and performed amongst us in these days; yea that this, the
circumstances duly considered under which it is performed, has neither
footing, nor foundation in the Scriptures. Therefore the Question he speaks of,
which Administration, etc. does every whit as much, if not much more, busy Mr.
A' s mind, and the minds of his party, as the minds of any of those servants of
God, who dissent from them. But that it should busy the minds either of the
one, or of the other, or take up so much of their time in debates, as it does,
is of no good abode to the affairs of Christ Jesus in the world: therefore they
who have kindled the fire of the contest, have the greater sin.

Sect. 5.
But Mr. A. somewhat handsomely covers the nakedness of those, as well who at
first occasioned the said contest, as those who importunely keep it still on
foot, by terming his question, a Question about Baptism. If it were (indeed) a
Question about Baptism* i. e. about the nature or essence of Baptism, or about
any thing much considerable in relation to it, as the necessity, end, benefit,
etc. it might reasonably be put to consideration amongst the Churches of
Christ; yet with this proviso too, that the sense of the propounders in any the
said questions, be not imposed upon the Churches, as necessary to be embraced
upon the sore penalty of being for ever excluded from Christ, or of being
un-churched. This would be to threaten, not to argue, or dispute. But Mr.
Allens Question is not about Baptism it self, nor about any thing much
considerable relating too it, but only about the precise, adequate, and
appropriate subject of the Administration of it. It is true, the will and mind
of God, even about Tythingmint, Anise, and Cummin, yea though sparingly
discovered, and hard to come at, is not to be despised, nor the knowledge of it
neglected; but he, or they that should spend much of their time in hammering
out such a notion ^ with colorable arguments and grounds to commend and set it
off) wherein they can please themselves, as if it were the unquestionable mind
of God in the case, and then adjure all Christians to be of their mind, either
upon pain of damnation, or of losing their Church-ship, or the like, such
persons certainly would not approve themselves unto God, or unto Jesus Christ
in so doing; no not though their notion; which they should obtrude upon the
Christian world in this case, and upon these terms, should prove to be the
truth. The mind and will of God was, that by the coming and suffering of
Christ in the flesh, the Mosaical differences of meats should cease, and that
Believers should be at liberty, (and so judge themselves) to eat what kind of
meats they pleased. Yet was it expressly contrary to the Will of God, that
they who knew the truth and will of God in this case, should be either
troublesome, or insnaring unto other Christians, so much as by the exercise or
acting of this their liberty before them. Have thou Faith [i. e. beleevest
thou, that thou now lawfully may eat meats, that were prohibited by Moses
Law!] have it to thy self before God; a meaning a Romans 14. 22
that he should be content with the use and benefit of this his liberty, in
private, and not by any importune use or venditation of it before others, who
were yet weak and unsatisfied in the point, trouble or ensnare them. And yet
the knowledge of the mind and will of God in this case, was by many degrees ( I
wis) of greater moment and consequence then the knowledge of his mind touching
the precise subject of the Baptismal Administration, whatsoever it shall be
found to be. For either to doubt, or to be ignorant, whether a man or woman
^ight lawfully eat meats prohibited by Moses Law, was (constructively) to
doubt, or to be ignorant, whether Christ was come in the flesh, or no, and
consequently, whether he was not to be expected afterward; an error which
occasioned the destruction of many thousands of the Jews temporally, yea (as is
greatly to be feared) eternally also (not to mention many other Christian
accommodations, which accompanied the knowledge of the truth in the case.)
Whereas the knowledge of the mind of God touching the proper subject of the
Baptismal Administration, especially if it be that, which Mr. A. and his party
contend for, is by this (to omit many other arguments) evicted to be of very
slender consequence, viz. that since, and where, it has been discovered, and a
practice corresponding with it submitted unto, the State of Christianity has
little advanced (if not retreated rather) nor any thing more of God, or of
Christ, been seen or known in the world, then was before, yea and still is in
such places, and amongst such persons, who do not acknowledge or own the said
subject. But of this probably we may speak more at large elsewhere. In the mean
time let not Mr. A. nor men of his opinion, any more call the Question argued
in his book, a Question about Baptism, nor yet about the Administration of
Baptism, but only about the appropriate subject of this Administration; which
being truly interpreted, is (as has been proved) a Question of small
consequence; not of much greater, then the question about Melchizedek's Father,
which also is very solemnly, with much devotion and gravity, argued by some.

Sect. 6.
Nor does he state his Question with any clearness to the sense of his
Adversaries. For they do not hold or teach, that an Administrator of Boptism
made to infants, is more agreeable to the mind of God, then a like
administration made to some, who believe, and profess the belief of the
Gospel. They acknowledge that Baptism is administered to such persons, who newly
come out of Judaism or Paganism, and profess the Gospel, with as much
agreeableness to the mind of God, as unto Infants. 2. Neither do they hold (at
least some of them) but that Baptism may be administered to those who have lived
loosely and profanely in a profession of the Gospel, upon their repentance, at
least in case they have not been baptized formerly, and this with as much
agreeableness also to the mind of God, as unto Infants. Nay 3 some of them
(for I know not the sense of them all in this point) are not positive, but that
the said administration may be made, and this with as much agreeableness unto
the mind of God as unto infants, to such Believers, though formerly baptized,
whose consciences cannot be satisfied without it; according to the saying of
the Apostle in a like case, It is better to marry then burn; though if the
burning could be healed without marrying, it were better then either. But that
which they generally hold in the Question about the subject of Baptismal
administration, is, that this administration may with good agreeableness to
the mind of God, be made unto infants. And this (indeed) is that against which
Mr. A's discourse is directly bent in the first part of it; and if his reasons
and arguments, by which he opposes this, be disabled by a fair and rational
answers given to them (respectively) there will be no need of any further
inquiry after either of his undertakings in the latter part.

Sect. 7.
In order to the advance of his first argument, he prescribes us the best way
(as he conceives) to come to satisfaction about the said Question, and this
(says he) is to observe the Mr. A. p. 1.
footsteps of the Flock of Christ in the first setting forth of this Ordinance,
etc. (he means, in the practice of Christians, in John the Baptists, and
Apostles times.) To prove this to be the best way, he refers us to what the
Apostle did in one case, 1 Cor. 11, 23. and to what Christ did in another, Mat.
19. 4. 8. But first Mr. A. prescribes us one way to come to the said
satisfaction, but his Proofs and Texts brought to commend this way unto us,
lead us to another way. This way which his proofs and texts lead us, unto is
(indeed) absolute and complete, and could he guide our feet into this way, in
the case and question in hand, we should without asking, or making any more
questions for conscience sake, walk together with him in it. But this way
consists not in the footsteps of the flock of Christ, nor in the practice or
example (one, or more) no not of the greatest Saints, but in the express
letter of an institution. In the latter of the two places cited, our Savior,
for the reducing of marriage, and matters relating thereunto, to their
primitive intent and use, does not send the Jews to the practice either of
Abraham, Isaac, or any of them that came nearest in practice to the Law, or
institution of marriage, but to the institution it self. So likewise in the
former, the Apostle, to make straight, what the Corinthians had made crooked,
in the Administration of the supper, does not send them to the practices of
such and such Churches, who possibly in their administrations, came nearest to
the institution, but to the institution it self. Which way of the two shall we
take for our satisfaction? that which Mr. A. prescribes and follows, or that
which the Scripture cited by him leads us unto? If he would have us to follow
the former, we have no authority or rule of Scripture from him (if at all) so
to do; if the latter, then he counsels us against his own practice, and
prevaricates with his cause, and with the foundation on which he builds his
first argument, viz. matter of fact (as himself calls it, p. 2.) And indeed it
is the foundation of all the rest of his arguments, and of the arguments of all
of his way, upon the subject in hand. Nor do we deny matter of fact to be a
foundation in its kind; but in what cases, and how far, we own and reverence it
in such a relation, may be showed in due time.

Sect. 8.
But 2. His more probable meaning and intent is (though his words fall short)
that both together, practice and institution are the best way or means whereby
to receive satisfaction in the Questi^n before us. If so, then is it but
reasonable to desire of him, either 1. To produce or show unto us an express
institution for Baptism; this (probably) would soon comprimise the difference
between us: Or else 2. To prove substantially (for, as the saying is, old Colts
are not to be taken with chafe, nor considering Christians to be satisfied
with light or loose conjectures) that an usage or practice, though immediately
following an institution, yea and this with good correspondency and conformity
to the institution, is notwithstanding commensurable to the whole council and
intent of God in the institution, or holds forth and expresses adequately and
completely all that, which the institution comprehends. Nay the certain truth
is, that not only no practication of an institution, though with never so good
conformity hereunto; but that not the letter it self, or Grammatical sense of
the words of an institution, do express hold forth, or comprehend, the whole
mind or counsel of God in any institution whatsoever. For God himself has
authorized the law of nature, and humane accommodation, to Umpire in the
practice or administration of all institutions, and to overruled the letter of
them, See this more l^rgely opened and proved, Water-dipping, etc. p. 5, 6, 7,
etc.
in these and such like sayings; I will have mercy and not sacrifice: Mat. 9.
13 12. 7.
So again, The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. Mar. 2.
27.
Again, Which of you shall have an Ass, or an Ox fallen into a pit, and will
not straightway pull him out on the Sabbath day? Luke 14. 5
See also Josh. 5. 5, 7. 1 Samuel 21. 6. Mat. 12. 3, 4. Luke, 13. 15. Mat. 5. 23,
24. (with some others.) This heing so, how far is Mr. A. out of the way, in his
Doctrine toward the close of his discourse, where neither I, nor he, can truly
say, for an institutions sake, but for a disputable circumstance or punctillo's
sake, about the administration, nay about the subject only of the
administration of an institution, he not only teaches a lawfullnesse, but
importunely urges and presses a necessity upon men, to abandon Churches, as
unclean, and so to break that faith, which they had formerly given unto Christ,
and unto his Saints, touching the performance of all Christian services of
love, for the edification, comfort, and well-being of those Churches, which
they thus abandon, and separate from, having formerly been members of them. But
to make disputable and uncertain notions, grounds of forsaking or omitting,
evident and undisputable duties, what is it but to make the night an overseer
of the day? But this by the way.

Sect. 9.
To this I cannot but add one thing more upon the same account. Mr. A, knows
very well, that his Brethren, from whom he dissents in the present
controversy, deny that there is any institution at all of Baptism upon record,
either in the New Testament, or the old; yet takes no notice at all of it. And
though it be matter of so great consequence to the business in hand, though he
had so fair an opportunity, yea though the Scriptures cited by him imposed a
kind of necessity upon him, to speak concerning it, as either to prove that
there is such an institution, or otherwise to show how we may come to
satisfaction in and about, the use and practice of Baptism, though there be no
institution, yet he waves the consideration of it altogether. Whether this
omission was casual, or prudential, shall be no part of our present enquiry.
However by the light of what has been said, we plainly see that Mr. A. knows
not, or at least, that it does not appear that he does know, how to clear up
unto us a way, or rule, how to receive satisfaction in the particular in hand.
His Scriptures produced lead us to the institution of God; but his best way, to
the practices of some men. The institution would be satisfaction unto us
without the practices of men: but the practices of men without the institution,
do but satisfy us in part, touching the institution, viz. how it may* or
ought, in such and such cases, under such and such circumstances, to be
administered. Yea the truth is, that for Mr. Allen's praetises themselves, as
far as he is able from the Scriptures to declare and argue them unto us, they
are not, no not to such a degree, so completely satisfactory, (as there may be
occasion to show afterward,) When the institution of circumcision was given,
if an estimate should have been made of the mind of God, concerning the
adequate or proper subject of this Ordinance, by matter of fact, or by the
first administrations of it, evident it is that such an estimate would have led
men into error, notwithstanding he that managed and ordered these first
administrations, was as faithful, and as good a friend of God, as either John,
or the Apostles themselves. For no administration was at first made of this
Ordinance (at least we read of none that was made) but only unto persons that
had outlived the eight day of their lives by many years, as unto Abraham
himself, being now 99 years old, unto Ishmael, being 13 years old, aad unto
every male among the MEN in Abraham' s house, Genesis 17. 23, 24, 25. And yet we
know that the primary intent of God concerning the subject of this
administration, respected children only of the eight day, Ger. 17. 12.

He proceeds to tell us, That it is no man's douht who believes the Scriptures,
but that Baptism was administered to believing and repentant persons in those
times; but that it was administered to Infants, divine History, no where
reports, nor can it be duly collected, from any part thereof. We answer,

Sect. 10.
1. As it is no man's doubt indeed (in which respect Mr. A. might have spared
the asserting it, without any detriment to his cause) but that Believing and
Repen^an^ persons were baptized, so neither needs it be any man's doubt, but
that persons, neither b^leeving (I mean, truly, unfeignedly, and to
justification) nor Repentant, were baptized also. For who can think that the
inhabitants of Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan,
were all believing and repentant persons, (who yet were all baptized. Mat. 3. 6.
) considering that when the Apostles met before God about so solemn and weighty
a business, as the choosing of a new Apostle, the whole number of Disciples
present with them were but about an hundred and twenty? yea that whole
multitude which John calls a generation of vipers, were all baptized of him,
Luke. 3. 7. compared with verse 21. Nor do I suppose it to be any man's doubt,
but that Simon magus was an hypocrite, and consequently no Repenta^t person,
when he was baptized. Yea Mr. A. himself seems to suppose ( page 15.) that men
may lawfully t^^e up the Ordinance of Baptism, only to ingag^ themselves to
the practice of Repentance and Mortification afterward.

2. Neither is it any man's doubt now (or the doubt of some few only) but that
Baptism may, and ought, to be administered to believing and Repentant persons,
in such cases, and under such circumstances, in, and under which it was
administered unto them in the Apostles times. But*

Sect. 11.
3. No ways, no not with so much as the face of a consequence, does it follow;
that because it was administered then in such particular cases, or under such
and such circumstances determinately unto Repentant persons and Believers,
ought If Mr. A. could show us such a command as this, for the baptizing o^
^ele^vers or Professors only, we sh(...)d not declin^ to practice accordingly.
it now to be administered in cases altogether differing, or under circumstances
of a quite contrary nature and import, unto the like. It was Mr. A's opinion
very lately (whether it be still alive, or since dead, I know not) that the
anointing the sick with oil by the elders of the Church, in order to their
healing and recovery, ought not now to be practiced by them; yet I suppose he
will not deny but that it was practiced by the elders of Churches in the
Apostles days, and this by expresseness of command, Jam. 5. 14. This his
opinion touching a necessity of varying from a primitive practice, and and this
imposed by an express command, he can upon no other account tolerably
justify, but only by alleging that the case, in reference to such a practice
is different in these days, from what it was in the days of the Apostles, when
the gifts of healing were vested in persons of that relation in Christian
Churches. So again, while he declines that primitive practice of gr^eting his
Christian Brethren with an holy ki^se, so often, and so expressly commanded by
God, Romans 16. 16 1 Cor. 16. 20 2 Co^. 13. 12. 1 Th^ss. 5 26 1 Pet. 5. 14.
and withal so religiously observed by Christians for several ages after the
Apostles (as appears from Justin, Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens of Alexandria,
Origin, and others) he can give no competent reason but only the difference of
the case, or of circumstances between those primitive times, and ours, or
rather (perhaps) between those countries or parts of the world, and ours. There
is the same consideration of our common custom (at which Mr. A. is no more
scrupled then others) of prophesying [i. e. of being present at the exercise of
prophesying, or of preaching or opening the word of God] with our h^ads
covered; which notwithstanding is expressly contrary to the practice, which the
Apostles ordered and injoined in the primitive Churches, 1 Cor. 11. 4. 7. Yea
the Prophets or Ministers themselves in the French Churches, prophecy with
their heads covered, and (for ought I know to the contrary) are therein
blameless. Again Mr. A. takes, or at least allows a liberty to vary from the
practice of Christ himself in his primitive administration of the Supper. He
administered it unto men only; Mr. A. pleads the title of women also to the
administration, page 11. Doubtless he cannot justify an administration so far
differing from that of Christ in respect of the subjects of it, or persons
administered unto, but by pleading that the case is otherwise with us, in
reference to the ordinary administration of the supper, that ought to be
practiced amongst us, then it was with Christ, after this, or some like manner:
Christ judging it meet to solemnize the first administration of the Supper,
with his Apostles only, by whom he intended to erect the said administration
in all Churches thoroughout the world, had no occasion to interess women
therein; and besides, the administration being yet unknown and unheard of
amongst Christians, no women more then men, could so much as desire part and
fellow-ship therein. Whereas amongst us, and in our Churches, we have
women-members, as well as men, who are in the same capacity with men to partake
in the Ordinance, and who desire it with as much desire as they: and besides,
we have no such motive or occasion, to confine our selves unto men in our
Administrations, as the Lord Christ had in his. If then difference of case, and
diversity of circumstance, one or more, will justify a different practice in
all the particulars now mentioned, from those, which were most regular and
worthy in other cases, and under differing circumstances, is it not most
rational to conceive and conclude, that the ordinary practice of the Apostles
in Baptizing Believing and Repentant persons, (supposing it to have been such)
does no ways argue or prove, but that the ordinary practice of baptizing
children now may be more justifiable* then such a practice would be,
considering that the case of Christianity and circumstances relating unto
Baptism, are so much altered, and differing as they are, from what they were in
the Apostles days. In the Apostles days, the Believing and Repentant persons
whom they baptized, had not been trained up in the knowledge of Christ, or in
the profession of Christian religion, but were newly converted unto Christ,
either from Judaism, or Gentilism. In the like case, and under the same
circumstances, we also judge that Believing and Repentant persons, at least
professors of both, and these only, ought to be baptized. But in our days,
and amongst us profession of the name of Christ being made by persons from
their childhood, and it being difficult for men and women to determine the time
of their effectual conversion; we, in regard of this great change of
circumstances, and considering that Baptism is very improper to be administered
after many years profession, and having no ground or warrant in the Scriptures,
for the administration of it in this case (least of all for the ordinary and
constant administration of it) judge it much more agreeable to the mind of God,
and to the requirement of those circumstances, which lie before us, (in
conjunction with other reasons and grounds, which we shall account for in due
time) to make the administration unto children, then to defer it until after
years. But,

Sect. 12.
4. (And lastly) whereas he adds, It cannot duly be collected from any part
or circumstance of divine History, that Mr. A. p. 2.
Baptism was administered to infants in the Apostles days; we Answer: 1. That
here he boasts, whilst he is only girding on his Armor, and triumphs
before the Battle. 2. That though the administrntion he speaks of, cannot be
collected from any part or circumstance of Divine History; yet it makes every
whit as much against him, if it can be collected from any other passages of
Scripture, though not Historical. Mr. A. himself, only upon grounds delivered
in the Scripture for the doing of many things, presumes them to have been
done, both by the Apostles and other Christians, although the Historical part
of the Scripture records not their doing, as in the matter of women's
admission to the Lords Table, of the baptizing of many Christians, yea and of
the Apostles themselves, whose Baptisms are not reported in the Scriptures. 3.
We affirm and say, that what he says cannot be duly collected from Divine
History, may be duly collected from hence, especially other passages of
Scripture being allowed to prompt the History i^ the case. This we are
confident we shall be able to make good in due time and place. 4. (And lastly)
Neither ca(...)t be duly collected from Divine History, that Baptism was not
administered to Infants in the Ap^stles days, which yet (it seems) is Vena
Basil^ca the master vein in the body of Mr. A's Faith about Baptism.

Sect. 13.
After this Harbingery, his first argument, which (by the way) he tells us is
drawn from matt^r of fact, advances. Mere matter of fact, is somewhat a
strange principle or foundation* from whence to prove either the lawfulness,
or unlawfulness, of a practice about an instituted Ordinance, especially in
all cases. Nor is such a reasoning as this meet to make a pillar of any man's
Faith: Such or such a thing was neither done by Christ, nor his Apostles. Ergo
it ought not to be done by any others. For if the ^ctions and practices of
Christ and his Apostles, be such e(...)es and so far binding to us, that we are
wholly bound up ^^to them, in respect of acting, and non-acting, then they are
thus binding either universally, and without exception; or else particularly,
and with limitation only.

That they do not bind universally, is evident from the consideration of the
many absurdities, which will unavoidably follow hereupon, and which are obvious
to every man's thought: In particular it would follow, that we should be bound
to forswear, to deny our Lord and Master Christ, not to believe his
resurrection, unless we should see in his hands the print of the nails, thrust
our hand into his side, etc. with several other things of like notorious
consideration.) If they bind us particularly only, I mean, if only some of
them be binding unto us, and not all, then is Mr. A's argument, drawn from
matter of fact, of little value, until he has proved, that whatsoever Christ
and the Apostles particularly did in the administration of Baptism, is of that
kind of action, which binds both negatively and affirmatively all persons, in
all cases, and circumstances whatsoever. When he shall have proved this
substantially and workman like, I shall be his Proselyte without any more ado.

Sect. 14.
His first argument, which is spe gregis, the argument that must stand to it,
and fight for all his fellows, is this:

If Baptism were not administered to Infants in the days of Mr. A. first
Argument.
John the Baptist, nor of Christ, nor of the Apostles, then ought it not to be
administered unto infants now. But it was not administered then, etc. Therefore
it ought not to be so administered now.

Because Mr. A, does his business logically, and draws Conclusio sequitur
det^riorem partem, i. e. the conclusion is never better then the worst of the
propositions, by which it is proved; as a ^^affe, anchor, cable, or the like,
^re not to be esteemed stronger, then what their strength is in the w^^kest
parts. I confess there is no great need of delivering this Item here, because
we shall find both propositions tardy. Only it may possibly be, that the
weakness of one, will be made more manifest unto some, then of the other: and
in this respect the notion now presented may be of use. But,

1. To the major proposition in the argument, we answer die benying it, and give
this account of our denial. First no particular observation, or administration
of an Ordinance, or institution, does, or can, answer or express, the whole
mind or counsel of God therein (I mean in the said Ordinance or institution.)
When Abraham circumcised his son Isaac the eight day, ( Genesis 21. 4.) he did
not act or express the whole counsel of God in the institution of
circumcision. For the mind of God was, that men Jews should be circumcised, as
well as children at eight days of age, in case their circumcision was omitted,
whilst they were children. In like manner when Joshua circumcised men ( Jos.
5. 5. 7.) neither did he express herein, the full mind of God in the
Ordinance, as is evident: nay he herein acted expressly contrary to the letter
of the institution, which confined circumcision to the eight day, and yet was
blameless. When the Priests and their families observed the Ordinance of God
in eating the Show bread, they did not herein express the whole counsel of God
in this Ordinance: For this extended to a lawfulness even for others also, who
were not of any Priestly family, to eat of this bread, in case of much hunger,
and defect of provisions otherwise; as is evident by what David, and those that
were with him, did in the days of Abiathar the Priest. Mar. 2. 26.
When the Jews observed the institution of the Sabbath according to the
greatest preciseness of the letter that can be imagined, as when neither
themselves, son nor daughter, man servant, nor maid servant, cattle, nor
stranger within their gate, did any work at all, they did not by such an
observation as this, express the whole counsel of God in, and about the
Sabbath. For his counsel and intent herein further was, that they should do
good on the Sabbath day, as well as on any other day, as in ministering unto the
sick, in helping an Ox or an Ass out of a ditch or pit, whereinto they were
fallen, etc, Our Savior himself in his administration of the supper, did not
act to the extent or compass of his own counsel and intendment in the
institution. For he did not administer it unto women, when as notwithstanding,
we generally believe (and this upon sufficient grounds) that his intentions in
the institution reached unto these also. From hence then it evidently follows,
that John's, and so Christ's, and the Apostles, administering Baptism unto
Believers or Repentant persons only, and not unto Infants, is no sufficient
argument or proof, that therefore it was no part of Gods intent in the
institution of Baptism, that it should be administered unto infants. God (as
has been said, and showed) always intends more in an institution, then any
administration of it does express.

Sect. 15.
If it be here replied; that in case it had been any part of the mind of God,
in the institution of Baptism, that infants should partake of it, it is no ways
likely but that either John, or Christ, or one or other of the Apostles, would
first or last have made the administration unto them; I answer.

1. It has not yet been proved, (nor I believe, ever will) that none of these
ever made an administration of Baptism unto infants. But more of this in our
answer to the minor proposition.

2. Why is it not as likely, supposing the counsel of God in the institution we
speak of, to stand as well for the baptizing of Infants, as of men, that yet
neither John, Christ, nor any the Apostles, should baptize infants, as that
Paul should baptize only so few, as himself reports he did, 1 Cor. 1. 14,
15, 16.
when as according to the counsel of God, he might have baptized twenty times
as many, yea and (doubtless) had opportunity to have done it.

3. (And lastly) As the reason why Paul baptized so few as he did (and I
suppose he had not sinned, in case he had not baptized these, yea or any at
all) was, because he had another work of far greater weight, worth, and
concernment unto him, to lay out himself upon ( viz the preaching of the
Gospel) then baptizing was; in like manner, John, Christ, and the rest of the
Apostles, probably did conceive and judge, that it did more principally in
those times, concern them to look after, and provide for the baptizing of men
and women, then of children; and upon this account might, though not neglect,
yet omit, the baptizing of children. Yet this does no ways prove, but that it
might be lawful for them to have baptized children; as (questionless) it was
lawful for Paul to have baptized a thousand more then he did baptize, the
baptizing of whom notwithstanding he omitted without sin. Again.

2. We deny the consequence in the said major Proposition, upon another account
also, which is this. Circumstances, and aspects of probable inconveniences, may
render, not only things that are lawful, but even such, which in some cases
are necessary, in expedient in some others, and consequently, better and fitter
for the servants of God to let alone, during the said posture of circumstances,
then to practice. This is so evident, both in the Scriptures, and in reason it
self, that I suppose I may without loss, spare the proof of it.

Therefore John, Christ, etc. might upon consideration of some circumstance,
one, or more (possibly unknown unto us) forbear the baptizing of infants in
their days, though a practice lawful enough, and ordinarily, in Churches
constituted, necessary. And whereas Mr. A. pleads the cause of his proposition,
or consequence, which, upon the grounds now specified, we deny, by this reason,
viz. That that which was a reason to them then to forbear baptizing infants,
and upon which they did forbear it, is, or ought to be a reason to all men now
to forbear it likewise, we answer, that this reason has but a very waterish
and faint taste of reason in it. For,

Sect. 16.
1. It proceeds ex non conc^ssis, takes that for granted, which is denied by
his adversaries, viz. that John, Christ, etc. did forbear the practice in
question. 2. If they did forbear it for a time, it follows not that they did
forbear it perpetually or altogether. 3. If they did forbear the said practice
altogether, and never baptize any infant, in the next place we deny that the
reasons of their forbearance are binding unto us, until 1. They be declared and
made known to us what they were; and 2. Until it be proved that those reasons,
upon which they forbear, (in case they did forbear) have the same influence
upon, or relation unto, us, which they had upon, and unto them. For it is not
reasonable that we should suspend, or forbear, the doing of that, which we
conceive to be a duty, and that upon such grounds, which were never yet (at
least to our judgments) sufficiently answered, or disproved, only because it
was not done (or rather because some conceive it was not done) in the days of
Christ, and the Apostles; especially considering that we are able to give a
competent account, (at least) to our selves; yea and (we suppose) to others
also, who are not too deeply baptized into a spirit of prejudice and partiality
(which in such a case as this we judge sufficient) why they did, or might
forbear, in case it should be proved that they did forbear in this kind. This
account we briefly mentioned,. 15. and may somewhat enlarge upon it in place
convenient. In the mean time we clearly see that hitherto Mr. A. has only
cleared doubts by darkness; and by the reason or proof exhibited, has
mediated no good accord between the consequent and Antecedent in his major
proposition. For were both these granted. 1. That John and the Apostles did
forbear infant baptism in their days: and 2. That that which was a reason unto
them to forbear it, ought to be a reason unto all men now to forbear it, (viz.
in case all men had the same reason now, I mean, were under the influence or
command of the same or the like reason) yet does it no ways follow from hence,
that therefore if they forbear infant baptism, all men ought to forbear it now.
The reason of the non-sequitur is, because God may subject one man, or some
men, to a necessity of some forbearance, by such a reason, in individuo, or in
actu excercito (as the Schoolmen speak) by which all men are subjected to the
like forbearance, in specie, or in actu signato, who yet may never actually, or
in individuo, be subjected hereunto, by this reason.

As for example, the command of God, o^ the motion of the spirit of God in men,
to forbear such or such a practice, is in specie, and in the general, equally
binding unto all men as to this forbearance. All men are alike bound (I mean,
one man is bound, as well as another) to obey every command of God, that shall
be directed to him, or imposed on him. But in case such a command be directed
and given unto some particular men, and not unto others, (and there is the same
consideration of an inward motion of the spirit) it does not follow, that
because the former are bound by it to the supposed particular forbearance, that
therefore the latter, viz. to whom this command is not given, should be bound
likewise, though the command of God, simply considered, be alike binding unto
all. Therefore in case John, and the Apostles, were moved by the spirit of God
to forbear the baptizing of Infants, (which I presume Mr. A. himself will not
deny) and upon this motion did forbear it, it does not follow from their being
moved hereunto, that those who are not moved, as they were, are, or should be
bound by their motion, to the like forbearance. Particular motions of Gods
spirit unto actions (and there is the same reason of forbearances also) either
besides, or contrary unto, standing and known rules, or laws, bind no man, but
only those particularly inspired and moved by them, either to the actions or
forbearances, unto which these persons are moved or led by them. But that as
well John the Baptist, as the Apostles, did forbear the baptizing of infants,
in case it be supposed that they did forbear it (which was never yet
substantially proved, nor I believe ever will be) by special and particular
direction or motion of the Holy Ghost, and not otherwise, is clearly
demonstrable by this argument. Either (upon the said supposition) they did
forbear it by particular and express motion from the Holy Ghost, or else by
some standing order, rule, or direction, recorded in the Scriptures or else by
the motion or guidance of their own spirits. But they forbear it not upon
either of these latter accounts. Therefore their forbearance (upon the
supposition mentioned) was by extraordinary and particular motion of the Holy
Ghost. If Mr. A. will say, that their forbearance was grounded upon any general
or standing law or rule of Scripture, let him produce such, whether law, or
rule, from hence, whereby men are prohibited or restrained from baptizing
infants. If he shall do this, the controversy between him and his Antagonists
about Infant Baptism, will soon be at an end. That the said persons ( John, and
the Apostles) did not forbear Infant Baptism, out of the private dictate or
motion of their own spirits, Mr. A. (I presume) will not affirm, in which
respect it needs no proof.

Sect. 17.
But whereas we might here regularly have expected to see the reasons, why, as
Mr. A. pretends, Baptism was not administered unto infants in the days of John,
etc. behold quite another vision. He turns another way, and falls upon inquiry,
what reasons, we should, or can, have to baptize infants, which they had not;
as though he would imply, that he had showed what reasons they had, and would
go somewhat further, viz. to see whether we had, or possibly might have any
other. And thus whilst we were in expectance of some arguments from him to
confirm his argument, he has slidden from us like a Serpent over a rock, and
we find him again creeping in at a whole on the other side. But let us follow
him at this turn also, and draw him forth into the light.

He makes an enumeration or recital of five reasons, which may be pretended for
infant baptism now, and which some may think were not obligatory unto them (
John, the Apostles, etc.) and closes (with confidence more then enough, as if
he had surveyed the round world, and all that is therein.) Other [reasons] then
these cannot lightly be supposed, or imagined ever to come up into the minds of
men. Mr. A. was not comprehensive enough at this turn, there are several
reasons here, which lie without the verge or circle of his imagination here;
two of which have been already mentioned, and shall (upon this occasion) be
again repeated, and a little further opened.

Sect. 18.
1. We may be in a better, and more convenient capacity for baptizing infants
now, then they were, because the Apostles, yea and Christ himself, had a
business of far greater weight and moment lying upon their hand, then
baptizing, not only infants, but even believers themselves, viz. the planting
of the Gospel in the world, the constituting and inspection of Churches, etc.
in comparison of which, the business of baptizing, whether one sort of
persons, or other, was but of an under consequence. And that de facto, they
many times did, upon the account we speak of, omit other things as necessary as
this (yea by many degrees more necessnry) sufficently aippears in that for the
Gospels sake, and ministry thereof, they frequently exposed themselves to all
kinds of hazards, neglected their healths and lives, the preservation of which
(being a work of mercy) was of more consequence, then any such sacrifice as the
Baptism of infants is, yea or of believers themselves. The Apostle Paul in
saying, that he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel (though yet
he did baptize, as lawfully he might by his commission) clearly implies, that
baptizing, in comparison of preaching the Gospel, was but an inferior
employment, and which he ought at some turns to omit, viz. when it fell nor in
conveniently with his greater occasions (as will further appear afterward) yea
baptizing, whether one or other, was of so small a consideration in the eyes of
the Lord Christ, in comparison of the preaching of the Gospel, that at the
first sending forth of his* Apostles to preach the Gospel ( Mat. 18. Mar. 3.
Luke 9.) yea and when a while after, he sent forth seventy other Disciples
about the same work, he spoke not a word either to the one, or the other, about
baptizing any. So then this is one reason, not reducible to any of Mr. A's
five, why that Ministers of the Gospel, and Pastors and Elders of Churches in
these days, may be reputed in a better capacity for the baptizing of children,
then the Apostles, and those that were assistants unto them in their days,
were.

Sect. 19.
2. As Paul and Silas, were once forbidden by the Holy Ghost, to preach the
Gospel it self, for a time in such a place, where otherwise they were then
minded to have preached it, Act. 16. 6.
yea and where they did preach it afterward, Act. 19. 10. 26.
by the direction of the same spirit, so why may we not conceive, that in case
the Apostles, and other Baptists in their times, did forbear the baptizing of
infants, they might receive a secret prohibition of the Holy Ghost in that
behalf, not because the practice was any whit more unlawful, then the
preaching of the Gospel was in Asia, when Paul and Silas were restrained from
it, but because the will and pleasure of God was, that they should forbear it
for a time? And I believe we are able to give as reasonable an account of such
a will and pleasure in God, as this, as Mr. A. is to give a reason of that will
of his, by which Paul and Silas were testreined from preaching in Asia.
Besides, if they were taken off from a practice or course, wherein they had
engaged, or exercised themselves for a time, (as viz. from ministering unto or
serving tables, as themselves express it, Act. 6. 2. That they might give
themselves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the Word, v. 3.) if (I
say) they were taken off from the employment of serving Tabl^s, upon such an
account as this, by the motion or suggestion of the Holy Ghost, why is it not
most reasonable to conceive, that upon the like, or rather the same account,
they might by a like motion of the Holy Ghost, be dissuaded from entering upon,
or engaging themselves in a course of baptizing children; I suppose that
neither Mr. A. himself, nor any considering man of his way, will deny, but that
the Apostles, and those that were directed by, and assistants unto, them in the
affairs of the Gospel, in their days were acted and led by the special
guidance and motion of the Holy Ghost, in their forbearing Infant Baptism (in
case it must be supposed that they did forbear it) as well as in any other
course or practice, wherein they walked in order to the advancement of the
Gospel. If then John, the Apostles, etc. by special order, advice, or
admonition from the Holy Ghost, refrained the baptizing of infants in their
days, it follows not, but that we, who in these days, have received no such
order, advice, or admonition from the Holy* Ghost, neither by any word from the
Scriptures, nor by any inward motion or inspiration, may lawfully practice
infant baptism, notwithstanding their forbearance; especially considering that
we judge our selves encouraged, yea obliged hereunto, by the Holy Ghost
speaking unto us as he does, in the Scriptures.

Sect. 20.
This is a second consideration (over and above those five suggested by Mr. A.)
proving that we in our days may be in a regular, yea in an obliging capacity
for baptizing infants, although John, the Apostles, etc. in their days were
not. We do not in all this imply, or suppose, that the Apostles or other
primitive men, did always, or altogether omit baptizing infants; our judgment
is (as we shall further declare in our examination of the minor proposition)
that infants were, even in the Apostles days baptized; but only show and
prove, that in case it could be proved that they did never baptize infants, yet
this does at no hand lead us to the like forbearance, much less impose a
necessity upon us by way of duty, of the like. So that Mr. A's argument or
proof of his major proposition, from enumeration of some particulars, is not
altogether so good, as the young man's proof of his integrity, from his
observance of several of the commandments of God was. For our Savior
challenged him with the lack of one thing only: yet lackest thou one thing:
Luke 18. 22
But Mr. A's argument lacks two things at least, and who knows how many
more? And in the conclusion of this his argument, he windeth up much more, then
he had spun in the premises. For thus he concludes: And therefore what ever the
reasons, or considerations were upon which they (the primitive Baptists) did
forbear to baptize infants, the same are binding to all men in these days to
forbear it likewise. Will you please to consider how this has been proved?
Because (says he) we have no other reasons for the doing of it then they had.
This reason stands by the said conclusion, as David's friends stood by him,
when God (as he complains) had put them far from him. Psa. 88. 18.
For what though it were granted (which yet has been denied, and a good
account given of the denial) that we have no other reasons to baptize infants,
then they had, yet is it no legitimate consequence from hence, that therefore
their reasons of forbearance, are to be our reasons, or reasons unto us, why we
also should forbear such a practice. For they might have all the same reasons
for baptizing infants, which we have; and yet their reasons might possibly, as
to them, be overballanced with others of a contrary import, upon which they
might forbear the said practice. But such reasons as these not lying before us
(as there is no necessity why they should) we may stand bound to the practice
in question, by those very reasons, from the bond or obliging force whereof,
the Apostles might be discharged by others of a preponderant consideration.
Therefore the arm of Mr. A's reason is too short to reach his conclusion.

Sect. 21.
In the upshot of his proof of his major proposition, he tells us, that it
might be backed (if needful; he might more truly have said, bellied, or made
more bulky, then backed, or strengthened) from Philip 3. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 1, 2.
From which Texts he would prove, that we ought to follow Christ and his
Apostles, in what they did, as being rules and examples to us what to do, and
what not, in all manner of worship or actions, which they did, or did not.
Either this must be his inference from these Scriptures: or else his citation
of them is no ways relative to his purpose. But evident it is from what has
been already argued, neither these Scriptures, nor any other of their
calculation, do require any further, or any other imitation, either of Christ
himself, or of the Apostles: then 1. In such ways and actions, which are
prescribed unto us by some Commandment or other of God: and 2. In such cases,
when we are engaged by, or are found under the same circumstances to follow, by
which they were engaged to go before. But the said Scriptures do at no hand,
nor with any tolerable face of probability, impose it as a duty upon us, to
refrain all actions or practices, which, for ought we know, they refrained;
especially not to refrain all such actions or practices, which in case they did
refrain, they had ground and reason to refrain, and we not. Yet unless Mr. A.
can tamper these Scriptures to speak this, they will (in effect) say to him and
his cause, for which he seeks their advocation, Depart from us: we know you not.

Thus we see by a light as clear as any the Sun shines at noon day, that the
major proposition in Mr. A's first argument is very crazie, and so no competent
material to make a pillar for any man's Faith or practice. And if this
proposition be shaken, the whole strength and glory of the Argument (according
to the rule mentioned,. 14.) is already in the dust. Notwithstanding, lest any
man should be so ignorant or weak, as not to give credit to the said rule, but
think that if either of the propositions in an Argument, will stand, the
Argument may by virtue hereof, be authentic and in force, let us bring the
minor proposition, which he calls, The assumption, to the touchstone also. The
tenor of this proposition, is this.

But Baptism was not administered to Infants, neither in the days of John the
Baptist, nor of the Apostles. If this proposition were true, and could be
demonstrated, yet it comes too late to salve the credit of the Argument (as was
lately said.) But being carefully weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, it
will be found too light, as the former also was. For,

Sect. 22.
1. It is no where said or affirmed, that Infants were not baptized by John,
the Apostles, etc. Therefore unless it can be proved by some light, and
pregnant consequence, from somewhat that is written, that they were not
baptized, (which to do, would make a new thing under the Sun) the proposition
before us, is no proposition of Faith, nor stands any man bound to believe it.

2. Mr. A's proof from the total silence of the Scripture herein, is as good as
total silence, or the speaking of nothing. For it is a common and true rule;
that Argumentum ab authoritate ductum negative, non valet, a negative Argument
from Authority proves nothing. And Mr. A. from the total silence of the
Scripture, may as well prove that neither husband men, nor Merchants, nor
Tailors, nor Shoe-makers, (nor persons of twenty other callings besides) were
baptized, as well as that infants were not baptized. There is alike total
silence of the Scripture, concerning the baptizing of the one, and the other;
or if there be any difference in this kind, the silence is not so perfectly or
absolutely total concerning the baptizing of children, as of the others (as
will appear presently.)

Sect. 23.
3. That total silence of the Scriptures, which he pleads to prove the
non-baptizing of children in the Apostles days, may with as much reason be
construed, as an argument, that they were baptized constantly and of course.
For matters of common and known practice, the knowledge whereof does not much
concern future times, especially when these practices may be^evinced otherwise,
are frequently, and as (it were) of course pretermitted in Historical
narrations. There is very little mention made of children circumcised in the
old Testament: the reason (questionless) is, because their Circumcision was so
common a practice. There is much more notice taken of the Circumcision of men
(see Genesis 17. 23, 24, 25. Genesis 34. 24. Jos. 5. 7. 8.) because this was a
practice besides, yea and contrary to, the letter of the institution. I
conclude therefore (says Mr. Baxter, p. 116. of his Discourse for
Infant-Church-membership, and Baptism) that it is a most evident truth, that
Christ did not speak about Infants-Church-membership, because it was a known
truth beyond controversy. Nor was there any one man found in those days (that
we read of) that ever denied it: and all the Jews, yea and all other
Church Members were in actual possession of it, and Christ never questioned
their possession. Upon the like account it very well may be that there is so
much spoken in the New Testament of the baptizing of men and women, and so
little (or nothing at all, in so many words) of the baptizing of children. The
frequent mention of men and women baptized, may with as much probability (if
not more) argue, that the first administrations of Baptism were out of course,
and contrary to the order settled by the institution, made unto them, as that
they should be exemplary or binding unto future ages: As the recording of so
many men circumcised, about the first institution of Circumcision, was not
intended to make these administrations standingly or in ordinary cases,
exemplary, or obligatory unto aftertimes, because this had been to defeat the
express letter of the institution; but rather to show that in like cases, and
under like circumstances, viz. when male Jews, or Proselites had not been
circumcised the eight day, they might be circumcised afterward, when ever they
had opportunity. And pr^b^ble it is, that the circumcising of so many men, Jos.
5. was warranted unto Joshua by the record of those examples. In like manner,
the reason why the Holy Ghost makes such frequent report in the New Testament
of men and women baptized, may (with greatest ^^obability) be, not to leave
these examples for patterns, or rules, in all (no nor yet in ordinary) cases,
but only in such cases which parallel those, wherein the said administrations
are reported to have been made, viz. when men and women should at any time be
converted from an idolatrous and false Religion, and not have been baptized
before. Much more might be added in confirmation of what has been now
asserted: but the thing it self has so much face, as well as heart and
strength, of reason in it, that until I hear whether that which has been
already said, will satisfy, or why it should not, I shall forbear any further
engagement for the proof of it.

Sect. 24.
If children were not baptized by the Apostles, or in their days, it is at no
hand to be believed, that the Holy Ghost would have cast any such snare upon
the Christian world in aftertimes, as so frequent a report of households and
families baptized, made in the New Testament, and this without any limitation,
or exception of persons, amounts unto; especially considering that it both
was, and is, a thing generally known, that under the Divine dispensation
immediately preceding (I mean, that of Moses) children in families were the
more appropriate subject of that Ordinance, which was a seal of the same
Covenant with baptism [viz. of the righteousness of Faith, i. e. of remission
of sins upon beleving, Romans 4. 11. as we shall evince and prove in due time]
and did perform the same, or like service (in the main) unto the Church of God
under the Law, which Baptism now performs under the Gospel (as some of the
Doctors of the way of Ana-baptism themselves do acknowledge; though Mr. A.
following his over-confident and sufficiently-ignorant leader, weeneth
otherwise.) For what though that which Mr. A. labors to prove page 10.
(though his enterprise be too hard for him) should be granted, viz. that there
were no children in those families, which are reported to have been baptized by
the Apostles, or by their order, yet from the very tenor of this expression,
that they baptized Households, it is evident enough that they did baptize
children; or (that which is every ways equivalent hereunto) that the mind of
the Holy Ghost is, that children should be baptized. For it being left upon
sacred record, simply and indefinitely, that households were baptized, and it
being the ordinary dialect and language of the Scriptures, by the word,
household and house, to understand and comprehend as well children, who are very
considerable parts or members of an household, where they be, as persons of
riper years, Therefore we may conclude that the Apostles did baptize children
or infants, and not only men of lawful age and that the house or household is
taken for man woman and child, is manifest in the 17th. of Genesis, and also in
that Joseph does call Jacob with all his house to come out of the land of
Canaan into Egypt. Mr. J. Philpot Martyr, in a letter directed unto. 27.
it cannot reasonably be thought, but that the Holy Ghost did intend that
households simply and ablolutely* as well those which have children in them, as
those which have none, yea and these children themselves, being (as was said)
parts of these households, might be baptized. And if so, doubtless the
Apostles, who complied with the mind and intent of the Holy Ghost in their
sacred administrations, did baptize children. And if Mr. A. and his, from the
simple and general reports of believers being baptized, argue and conclude,
that therefore all believers may be baptized, why from the like report of
households being baptized, where the grown members did believe, may not we
infer, and conclude likewise, that all households where the grown members do
believe, may be baptized also? Or if the intent of the Holy Ghost had been,
that only actual Believers in an house should be baptized, would he have
informed the Christian world, that households, whole households, or all in an
house, were baptized, without giving some intimation at least, that children in
every house were, and ought to be excepted? He that is so careful and desirous
above measure to way-lay and prevent every sin and every transgression in men,
even to the speaking of an idle or vain word, yea to the conceiving or
tolerating of a vain thought, doubtless would not have neglected at that turn
we now speak of (especially not having done it elsewhere) to insert some word
or other, by which so great a sin as the baptizing of children, if it be a sin,
might be prevented; much less would he have ministered such an occasion unto
his Saints, as that specified, to draw and encourage them to the perpetration
of such a sin.

Sect. 25.
5. To me it is one of the Congregation of the first born of Probabilities,
that the Children brought to Christ, with a desire in them that brought them,
that he should lay his hands on them and pray (Mat. 19. 13. etc.) had been
already baptized. For it is expressly said Mar. 10. 16. that he put, or laid his
hands upon them.

Now we never read in the New Testament, of the laying on of hands upon any
unbaptized person, unless (happily) it were in order to the working of some
miraculous cure on him, on whom they were laid, See Mar. 5. 5. 8. 23. Mar. 16.
18. Luke 4. 40. Luke 13. 13. Acts 9. 17. Acts 28. 8. In all other cases
imposition of hands was practiced upon baptized persons only, Acts 6. 6. Acts
8. 17. Acts 13. 3. Acts 19. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1 6. And more usually this
imposition of hands was practiced on those that had, either formerly, or
lately, been baptized, and this in order to the receiving of the Holy Ghost,
the Apostles (it seems, happily with some Elders of Churches besides, in those
days) having received this gift from God, viz. by laying on of hands and
prayer, to obtain and impart the gift of the Holy Ghost unto Christians. Yea
several Churches of the Anabaptists themselves amongst us, glory in the outward
ceremony of laying on hands upon their proselytes newly baptized, as if they
were the Apostles heirs, and by descent inherited all their spiritual
royalties, and heavenly prerogatives; herein much resembling that ridiculous
effeminate Emperor, who out of a foolish desire to be thought Hercules, or a
man of strength and courage like unto him, would needs attire himself with a
Lions skin. But now it no ways appears, nor is it in it self a thing likely,
that the children we speak of were brought unto Christ, to obtain any cure of
any malady or disease from him. Besides if Christ had performed any miraculous
cure upon them, there is little question but that this would as well, yea much
rather, have been mentioned by the Evangelists, at least one or other of them,
as his laying of hands upon them. Therefore (in all likelihood) they were
baptized before they were brought to Christ, to obtain the laying on of his
hands upon them. Or if we shall say that Christ laid hands on them that they
might receive the Holy Ghost (supposing them at present un-baptized) yet being
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, by, or upon, the laying on of Christ's hands,
they were hereby put into an immediate capacity of receiving Baptism, according
to that of the Apostle Peter, Acts 10. 47. Can any man forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we? And
what other benefit or accommodation the Lord Christ should intend to these
children, or confer by laying hands on them, but the gift of the Holy Ghost,
when Mr. A. demonstrates unto me, I shall demur upon the place.

Sect. 26.
6. It is a law or rule established by God himself (repeated several times both
in the Old, and in the New Testament) and that for the deciding of cases and
questions of far greater moment, then whether children were baptized in the
Apostles days (I mean cases and questions about life and death) that In the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word should be established. 2 Cor. 13. 1
Our Savior more briefly reports it thus (speaking to the Jews) It is also
written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. Joh. 8. 17.
If Mr. A. and men of his judgment, will be content to be overruled by this law
of God, and this so interpreted and, understood, as the Scripture it self uses
and interprets it, the Question depending about childrens Baptism in the
Apostles days, will soon receive a clear issue. For who from amongst men can
(lightly) be found a more competent witness in the case, then that great and
famous light of the Christian world in his days, whose testimony in matters of
fact, was never (to my knowledge, or hearing) so much as questioned or
suspected ( Augustine I mean.) In one place (speaking of childrens Baptism) he
says: If any man ask for divine authority in the matter, although we most
rightly believe that what the universal Church holds, and was not instituted
by councels, but has been ever held, was not delivered but BY APOSTOLICAL
AVTHORITY; yet we may truly conjecture what the Sacrament of Baptism performs
to Infants, by Circumcision, which the former people did r^c^ive. Et si
quisquam in hac re authoritatem divinam quaerat, quanquam quod universa tenet
Ecclesia, nec concilijs institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi
authoritate Apostolica traditam rectissime creditur; tamen veraciter continere
[potius conjicere] possumus quid valeat in parvul^s baptismi Sacram^ntum, ex
circumcisione carnis, quam prior populus accepit, etc. Aug. de Bapt. Conta
Donatistas. l. 4. c. 23.
In another place, reporting what Cyprian (who lived within an 150 years after
John) with many other learned men, Bishops, and Pastors of Churches in his
time, had resolved concerning the lawfulness of baptizing children at any
time, as well before the eight day, as on it (which was the doubt of one Fidus
a Bishop) he affirms, that Cyprian with his fellows, did not in this their
resolution of the case, make any new decree, but kept to the most constant [or
setled] belief of the Church. Beatus quidem Cyprianus, non aliquod decretum
c^nd^ns novum, sed Ecclesiae fidem firmissimam servans, ad corrigendum eos qui
putabant ante Octavum diem nativitatis non esse parvulum baptizandum, non
carnem, sed animamidixit non esse perdendam, et mox natum rite baptizari posse,
cum suis quibusdam coepiscopis censuit. Aug. Ep. 28. ad Hieronymum.
A little after, he calls the practice of baptizing infants, Ecclesia
fundatissimum morem, the best [or most] grounded practice of the Church.

This passage of Cyprian, is by this famous Author reported c Quid senserit
[Sanctus Cyprianus] de baptismo parvulorum, imo quid semper Ecclesiam sensisse
monstraverit, paululum accipite.
in several places of his works, De verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 14. Contra duas
Epist. Pelag. ad Bonifacium. lib. 4. c. 8. Item Epist. 222. ad Marcellinum.
Immediately before the former of these quotations, he affirms that Cyprian in
that passage, did not so much declare what his own judgment was about the
baptizing of children, as what the Church had ALWAYS held concerning i^*
Elsewhere speaking of Infant Baptism he says that the Authority of the Church
maintains or possesses it, the well-grounded Canon [or rule] of truth (I
suppose he means the Scripture) obtains [or evinceth] it: whoever runs at
Tilt against this strength, against this impregnable [or inexpugnable] wall [or
fortresse] will be broken to pieces by it. Hoc habet Authoritas matris
Ecclesiae, hoc fundatus veritatis obtinet can^n; contra hoc robur contra hunc
inexpugnabilem muru^ quisquis arietat, ipse confringetur Aug. de verbis Apost.
Sermon. 14.
In another place he says, that by the ancient Canonical and most grounded
usage of the Church, children baptized, are called faithful [or believers.] Nam
ideo and consuetudine Ecclesiae, antiqua, canonica, fundatissima, parvuli
baptizati fideles vocantur, ibid.
In another, that that which made him solicitous, was not the opinion it self
(meaning of Infant Baptism) which had been now long since founded, by the
highest authority that is in the Catholic [or universal] Church, but the
disputes of some men, which attempt the public and the subversion of the minds
of many. Solicitos autem nos facit non ipsa sententia jam olim in Ecclesia
Catholica summa authoritate fundata, sed disputationes quorundam quae modo
crebrescere, and multorum animos evertere moliuntur, ibid.
Yet again he says, that the custom of the Church in baptizing little ones,
is not at any hand to be despised; nor yet were it at all to be believed [or
received] were it not an Apostolical tradition, Consuetudo matris Ecclesiae in
baptiz^ndis parvulis nequaquam spernenda est, neque ullo modo superflua
deputanda, nec omnino credenda, nisi Apostolica esset traditio. Aug. de Genesis ad
lit. l. 10. c: 23.
[ i. e. a practice handed over by, and from, the Apostles to the succeeding
Church of Christ.] To add only this one testimony more from this worthy
friend and Factor of Christ Jesus in his days: Let no man (says he) buzze
abroad any strange Doctrines. This [of Infant-Baptism] the Church always had,
always held, this it received from the Faith of its Ancestors; this will it
with perseverance keep unto the end. Nemo susurret Doctrinas alienas. Hoc
Ecclefia semper habuit, semper tenuit, hoc a majorum fide percepit, hoc usque
in finem persev^ranter custodit. Aug. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 10.


Much more might be cited from this worthy Author, for the attestation of this
truth, that Infant Baptism was practiced in the Apostles times, and from thence
continued in Christian Churches until his days. Nor is it to be believed, the
unparalled integrity, ingenuity, wisdom and gravity of the man considered,
that ever he would have opened his mouth, or lift up his pen, to assert such a
thing, had he not known the truth thereof very perfectly, yea and been able to
give a satisfactory and demonstrative account of what he affirmed in the case,
unto all that should have opposed, or questioned him about it. Origin likewise,
who lived about 200 years nearer to the times of the Apostles, then Austin, and
not much above an 100 years after the death of the Apostle John, and
consequently being a very learned, industrious, and inquiring man, could not
but know what was done in a business of that public nature in the Apostles
times; this Author I say expressly affirms, that the Church FROM THE
APOSTLES had received a tradition [or practise] to administer Baptism even unto
little ones. Pro hoc and Eccl sia ab Apostolis traditionem suscepit etiam
parvulis Baptismum dare. Sciebant enim illi, etc. Origin. ad Romans c. 6. v. 5,
6, etc.
Yea and subjoins a reason, which (as he conceived) induced the Apostles to
this practice. However this Author was not so sound in many points of Doctrine,
as some other of the Fathers (although there was none of them, who did not now
and then step besides the way of truth; as neither is there any amongst those
themselves, who are the severest observers of their errors, but are obnoxious
also in the same kind) yet as to matter of fact, I suppose him as competent a
witness, as the Law of God lately mentioned intends. He that desires to see
more of the sense of antiquity about the point in hand, may consult the writing
of Dr. Holms, and Mr. Stephen Marshal, and especially Mr. Richard Baxter,
against Mr. Tombs; the first, in his Animadversions upon Mr. Tombs his
exercitation, etc. c. 13. p. 107. etc. the second, in his Defense of
Infant Baptism in answer to two Treatises, etc. beginning page 7. to the end of
page 61. The third and last in his Plain Scripture Proof of Infants
Church-member-ship, and Baptism. Part. 2. cap. 15. page 152, 153, 154, etc. See
also page 262, 263, etc. and page 374, 375. To which he may please to add a
short Treatise, entitled, Infant Baptism, published some years since by Mr.
Robert Ram, Minister of Spalding in Lincolnshire. In this Treatise the Reader
(amongst other things) shall find a breviate drawn out of the Centuries of the
Divines of Magdeburgh, pointing at such passages in the said Centuries, wherein
the continued practice of Infant Baptism for 1300 years together from the
Apostles times, is demonstrated from Histories and Authors of best account. In
the two former besides many pregnant testimonies from the most ancient writers,
evincing the descent of Infant Baptism from the Apostles, he shall find both
the authentiquenesse of the Authors, from whence the said testimonies are
cited, fully vindicated against those pretenses which are levied by
Anti-poedo-baptists against their authorities (respectively) as also such
colorable arguments substantially answered, which are by these men drawn [by
head and shoulders] from antiquity. So that nothing needs to be added upon any
of these accounts, beyond what has been done lately by others, and is (I
presume) of ready procurement by any, that is desirous of satisfaction in any
of the particulars.

Sect. 27.
To the testimonies and authorities of ancient writers, who are one and all in
asserting the lineal descent of Infant Baptism from the Apostles, I shall only
subjoin the sense and judgment in the case of that learned and worthy Martyr
in Queen Mary's days, Mr. John Philpot, in a letter written to a fellow
prisoner of his at the same time in Newgate, recorded in the book of Martyrs,
Vol. 3. page 606. of the last edition. A. 1555. together with a testimony from
Robert L. Brook, cited by Mr. Tombs for Anti-poedo-baptism, in which respect I
conceive his testimony will be the more passable with Mr. A. and men of his
judgment. But first in one place the Martyr says: Now will I prove with
manifest arguments that children ought to be baptized, and that THE APOSTLES OF
CHRIST DID BAPTIZE CHILDREN. In another, Since the Apostles were the Preachers
of the word, and the very faithful servants of Jesus, etc. who may hereafter
doubt, that THEY BAPTIZED INFANTS, since Baptism is in place of Circumcision?
In a third. Therefore we may conclude, that THE APOSTLES DID BAPTIZE INFANTS OR
CHILDREN, and not only men of lawful age. More of like import might be cited
from this letter, if it were needful. So that unless Mr. A. or men of his
mind, can produce some negative testimony, or witness from the Scripture,
which do as expressly deny the baptizing of children by the Apostles, as these
lately produced by me, and many more in far greater numbers produced by others,
do affirm it, the affirmative is to be taken for truth, and this by the
express law of God mentioned, which says, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word shall be established. This Law was made by God to
overruled and issue cases and questions of life and death; and consequently of
far greater import, then whether children were baptized or no, by the Apostles.

Secondly, for the L. Brook, his words (toward the end of his book concerning
Episcopacy) are these: First, for ought I could ever learn, it was the constan^
custom of the purest and most primitive Church, to baptiz^ infants of
believing Parents For I could never find the b^ginni^g and first rise of this
practice: whereas it is very easi^ to track heresies to their first rising up,
and setting foot into the Church. Again, I find all Churches (even the most
strict) have ge^erally been of this judgment and practice: yea though th^re
h^ve been in all ages some, that much affected NOVEL^Y, and had parts enough to
discuss and clear what they thought good to preach; yet was this scarce ^ver
questioned by men of note, till within these last ages. And sure the constant
judgment of the Churches of Christ is much to be honored, and heard in all
things that contradict not Scripture.

It may be Mr. A. will object, that the witnesses intended by God in his law,
are only such, who can speak to the case in question upon their own knowledge,
as having been either eyewitnesses, or ear-witnesses themselves, of what they
testify; not such who testify upon the credit or assertions of others.

To this I answer, that Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Origin, Cyprian, Augustine,
(with many other studious and learned men about their times) all things
considered, had as considerable, as unquestionable grounds, for what they
testify concerning the practice of Infant Baptism by the Apostles, as a
witness, who speaks or gives evidence, upon the credit of his eyes, can
reasonably be supposed to have, for such his testimony. For as it is possible
for a man to have a mist cast before his eyes, or to suffer such a Deceptio
visus, a deception of his signt, that may occasion him to believe with
confidence, that he sees such or such a thing, which (indeed) he sees not,
yet this possibility dis-ableth no man's testimony, who gives evidence upon the
authority of his eyes; in like manner there being no more then a bare
possibility (and this not degreed neither like the other) that the Authors
mentioned should be mistaken in the grounds, upon which they build their
testimony of the practice of Infant Baptism by the Apostles, it is very
importune, dis-ingenuous, and hardly consistent with a good conscience, for any
man to reject their testimony in the case. And if Mr. A. himself, and three or
four more of his judgment, of equal repute with him for sober and
conscientious men (although I believe his new opinion and way has not at all
tenerized, or bettered his conscience, nor any other man's) should report any
thing upon grounds as pregnant with evidence of truth unto them, as the grounds
upon which the fathers testified the baptizing of children by the Apostles,
were unto them, I should without much scruple believe him, yea though the thing
reported by him in this case, should in it self be much more incredible, then
that children were baptized by the Apostles. Nor is it at any hand to be
believed or thought, that the said Authors (their gravity, wisdom, interest and
authority in the Churches of Christ, in their days, over and besides the most
approved goodness of their Consciences, considered) would upon conjectural or
light grounds, or such which had been liable to dis-proof, asserted any such
matter of fact as that. Yea (that which is more then this) their adversaries
themselves (I mean the Pelagians, who were great opposers of Augustine and the
Orthodox Fathers about his days) men of great learning, subtle, diligent and
studious in their way, against whose Doctrine and Tenants, the baptizing of
infants, was one of the grand arguments or objections, urged and insisted on by
the Orthodox Fathers, yet never denied, or so much as questioned the truth of
what they constantly affirmed, touching the descent of Infant Baptism from the
Apostles.

To pretend, that the writings at this day passing under the names of the
forenamed fathers, may for ought we know, be spurious and counterfeit, or else
depraved and corrupted, and that upon this account, the authority of any thing
found in them, is not much to be valued; thus (I say) to pretend argue, and
conclude, is worthy only such men, whose consciences will serve them rather to
say any thing, and to seek out any frivolous or puted evasion, then to yield to
the truth. However if Mr. A. can offer any thing for proof of the negative
(that children were not baptized by the Apostles) which in the eye of unpartial
and considering men, does any ways, to any proportion, or degree, balance the
weight of what has been alleged from many competent witnesses for the
affirmative, I shall let go the hold I have taken on the credit of their
testimony in the case, which until then I suppose himself will judge meet and
Christian that I should keep. In the mean time the premises, together with what
we shall upon somewhat a like account, immediately subjoin, considered; I do
with very little less confidence believe, that Children were baptized in the
Apostles days, then I believe the Sun to be up at noon day. Therefore,

Sect. 28.
7. It is very considerable also for the discovery of the truth in the
business in hand, that the times, when (and for the most part, the occasions
whereupon) those additional ceremonies which for a long time accompanied the
baptizing of infants, as Godfathers, and Godmothers (so called) with some
others, had their first rise and original, may from current histories, be
showed and found. Whereas no history whatsoever undertaketh to report, when the
baptizing of infants came first into the Church; which is no light argument or
proof, that this practice was more ancient then any Ecclesiastical history now
extant; and consequently, as ancient as the times of the Apostles. For it is
altogether improbable, that any History should take notice of appurtenances, or
additional circumstances, and record the time of their introduction into the
Church, and not withal take and give knowledge of the time, when the
fundamental and main practice it self first began, in case the beginning
hereof, had fallen within that compass of time, which the said History
traverseth. What Mr. Tombs impertinently attempteth from the council of
Carthage, has been sufficiently staved and beaten back by others. Dr. Hosms
Animad. upon Mr. Tombs his Exercit. p. 167, 168. etc. Mr. Marshal Defense of
Infant Baptism. p. 40.
Nor is there any thing more apparent from History, then the mention of
Infant Baptism before that council. For the first council of Carthage (which it
is like Mr. Tombs means, though he distinguishes not, there having been
several of the name) was held about the year, 217. according to some
computations several years after; whereas there is mention of ^nfant-Baptism
(as we heard) both in Origin, who died before this council, as also in Justin
Martyr, Ireneus, yea and Tertullian, who all lived nearer to the times of the
Apostles, then Origin. And it may be worth some observation that Augustine (who
as we have heard) so frequently and constantly (upon occasion) asserteth
Infant Baptism it self, to have been practiced in the Apostles times, yet
speaking of the custom of interrogating the infant, to be baptized by the
Susceptores, or those that brought it to Baptism (whom we call Godfathers and
Godmothers) affirms no such thing concerning this, though otherwise he
indeavoureth to give the best account of it he can, to his friend and
fellow-Bishop Boniface, Epist. 23.

Sect. 29.
8. Although no History records either when, or by whom Infant Baptism was
first brought into the Church, yet is the first opposing of it ascribed by good
History to an Arrian Heretic, named Auxentius with his adherents; as the most
learned and worthy Martyr Mr. John Phi^pot, (formerly mentioned) affirms in
that letter, whereof we took notice in the beginning of. 27. The diligent
perusal of this letter alone, is enough to make Ana-baptism the abhorring of
any intelligent man's soul. This Auxentius I find upon the stage acting the part
first of a subtle, and afterward of an imperious insulting Arrian, about the
year 369. So that until this time the baptizing of Infants (it seems) was
never so much as questioned in the Churches of Christ, and he who first
questioned and opposed it, opposed withal the Godhead of Christ. So that Mr.
A. and his, have no great cause to boast of the founder of their Faith in the
Doctrine of Anti-poedo-baptism; as neither have they of one of the greatest
defenders of it, since the late resurrection of it from the dead in Germany
(Lodivicus Hetzer by name) who with Auxentius denied, the Divinity of Christ,
and besides was a notorious Adulterer, and withal was confident that he was
able to justify his adulterous practices by the Scriptures. Indeed the History
reports that at last he very seriously repented of all, as well his
Anabaptism (for so I understand my Authors, Quorum omnium) as of his Arrianism,
and Adulteries. Constantiae, quarta Februarij capite truncatur Ludovicus Hetzer
Ana-baptistarum Antesignanus, vir trium linguarum peritissimus, sed qui de
multis fidei capitibus singulares opiniones habuit. Negavit divinitatem Christi
-- Causam supplicij de illo sumpti Blarerus in Anabaptismum rejicit, alij in
crebra ejus adulteria, quae nonnunquam e Scripturis defendere sit ausus. Quorum
omnium seria ductus poenitentia, etc. Scultet. Annat. Dec. 2. circa finem Anni,
1529.


Those who of later times, and since the beginning of the Reformation attempted
first by Luther, revived this opposition, whereas before the followers of the
Lamb, as well as of the Beast, had continued the practice of baptizing infants
time out of mind (as the saying is) without interruption, are known to have
been one Nicholas Ciconia (in English Stork) Mark Stubner, Martin Cellar, and
Thomas Munster; these in the year, 1521. went up and down from place to place
in Germany, and ensnared many unlearned and simple people, with their
pernicious Doctrine (as my Author terms it.) Their manner was, to boast of
colloquies (or private conferences) with God, to talk and inveigh both against
Ministers of the Gospel, and men in civil authority: to clamor, that all
things in the Church were corrupt and out of order, and therefore must be
reduced, that there must be a new Church built, and the Citizens [or members]
initiated with a second Baptism. What kind of persons these were, together with
the far greatest part of those, whom they drew into their opinion, how they
disturbed both the Ecclesiastical and civil peace in all places (almost) where
they came, especially where they grew to any head or numbers considerable, I
shall forbear here to relate, referring the Reader desirous of satisfaction in
such particulars, to unpartial histories of those times. Or to contract his
labor in this kind, I recommend unto him (upon this account) the perusal only
of the 14th* chapter of the second part of Mr. Baxter's book, entitled, Plain
Scripture Proof for Infants Church Membership and Baptism. Only I shall
mention this concerning Martin Cellar, one of the four, and the learned man
of them, that after he had stood by his sect several years, and had writ much
for it, at last perceiving that his party declined, and matters did not answer
his expectation, he went and settled at Basil, married and lived quietly, taught
Divinity; and as being ashamed to be known or called by that name, under which
he had professed Ana-baptism, he changed his name from Cellarius into Borrhaus;
under which name he wrote learned Commentaries upon the five books of Moses,
with some others, which are now extant under this name.

By the way, I marvel not a little, upon what ground Mr. A. and his partisans
can satisfy themselves touching the authentiquenesse of their new Baptisms,
considering that (which I suppose is their own principle also) that no
unbaptized Person has any right, or is in any regular capacity to administer
Baptism; and consequently that Baptism administered by, and received from such a
person, is a mere nullity, and no true Baptism. For all persons baptized in
infancy, being judged by them unbaptized, and there being no other but such in
the nation, when their new Baptism was first administered here, it undeniably
follows, that the first administration of it was a mere nullity: and upon this
account how the second, or third, or thousandth, or ten thousandth
administration should become any other then a nullity also, and this according
to their own principles, I cannot understand. And to prove that their first
administration here, had an immediate Commission from God, as John Baptist had,
or from Christ, as possibly the Apostles had, to erect that kind of Baptism in
this Nation, which he administered, is (I suppose) far above the line of their
learning: Certain I am, that they must ascend far above that which is written,
to prove it.

Sect. 30.
9. Had not children as well as men and women been baptized by the Apostles, or
in their days, why do we not hear of exceptions, quarrels, and contests made
against them in that behalf, by some or other of their Antagonists, Lawyers,
Sadduces, Scribes, Pharisees, or other Zealots amongst the Jews? This nation
(we all know) had now for many generations, even from the days of Abraham
their Father, been possessed by God of an holy privilege and accommodation for
themselves and their children, I mean, circumcision; yea and were wont to
boast, not only or simply of their prerogative of circumcision, but likewise
of their admission unto it, and reception of it in their infancy, and at the
eight day, as is clear from that of the Apostle, Philip 3. 4, 5. If any other
man thinks he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more; CIRCVMCISED
THE EIGHT DAY, etc. Yea Mr. Fisher himself ( Baby-baptism page 182.)
acknowledges (or rather, as making for his cause, confidently avoucheth) that
the circumcising of their children, was a business, which the Jews so doted
on, that of all things they were unwilling to let it go. Yea (it seems) they
were highly incensed against Paul, upon a rumor that he prohibited the
circumcising of their children, Act. 21. 21. Now then if Christ or his Apostles
should by their new Doctrine of the Gospel, against which they sought all
manner of exceptions and pretenses lightly imaginable, have excluded their
children, not only from circumcision it self, but from all other
accommodations or privileges whatsoever, that should any ways answer, or
counterpoize it, is it to be believed that they would have taken no notice of
it, or made it no matter of offense and quarrel? Or if they did stumble at it,
and disparage or fault the Gospel, or the managing of it in the world upon such
an account, can it be thought that the Holy Ghost would have made no record of
such a thing, nor yet of Christ's or the Apostles vindication or justification
of themselves and their practice against such an imputation; especially
considering that very many things are recorded by him of far less moment, then
such a vindication would have been? Yea (doubtless) the reason why the Apostle
Peter immediately upon his exhortation to the Jews to repent and be baptized,
subjoineth the mentin of their children, as interessed in the same grace and
privilege with them, was to prevent the offense which they might justly have
taken, in case themselves only had been admitted to Gospel privileges, and
their children excluded.

Sect. 31.
10. Whereas the Apostle Paul informs the Colossians, who (it seems) were
bending toward the Jewish Circumcision, that they were COMPLETE in Christ, in
whom (he says) they were circumcised, also with a Circumcision made without
hands -- Buried with him in Baptism, etc. Manifestly implying, that Baptism was
an Ordinance, as much, or as well, if not more, or more significantly
completing them, as Circumcision (with all the retinue of legal observations
depending thereon) did, or ever had done the Jews; if it be not supposed that
their children, whilst such, had been, or might be baptized, as well as
themselves, might they not justly have denied Paul's assertion concerning their
being complete in Christ? might they not have objected and said, we are not as
complete in Christ, or under the Gospel, as we were, or might be in Moses, or
by subjecting our selves to the Law? In Moses, or under the Law, we had the
great spiritual privilege or accommodation of Circumcision, as well for our
children, as our selves; whereas in Christ, or under the Gospel, we want not
only the Ordinance of Circumcision, but all other privileges, or
accommodations of like import, in respect of our children. For the Baptism you
speak of, and which you make the successor of Circumcision, you permit us not
to administer unto them. In this respect therefore we are maimed or lame in
Christ, not so well accommodated, not so completed in him, as we were in
Moses, under the Law.

11. Some of the greatest Defenders of Mr. A's faith, in the point of
Anti-poedo-Baptism, acknowledge; that according to Mr. A's principles, touching
the extent of the Grace of God, in the death of Christ, children ought to be
baptized. If (says Mr. Tombs Exercit. concerning Infant Baptism, page 24.) it
should be made known to us that Children are sanctified, I should not doubt
that they are to be baptized. He expresses his sense to the same purpose
elsewhere, as viz. page 19. Now according to the tenor of Mr. A's faith, the
Apostles did know, that Children were sanctified; and consequently (according
to the sense of the prime head of his party) that they ought to be baptized.
And if the Apostles doubted not but that children were to be baptized, how can
I reasonably doubt, but that they did baptize them? I know some others of Mr.
A's sense, in the point of Rebaptism, who join with Mr. Tombs in his sense
touching the meetnesse of baptizing infants, upon a supposal of their being in
favor with God.

Sect. 32.
12. (And lastly) there ^an no probable, no nor tolerable reason or account be
given, why any such innovation or practice as the baptizing of Infants, should
be brought into the Churches of Christ, especially so soon after the Apostles,
and in those times, wherein all records of Antiquity mention the use and
practice of it. This is another consideration, pregnant of proof, that
Infant Baptism was the practice of the Apostles, as well as of later times. If
it could be supposed to be any ways gratificatory to the flesh (which yet is a
studied and far-fetched pretense) yet such a motive or ground as this, no ways
suits with the zeal, diligence, faithfulness, painfulness, self-denial, most
exemplary mortification of, the chief Pastors of Churches, and Ministers of the
Gospel in those times. Non ut nunc, sic and olim; it is a very weak and
childish conceit, to imagine that Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Jerome, Austine
(with many other worthy Agents for Christ, and the Gospel in their times) who
were able and ready to be baptized in their own blood for Christ and the
Gospels sake (as (...) of them actually were) should rebel against so great an
Ordinance of Christ, and Gospel institution, as Baptism, or deprave and vitiate
the Administration of it, thorough fear of going into cold water, and of
administering it in a River; especially considering, that in those warmer
Climates of the world, where they lived, cool waters were rather matter of
delight, and refreshing unto nature, then of offense or inconvenience. Yea Mr.
Laurence (for the Treatise entitled, Of Baptism, is generally reputed his, and
is none of the worst pieces written in the cause of Anti-poedo-Baptism) to
salve his notion of the necessity of dipping, if it may be, out of the hand of
the Holy Ghost, recording the baptizing of the Jailer and his household by Paul,
to have been in the night, is pleased to suppose, that in those Eastern and
hotter Countries, bathing was of great, and continual use; and that in this
respect, the keeper of the Prison MIGHT be provided of some vessel fit for
bathing and washing the whole body, which might serve for the use of Baptism.
Of Baptism, page 81, 82.
I confess this is a pretty ingenious conceit to help a lame notion over the
wall, that stands in the way; but in the mean time, we see how the greatest
Patrons of Anti-poedo-Baptism are necessitated to Sanctuary their cause under
the shadow of their wits and fancies, the Scriptures ever and anon forsaking
them, and many times rising up against them. They tell us, that we build only
upon consequences and deductions from Scripture, wherein we are fallible, and
subject to error: but certainly the weakest of our consequences, are much
stronger then such suppositions as this, and more relative to the Scriptures.
Yea the very truth is, that themselves hold nothing, that reaches their cause
in opposition unto us, but only consequences, such as they are, pretended from
the Scriptures. They never yet produced (nor ever will) any Text of Scripture
wherein Infant Baptism is in expressenesse of words declared to be unlawful.
Therefore they who undertake to prove it such from the Scriptures, must of
necessity levy consequences to serve in their warfare. But the late mentioned
Author, to preserve dipping from drowning in the Jaylors baptism, makes two
suppositions, (like two corkes) one upon another, neither of which has so much
as one dust or grain of sand in the Scripture, for a foundation. First, that
the Jailer had a Vessel in his house fit for ba^hing and washing the whole
body. 2. That this vessel served for the use of Baptism [by dipping.] If his
intent was only to affirm and say, that he MIGHT have such a Vessel; and
again, that such a Vessel MIGHT serve for Baptism, he supposes indeed nothing,
but what may well be supposed; but withal, says nothing to his purpose. But
this by the way. Only evident it is upon the credit of my Author, that in the
hotter Regions of the earth, going into the water, could be no great affliction
to the flesh; as neither is it in these colder Climates themselves in warm
seasons, as well boys as men going into rivers, and dowsing themselves over
head and ears for their pleasure. Therefore an unwillingnesse to administer
Baptism in rivers, is no likely motive, occasion, or temptation, to have
diverted the primitive and worthy Bishops and Pastors of Christian Churches
from such an administration of it, to an administration by sprinkling, had they
apprehended it to be the only regular administration. How otherwise the
sprinkling of infants should accommodate the interest of the flesh, more then
the baptizing of Believers in Rivers, is (as far as I can apprehend) of no
easy conjecture. And however, no accommodation whatsoever in this kind, is
like either to have perverted the judgments, or polluted the consciences
either of Cyprian, or, of any other those most zealous and faithful servants
of God, who both before him, and after him, and in the same age with him,
unanimously both pleaded and practiced Infant Baptism. It is a memorable saying
of this Cyprian, and of a very pregnant import to acquit him in this kind:
Whatsoever is instituted by the madn^sse of men, whereby any thing of Divine
disposition is viola^ed [or corrupted] is adulterous, is impious, is
sacrilegious. Adulte^m est, i^pum est, sacril^g^m est, quicquid humano furere
instituitur, ^t d^spositio d^vi^a violetur, Cypr. l 1. Ep. 8.
He that shall at such a rate of severity as this, censure, condemn, and
abhominate all humane institutions whatsoever, whereby any divine institution
shall be prejudiced or corrupted, cannot lightly, especially being a person of
singular integrity, gravity, piety, and conscience, be an Abettor or Patron of
such institutions.

Mr. Tombs has strained his wits and fancy to invent and devise, what with any
color or show of probability might first occasion Infant Baptism in the
Church. But what he has obtruded upon the world upon this account, is so
inconsiderable in it self, and besides has been so fully answered by others,
Dr. Holms Animad. upon M. Tombs Excercit, etc. p. 191, 192, etc.
that I cannot judge it worth the Readers patience to hear any re-examination
of it. That which some pretend should move Pope Innocent to decree the
baptizing of children, viz. a desire to propagate and enlarge the Kingdom of
Christ in the world, is altogether impertinent to the business in hand. For 1.
The baptizing of Infants is famously known to have been practiced in the
Church, some hundreds of years before this Pope was born; therefore nothing
could move him to decree the first introduction of it. 2. Neither did he decree
simply the practice of it, but only by his decree confirmed the practice of
it; or rather (as the Pontifician Historians themselves report) confirmed the
practice, or the necessity of the practice of it, for the taking away of
original sin; or (which is the same, at least as he seems to have interpreted
it) for the enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ. I confess the practice we
speak of (Infant Baptism) is a means very proper for the enlargement of the
Kingdom of Christ, though not by taking away original sin, but by a timely
engagement of the persons baptized, to the obedience and service of Jesus
Christ (of which, occasion may be to speak more hereafter.) And though it be
supposed, that they who practiced Infant Baptism long before this Innocent,
built their practice upon the same mistaken ground with him, yet it follows
not from hence, that therefore it was not practis^d by the Apostles in their
days; but only that they who used the practice after them, were mistaken in
the grounds, upon which they (the Apostles) practiced it. Nor is the practice
therefore to be esteemed, or termed Antichristian, because a Pope decreed the
confirmation of it, more then this Doctrine, that Christ is the Holy One of
God, is to be esteemed Diabolical, because the Devil preached or avouched it,
Mar. 1. 24. Luke 4. 43.

Home to this point, is this passage of the most learned and worthy Martyr
Master J. Philpot (formerly mentioned, in that letter of his specified,. 27.
and 28.) These authorities of m^n I do alledge^, not to tie the Baptism of
Children to the authorities of men, but to show how men's testimonies do agree
with Gods Word, and that the verity of Antiquity is on our side, and that the
Anabaptists have nothing but lies for them, and new imaginations, which FEIGN
THE BAPTISM OF CHILDREN TO BE THE POPES COMMANDMENT.

Sect. 33.
I expect none other but that to Mr. A. and men of his engagement, all these
arguments and proofs of the baptizing of children in the Apostles days, will
seem poor, pedling, and paltry: For Mr. Fisher (it seems) never had the good
hap to meet with any better from any of his adversaries, then such; yea and
lest, either he, or his cause, might suffer thorough want of confidence in the
highest, he affirms, that God himself knows them to be no better. Baby-baptism,
p. 305.
However I heartily wish that some one or other of their persuasion, would
exhibit and tender unto the world, were it but the one half (in evidence and
pregnancy of proof) against the lawfulness of Infant Baptism, of what has
been now delivered in the twelve Considerations propounded for the proof of
Infant Baptism in the Apostles days; that so the troublesome and tempestuous
controversy about the appropriate subject of Baptism amongst the Saints, might
suddenly end in a sweet calm of love and peace. For verily I have gone round
about the whole body and Systeme of that Doctrine, which so much magnifieth it
self against Infant Baptism, and have narrowly and with an un-prejudiced eye,
observed all the parts, limbs, and joints thereof, and cannot find so much as
one sound member, or clean joint in it. The whole structure and fabrique of it
stands upon such foundations, which either are sandy or loose, or else
irrelative to what is pretended to be built upon them, and so are indeed no
true foundations of this Doctrine, though otherwise Truths. But notwithstanding
all that has been said to prove Infants baptized in the Apostles days, or (as
Mr. A. supposes) can be said, he judges himself sufficiently enlightened to
demonstrate the contrary. But his allegations in this behalf being weighed in
the balance of the Sanctuary, how light will they be found to be?

Sect. 34.
To the first therefore I answer; 1. By denying that the Mr. A's arguments for
the nonadministration of Baptism to Infants in the Apostles days, answered.
Scripture is totally silent, touching the baptizing of Infants (within the
times queried) and that it no where directly, or consequentially, affirms or
hinteth such a thing. For the ground and reasonableness of this denial (to
spare repetitions as much as may be) I appeal to the premises in the 24 and 25
Sections.

2. For the rule which he cites from the Civil Law, in these words, that which
appears not, is not, this Law indeed holds forth such a maxim is this, Non
esse, and non apparere, aequiparatur in jure, i. e. not to be, and not to
appear to be, are of the same consideration in Law; meaning, that the Law takes
no judiciary or penal cognizance of what appears not by proof to be, more then
it does of that, which simply is not. But this rule makes not at all for Mr.
A. but rather, as far as it relates to his cause, against him. For 1.
Infant Baptism does (as has been proved) appear, and this by the light of the
Scriptures, to have been in the Apostles days. 2. Mr. A's rule it self (now
specified) supposing a possibility of the real being of that, which yet in Law
appears not to be, applied to his cause, imports a possibility of the
practice of Infant Baptism in the Apostles days; only denying that though it
were indeed then practiced, yet in as much as the practice appears not ( viz.
to Mr. A. and men of his judgment, for to many others it appears
sufficiently) it ought not to be avouched, or supposed. Those Scripture
reproofs 1. Of men's intruding themselves into those things which they have not
seen. And 2. Of being wise above what is written, fall more directly upon
himself and his Symmysts, then upon his Adversaries. For certain it is, that
the non-baptizing of Infants in the Apostles days, is not written; and yet Mr.
A. makes himself so wise as to know it.

Sect. 11.
To his second proof, wherein (with its fellows) he rejoices, as being of a
proper and potent tendency, to carry the minds of men that are at liberty [to
believe any thing] and not under the bands of pr^judice and partiality, to
think and conceive that no Infants were baptized in the days mentioned. p. 3.
We answer likewise

1. That the Evangelist Luke, did not set himself to express and set forth the
power and great success of the Gospel in Samaria, Answer to Mr. A's 2d.
consideration to prove no baptizing of Infants in the Apostles days, p. 3, 4.
etc.
in those words, They were baptized both men and women; but rather in those (in
the former part of the verse.) But when they believed Philip preaching the
things concerning the Kingdom of God, Acts 8. 12. A cordial and sound believing
of the things of the Gospel by men and women, argues the power and great
success of the ministry thereof; but a prevailing with them only to be
baptized, is of no such interpretation or import. Jerusalem and ALL Judea, and
all the Region round about Jordan, were so far prevailed with by John, as to be
content to be baptized. Mat. 3. 5, 6.
And yet John himself, speaking of Christ, complains that no man [i. e.
exceeding few] receives his testimony, Joh. 3. 32.
[ i. e. truly believed on him.] And notwithstanding the vast multitudes that
were baptized by John a very little while before; yea and greater by Christ
himself and his Disciples Joh. 4. 1.
, yet the number of the names of the Disciples at the time of Christ's
ascension, amounted only to an hundred and twenty. Acts 1. 15.
Nor was the great multitude that was baptized by John, any argument of the
great power or success of his ministry; because many who in all likelihood had
never heard him preach, yet upon the common fame of his being a Prophet, came
forth with a desire and intent to be baptized of him. For we read not of his
preaching any where, but only in the Country about Jordan, and in the
Wilderness where he baptized; Luke 3. 3. See. 177.
whereas, as well Jerusalem and all Judea (as we heard) as all the Country
about Jordan, went forth to be baptized of him. Mat. 3. 5. Mar. 1. 5.
Therefore a persuasion wrought in men and women to be content to be baptized,
is a weak proof of the power or great success of the Gospel. Thus we see the
very basis and groundwork (which is but Mr. A's own supposition) of all he
pleads, page 4. and 5. to be a pure mistake.

Sect. 36.
2. The Power and great success of the Gospel, is expressed by Luke (and this
in several places) where he makes no mention at all of the baptizing of any
person, man, or woman, but only of the conversion of persons to the Faith, and
of some worthy fruits or testimonies thereof (far greater then a willingness
to be baptized.) -- Atd the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. And many that
believed came, and confessed and showed their deeds. Many also of them which
used curious Arts, brought their Books together, and burned them before all
men: and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of
silver. SO MIGHTILY grew the Word of God, and PREVAILED. Acts 19. 17, 18, etc.
See also Acts 4. 4. Acts 11. 21. 24. Acts 13. 43. 48. Acts 14. 21. Acts 16. 5.
Acts 17. 3, 4. 11, 12. 34. In all these places Luke (questionless) intended to
set forth the power and great success of the Gospel; yet mentions not the
baptizing of so much as any one person. Therefore according to Mr. A's
principles, if we shall suppose that there were any such thing as baptizing
amongst any of the persons recorded in these passages to have been converted to
the Faith, we must suppose that the Holy Ghost not recording it, scarcely did
that to the one half, which he should have done totally and entirely in
relation to his proposed end. These kinds of reasoning are most lamentable
grounds whereon to build the pulling down of Churches.

3. Whereas he urges the record of Moses declaring Abraham's obedience to the
Word of God, not only and barely by his own personal circumcision, but by his
circumcising, first himself, after that, his Son, and then his servants also;
it seems that if Moses had not been thus punctual and particular in drawing up
this record, M. A. would have blamed him for it, and arraigned him of
unfaithfulness, had he known that such things had been done by Abraham, and he
( Moses) not recorded them. Is it so hard a thing for Mr. A. to allow unto the
Holy Ghost the liberty of his own understanding in framing his records and
reports of matters done? Or must it needs be supposed that because he is more
particular and express in one place, he must needs be so in another, or in all?
Or must he be charged, either with superfluity in Matthew, because he, in
making the report of the greatness of the miracle wrought by Christ in feeding
several thousands with five loaves, and two fishes, besides the number of the
men who were fed, makes mention both of women, and of children; Mat. 14. 21.
or with deficiency in his two other Evangelists, Mark, and John, because they,
in their reports of the same miracle, mention only the number of the men, but
take no knowledge at all either of the women or children Mat. 6. 44 Joh. 6. 10.
? Or does it follow, that because he directed his penman Luke, to record the
baptizing of men and women in Samaria, upon their believing, and did not direct
him to make the like record concerning those, who believed in Jerusalem, Acts
4. 4. or in Ephesus, Acts 19. 18. 20. that therefore he was either superfluous
in the former direction, or defective in the latter?

Sect. 37.
4. His marginal instances (page 5.) make much more against him, then for him.
For if Children in the Old Testament were brought by their Parents before the
Lord in their holy Assemblies; is it not a pregnant argument, that then they
were Church Members; and consequently in a sufficient and regular capacity of
this member-ship? And if God be no accepter of persons, more under the Old
Testament, then in the times of the New, children being every ways qualified
alike, and in the same capacity of Church-member-ship, under both, how they
should enjoy the privilege of such a relation under the former, and yet be
excluded from it under the latter, I confess I understand not; especially
considering. 1. That Infant-Church-member-ship, was no Mosaical ceremony (nor
ever has been so adjudged by any understanding man, as far as I have heard)
and so not liable to that abrogation or dissolution of ceremonies, that was
made by the body of Christ (as the Apostle speaks.) 2. That the grace of God,
in the vouchsafement of privileges and means of Salvation, is not more
contracted (no more I mean, in respect of ages, then either of sexes, or of
nations) under the Gospel, then it was under the Law, but rather every ways
enlarged, where there is place or opportunity for enlargement

5. There is somewhat alike consideration of his observation, from Acts 21. 5.
where he finds Luke reporting how the Disciples at Tire accompanied Paul on his
way, with their wives and children. For if he grants that the wives of the
Disciples here spoken of, were Disciples also (which I presume he will not
stick to do) then why he should not grant that their children likewise, who are
joined with them in the same action of service and respect unto the Apostle,
were Disciples, I believe he is no whit more able then I, to give a reasonable
account. Or is it reasonable to suppose, that when Luke says, that the
Disciples accompanied Paul on his way, with their wives and children, that his
intent or meaning should be, that they accompanied him with their baptized
wives, and unbaptized children? or that the Apostle should accept of a
Linsey-woolsey retinue, compounded partly of Christians, partly of Pagans, or
little Heathens? But however, though it should be granted to Mr. A. that this
act of the Disciples, accompanying Paul with their wives and children, should
be less [i. e. an act of less weight or consequence] then the act of Parents
causing their children to be baptized; yet supposing this to have been
frequently and ordinarily done (which Mr. A. knows to be the sense of his
adversaries) and such acts as that of the Disciples accompanying Paul, with
their wives and children, more exemplary and rare, the reason is apparent
enough why there should be mention made of children in the record of this act,
though there were no record at all made of the other. It is recorded concerning
Barnabas (Acts 11. 24.) that he was a good man, full of the Holy Ghost, and of
Faith; but no mention of his having been baptized. But will Mr. A. upon the
account of a non-mention of his baptizing, give us leave to conclude, that
therefore he was not baptized? If he will not give us leave to conclude upon
such premises, he must not take it himself. Instances in this kind might be
produced without number.

Sect. 38.
6. Under the expression of men and women in the Scriptures, children are
sometimes comprehended; yea sometimes where men only are named, both women and
children are understood. When Mark says, And they that did eat of the loaves
were about five thousand men, he meant, besides women and children; otherwise
he must contradict his fellow Evangelist Matthew (who speaking of the same
business) says, And they that had eaten were about five thousand men, besides
women and children, Mat. 14. 21. Compare also herewith, Joh. 6. 10. again J^s.
8. 25. And so it was that all that fell that day, both of men and women, were
twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai. Here is mention made only of men and
women. Yet evident it is, from v. 26. and from the context of the story round
about, that under these terms, both of men and women, children also were
comprehended. The Evangelist Mark, recording the other miraculous feeding of
multitudes by Christ, and coming to report the number of those that were fed,
says only thus; And they that had eaten were about four thousand, and he sent
them away Mar. 8. 9. Whereas Matthew recording the same miracle, reports the
number of those that had eaten, to have been fo^re thousand, BESIDES WOMEN AND
CHILDREN, Mat. 15. 38. So that it is customary and frequent in the Scriptures,
both under the word men, to comprehend as well women and children, as men; and
again under, men and women to comprehend children. And it is the probable
opinion of some, that amongst the three thousand said to have been added unto
the Church [or rather, un^o the Lord, as Acts 11. 24.] there were both women
and children.

7. Whereas ( p. 6.) he labors to prove that the scope and intent of the
Evangelist in the words, They were baptized both men and women (Acts 8. 12.)
was to set forth the great success of the Gospel in Samaria, sufficient proof
has been made of the contrary, 35, 36. the perusal of which two Sections, is
upon this account commended unto the Reader. Yet let us weigh the double proof
he levieth to get his conceit the victory. First he argues from lik^nesse of
phrase and words, Acts 5. 14. used (as he supposes) by the same Evangelist, to
the same purpose, viz. to set forth the great success of the Gospel, etc. 2.
From the scope of the place and context. To the former of these I answer; 1.
That when it is said, Acts 5. 14. And Believers were the more added unto the
Lord, multitudes of men and wowen, the great success of the Gospel is not at
all set forth by the bare mention of both sexes, men and women but by the
BELIEVING of MVLTITVDES of both sexes. 2. I wouldly gladly know of Mr. A.
whether there be any thing at all in this his parassel place, concerning the
baptizing, not of both, but of either men or women. If not, I would gladly
learn of him, what likeness of phrase, or words, here is, to prove that Luke
intended to set forth the power and great success of the Gospel in those words
( Acts 8. 12.) they were baptized both men and women, more then there is in
these, Jos. 8. 25. And so it was, that all that fell that day BOTH OF MEN AND
WOMEN, were twelve thousand. 3. (And lastly, for this) I would soberly ask Mr.
A. whether in case there had been no mention at all of women, either as
believing, or as baptized, in either of the places compared by him, but only
that so many men more, as the number of the women (whatsoever it was) amounted
unto, had believed in the one, and been baptized in the other, would not this
have argued and set forth the success of the Gospel as considerably, as now
the mention of women believers, and women baptized, in conjunction with men,
does? If so, then his plea from the phrase, both men and women, amounts to
little for his purpose.

Sect. 39.
To his latter plea from the scope and cont^xt (p. 6.) I confess I cannot well
tell where to strike with my answer, because I cannot well discern where the
vein of proof lies. For though it be granted, that Luke speaks v. 12. of the
same person, of whom he had spoken, ver. 10. 11. and who had given heed from
the least unto the greatest, unto Simon the Sorcerer, yet what is this to
prove, that therefore his intent was to set forth the power and great success
of the Gospel, in these words, they were baptiz^d men and women, considering
(as has been lately observed and proved, viz.. 35, and 36.) that (in this
verse) he speaks of the believing of men and women, as well as of their being
baptized; and that if there be any thing intended here to set forth the power
and great success of the Gospel, it is projected rather by the mention of
their believing Philip, preaching the things of God, and the name of Jesus
Christ, then by the mention of their baptism: in as much, as the Evangelist
having frequent occasion elsewhere in this book to report the great success of
the Gospel, still upon this account mentions only the faith of those who
were converted by it, and not their baptism? Besides, Mr. A's supposal (the
ground of this vein of his discourse) viz. that Luke speaks of the same
generality of the people, ver. 12. of which he had spoken, ver. 10, 11, where
it was thus expressed, To whom they all gave heed from the least to the
greatest, is not so authentic or clear. For it is hardly credible that
amongst the great numbers of the inhabitants of such a City as Samaria, there
should not be found so much as one unbeleever left upon the preaching of one
Sermon only. Certain I am that there can be no instance produced from the
Scripture of like nature, or import. Nor is it said v. 12. either that they
believed Philip, or were baptized, from the greatest to the least: Or if by
this expression Mr. A. understands simply and absolutely the generality of
the inhabitants of Samaria, does it not follow from his said supposition, that
as well children, as men and women, were here baptized; unless he will either
understand this expression, from the least unto the greatest, exclusively, or
else say, that children are not to be numbered, either amongst the least or the
greatest, nor yet amongst those that are between both?

But (for a close of the point now in hand) to give Mr. A. a brief account of
his men and women, with whom he has had so much to do, to so little purpose
for his cause, the reason why the Evangelist Luke, having in the beginning of
the verse, mentioned the believing of the Samaritans, without distinguishing
the different sexes of those who believed, in the latter part of the verse,
speaking of their baptizing, distinguishing them into their respective sexes of
men and women is to show, that though under the law, the one sex only (that of
men) was capable of, and admitted unto circumcision, (which was then the
initiating Ordinance, answering in that respect, as in several others, Baptism
the successor of it under the Gospel) yet now, since the coming and suffering
of Jesus Christ in the flesh, both sexes, as well women, as men, were made
capable by God of being baptized. This (I believe) is all the mystery, that an
intelligent Reader will find, in the clause (so much courted by Mr. A. to be
friend him in his cause) they were baptized hoth men and women.

Sect. 40.
His third proof for his conceit of no Infant baptized in Mr. A. p. 6, 7
Christ's or the Apostles days, borrowed from Mar. 10. 13, 14, 15, 16. wherein
some are said to have brought young children to Christ (p. 6, 7.) has been
already, not only answered, but clearly argued and proved to make against him.
I presume a considering Reader, will be of the same mind upon an attentive
re-perusal of the 25th. Section. I shall here add, that the judgment and
conscience of that learned and worthy Martyr, Mr. John Philpot, were so full of
conviction and satisfaction touching the pregnant validity of this passage, for
Infant Baptism, that (in that Epistle of his, formerly mentioned, once, and
again) upon the mention and recital of this clause, Let the babes (so he reads
it) come unto me, he breaks forth with an holy indignation into this demand;
why then do not these rebellious Anabaptists obey the Commandment of the Lord?
For what do they now a days else that bring their children to Baptism, then
that they did in times past, which brought their children to the Lord, and our
Lord received them, and putting his hands on them, blessed them, etc. And if
Christ judged little children capable subjects of imposition of hand^, which
(according to some of the most Seraphical Doctors themselves of the faith of
Anabaptism) is an Ordinance subsequent unto Baptism, and not to be administered
before it, it roundly follows that these children brought to Christ had been
baptized. But either for Mr. F. the Mr. or for Mr. A. the Disciple, to put us
to prove by whom they were baptized, is such a yoke, as themselves are not able
to bear, no not in such cases, where the demand of proof in that kind is much
more reasonable. For if we, in arguing the controversy, whether there can be
no true Church of Christ, and with which communion is lawful, without their
baptism by dipping, should put them upon proof by whom all and every the
members of the 7 Churches of Asia, were thus baptized, or by whom those
Christians mentioned, Acts 5. 14. Acts 4. 4. and in many other places, were
after that manner baptized, would they not cry out against such our demands as
importune, captious, and unreasonable? That Mr. Fisher Baby-Baptism, p. 141.
evasion of Mr. Fishers, viz. that the imposition of hands here recorded to
have been administered by Christ, unto the children brought to him, was another
kind of imposition, viz. that which was frequently used in order to cures or
healings, not that which pre-supposed baptism, is magisterial enough (as
seventy times seven assertions more in the same book with it are) but
altogether proof-lesse. The contrary hereunto is, little less, then clearly
demonstrable upon these grounds. 1. There is no intimation in the context, that
any of these children (much less all of them) were either sick, or diseased.
Now there can (I believe) no instance be produced, where, any, young or old,
either came, or were brought, to Christ, to obtain any cure or healing from
him, whose infirmity or disease was not mentioned and named. 2. Whereas all the
miraculous cures wrought by Christ, are either particularly (as when he wrought
but only one, or some few in the same place) or else in the general (as when
he wrought many in places near adjoining) recorded, here is not the least or
lightest mention (in one kind, or other) of any cure wrought upon these
children by him. 3. Had the children been any ways sick, or diseased, it is at
no hand credible that the Disciples would have rebuked those that brought them:
it would have argued want of common civility, yea of humanity it self to have
done it. 4. The reason given by Christ unto his Disciples (and in them unto
others) why they should rather, countenance and further, then restrain or
hinder the access of little children unto him, viz. because of such was the
Kingdom of God, Mar. 10. 14. or the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat 19. 14. sufficiently
declares, that they were brought unto him upon a spiritual account, or in
order to the obtaining of some spiritual benefit, or privilege, rather then
for any bodily cure. 5. The general order of Christ directed unto the
Disciples, and in them unto all men, to suffer not those little children in
particular, that were now brought unto him, but little children in general, to
come unto him [ Suffer, says he, little children, and forbid them not to come
unto me, Mat. 19. 14.] this general order (I say) and injunction of Christ*
plainly shows, that his will was, that little children should be brought unto
him, whether they had any bodily ailment upon them, or no: inasmuch as there is
nothing more certain, then that all little children have not bodily ailments or
diseases. And if his will be, that little children in general, and whether
diseased, or no, should come, or be brought unto him, doubtless the reason or
end why he orders their coming to him, must needs be the receiving of some
spiritual grace, benefit, or privilege from him, and this by means of such
their coming.

6. It is said Mar. 10. 16. that Christ did not only lay his hands upon these
children, but that he blessed them also; (...), i. e. prayed for them (as the
word frequently signifies, and the best interpreters understand it in this
place.) Now though Christ frequently prayed, and sometimes preparatively (as it
were) and in order to the working of some great miracle, as before the raising
of Lazarus from the dead, etc. yet we never find that he wrought any bodily
cure by prayer simply or only, but very often by words of a divine-like
authority and command. I will, be thou clean, Mat. 8. 3. As thou have believed,
so be it done unto thee, Mat. 8. 13. See also Mat. 9. 29. Arise, take up thy
bed, and go unto thy house, Mat. 9. 6. Stretch forth thine hand, Mat. 12. 13.
Be it unto thee, even as thou will, Mat. 15. 28. Lazarus come forth, Joh. 11.
43. (to omit many the like.) 7. Mr. A. himself giving this account why the
Disciples rebuked those that brought these children, viz. that they thought it
an impertinent thing to trouble Christ with them, plainly enough supposes,
that they were not brought to receive any bodily cure from Christ: for then
they (the Disciples) could not have thought it an impertinent thing to trouble
Christ with them, more, or otherwise, then they judged it impertinent, for any
others to come unto him upon the like occasion. And doubtless Mr. A. himself
does not judge it an impertinent thing for him to trouble the Physician by
repairing, or sending unto him when he is sick, and stands in need of his
help. So then by the fortified light of this great constellation of
circumstances, it fully appears, that Mr. Fisher casts out his net on the
wrong side of the ship, when he affirms that these children came to Christ
for another kind of imposition of hands, then that asserted by us, which (^aith
he p. 141) is otherwise called, Touching. I confess that Touching is another,
a new, a strange kind of imposition of hands: but Anabaptism can now sail with
any wind And whereas to salve his opinion, he says, this Ordinance of laying
on of hands, [he means, which we plead for] was not LIKELY yet in use and
being, although he qualifies the magistrality of the assertion a little, with
the term, likely, yet is it ventrous and daring enough to march in the retinue
of such notions as these, That Baptism is only a signing or signifying not a
sealing Ordinance, Baby-baptism, p. 154. 193.
that Circumcision was neither sign nor seal of the Covenant of grace, that it
was a seal of the righte^usnesse of Faith unto Abraham only, Baby-baptism, p.
153.
(with twenty and ten more of a like unhallowed inspiration, confederate in the
same warfare against the truth, with it.)

Sect. 41.
Whereas Mr. A. bestows the greatest part of his seventh page, upon the probat
of this, that the children spoken of in the passage represented by him, were
not brought to Christ to be baptized (although all he says upon the account
falls short of such a sum) he labors in the fire to make a ^old purchase,
and raises a great dust of contest for that, which he might have had of me
(and I suppose of others also) only for the asking. But whether the children
brought to Christ, were brought to be baptized, or no, I shall (I question not,
God assisting me) in due time manifestly evince the lawfullnesse of
Infant Baptism from the said passage. In the mean time, I shall take notice of
these words (toward the close of Mr. A's third proof of his minor) that if the
baptizing of Infants had been AN ORDINANCE OF GOD, the knowledge of it would
have been of as great, or greater use unto the world, then the knowledge of
those other things are, touching Christ's embracing and blessing of infants,
etc. In the first clause of this passage, does he not plainly enough charge, or
challenge, his adversaries, as if they held the baptizing of Infants, to be an
Ordinance of God? How some of them may at unawares express themselves, I know
not, but they can with no more truth (in propriety and strictness of phrase)
affirm the baptizing of Infants to be an Ordinance of God (neither do they I
suppose, ordinarily so speak or affirm) then their Opposers do affirm the
baptizing of un-baptized believers to be the Ordinance of God. Well may the
baptizing of the one, or the other, be the precept, or will of God: but
certainly, the subject of an institution or Ordinance, or the person to whom an
Ordinance is, according to the will of God, to be administered, is no part of
the Ordinance it self. Neither Abraham nor Isaac were any essential part of
circumcision. This is Mr. Fishers Doctrine it self, who ( Baby-baptism, p.
211.) complains of the Priests, (I know not well whom he means, at least
extensively) for adding other subjects to Gods Ordinaces. In which expression
he plainly enough makes an Ordinance a thing by it self, and the subject
another by it self. In which respect, he is no more consistent with himself,
then with the principles of Christian modesty, when he thus rates his opposers,
for their conjectural sin of Infant Baptism: will you imagine and suppose, and
dream, and dote, and fancy, and fame a Baptism, which the Scriptures and first
Churches never knew? For may they not imagine, etc. the baptizing of Infants,
and yet not imagine another Baptism, then the Scriptures know, if Infants be no
part of the Ordinance administered unto them. See also, page 312. 314.

Again, whereas Mr. A. says, that had infant baptism been an Ordinance of God,
the knowledge of it would have been of as great, or greater use to the world,
then etc. I answer,

1. That it does not follow, because the knowledge he speaks of is not given in
this place unto the world, therefore it is given no where else. Nor 2. That
because this knowledge is not yet arrived at Mr. A's or at Mr. Fishers
understanding, it is not therefore sufficiently given unto the world, or not
convincingly enough arrived at the judgments and understandings of other men,
as considering and conscientious as they. Nor 3. That the knowledge of Christ's
embracing and blessing infants, is so inconsiderable as Mr. A. seems to
represent it unto the world, because he has no higher esteem of it. Nor 4.
(And lastly) Does it follow, that because Mr. A. makes an opposition between
the giving knowledge unto the world, that Infant Baptism is an Ordinance of
God, and, the giving knowledge that Christ embraced and blessed infants,
therefore the knowledge of this latter, does not give sufficient knowledge of
the former (in his sense of the word, Ordinance, lately expressed.) However we
shall not at present argue the case, whether it be so, or no; but only leave
it to all considering men to judge, whether his minor proposition be preferred
to any degree of light, by all he has delivered in this third proof of it, or
whether the native darkness remains not still spread round about it, rather
condensed and thickened, then any ways lessened or cleared by all this
discourse.

Sect. 42.
To his fourth proof we answer; 1. That to argue from Answer to Mr. A's 4th,
proof of the minor proposition of his first Argument, p. 8.
what is not recorded, to what was not, or was not done, in Christ's or the
Apostles days, is extremely weak and inconcluding. It is not recorded that the
Eunuch, Acts 8. was baptized either naked, or with his clothes upon him. Does
it therefore follow, that he was baptized, neither naked, nor with his clothes
upon him? It is not recorded that the spring or water wherein the Eunuch was
baptized, was so deep, as to reach or come up to his ankles. Does it follow
from hence, that therefore it was not thus deep? It is not recorded that all
the members of the 7 Churches of Asia, were baptized. Is this a sufficient
proof that therefore they were not baptized? It is not recorded that John the
Baptist, when he executed his office, and baptized those that came unto him,
put off either his Camels-hair garment, or leathern girdle, nor yet that he
kept them on. Does it therefore follow that he did neither, because neither is
recorded? Or is it a sufficient proof that no woman was admitted to the Lords
Table in the Apostles days, because the admission of none is recorded? But
such arguings as these are the pillars of Anti-poedo-baptisme; which for
brevities sake, and not to offend any man, or to reproach the opinion, from
hence forth we shall call, Ana-baptism.

Secondly: Whereas he says, that the description which the Scripture every
where mak^s of persons, or qualifications of such, whose Baptism it records,
argues them to be no Infants, the saying is captious and encroaching, taking
that for granted which is to be denied, viz. that the Scripture still
describes the persons and qualifications of [all] such [though Mr. A. craftily
leaves out this particle All, least his proof should appear to be too narrow
and scant for the length and breadth of his position; though the truth is, that
to those who understand the principles and rules of arguing, the omission of
the said particle invalidates the process of his argument] of all such (I say)
whose Baptism it records. Yea himself page 10, 11. essaying to answer that
unanswerable objection about the Baptizing of households, though with much
regret and reluctancie of spirit, yet yields that there is not the same
account given of the qualifications [he might with as much truth have added,
and then he had done somewhat ingenously, nor of the persons] of those that
were baptized of the family of Lydia. So that himself, with speaking only a
little truth, has cut the sinews of his fourth proof. Yet

Thirdly: Whereas he here supposes that the Name or Title of a Disciple is
incompetible unto children, and cannot rationally be applied unto them, does he
not condemn the Holy Ghost himself of irrationality, who very expressly, Act.
15. 10. terms children, as well as their Parents, Disciples; unless he will
suppose that the yoke of Circumcision* in case the Parents had been persuaded
by their Judaizing Teachers to subject unto it, would not at all have concerned
their children, or been any yoke unto them. I confess Mr. Fisher
(Baby-baptism, p. 176.) out of the ingenuity and Christian meekness of his
spirit, terms the citing of this scripture to prove Infants to be called
Disciples, a frivolous flim flam: But the best is, that these wild Figtrees (I
mean, insolent and uncomely jeers) grow so abundantly in the plain of his book,
that ten thousand of them are not worth the price of two Sparrows. But Mr.
Fisher knows better how to triumph, than how to conquer: And if you will take
his own word for it, Tanquam umbrae volitant alij: solus sapit ipse.

All other men like shaddows vain
On earth flit to and fro:
He, he alone the wise man is:
Truth none but he does know.
Yet let me say this by the way (by Mr. Fishers good leave) that the yoke of
Circumcision (with all the burthensomnesse of the Mosaical Law attending it)
was indeed no yoke at all, in comparison of such a Baptism as Mr. A. or at
least many who rejoice in his light, violently obtrude upon the world, in the
name of Christ's Baptism. But I hear there is one wise man amongst them (whose
prudence, I suppose, many others will follow) who has found out a way to
conjure the spirit of winter out of the water by an application of fire; a
commendable project to reconcile winter-dipping it self with the lives of men,
and especially of women, which, without such a mediation, is like to deal very
severely by them. He that baptiseth upon such terms as these, baptiseth both
with water and with fire; and so, in this respect, administreth a more complete
Baptism than either John, or any the Apostles of Christ. But Mr. Fisher
disdains all warming of water, unless it be with the fire of men's zeal that
are to be baptized. This only by the way. But might not Mr. A. more rationally
contest with Christ himself, for giving the Name or Title of a man to a child
new born (Joh. 16. 21.) and especially for giving the Name and Title of a
Believer to a little child (Mat. 18. 5, 6.) than with us, for giving the name
and title of Disciple unto a child? Or is it not somewhat less to be a
Disciple than a Believer? For that our Savior in this Scripture, by, one of
these little ones, who believe in me, means, any such child, as that
mentioned ver. 5. and now pointed at by him, is evident from the context (as
Musculus well conceives, and expounds the place accordingly.)

Sect. 43.
Against his fifth proof ( p. 8.) there is matter of exception enough to make a
little volume. For,

1. What if the instructions g^v^n to those who were commissioned to baptize,
and the practice of such persons, who did baptize, argue the persons [i. e.
some of the persons, for he was tender of saying all, for fear of after-claps]
that were baptized by them to have been no infants? Does it follow, because all
that were baptized, were not Infants, therefore none that were baptized were
such? Or that they who had instructions to baptize persons of ripe years, had
no instructions or commission to baptize any others?

2. Whereas he says, that the instruction which Christ gave those whom he
commissi^ned on this b^half, was, that they should first teach persons, ^r make
them Disciples, and then baptize them; I confess he mentions teaching in the
first place, and baptizing after; but this is not to instruct them to teach in
the first place, and then to baptize them after; but only, in the first place
to instruct them to teach, and in the second to baptize. And such an expression
of Christ, as this is so far from proving, that therefore all that are, or
ought to be baptized, ought to be taught first, that it does not prove that any
one person who is, or ought to be baptized, must be first taug^t; however it be
granted, that this latter, [ viz. that some are, and ought to be taught before
baptized] may both by other Scriptures, and by ground in reason, be evinced for
truth. But there is nothing more frequent or familiar in the Scriptures, then
to find such things mentioned or ^amed ^n the first place, which according to
the order of nature, and sometimes of time it self, should be mentioned after
Gal. 5. 22. love j^y, peace, etc. are mentioned before faith* 2 Cor. 13. 14.
The second person is mentioned before the first, as Revel. 1. 4, 5. the third
before the second, Romans 10 9. confession with the mouth, is named before
believing with the heart, Ezekiel. 14. 14. Daniel is named before Job, who
notwithstanding was long after him in time; so Mic. 7. 20. Jacob before
Abraham, Levit. 12. 8. The burnt offering, is first mentioned; but the
Sin-offering though after-named, was always first offered. In the business of
regeneration, water is mentioned before the Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. and Mar. 1. 4.
Baptizing it self is mentioned before the preaching of baptism. John did
baptize in the Wilderness, and preach the Baptism of Repentance, etc.
Therefore from Christ's mentioning teaching in the first place, and baptizing in
the second, it cannot be proved that persons must always be* first taught,
before they be baptized; no more then from the Apostles informing the
Corinthians, in the first place that they were sanctified* and in the second
that they were justified (1 Cor. 6. 11.) it can be proved, that their
sanctification, did in time precede their justification.

Sect. 44.
3. Though nothing can be inferred from our Saviors mentioning teaching in the
first place, and baptizing after, touching the necessity of teaching to go,
always (or indeed at any time) before baptizing, yet if we speak of baptizing
nations (of which it is a clear case that Christ here speaks) it is granted
(upon another account) that teaching always ought to precede baptizing; my
meaning is, that no nation, nor any person, or numbers of persons, in a nation,
ought to be baptized, until the Gospel has been preached unto, or in this
nation, and withal received and believed. But this at no hand proves, but
that in case the heads of a family, one, or more, in a nation* shall receive
the Gospel, and be baptized themselves, their children also, if they have any,
may be baptized likewise. In this sense it is granted that t^ac^ing ought
always to go before baptizing; the teaching of nations, before the baptizing
of nations; and so the teaching of families, the baptizing of families; that is
the generallity of a nation (and so of a family) old and young, men and
children, ought not to be baptized, until those who are capable of teaching in
both, have been taught, yea and have learned too (to some degree) the things
which have been taught them. But,

4. Whereas he uses these two expressions, as synonymous, or of like
signification, to teach persons, and to make them Disciples, he makes black
and white the same color, and fire and water the same Element. For Stephen
taught those (and this with great authority, wisdom, and faithfulness) who
stoned him to death, yet made none of them Disciples. So Paul taught many Jews
at Damascus, and elsewhere, whom he could not make Disciples. To teach, and to
make Disciples, differ (upon the matter) as much, as sowing, disfers from
reaping, or fighting from conquering.

Whereas he adds; The practice of those who did baptiz^, was answerable to
this Commission; they first instructed person: in the things Gospel, and then
baptized them; I suppose his meaning is not, that they baptized all, whom they
first instructed in the things of the Gospel, but only those who voluntarily
offered themselves unto Baptism, or desired it, after they had been thus
instructed: they compelled no man to be baptized, neither threatened they any
man, or delivered any man up unto Satan, for not being baptized. But that when
they first brought the Gospel to a family, City, or Country, they first
instructed, before they baptized, is easily granted, and fully accords with our
sense and notion in the premises.

Sect. 45.
And thus we see how much, and to how little purpose much, has been said by
Mr. A. for the confirmation of the minor proposition in his first Argument,
viz. that Baptism was not administered to any Infant, neither in the days of
John the Baptist, nor of the Apostles. We have both weighed his arguments for
confirmation in the balance of the Sanctuary, and found them light, or
wanting, and given you others for infirmation of them, of sufficient weight.

In the Rear of this his first argument ( page 8, 9, etc.) he frames two
objections against himself, and essaieth a solution of them respectively, but
with no better success then some novice practitioners in the Black Art, who
sometimes raise such stubborn spirits, which their skill failing them, they are
not able to conjure down. He has not in either of his answers infringed, nor
indeed so much as touched, the spirit or strength of either of the objections,
as they are manageable both against his argument, but especially not as they
are manageable for the cause of Infant Baptism. This we shall (God willing)
demonstrate in due time and place, viz. when we come to argue our grounds for
the baptizing of Infants. However, when the grounds and reasons, which are held
forth and pleaded for the justification, either of an opinion, or practice, are
evicted of weakness and insufficiency, no answering of objections is able to
repair their strength, or releeve them. A man may answer, and this very
substantially two, and ten objections (especially framed by himself) against
his opinion, and yet be never the more solid or substantial in his grounds, by
which he asserteth his opinion. But his first argument being fallen, let us see
whether his fellow (the second) will help him up, or supply that, which we
found lacking on the behalf thereof, for the support of his cause.

Sect. 46.
His second Argument he informs us by the way, shall be Mr. A's second
Argument against Infant Baptism answered.
taken from the nature of Baptism, and from the declared ends and us^s of it. I
wish he thoroughly understood the nature of Baptism: for then I presume he
would abhor himself in dust and ashes, from that un-Christian and needless
disturbance, which he has made amongst the servants of God about it. And for
the declared ends and uses of Baptism, of which he speaks, it will appear by
the management of his argument, that he is at a loss in himself about them,
and uncertain what they be. But the argument, which he prefaceth, as ye have
heard, rises up before us in this form.

If that administration of Baptism, which is made to professed Believers, does
more conduce to, and better answer the ends of Baptism, then that does, which
is made to Infants, then Baptism ought not to be administered unto Infants, but
to professed bel^evers.

But that Administration of Baptism, which is made to professed Believers, does
more conduce to, and better answer the ends of Baptism, then that which is made
to Infants. Ergo

By the way, this argument with that strength which it has magnifieth it self
every whit as much (if not more) against the council and wisdom of God in
Circumcision, as against his Adversaries opinion and practice about
Infant Baptism. For may it not altogether as rationally, and with as much truth
be pleaded and said; that that administration of Circumcision, which was made
to professed Believers, did more conduce to, and better answer the ends of this
Ordinance, then that which was made to infants, as it can be pretended, that
that administration of Baptism, which he exalts, more conduces to, and
better answers the ends and uses of Baptism, then that other which he
depresseth? For (assuredly) Circumcision was in the ends and uses of it (at
least in the chief and principal ends and uses of it) altogether as mysterious,
as sacred and holy, as Baptism, yea and very little, if at all, in these
differing from it.

Sect. 47.
But let us partially weigh and consider both the propositions The major
Proprosition answered.
now before us in their order.

To the major we answer; that the consequence herein is void of strength and
truth, yea and has scarce so much as a face of probability in it. For the
better or greater serviceablenesse or conducement of a thing to the ends
intended by God in it, in some particular cases, is no argument at all to
prove, that therefore the use of this thing is in all other cases simply
unlawful. Breast-milk given unto new born babes more conduces to the end
intended by God in this creature, then when it is given unto healthful and
strong men; yet this proves not that therefore it is simply unlawful to give
this milk unto such men, or for them to use it for food, especially in some
cases. The Ordinance of marriage, more conduces unto, and answ^rs the ends and
use^, intended by God in it, when it is embraced by persons of competent years
for the procreation of children, etc. then when it is entertained by men and
women who have outlived such a capacity; yet this proves not but that persons
stricken in years beyond the procreation of children may lawfully marry. The
Ministry or preaching of the Apostle Paul did more conduce unto the ends of
preaching (as viz. the glorifying of God, the saving of souls) etc. then the
ministry or preaching of some other the Apostles, or however then the ministry
or preaching of ordinary Pastors and Teachers, either in these, or in former
days. Yet this no wise proves, that the ministry or preaching of the other
Apostles, or of ordinary Pastors and Teachers, is unlawful. The administration
of Circumcision which was made to infants, did more conduce unto, and better
answer the ends of it (as appears by the standing law given by God himself for
this administration, Genesis 17.) then the administration of it made unto men. Yet
it follows not from hence, that therefore the administration of it unto men,
was simply, universally, or in all cases unlawful.

2. When he says, that that administration of Baptism, wherein he so
inordinately pleases himself, does MORE cond^ce to, and BETTER answer the ends
of it, etc. does he not plainly grant or suppose, that the other
administration, which is made to infants, and which his soul so greatly
abhors, does notwithstanding in some degree, both conduce unto, and answer
the ends of Baptism also? If so, can it be simply and absolutely unlawful? Or
if we suppose, or say, that Paul's ministry or preaching the Gospel, did MORE
conduce unto, or BETTER answer the ends of preaching, then the ministry of
some other of the Apostles, do we not in so saying, suppose the ministry and
preaching of these Apostles, to be (at least) lawful, and in some degree
conducing unto the ends of preaching? More reverence is due to the Consciences
of men, especially of the Saints, then to trouble or disturb them with such
slight reasonings as these. But

Sect. 48.
3. Neither does he express himself so handsomely, when he says, that the
administration of Baptism, whether to the one subject, or the other, does more
or less, either conduce to, or answer the ends of Baptism. Baptism is one
thing, and the administration of Baptism is another, far differing from i^.
They differ more then toto genere the one from the other. Now to say that one
thing conduces more or less to, or more or less answers the ends of
another thing, which is of quite another nature and consideration from it,
makes no pleasant harmony in the ears of any considering man's understanding.
But (to overlook this oversight.)

4. How impertinently does he argue the consequence in the proposition now
under canvasse, from these Scriptures, ( p. 12.) Cursed be the deceiver, which
having in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt
thing, Mal. 1. 14. And again, Seek to excel to the edifying of the Church, 1
Cor. 14. 12. Does it follow from these texts, either divisim, or conjunctim,
that If that administration of Baptism, which is made to professed Believers,
does more conduce unto, and better answer the end of Baptism, then that does
which is made to Infants, then Baptism ought not to be administered unto
Infants, etc.? Or is that, which conduces to a good end, though in an
inferior or less degree, then (happily) some other means or thing may do,
necessarily a corrupt thing? That Tree which brings forth GOOD Fruit, is
adjudged by our Savior, a good tree, though it brings not forth the best
fruit, or the most fruit, that is possible for a tree, yea or for it self, to
bring forth? Or were all the rest of the Apostles corrupt things, because the
Apostle Paul labored more abundantly then they all, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
and so promoted the end or ends, of Apostolic mission above them all? Or may
not he truly and cordially, seek to excel to the edifying of the Church, who
sometimes edifieth the Church less, by his labors and endeavors in this
kind, then at some other time? But when propositions are false, proofs cannot
be pertinent. And thus, through a manifest defectivenesse in the major
proposition, the glory of Mr. A's second argument against Infant Baptism is
laid in the dust. Neither is there any hope or possibility of releef from the
minor proposition, though this should be found never so Orthodox. For it is a
sovereign maxim in argumentation (as has been formerly said) that Conclusio
semper sequitur deteriorem partem, the proof of a conclusion by a syllogism, is
never valid or strong, when either of the propositions therein are weak. So
that we might wave the examination of the minor proposition in the argument
before us, without any detriment to our cause at all. Notwithstanding to make
it evident, even to prejudice and partiality themselves, if it be possible,
that there is no sound part in the whole body of this argument, let us arraign
the minor proposition also, at the Bar of reason and truth. The tenor of this
proposition (as we heard) is this.

But that administration of baptism, which is made to professed Believers, does
more conduce to, and better answer the ends of Baptism, then that which is made
to infants.

Sect. 49.
That Truth is a sufferer in this proposition also, is to me sufficiently
evident from hence, viz. because God himself, who (questionless) knows much
better then Mr. A. or any of his judgment, what administration of an Ordinance
most conduces unto, and best answers the ends of it, judged the administration
of Circumcision (an Ordinance of like import with Baptism, as shall upon
occasion be showed, God willing elsewhere) unto Infants, more conducing unto,
and better answering the ends of it (the principal of which was to signify and
seal the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11.) then unto Believers, or unto
persons of ripe years. Otherwise I presume he would not have ordered the
ordinary and constant administration of it unto children, but rather unto men.
For it is very importune and burdensome to my Faith to believe, that God
should appoint such an administration of his Ordinance, which should be in any
degree disadvantagious or prejudicial to the ends thereof. If therefore the
administration of Circumcision made unto Infants under the Law, did as much, or
more, conduce unto the ends thereof, as this administration made unto men could
have done: in like manner, the administration of baptism made to infants under
the Gospel must needs more, or as much, conduce unto the ends thereof, as it
would do, in case it were made unto men. They who think, write, or say
otherwise, do they not make themselves wiser then God? How, and in what
respect, one, or more, that administration of Baptism, which we prefer,
conduces as much (or more) to the ends of Baptism, as that administration
which Mr. A. commends, might readily here be showed; and may be in time
convenient. In the mean time let us consider how Mr. A. makes his rope stand
right up on the one end.

Sect. 50.
1. (Says he) One end of Baptism is to declare Jesus Christ unto the world,
Joh. 1. 31. And (a little after) this manifestation of Christ is better made by
the Baptism of Believers, then by the Baptism of Infants, whether it respects
the party, who is baptized, or others, who behold it. For answer;

1. The end indeed of John's sending to the Jews to baptize, was that Christ
should be made manifest unto Israel. This the words cited by himself ( Jo^. 1.
31.) expressly affirm. But this proves not that therefore the end of Baptism is
to declare Jesus Christ unto the world, Baptism and John's sending to the Jews
to baptize, are two very different things; and so are Israel, and the world.
Nor was Christ declared unto the world, but unto Israel only, by John's
baptizing. Yea when John himself says, that he therefore came baptizing with
water, that Christ might be made manifest unto Israel, his meaning is not, that
the manifestation of Christ, no not to Israel, was the proper end of that
Baptism, which he administered, but of his administration of it, the manner and
terms, upon which he came to administer it, and according unto which he did
administer it, considered. For had the same Baptism which John administered,
been administered by an ordinary person, or a man ignorant who Christ was, or
that he was now come into the world; yea or without those or the like
additional discoveries, which John made of Christ in his preaching, it would
never have produced any such effect as the manifestation of Christ unto Israel;
nor was there any thing in it any ways proportionable unto such an end, or
effect as this. Therefore certainly, the manifestation of Christ unto the
world, is no end of Baptism; or however, no such end as this can be proved from
John 1. 31. which text notwithstanding is our whole allowance, for our
satisfaction therein.

Sect. 51.
By the way, the reason (I conceive) why John, being the messenger of Christ
sent before his face to prepare his way [ i. e. to awaken the Jewish nation to
own and entertain him, being now come unto them, though as yet they knew it
not] came baptizing with water, in order to the manifestation of him unto the
Jews, was; because this new undertaking to baptize, was a proper means to
occasion the generality of this people to inquire more diligently after him (
John I mean) to examine more narrowly his Commission, and authority by which he
did baptize. By means of which inquiry, they came to understand that he was a
man sent from God unto them; and consequently could not but so much the more
reverence and believe the words of his mouth; the first born of which was the
testimony which he gave of their Messiah, as now ready to discover himself unto
such of them, as desired his coming.

Upon this account John's baptizing with water, might contribute toward the
manifestation of Christ unto Israel, and yet the manifestation of Christ to the
world be no end of Baptism, simply considered, or in its ordinary or standing
administrations.

2. Reason it self interposeth with an high hand against such a conceit, which
makes the manifestation of Christ unto the world one of the ends of Baptism.
If Christ be in baptism, he is here only tanquam in aenigmate, darkly, and as
in a riddle; and he that does not plough with Gods Heifer (the Scripture) will
never know or understand this Riddle. In this case, it is not the Riddle, but
the heifer ploughed with for the unfolding of it, that makes Christ manifest.
The end of shadows, types, figures, enigma's, parables, etc. is not to make
either things, or persons MANIFEST, but rather to veil and conceal them, at
least in part, or at the most to reveal them sparingly and with reservation.
And he said unto them, to you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom
of God; but to others in parables: that seeing, they might not see, and hearing
they might not understand, Luke 8. 10. And certainly Baptism is such a
mysterious and profound parable of Christ, that without an Interpreter it would
never be understood, nor Christ be found in it. Therefore the end of it cannot
be his manifestation to the world.

Sect. 52.
3. The manifestation of Christ unto the world, is the end of the Scriptures,
and more especially of the Gospel, (I mean of the writings of the
New Testament) and of the preaching and publishing of these in the world. Ephesians.
6. 19. 2 Pet. 1. 16. Romans 16. 25, 26. Col. 4. 3, 4.
So that as the Apostle reasons against justification by works, Gal. 2. 21.
If righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain, so may we
reason and conclude against the manifestation of Christ to the world by
Baptism: If Christ be manifested unto the world by Baptism (which must be
supposed, if this manifestation of him be the end of Baptism) then is the
letter of the Gospel, and the ministry thereof in the world in vain. Yea and
Paul whose great work and imploiment was to make Christ manifest unto the
world, should rather have been sent to baptize, then to preach the Gospel, if
the manifestation of Christ unto the world had been the end of Baptism. But
this notion of Mr. A. concerning the end of Baptism, is so broadly obnoxious,
that an over-operous refutation of it would be but an impertinency. And,

Sect. 53.
4. Whereas he affirms, that the manifestation of CHRIST is better mad^ by the
Baptism of Bel^evers, then of Infants, whether it respects the party who is
baptized, or others who behold it;

1. It seems then that there is a manifestation of Christ made in or by the
Baptism of infants, as well as by the Baptism of Believers, although not so
good [I suppose he means, not so full or perfect] a manifestation. If then
there be a manifestation of Christ in the Baptism of infants, although not so
pregnant, rich, and full, as in the Baptism of men, how can he judge it to be
unlawful? Is any manifestation of Christ, though in a lower or lesser degree,
unlawful? Or is the ministry of all such Pastors and Teachers unlawful, who
do not, (happily cannot) manifest Christ unto the world therein, with ^^ much
power and glory of manifestation, as the most able, and best qualified Minister
or Preacher in the whole world?

2. Upon what account, can he suppose Christ to be manifested to the party
baptized, supposing him a Believer, by his Baptism? I thought that his sense
had been, that none ought to be baptized, but only such to whom Christ was
manifested before their baptizing. And if Christ be manifestable to a Believer
in some further degree, by Baptism, it must be by the Baptism of others, rather
then his own; at least if he be baptized by a total submersion under water. For
during the while of his being under water, he is in no good capacity,
notwithstanding any former use or exercise of his understanding, to receive any
further information or knowledge concerning Christ, being taken up with
thoughts about his emersion, and how to recover and come off with the safety of
his life from the water. Or if it be said, that Christ may be said to be
further manifested by Baptism to a Believer, although the effect it self of
this manifestation does not take place, till after such his Baptism; I answer,
upon this account, may Christ be manifested to an Infant also by his Baptism,
viz. when he shall grow up to a capacity of understanding what his Baptism
means, and what the counsel of God, was, or is in it.

Sect. 54.
3. Whereas he pleads ( p. 13.) that that end of Baptism, whereof he speaks (
i. e. that end of Baptism, which is no end thereof, as has been proved) is
more effectual unto Spectators, when Baptism is administered unto Believers,
then when unto Infants, because their Faith in Christ, and repentance, are
visible in their willing submission unto Baptism, and their example apt to
quicken, etc. whereas there is nothing of all this in the Baptism of Infants,
who are merely passive herein, etc. I answer.

1. That when and where, the baptizing of men and women, under the notion of
Believers, becomes customary and in fashion, (which are the terms and state of
it amongst us in these days) the truth is, that there is a very poor and faint
visibility of any man's Faith in Christ, or Repentance, in their willing
subjection unto that Ordinance. When all the land of Judea, and they of
Jerusalem, and all the Region round about Jordan, went out unto John to be
baptized of him, and were baptized accordingly, what exemplarinesse was there
in any particular man's subjection unto this Ordinance? or what visibility of
any man's faith or repentance, whereas John himself, notwithstanding this
voluntary offering themselves unto Baptism, called them a generation of vipers,
(Luke 3. 7.) and complaining of the unbeleef of the generality of them, says;
And what he has seen and heard that he testifies, and NO MAN receives his
testimony? John 3. 32. Yea many of those who willingly offered themselves unto
Baptism (yea, and were immediately after baptized of him, were so far from
believing in Christ, that they were doubtful whether John himself was not the
Christ, Luke 3. 15. Therefore there is no such visibility of Faith or
Repentance in any man's offering himself unto Baptism, or in his being baptized,
especially under such a circumstance, as that mentioned. It was Postquam in
tanto culmine nomen coepit esse Christianum crevit hypocrisis.
the observation and saying of Austine long ago; that When the name of a
Christian began to be in honor and esteem, hypocrisy increased. Yea all
things duly considered, we have reason to judge, that there is a better or
clearer light in any one act of charity or mercy, toward the poor, to render
any man's says and repentance visible, then in a willing offering himself to be
baptized.

Sect. 55.
2. What religious affection, devout carriage, matter of edification,
quickening, or the like, unto spectators Mr. A. can pretend or imagine to
accompany the Baptism of Believers, may, and this as seasonably, as regularly,
proceed from them upon a thousand occasions otherwise, as upon the occasion of
their being baptized. When any afflicting hand of God is upon them, as by
sickness, loss of estate, friends, etc. and so when God lifts up the light
of his countenance upon them, blesses or prospers them in one kind or other,
(and the like) these are as proper occasions for Believers to express
themselves with devotion, and religiousnesse of ^ffection, to the affecting,
edifying, quickening of bystanders, as their baptizing. Therefore if there be
any such Christian and worthy doings by Believers at the time of their Baptism,
as Mr. A. speaks of, they are not the proper fruits or effects of their being
baptized, or of their being to be baptized, but merely accidental hereunto, and
so no ends of Baptism, more then of afflictions, or of mercy in any kind
received from God. Yea

Sect. 56.
3. When the Infants of Believers are baptized, there may be (and happily ought
to be) the same Christian actings and deportments in every kind, in the
Parents, or those who offer them unto baptism. So that the Spectators, may by
means, or by occasion of their baptizing also, be as much instructed, edified,
quickened, etc. as they can or could be, by the baptizing of these Parents
themselves. He that offers his child to be baptized in the name of Christ,
hereby makes as solemn as serious a profession of his faith in Christ, and so
of his Repentance, as he could do by being baptized himself. So that Spectators
are no whit greater gainers by Beleevers-baptism, then by infant baptism. Nay
the truth is, that they are, or may be, greater gainers by the latter. For when
a Believer having been himself formerly baptized, shall offer his Child also
unto Baptism, this argues a greater stability and triednesse of faith in him,
then his offering himself unto Baptism does, who newly believes. A testimony
given upon, and after, a thorough experience, is ( coeteris paribus) more
authoritative and convincing, then that which is given upon little or no trial.
Yea the baptizing of Infants must needs in this respect turn to a better
account unto Spectators (if by Spectators, we mean, either the Church, or the
world, who may as well the one as the other, if they please, and have
opportunity, be present at any kind of baptizing) then the baptizing of
Believers; because if Believers only be baptized, the occasions and
opportunities of all baptismal edification are like to be fewer by many, then
they would be, in case Infant Baptism were generally practiced. For many
infants are taken away by death in their infancy, and so never come to be
Believers (in Mr. A's sense) in which case, if they be not baptized, all those
opportunities of Baptismal edification are lost, which might have been taken
and happily improved, by their baptizing. I take no notice of the
Anti-Scriptural notion, upon which he argues all along this part of his
discourse, viz. that Infants and Believers are two contra-distinct, or opposite
species of men. We may have occasion to touch this hereafter.

Only by the way I cannot but a little marvel, why Mr. A. should ascribe unto
his baptism of Believers, such great matters of edification in respect of
Spectators, when as (as far as I can yet understand) the practitioners of this
Baptism seek and take, both times and places of greatest privacy for the
administration and practice of it. But the very truth is, that Mr. A. does but
merely trifle in all that long-some discourse ( page 12, 13, 14, etc.) wherein
he builds upon this supposition (formerly detected of the crime of vanity) that
One end of Baptism is the manifestation of Christ unto the world. But

Sect. 57.
4. Whereas ( p. 14.) he supposes, that the Faith and Repentance of the
Publicans and Harlots was made visible to the Priests and Elders by their being
baptized upon their believing the Doctrine of John, he sides more with his
cause, then either with reason, or truth. For

1. We lately showed, that in that universal and promiscuous recourse of people
unto John to be baptized of him, of which the Scripture speaks, there could be
no visibility of the truth or soundness of any man's faith or repentance, in
his being baptized; much less of any particular species or kind of persons
amongst them, more then of others. Nor does the Scripture hold forth any such
thing. For

2. Whereas he says, that that which Matthew, (c. 21. 32.) calls their
believing of John, Luke speaking of the same thing (as I conceive) calls it
their justifying God, in being baptized of John, I conceive that he cannot
lightly conceive that, which here he says he conceives. For evident it is
that what Matthew speaks (in the words cited) he speaks particularly, of
the Publicans and Harlots: and as evident, that what Luke speaks (in the
words cited from him) he speaks of all the people. And all the people that
heard him [viz. Christ, speaking verily worthily of John] and the Publicans,
justified God, being baptized, [or rather, having been baptized, (...)] of
John; not [as Mr. A. again mis-reports] IN being baptized of John. The
proposition IN, which only is the smiling lineament upon his cause, in the
face of the words as he transcribeth them, is neither in the original, nor in
either the former, or latter, English translation. A little after, he stumbles
at the same stone, of mis-alledging the text (whether wittingly, or at
unawares, let the reader judge) where pretending to represent the sin of the
Priests and Elders, in opposition to the Faith and Repentance of the Publicans
and Harlots, visible (as he says, but untruly as has been showed) in their
baptism, in the words of Luke 7. 30. he says it was their rejecting the
counsel of God against themselves, IN not being baptized; whereas (as was now
said) there is not the least appearance of the proposition, IN, either in the
original, or translation. The sense and import of the place, is plainly, and
without parable, this; that the Priests and Elders in refusing the Baptism of
John, hereby discovered the prodigious folly, and wickedness of their hearts,
in rejecting the counsel of God concerning their justification and salvation by
Faith in the Messiah, whom John preached, and this with so much the more
authority and advantage to have been believed in his Testimony or Doctrine
concerning him, because he was extraordinarily raised up and sent by God to
administer a new Ordinance amongst them. The meaning is not, as if that counsel
of God, which they are here said to have rejected against themselves, consisted
in this, that he would have had them baptized by John; but in this, that he had
purposed to justify and save them by Faith in his son Jesus Christ. This was
the great and blessed counsel of God, which they rejected* [frustrated, or made
void] against themselves, i. e. to the depriving of themselves of the two great
blessings, justification by the way, and salvation in the end. Concerning their
not being baptized by John, had they otherwise believed in Christ, this could
have turned to no such great prejudice unto them. Nor was it the counsel of
God, that either they, or any other sort of men, should be baptized of John by
way of necessity, either to their justification, or salvation. For if so, then
all those who were not baptized by John, although afterward baptized by
Christ, or his Disciples, must be supposed to have perished eternally. But
certain it is, that all those who rejected that counsel of God, and continued
in this rejection, which the Priests and Elders are here said to have rejected
against themselves (especially having like means with them to embrace it) did
perish eternally. Therefore nothing can be more plain, then that they sit down
quite besides the mind of the Holy Ghost in this text of Scripture, who
conceive the counsel of God here mentioned, to respect John's baptism, or any
man's being baptized by him.

Sect. 58.
Besides the present unbeleef, and wicked frame of heart, of the Priests and
Elders considered, they did not so much as sin in not coming to John to be
baptized; as Turks and infidels during their infidelity, do not sin, in not
offering themselves either to Baptism, or to the Lords Table, among Christians;
albeit it is true, that they sin in neglecting to put themselves into a regular
capacity of offering themselves both to the one and the other. Therefore
certainly it was not the counsel of God, that the Priests and Elders, under
that irregularity of heart, which they had at present contracted, should have
heen baptized by John, inasmuch as this had been a manifest profanation in
them of this great Ordinance; although I do not conceive that John had sinned
in baptizing them, in case they had desired it of him. Nor is it any part of
the counsel of God, that men should sin or act any thing to their own
condemnation. The result of the late premises, is, that the sin of the Priests
and Elders in rejecting the counsel of God; [so termed in the words before us]
against themselves, did not consist in their not being baptized by John, but in
rejecting their Messiah, the Lord Christ sent unto them: and that their refusal
of being baptized by John, having been invited and exhorted unto Faith and
Repentance by his ministry, was a sign or evidence of this their rejection. Nor
does it follow, that in case their refusing Baptism at the hand of John,
plainly argued their unbeleef; therefore the accepting of baptism from him did
in like manner argue the Faith and Repentance of all those who accepted it. A
remotione unius contrarij ad position^m alterius, non valet argumentum. A
continual blaspheming of the name of God, demonstratively argues a man to be
desperately wicked and profane; but the forbearance of such blasphemies does
not prove a man to be truly pious or religious. The sin of covetousness
proves a man or woman to be in the gall of bitterness, and band of iniquity,
but freedom from this sin, does not argue a man to be in a state of Grace, or
in favor with God, Many like instances might be given.

We have done at last with Mr. A's first end of Baptism, which he makes to be,
the manifestation of Christ unto the world, and have proved. 1. That this is no
end of Baptism. And 2. That granting it to be an end, yet it is in all respects
as effectually promoted, (as in some more) by Infant Baptism, as by the Baptism
of men-beleevers.

Sect. 59.
He proceeds, and tells us ( page 15.) of another end or use of Baptism, which
he terms, the serving the design of God touching the great business of
Repentance for the remission of sins. And having instructed us by the way,
that, as he conceives, there are several considerations, in respect of which,
or some of which, Baptism is called the Baptism of Repentance, for the
redemption of sins, he undertakes the asserting of this conclusion; that all
these considerations are better answered in that said administration of
Baptism, which is made to men and women Believers, then in that which is made
to infants.

By the way, whereas he here speaks somewhat masculinely, though in a female
phrase, viz. that, as he conceives, there ARE several considerations in resp^ct
of which, etc. when he comes to deliver out these Considerations in particular,
he bewraies more effeminatenesse, and delivers none of them positively, but
under the protection of this particle If, If says he, If, If, and If, and If.

1. He begins; If it shall be conceived, that it is therefore called the
Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins, because such who are at any
time duly baptized, do take up the Ordinance out of a Principle of Repentance,
upon which they look for remission of sins according to the promise of God in
that behalf (which if it be, the saying contains a metonymie of the cause for
the effect, Where, or in what word, or phrase, of the saying he speaks of, his
metonymie of the cause for the effect resideth, verily I understand not.
a thing not unusual in Scripture) yet this denomination and use of it is
better served in Men's baptism then in Childrens; because Children have no such
principle to act in them, as Repentance is, etc. I have much ado to make any
competent sense of this period: but as far as I apprehend, I answer;

Sect. 60.
1. Delivering himself only thus; IF it shall be conceived, that therefore it
is called, etc. does he not encourage and teach others to doubt with himself,
whether Baptism be called the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins,
in any such consideration, as here he suggesteth? Or himself only being in
suspense about the truth of the notion, why does he build castles in the air,
or offer sacrifice to an unknown god? undertaking to assign us a reason of
that, which, for ought he knows, yea or pretends to know, may be of the
house and lineage of that which is not? He acts this part of vanity no fewer
then five times over within the compass of two pages, viz. p. 15. and 16.

2. That which he sacrifices to his unknown God, is a corrupt thing. For they
who are duly baptized, do not always take up that ordinance out of a principle
of repentance. Simon the Sorcerer, being baptized by Philip, was (I suppose) in
Mr. A's judgment, duly baptized; yet it appears by his story that he took not
up this Ordinance out of a principle of Repentance. Or if Simon the Sorcerer
were not duly baptized, yet certainly the Lord Christ was. But did he take up
the Ordinance of Baptism out of a Principle of Repentance? And if none be to be
looked upon as duly baptized, but only those, who take up the Ordinance out of
a Principle of Repentance, both He, and we, have cause in abundance to demur,
and doubt, whether the far greater part of those in this nation, who have
lately been dipped, have been duly baptized, or no Yea Mr. A. himself,
according to such a principle, cannot upon any certainty of knowledge, affirm
any person to have been been duly baptized, unless (him happily) self. Nor
indeed does the regular and due administration of Baptism depend upon any
principle of Repentance in the person to be baptized. It is a true saying of
Musculus, that Baptism is indeed the Laver of Regeneration; but not so, that
only they who are actually regenerate, ought to be sealed therewith, but those
also, who are to be regenerated afterward. Baptismus est lavacrum regeneration
is; sed non ita, ut regenerati tantum illo debeant obsignari, verum etiam
regenerandi. Mus. in Mat. c. 22.
And Calvin answering an objection against the Baptizing of Infants, affirms
that they are to be baptized, in futuram poenitentiam and fidem Calv. Institut.
l. 6. c. 14. Sect. 20.
1. in order to that Repentance, and Faith, which afterward should be found in
them. And herein their Doctrine is expressly consonant to the Scriptures. I
indeed (says John the Baptist to those, who were at present a generation of
vipers) baptize you with water (...), for, or, unto Repentance; [1. to oblige
or engage you the more effectually to Repent] Mat. 3. 11. So v. 8. Bring forth
therefore [therefore, 1. since you have now been baptized] fruits worthy
Repentance.

3. When he says, upon which they look for remission of sins according to the
promise of God in that behalf, I do not well understand with what antecedent he
intends, a match for his Relative, WHICH. If he intends it barely and nakedly
with Repentance, that which he says, nothing concerns the Interest of his
cause. If, with this clause, do take up the Ordinance of Baptism out of a
Principle of Repentance, so that his meaning be, that upon such a taking up of
the Ordinance as this, viz. out of a principle of Repentance, persons look for
the remission of sins according, etc.

Sect. 61.
1. Remission of sins is promised by God unto Repentance, whether it be
accompanied with Baptism or no, ( Act. 3. 19. Act. 5. 31. Luk 24. 47. Prove. 28.
13.) And consequently he that truly repents, may look for remission of sins
according to the promise of God in that behalf, whether he takes up the
Ordinance of Baptism, or no. Yea according to Mr. A's. own principles, no
person ought to be baptized, until he believes: and what is believing, being
interpreted, less then a looking for remission of sins upon Repentance
according to the promise of God in that behalf? If so, then men may, nay must,
or ought, to look for remission of sins upon Repentance, according, etc. before
the taking up of the Ordinance he speaks of, and consequently, without it.

2. In the Scriptures I find neither precept for, nor example of, any looking
for remission of sins by any man, simply upon his taking up the Ordinance of
Baptism, no though taken up by him out of a principle of Repentance.

4. What he means by his Denomination and use of Baptism better served in
men's baptism, then in childrens, I am again to seek. If by this better service,
he means any thing meet for the understandings of men, I know no reason why the
Denomination and use of Baptism he speaks of, should be either better, or so
well served in the Baptism of men, as of children, considering that God himself
judged the like Denomination and use of circumcision better served in the
circumcision of children, then of men; Otherwise I suppose he would have
ordained by Law the circumcising of men, rather then of children. And whereas
the Apostle declares the use of circumcision by this Denomination, a sign and
seal of the righteousness of Faith, (Romans 4. 11.) is not the Denomination of
it, and consequently the use of it, the same in substance, both with the
Denomination and use of Baptism? For what is Repentance but Faith in
implication, as Faith also comprehends Repentance in it, the Scriptures
accordingly by reason of this mutual (...), making the same promises
indifferently unto the one, and the other? Again, what is Remission of sins,
but the righteousness of Faith? Or what is the Righteousness of Faith, but in
strictest propriety of speech, remission of sins? As for that newfangled
conceit, that Circumcision was a sign and seal of the righteousness of Faith
only unto Abraham (personally considered) it is so ridiculously importune, that
an operous and solemn confutation of it would be little other it self.
Certainly God did not injoyne two kinds of circumcision, the one specifically
differing (in the signification and end of it) from the other; one, to signify
and seal both covenants, as well that which was temporal or carnal, as that
which was spiritual; another, to signify that covenant only which was
spiritual. Besides, if circumcision had signified and sealed nothing to the
Jewish nation, but only the covenant of God to give them the land of the
earthly Canaan, why should God covenant with them (long after Abraham was dead)
that he would circumcise their heart, and the heart of their seed, to love the
Lord their God with all their heart, and with all their soul, that they might
live? Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Doubtless these things import much more in circumcision,
then either the signifying, or sealing, of an earthly covenant, unto those, to
whom it was given. This appears from many other passages of Scripture, which
may be considered at leisure. Romans 2. 28, 29. Philip. 3. 3. Col. 2. 11. Act. 7.
51. (besides other)

As for the great argument in defense of the wild conceit now opposed, built
upon Romans 4. 11. it is built quite besides the clear meaning and import of the
place. For because here it is said, that He [Abraham] received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the Faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised, THAT HE MIGHT BE THE FATHER OF ALL THEM THAT BELIEVE, though
they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed unto them also;
Mr. Fisher See Mr. Fisher Baby-Baptism. p. 18. 19, 24, 154, 269.
and Mr. A. would infer, from these words, that he might be the Father of all
them that believe, that Abraham received circumcision [ viz. in his flesh] as a
seal of the righteousness of Faith, for this end, that by receiving it upon
this account, or upon these terms, [ viz. as a seal of the righteousness of
Faith] he might hereby be made, or become, the Father of all that believe, etc.
Which honor they weakly imagine could not accrue unto him by his receiving of
circumcision, if any other of his posterity should receive it upon the same
terms with him; I mean, as a seal of the righteousness of Faith. This is the
strength (or weakness rather) of their arguing from this place, that
Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of Faith unto Abraham only, For

1. Though Abraham did receive the sign of Circumcision in his flesh, ( Genesis
17. 24, 26.) yet is it not this receiving it, which is here spoken of; but his
receiving it in the Law or Ordinance of it [from God] in such a sense as John
the Baptist may be said to have received Baptism; viz. because he was the first
to whom the Ordinance of Baptism was delivered by God. Thus also Moses is said
by Stephen to have RECEIVED the lively Oracles to give unto them. Act. 7. 38.
In this sense also Christ is said to have RECEIVED of the Father the promise of
the holy Ghost, which he shed forth. Act. 2. 33. And if Abraham's RECEIVING
Circumcision in this place, signified his being circumcised in the flesh, it
must follow, that all his posterity, receiving circumcision in this sense, as
well as he, should at least in part, all of them be Fathers of them that
believe as well as he; in as much as this prerogative is manifestly by the
Apostles suspended upon that receiving of Circumcision, which is here spoken
of, not upon the end, for which he received it.

2. By the Faith, which Abraham is here said to have had being yet
uncircumcised, and of the righteousness of which he is said to have received
Circumcision, as a sign, and seal, is not meant that individual Faith, whether
act, or habit, which was in Abraham, but the species or kind of Faith, which he
had. In such a sense as this, the Apostle says that that Faith which was in
Timothy, dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois [2 Timothy 1. 5.] meaning, the same
species or kind of Faith, i. (as himself also expresses it) of Faith
Unfeigned. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned Faith that is in thee,
which first dwelt in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am
persuaded that in thee also. In like manner, by the Faith of Abraham, twice in
this very chapter ( Romans 4. 12, 16.) is meant that species or kind of Paith
which Abraham had.

3. For the clear understanding the Scripture before us, it is diligently to
be observed, that the Apostle does not say, that Abraham received circumcision
as either sign, or seal of his Faith, but, of the righteousness of the Faith,
which he had, i. of that justification, or justified estate, wherein by virtue
of the counsel, will, and decree of God in that behalf, he was invested or
instated, by, and upon, his beleving. Circumcision was neither sign, nor seal,
of Abraham's Faith, nor of any other man's Faith how like soever unto Abraham's,
but of the righteousness of his Faith; yet not as his, but as true, and
unfeigned, 1. such, as unto which God by covenant and promise, had annexed the
Grace and blessedness of Justification. From whence it fallows,

4. That circumcision could not be a sign or seal of the righteousness of
Abraham's Faith only, individually or personally considered; but must needs be
this sign and seal of the same righteousness of the like Faith, in what
person, or persons soever it should be found. Yea it was a sign and seal of the
righteousness of Faith, simply and indefinitely considered, i. as promised or
covenanted by God unto mankind. So that whether any person among the Jews had
been circumcised, or not, and so whether any circumcised person had believed,
or not, yet was Circumcision a sign and seal of the righteousness of Faith
unto them, as well as unto those, who were both circumcised, and believed. i.
As God made this covenant with the world, or mankind in general, that
whosoever truly believed in him, should hereby become righteous, or (which is
the same) be justified; so likewise upon the same general and unlimited terms,
he gave the Ordinance of circumcision (by the hand or ministry of his servant
Abraham) for a sign and seal of his truth and faithfulness in this covenant
[i. that he would justify all those without exception who should truly
beleeve] This is evident from these words [in the fall of the verse] in their
dependence upon the former; that righteousness might be imputed unto them also
[unto them, i. unto all] that should believe [whether circumcised, or
uncircumcised] as if he should have said; Therefore Abraham received the sign
of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of that kind of Faith, which he had
being yet uncircu^cised, that so all those without exception, who should
believe as he did, might have the same assurance with him, that righteousness
should be imputed unto them also, as it had been unto him, i. that they should
be as certainly justified by God, as he had been. Mr. Fishers notion, denying
Circumcision of old, and Baptism now, to be any sign at all unto children, is
very childish, and unworthy a Considering man. Circumcision was the same, i.
the same sign, unto children, which it was unto men: nor was there any
difference, change, or alteration in it, or in the signifying nature or
property of it, when it was actually apprehended and understood by these
children being now become men. But the present inability or incapacity in
children to understand the language or signification of a sign, does not prove
that that which is really a sign, is no sign unto them: it only proves, that
it is not apprehended as a sign, or in the signifying relation of it, by them.
If signs be no signs unto children, because they do not at present understand
their signification, it will follow, that there are none at all in the world
unto men, whilst they are asleep, or whilst through any engagement of their
minds or thoughts otherwise, they do not actually mind or attend the
significations of them. A sign is not therefore called a sign, because it
always actually signifies one thing, or other, unto any man, but because it is
apt to signify such or such a thing, unto those that are in a capacity
(whether more immediate, or more remote) to understand it, and withal,
actually mind the signification. But the conceit we now speak of is so
waterish, that there is no taste either of truth, or reason in it.

Sect. 62.
5. By the premises levied in the consideration of the Scripture before us,
duly considered, it clearly appears, that when Abraham's said to have
RECEIVED the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the Faith
which he had being yet uncircumcised, THAT HE MIGHT BE THE FATHER OF ALL THAT
BELIEVE; the meaning is, that God, by casting this peculiar honor upon
Abraham, to make him, from amongst all the men in the world, the Receiver of,
and (as it were) his Great feoffee in trust for, his Great Ordinance of
Circumcision, which he intended for a sign, and seal of that blessed Covenant
of Grace made with him and his seed, and in them, with all the world, did
characterise and commend him unto the world as the Father of all that should
ever after believe, i. for the most exemplarie and signal Believer that ever
the world had seen, the worth and transcendent excellency of whose Faith was
enough to replenish the earth with a generation of believers. The meaning of
this expression, That he might be the Father of, etc. according to the frequent
use of the verb substantive in the Scripture, is, that he might be declared, or
made known, to be, the Father (in the sense mentioned) of all that believe.
That ye may be the children of your Father, etc. [1. that ye may be known to be
so] Mat. 5. 45. And the man whom the Lord shall choose, shall be holy. [i. shall
be owned or acknowledged for holy] Number. 16. 7. So again: And now I beseech thee
let the power of my Lord be great, [1. appear, or be discovered to be great]
Number. 14: 17. That sin might BE out of measure sinful by the commandment, [1.
might appear, or, be known to be so] Romans 7. 13. Besides many the like This
interpretation of the verb Substantive, BE, Mr. Fisher himself attesteth,
affirming that Circumcision was a seal to Abraham to honor the greatness of
the Faith he had, and to NOTIFY him to be the Father of the Faithful, as is
plainly expest, Romans 4. 11. Baby-Baptism. p. 153.
As God by choosing Moses out of all the children of Israel, yea out of the
whole world, to be the first and immediate Receiver from himself of those
lively Oracles (as Stephen expresses them, Act. 7.) hereby declaclared and
commended him both unto the nation of the Jews, and then to all the world
besides, for a Great Prophet, and Person highly interessed in his favor, etc.
and did the like by John Baptist, in making choice of him from amongst all the
holy and worthy persons in the world* to be the first and imediate Receiver of
Baptism from his hand, that s^ by, and from, him it might be propagated unto
all those, to whom it was intended; in like manner by singling, and choosing
Abraham out from amongst the generation of men spread upon the face of the
whole Earth, to be the first and imediate Receiver of the Great Ordinance of
Circumcision, intended and given for a sign and seal of the Righteosness of
such a Faith, or kind of Faith, as he had being yet uncircumcised, by, and
from, him to be derived unto all those, that should desire, or be found meet to
partake thereof; he did (I say) hy casting the Spirit of this glory upon him,
recommend and set him forth unto the world as the Father of all those that
should believe, [i. for a person, whose Faith he so highly esteemed, that he
invited the world to follow his steps herein] So that Abraham was not properly
or formally constituted, or made the Father of all that believe, (in the sense
declared) by his receiving the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness os the Faith, which, etc. but by that great and worthy spirit of
Faith acting, and showing it self from time to time so exemplarily in him in
several cases, upon occasion (as appears, Romans 4. 18. Who against hope
believed in hope, that he might become, the Father of many a) See Romans 4 18,
19, 20, 21. Heb. 11. 8, 9, 17, etc.
nations, according to that which was spoken, So shall thy seed be, etc.) Only
the honor of this Father-hood, which was Abraham's equitable right upon the
account now specified, before his receiving Circumcision, God was pleased to
attest and set his seal unto, in the sight and presence (as it were) of Heaven
and Earth, by revealing that his mysterious and great Ordinance of circumcision
first unto him, as for his own personal accommodation, and heavenly security
in matters of highest concernment unto him, so likewise for the like benefit
and blessing unto his posterity, and all those who should incorporate, and
make one nation and people with them. And that the world might understand and
know, that the consignment of this great Ordinance unto Abraham, was intended
by God as an honorable cognizance of that signal Faith, which was in him; he
was pleased to impose this sense and signification upon the said Ordinance;
viz. that it should be a seal, or means of confirmation unto the world, that in
whomsoever that kind of Faith, which was in Abraham, should be found, he should
with Abraham, be justified in his sight, Romans 4. 11, 22, 23, 24. Gal. 3. 6, 7,
8. 9.

Sect. 63.
6. (And lastly, for this) evident it is, 1. that Abraham his being
circumcised, or his receiving this Ordinance in the flesh, is not in this
Scripture so much as mentioned, or intended, but only his receiving the first
discovery and command of it from God, as a Feoffee in trust, for his
posterity, and those who should desire to incorporate with them. 2. That
Circumcision, the Ordinance whereof Abraham thus received, was not intended, or
given by God, as either a sign or seal, either of Abraham's Faith, or of the
Faith of any other person; nor yet as either sign or seal of the righteousness
of Abraham's personal or individual Faith, as such, but of the righteousness
of the same kind of Faith, in whomsoever, or in how many soever it should be
found, during the time assigned by God for the continuance in it in the world.
3. That Abraham was very notably and solemnly declared by God unto the world to
be the Father of all that believe, not by any kind of receiving Circumcision in
his flesh, wherein all his posterity were equally privileged with him, but by
receiving the Ordinance and commandment of it immediately, and before any other
person, from God; which was his prerogative alone. 4. (And lastly) That the
counsel and mind of God in circumcision, was, that it should be both a sign
and seal of the righteousness of a true and unfeigned Faith. [i. of that kind
of Faith which was in Abraham] in whomsoever it should be found, as well as in
Abraham; yea simply and indefinitely so,] i. whether this Faith had ever been
found in any man, or no; inasmuch as neither men's believing, nor their
non-beleeving, do, or can, at all alter the purpose or counsel of God in any
of his Ordinances.]

Sect. 64.
Did I not judge the explication given of the Scripture lately argued,
abundantly sufficient to satisfy and convince any man, to whom Paul, being
alive, would not say, if he be ignorant, let him be ignorant, that Circumcision
was not a sign or seal of the righteousness of Abraham's personal or
individual Faith only, but generally and universally of the righteousness of
the same kind of Faith, in whomsoever it should be found, I should add much
more for his satisfaction in that behalf. I trust the Reader will pardon the
digression, considering that the text of ^cripture opened herein, thoroughly and
distinctly understood, gives little less then a through light into the Question
about Infant Baptism. And I am in no degree doubtful, had but Mr. Fisher, and
Mr. A. been both willing, and able to reach the mind of the holy Ghost therein,
and withal quitted themselves like men in the consideration of it, they had
been preserved in the straight way of God and of the Gospel, and not turned
aside into the crooked path of Ana-Baptism. But let us now return, and hear
what Mr. A. has farther to say, why God's design touching Repentance for the
Remission of sins, should be better served, or answered, by the Baptizing of
men, then of children. Therefore

2. (Says he) If it be called the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of
sins, because men by taking up that Ordinance, do engage themselves to the
practice of repentance and mortification, as the Apostle supposes the
believing Romans Mr. A. p. 15. 16.
to have done, Romans 6. 2, to 6. (By the way, what need we an IF, If it be
called, etc. if the Apostle has determined the case?) then this end is better
provided for in the baptism of men, then of Infants. Surely Circumcision under
the Law was an engagement unto men to the practice of repentance and
mortification, as well as Baptism under the Gospel. And yet God judged this end
of it better served, and answered, by the administration of it unto Infants,
then unto men; otherwise we presume he would have prescribed the Administration
of it unto men, rather then unto children. That men were engaged by their being
Circumcised unto the practice of Repentance and Mortification, I suppose is no
man's doubt or question. If it be, resolution in abundance on that hand we
speak of may be had, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Jer. 4. 4. Romans 2. 28, 29. Phil. 3. 3.
(besides some other places) Therefore unless Mr. A. can give us some better
reason, then God himself knew any in the like case, why a Baptismall engagement
unto Repentance and Mortification, should be better provided for by the
baptising of men, then of children, it concerns him to retract his assertion in
this behalf, But

3. The reason (or rather, vice-reason) which he gives of such his assertion,
is, because an engagement to practice repentance, supposes, 1. An end of
Repentance. 2. A capacity of performing that, to which they do engage; neither
of which are to be found in Infants, etc. I answer,

Sect. 65.
1. An engagement to practice Repentance by those who were circumcised,
supposed as much an end of repentance, as it does in those who are baptized
(and so likewise a capacity to perform that, which was engaged unto) yet
these, neither divisim, nor conjunctim, were judged any reason by God why
Infants ought not to be circumcised. But the wisdom (it seems) of men
rebaptized is super-infinite.

2. I confess, I do not understand what he means, when he affirms, that an
end of repentance is not to be found in infants, but in men. And therefore
reverencing that saying of the wise man, He that answers a matter before he
hears, [i. understandeth] it, it is folly and shame unto him, I shall make no
further answer at present unto it, but this; viz. that when Mr. A. shall enable
me to understand how the end of repentance is in men, and not in children, I
shall freely give him my sense of his notion.

3. Nor is Mr. A. a friend either unto reason, or to the truth, in affirming,
that there is no capacity in children of performing that, to which they do
engage. For, 1. in such a sense as there is a capacity in them to engage unto
any thing, there is likewise to perform. Children are in as good and proper a
capacity to perform that, which is or ought to be engaged unto in Baptim, as
to make the engagement it self. Secondly, though children be not in a present,
actual, or immediate capacity to perform that, which Baptism engages unto,
yet are they in a remote and mediate capacity hereof, and which by the use of
means, and blessing of God upon these means, may in due time become actual.
Nor can I think that all those, who according to Mr. A's. notion, are, or have
been duly baptized, have been in an actual and present capacity at the time
of their baptizing, to perform every Luke 3. 13.
thing they engaged unto by being baptized. They who as yet doubted whether
John was the Messiah, or no, were not in a present or immediate capacity of
beeleeving Christ to be this Messiah; yet were they engaged by their being
baptized to believe this; and notwithstanding their actual incapacitie of
believing it, were lawfully baptized. So likewise they, who think they truly
believe, and are supposed by others to believe accordingly, and yet both these
suppositions notwithstanding, do not truly believe, may and ought nevertheless
to be baptized; yet are they in no actual capacity to perform that to which
they engage by being baptized; I mean to believe in Jesus Christ, and to
persevere believing unto the end. Yea Mr. A. himself by being baptized, engaged
to a perseverance in Faith and holiness unto the end of his days; yet was he
not at the time of his baptism in an actual capacity to perform that, which
he engaged unto in this kind. For a present standing in Grace, or Faith, is no
more an actual capacity of persevering in either to the end of a man's life,
then a present healthful state or condition of the body is an actual
capacity of preserving himself in health until he dies; or then the present
possession of an estate worth 1000. l. per annum, is an actual capacity in
the possessor of paying a debt of a 1000. or 2000 l. twenty years after. So
then the difference which Mr. A. pretends to find in the consideration before
us, between men and children in reference unto Baptism, is altogether
inconsiderable, and turns to no account at all for the support of his cause.
Whether this second consideration, which he supposes may be the reason why
Baptism is termed the Baptism of repentance for remission of sins, be
consistent with the first, I shall not trouble the Reader to discuss; but
rather desire him to consider. But

Sect. 66.
3. He advances in his supposals about the business in hand, thus, p. 16. If
it be called the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins, because God
thereby signifies and SEALS unto men the remission of their sins upon their
repentance, this end and use likewise is BETTER answered in men's Baptism, who
do repent, then in Infants who do not, etc. I answer,

1. His conceit of any End, or Use, of Baptism better answered in the baptism
of men, then of Infants, has been again and again put to rebuke by the
consideration of the Counsel of God himself in circumcision. We shall not need
to repeat the consideration here. There was everywhit as much reason, why it
might have been said in the days of Circumcision, that such and such an End,
or Use, of Circumcision, is better answered by the circumcising of men, then of
infants, as it can be said under the Gospel, that any End, or Use of Baptism is
better answered by the baptizing of Men, then of Children. But

2. When he says, that the End of Baptism (so with some regret of jealousy
supposed by him) is BETTER answered by the baptizing of men, then of children,
does he not very plainly imply and grant, that this End is competently (at
least) answered in the baptizing of children also? If so, then certainly the
baptizing of children is neither a nullitie, nor yet a thing unlawful. But
this consequence, and the goodness of it, have been sufficiently vindicated in
the premises. As the Apostle in the case of marriage, affirming that he that
keeps his virgin [meaning unmarried] does BETTER, grants with all, that he
that gives her in marriage, does WELL, 1 Cor. 7. 36, 38. So he that teaches
that any End of Baptism, is BETTER answered one way, undeniably grants, that
this End may WELL and to a commendable degree, be answered in another.

Sect. 67.
3. Whereas he supposes, that Baptism may be called the Baptism of Repentance
for the remission of sins, because God thereby signifies and SEALS the
remission of sins upon Repentance, etc. he takes the boldness to lift up his
pen against the great Apostle of his Faith (in the doctrine of
Antipedo-baptism;) Mr. Sam. Fisher, whose avowed Doctrine it is, that Baptism,
as it is not so much as signifying unto children, (a) so is it no SEALING
Ordinance Baby-Baptsm p. 154, etc.
unto any. In which notion of his he lays the honor of the Ordinance of
Baptism in the dust, unto which notwithstanding otherwise he cries, Hosanna in
the highest.

4. Whereas he gives this for a reason, why the End and Use of Baptism, of
which he speaks, should be better answered by the baptizing of men, then of
children viz. Because men, who have begun to repent, are in a good capacity to
receive confirmation and establishment in their hope and confidence -- whereas
Infants, whilst such, are incapable of any such thing, etc. I answer,

1. That which himself here, only doubtfully, and with proviso, call's one End
and Use of Baptism, ( viz. the signifying and sealing unto men, the remission
of their sins upon repentance) one greater then He in the cause of Ana-Baptism
(as we lately heard) denies to be either the one, or the other. Himself being
doubtful, whether there be any such End or Use of Baptism, as that here
mentioned by him, upon what sober account does he trouble the world with
telling them, that in case there be such, either End, or Use, they are better
answered, by the baptism of men, then of children? Is that which may not be, as
well as be, better answered by one means, then another? These are strange
speculations.

2. Supposing that one End and Use of Baptism should be better answered by the
baptizing of men, then of children, what follows from hence? It neither follows
(in the first place) that therefore every end and use thereof is better
answered by such an administration; nor (in the second) that Baptism therefore
is not to be administered unto children. One end of meats and drinks (as for
example, the preservation of the health and strength of men and women come to
their just statures and growth) is better answered by the eating and drinking
of men and women, then of children: but it follows not from hence, that
therefore eating and drinking are not to be allowed unto children. One end and
use of marriage is better answered by the marrying of persons in the strength
and vigor of their youth: but this proves not, that therefore it is unlawful
for persons of more maturitie of years to marry. This very End and Use of
Baptism here suggested, was better answered by the Baptism of men, who had
sinned and repented, then by the baptism of Christ himself, who was incapable
of repentance, and of remission of sins hereby; yet this proves not, that
therefore the baptism of Christ was unlawful. Therefore Mr. A's. reasoning at
this turn is to little purpose.

Sect. 68.
3. Whereas he attempteth to prove, that the End and Use of Baptism now under
consideration, is better answered by the baptism of men, then of children, by
this argument; viz. because men WHO HAVE BEGUN TO REPENT, are in a good
capacity to receive, etc. does he not reason at as loose a tate, as he that
should go about to prove that men shall be saved, because righteous men shall
be saved? or should infer, that such and such things do belong to a subject
simply considered, because they belong to this subject so and so qualified?

4. Though Abraham, when he was circumcised, was in a good capacity to receive
confirmation and establishment in his hope and confidence, both that God would
give unto him (in his posterity) the promised land of Canaan, and likewise
that he would justify him through his believing, whereas Isaac, at the time of
his circumcising, was in no such capacity of either, yet was the circumcising
of Isaac every whit as regular and lawful, as the circumcising of Abraham; yea
was of the two, more agreeable to the standing Law for Circumcision. In like
manner though children be in no such capacity at the time of their baptizing,
to receive confirmation and establishment in their hope and confidence of
obtaining remission of sins upon their repentance, as repentant men are, when
they are baptized, yet may their baptism be every whit as lawful, yea and more
regular, then the baptizing of such men. Therefore Mr. A's. discourse in the
quarters we are now beating up, is without sinews.

Sect. 69.
5. (And lastly for this) when he says, whereas Infants, whilst such, are
ALTOGETHER incapable of of any such thing; in respect whereof this end is made
frustrate, when Baptism is given unto them, he speaks truth neither in the
premises, nor in the conclusion. For 1. Infants, whilst such, are not
ALTOGETHER incapable of that, whereof he speaks. For although (as has been
formerly argued) they be not in an actual capacity of the thing, I mean, in
such a capacity whereby they are enabled to receive the Confirmation and
establishment he speaks of, at the time of their baptizing, or whilst thy are
infants, yet are they in some capacity, and this proper and direct, (though
mediate and remote) of receiving these accommodations in due time, as they are
in such a capacity, as soon as born, of speaking, thinking, apprehending, etc.
however this capacity is not ordinarily reduced into act till after several
years. Secondly, from hence it follows, that neither is that End of Baptism, of
which he speaks, made frustrate, when Baptism is given unto children, any whit
more, then the End of planting is made frustrate by the non-fructification of
the tree planted immediately upon the planting of it; or the end of sowing made
frustrate by reason that the seed does not yield an harvest-increase, as soon
as it is sown. What I do, thou know not now (said the Lord Christ unto
Peter, and in him, to the rest) but thou shall know hereafter; Joh. 13. 7.
Christ's action here spoken of, was not hereby made frustrate unto Peter,
because he understood not the meaning or import of it, when it was acted. And
many of his sayings to his Disciples, which they understood not when they were
spoken, were understood by them with advantage afterward. See Sect. 152.

Sect. 70.
Whereas he adds, that there is a greater APPEARANCE both of the wisdom and
goodness of God in vouchsafing and applying such a means as Baptism is, to
strengthen men's Faith in his promise of Remission of sins upon their
repentance, unto such, who 1. have need of this Confirmation; and 2. are
capable of receiving it, then there is in that application of it which is made
unto Infants, who neither have need of it, not yet are capable of receiving it;
I answer,

1. What appearance there may be of the wisdom and goodness of God in such a
disposition as he speaks of, in his own eyes, or in the eyes of men of his
judgment, I shall not prejudge; but certain I am that there neither is, nor
has been, any such appearance in the eyes of many men, as sharp-sighted in
matters of this nature, as they.

2. Nor does it argue, either greater wisdom, or goodness to withhold from a
man such supplies, which he may have urgent occasion to make use of, until the
very pang of his necessity in this kind comes upon him, then it does to
prevent him with such accommodations against the time of his need. Suppose that
Circumcision was a sign and seal only of the faithfulness of God in his
promise of giving the land of Canaan unto the Jews, yet did there appear as
much wisdom and goodness of God in vouchsafing and applying this means of their
confirmation herein unto them, whilst they were yet children, and so at present
incapable of receiving it, as there would, or could have done, in vouchsafing
and applying the same means unto them afterward, when they were both more
capable of the said confirmation, and withal stood in more need of it.

Sect. 71.
3. (And lastly, for this) Though children have no present need of that
Confirmation he speaks of, yet have they even present need of the application
of such an Ordinance unto them, by means whereof they may receive this
Confirmation with advantage in due time.

As the children of the Jews, had need (at least some kind of need, unless we
shall say, that Circumcision was altogether superfluous unto them) of such an
Ordinance to be administered unto them, by which they might be confirmed
afterward, in the truth and faithfulness of God for the performance of that
promise, whatever it was, which was signed and sealed unto them by
circumcision, although they were incapable of any such confirmation as this, at
the time when they were circumcised: in like manner children under the Gospel,
though whilst children, they stand in no need of confirmation in the truth of
the Covenant of Grace, yea and are all this while incapable of it, yet this is
no argument to prove that therefore they do not stand in need of being
prevented with such an Ordinance from God, by which they may be confirmed
herein, when they shall arrive at a capacity of this confirmation. Mariners,
or such who traffic by Sea, whilst they are yet on shore in their own land,
or whilst they are sailing upon the seas, may stand in need of many things, of
which notwithstanding they have no use, or benefit, until they come to another
land, whether their course is intended. And though the same things may possibly
be procured and had in this other land, whether their voyage is bent, yet if
they cannot be had here upon terms equally beneficial with those, on which
they may be had in their own land, the men we speak of may truly and properly
enough be said to stand in need of them before they go to sea, and whilst they
are yet in their own land. In like manner though children have no actual or
present benefit by Baptism, nor are capable of any, until years of discretion
and knowledge, yea and though they may be baptized, when they come to be men, as
well as whilst they are yet children; yet neither of these considerations, nor
both together, argue any thing, but that baptism may be needful for children,
and that, whilst such, they receive it upon terms of better advantage for their
future occasions, then they could do, in case they should not receive it until
they come to be men. But the truth is that Mr. A. in all these reasonings, on
which He insists in his second argument against Infant Baptism, seems to strive
to out-wisdom God: and all they who rise up against the same practice with
arguments pretending inconvenience, unprofitablenesse (or the like) therein,
dash their foot against the same stone.

Sect. 72.
4. We have yet (p. 16.) another possible reason proposed to us, why it may be
called the Baptism of Repentance for remission of sins, viz. this, Because the
persons who are baptized do thereby profess and DECLARE UNTO THE WORLD, that
they look for remission of sins from God, upon their repentance. If (says he)
it be called, etc, yet this end also is better answered in men's Baptism, then
in infants. (I answer as formerly)

1. But what if this be no reason of that Denomination of Baptism, of which we
have heard so much to so little purpose? what then becomes of that, which Mr.
A. builds upon it? The air may be afraid of being beaten by it. That the five
reasons here suggested by him, should all of them be reasons in realitie and
truth) of the said Denomination, is (I suppose) scarce his own thought, or
notion: nor are they all well consistent amongst themselves (as was formerly
hinted) nor has he declared his mind which of the five, one, or more, should
inherit.

2. The reason or end of the said Denomination here waveringly, and upon
supposall, suggested by him, is (probably) no true reason or end thereof. For
how can persons baptized (upon the terms allowed by him, and frequently
practiced in his way) thereby profess and DECLARE UNTO THE WORLD that they
look for remission of sins upon their repentance, when as 1. many are baptized
in hugger-mugger, privately, and in the night, and of whose baptism its self the
world (possibly) may have no knowledge whilst they live? Yea I know, and Mr. A.
knows, a person not inconsiderable in the Commonwealth of new-baptism, who
kept his Baptism to himself for a eleven or twelve years together, before the
world, yea or his fellow-dippers themselves, one or two happily present at the
solemnity, excepted, knew any thing thereof. Doubtless all this while he made
no profession or declaration unto the world of any thing at all by his baptism.
2. In case the persons baptized should make proclamation in the streets or
marketplaces, that they are baptized, the world is at liberty whether they
will believe them, or no. If (says Christ, Joh. 5. 31.) I bear witness of my
self, my witness is not true, [meaning, legally true, or such, which you,
being strangers to me, are necessitated to own] And it is no easy matter for
the world to receive testimony of any man's baptism [in Mr. A's way of
baptizing] from two or three witnesses present at it. 3. (And lastly) in case
the world might be satisfied touching the truth and certainty of the baptism
of all that are baptized, yet do they not understand any such profession, or
declaration, imported or made by it, viz. that the persons baptized look for
remission of sins upon their repentance. Therefore no such profession or
declaration as this is made by baptism unto the world: and consequently this is
no end of baptism. To what purpose then does he pretend, that it is better
answered in the baptism of men, then of Infants.

Sect. 73.
Whreas he says, that men are capable of making such a profession and
declaration of themselves to the world IN and BY their Baptism, when as infants
are altogether incapable of doing any such thing; I answer,

1. That men themselves are very ill capable of making that profession he
speaks of, or any other, in their Baptism, [1. during the time of their being
under water]

2. As incapable altogether are they of making either the one, or the other, BY
their Baptism. A man cannot profess or declare that, BY baptism (at least
orderly and regularly) which God never intended should be professed or declared
by it Now Mr. A. himself speaks doubtingly whether such a profession and
declaratin as we now speak of, be any end of baptism, or no. If they be not (a
negative already proved by us, as well as questioned, or doubted, by him) then
can they not by any man be made by it.

3. There is very seldom much of the world, for the most part nothing at all,
present at the baptizing of those, who Mr. A. here supposes should make the
profession and declaration which he speaks of, in and by their Baptism. In what
capacity then are they of making them unto the world at such a time?

4. (And lastly for this) though they who are baptized men, are able to make
what professions or declarations by words they please, about the time of their
baptism, which infants at the time of their Baptism, by themselves, or in their
own persons, cannot; yet he that offers his Infant unto baptism, and so he
that baptizeth it, may at this very time make the same, whether professions, or
declarations, with men. And how, or why such a profession and declaration as he
speaks of, made by these persons, when an infant is baptized, should not as
well answer and accommodate that end of Baptism (if such it be) which he here
suggesteth (at least in reference to the world) as the like made by other men,
when they are baptized, I verily understand not. Truly these arguments are no
honor or strength to the cause of Antipedo-baptism.

5. He yet supposes once more; If it be called the Baptism of repentance, etc.
because it seals and confirms the Covenant or promises of God made to men
touching the remission of their sins upon their repentance, yet this end and
use Mr.] A. p. 16, 17.
also is attained upon far BETTER TERMS in the Administration of Baptism to
believers, and to men of understanding, then it is, or can be, when administered
unto Infants who have neither. I answer,

Sect. 74.
1. This fifth (and last) IF, is the same in substance and import (and partly in
words also) with the third. Wherefore (to avoid Repetitions) the Reader is
desired to re-peruse the preceding, 67, 68, etc. Sections, where he shall find
the impertinencie of the contents of it argued and discovered. And

2. Whereas he here pleads, that If the intent of God in making Baptism a seal
of his Covenant and Promise, is not to make his Covenant more sure in it self,
but to give it a more sure, stable, and unquestionable being in the minds and
apprehensions of men, then this end cannot be attained in infants by their
Baptism, because they want the use and exercise of their reasons, judgments,
etc. without which the articles and terms of Gods Covenant will never take
place, or have a being in the minds of any, by way of belief; does he not again
put the wisdom of God to rebuke in his counsel and Ordinance of Circumcision?
For whatsoever Covenant or Promise it was which he intended to seal thereby, it
was no whit more to make it more sure in it self, but only in the minds and
apprehensions of men, then his intent is to make that Covenant and Promise
sure, which he seals by Baptism: and yet we know (and it has been often noted)
that he judged his end in this kind as well, or rather better attained, by the
application of that seal unto Infants, then unto men. But God, and Mr. A. (it
seems) are divided in their respective senses upon the case.

3. (And lastly for this) be it granted, that without the use and exercise of
men's reasons and judgments, the Articles and terms of Gods Covenant will never
take place, or have a being in the minds of any, etc. yet this is no reason at
all, why such a Seal, by which [i. by the knowledge and consideration of which]
God intends to give being, or a more sure being, to the said Articles in the
minds and and apprehensions of men, should not be administered, or applied, but
only where there is an actual and present use and exercise of these faculties;
See more of this, Sect. 71.
Especially this is no reason why this administration should not be made in the
case mentioned, when there are reasons why it should be made; which is the case
in Infant Baptism, (as it was also in Infant-Circumcision.) What these reasons
are, I mean, why the Seal of Baptism should be adminstred unto Infants, we
shall (God willing) declare in due time. By the way, Mr. A. seems to be a man
of more then ordinary foresight, in delivering himself so provisionally, under
the protection of so many IFS, touching his sense, why Baptism may be called
the Baptism of repentance for the rem^ssion of sins. For hereby he seems to
foresee, that by that time he had traveled a little further in his discourse,
he should start a better reason of that Denomination, then any of those now
offered by the shaking hand of any of his IF'S. We shall hear of this in due
time.

3. Mr. A. in his progress acquainteth us with another SEEMING end of Baptism.
Another end of Baptism (says he, p. 17.) SEEMS to be this; viz. that such who
are baptized, might thereby signify their acceptance of, and consent unto, the
terms of the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace. But the substance of this
seemingness, we had lately under the conduct of the fourth, IF (p. 16.) and in
part also, of the first IF, p. 15. And if the Reader desires further
satisfaction herein, he is desired to repair back to the rifling of the two
said IFS, Sect. 60, 61, etc. and Sect. 72, 73, etc.

Sect. 75.
Nor does he tell us any news, when he adds: For the Covenant of God with men
does consist of certain articles to be observed and kept by each party
covenanting, as covenants among men generally dc. But this old story (it may
be) makes way to a new. Therefore he steereth on his course, thus:

And as amongst men parties covenanting are wont to signify their mutual
consent to their respective articles, by some solemn act of theirs in presence
of witnesses, as by signing, sealing, delivering, etc. So God in the Covenant
between him and men, will have something like unto this done by men PVBLIQUELY,
to signify their consent to the terms of it, as well as what is done by him to
declare his readiness to do and perform what he has undertaken on his part. We
are yet in a safe road; or however, not much beside it. Only a touch upon two
things.

1. If by PVBLIQVELY, he means, in the sight of the world, or, upon such terms,
that all men, or the generality of persons round about, may readily come to
know and understand, then his rule condems his practice, and the practice
generally observed by persons of his judgment. For neither did himself, in
this sense, publicly, signify his co^s^nt to the terms of the covenant by
his being baptized, the generality of us knowing nothing of his Baptism, but
only by tradition (whose information in other cases is not very authentic, or
authoritative) or by common fame, which is known to be

Tam ficti pravique tenax, quam nuncia very. i. As well an h^ld-fast of that
feigned is,
As a Reporter of Truth's certainties.
And (as has been notic'd formerly) that most of those, who are led, as they
think, to Christ by the way of new Baptism, choose Nicodemus his season, either
formally or materially, for their voyage. Therefore what they do in this kind,
they do it not so PVBLIQUELY.

2. The will of God, in the Covenant made with Abraham and his posterity
(whether spiritual or temporal) was as much that something should be done by
me^ publicly to signify their consent unto the terms of it, as it is that
any thing in this kind should be done by men to signify their consent to the
terms of the Covenant of Grace in the Gospel. Therefore how impertinent is that
which follows;

Now faith in Christ, and an obedientiall subjection to ALL his Laws and
precepts, being the condition of this Covenant on man's part, at WHAT TIME
SOEVER HE ENTERS INTO COVENANT with God, and undertakes the performance of the
condition, he is to sign and seal the same IN THE PRESENCE of w^nesses by that
solemn ACT OF HIS in being baptized. For answer,

Sect. 76.
1. I had thought until now (and shall think so still, notwithstanding Mr. A's
thought to the contrary) that a person in his being baptized, is a patient, or
sufferer only, not an Agent, or Actour, much less that he performs any Solemn
Act herein. For they who act in their being baptized, must needs be
Se-baptists, and not baptized after the manner of the Gospel. So that his
notion about men's signifying their consent to the terms of the Gospel by some
solemn ACT, falls to the ground. If he pleads, that men act in offering, or
submitting themselves unto Baptism, though not in their Baptism it self, I
answer; Be it so, yet men's offering, or submitting themselves unto Baptism, are
no solemn or Sacramental actings, nor can their consent to the terms of the
Covenant, be said to be signified by these actings, unless it may be said
withal that men may testify that consent we speak of, without being baptized.
For that men may offer themselves, and submit unto Baptism, without being
actually baptized, is (I suppose) no man's question.

2. Whereas he makes an obedientiall subjection to ALL Christ's laws and
precepts, (without any explication, or proviso) as well as Faith in Christ, the
condition of the Covenant of Grace on man's part, does he not make a Law, by
which, were it of any force or authority, as well himself, as all other men,
should be condemned, unless he can approve himself an exception from that
General Rule of the Apostle James, In many things we offend all? If no person
can claim interest in the good things of the Covenant, but only they, who shall
perform the condition of this Covenant, and this condition be (either in whole
or in part) an obedien^iall subjection to all Christ's laws and precepts (as Mr.
A. determines) then in case he does not obedientially subject to all these laws
and precepts (which I am far from thinking that either he, or any other
person does, yea or that they do so much as know what all these Laws and
Precepts are) he has fast shut the door of life against himself.

3. Whereas he says, at what time soever a person enters into covenant with
God, he is to sign and seal the same in the presence of witnesses by the solemn
act of his being baptized; 1. I would demand of him, whether he thinks the Lord
Christ was not en^ered into covenant with God, before his being baptized; or
whether he acted besides rule, that at the time of his entering into covenant
with God, he did not sign and seal the same by his being baptized. Yea I cannot
but think that the Eunuch was entered into covenant with God some considerable
space of time, before his being baptized. Nor is it an extravagant thought to
conceive the same of Cornelius. 2. Nor is he able to prove (nor is the thing
much more probable, then proveable) any presence of witnesses, either at the
Baptizing of the Eunuch, or of Paul, besides many others)*. (and lastly) I
would gladly learn of him, whether the children of the Jews entered into
covenant with God at the time of their circumcising, or not till afterward,
when they were able to make profession of their Faith in God. If he teaches me
the former for truth, then would I gladly learn this lesson further, why the
children (at least the children of believers) under the Gospel, should not be
as capable of entering into Covenant with God, as they: and if so, why they
should not be baptized (according to his own principles.) If the latter, then
what necessity was there (and consequently, now is there) that at what time
soever a person enters into Covenant with God, he should sign and seal the
same.

Sect. 77.
Of his further conceptions about the business, he delivers himself thus, p.
17. In this respect especially I CONceive it is, that Baptism is called the
Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins. (Mark 1. 4. Luke 3. 3.)
because men are to take up that Ordinance upon their first beginning to repent,
in order to the remission of their sins. For like reason I SVPPOSE it is called
the washing of regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. because men upon there being born again,
are to be baptized according to what was practiced in the Apostles times. Hence
it is likewise, as MAY WELL BE CONCEIVED, that men's being born of water and of
the Spirit (John 3. 5.) the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost (Tit. 3. 5.) are joined together, not because the Spirit works
regeneration, in, and by Baptism, if we respect the beginning of it, etc. The
day will fail us to gather up, by animadversion, what Mr. A. has scattered
here by inadvertencie and inconsideratnesse. For,

1. After five several accounts lately given in by him (as we have heard) with
the Imprimis of an IF, in every of them (respectively) why Baptism should be
called, The Baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins, now, as IF he
had but dallied, and played fast and loose with us in these, he delivers us in
a sixth account, of the truth whereof he seems to be more confident, then of
any, then of all the former; and yet we have this also tendered unto us
somewhat tenderly (though with an, especially) viz. with an, I conceive; In
this respect especially I CONCEIVE, it is that, etc. But

2. Does not his Comparative term, especially, relating to all his five former
accounts, suppose, that all these had done virtuously, though this last
surpasses them all? And yet are not some of them, at least one of them (if not
more) altogether inconsistent with this? The tenor of this sixth and
highest-priz'd account being this, because men are to take up the Ordinance
upon their first beginning to repent, in order to the remission of their sins,
renders it very hardly consistent with that before delivered in the third
place, which (as we heard) was this, because God thereby signifies and seals
unto men the remission of their sins upon their repentance. If Baptism be
therefore called the Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, because
men are to take it up in order to the remission of their sins, God cannot
thereby either signify or seal unto men the remission of their sins upon their
repentance. The reason of the inconsistencie is plain; If God seals unto men
the forgiveness of their sins upon their repentance, Baptism cannot be taken
up (I mean, regularly and, according to the mind of God) in order hereunto;
because Baptism is not to be taken up (according to Mr. A's own principles) but
after repentance, and consequently, after remission of sins (if this be given
by God upon repentance) If the remission of sins precedes Baptism (which it
must needs do, if it be given upon repentance) then ought not Baptism to be
taken up in order thereunto. Or if it be taken up by any person in order
hereunto, the intention represents the action hateful and abominable in the
sight of God. Therefore another IF would better have become this sixth account
also, then an, ESPECIALLY. How ill consistent it is with some other of his
former accounts, I judge it beneath the Readers edification to examine. But

Sect. 78.
3. How lamely does he plead the cause of his beloved Conceit, that Baptism
should especially be therefore called the Baptism of repentance for etc.
because men are to take it up upon their first beginning to repent IN ORDER TO
THE REMISSION OF SINS; For like reason (says he) I suppose it is called the
washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. because men upon, etc. So again: Hence it
is likewise, as may well be conceived (but much better not conceived, nor once
thought) that men's being born of water and of the Spirit, etc. What can a man
reasonably imagine that he should see or notion in any one of, or in all, these
passages, to countenance his notion, that Baptism shoud be taken up -- in order
to Remission of sins? The clause, which in face would best have befriended him
at this turn, he suppresseth, notwithstanding it was at his pens end. For
having cited these words Act. 22. 16. And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be
baptized; immediately follows, And wash away thy sins. Why, being to act the
part he had now in hand, he should keep these words behind the Curtain, is a
secret that I know not how to enter. All that can with any face or color of
reason be proved from the scripture passages as yet produced, is nothing, but
what will be granted unto him without proof, viz. that Baptism, by persons
adult and believing, and not formerly baptized, ought to be taken up upon the
first opportunity after their believing. But this, Mr. A's principles
considered, according to which he was not baptized till many years after his
believing, puts him to rebuke; but concerns not us, who judge our selves to
have been baptized in our Infancy. But for the countenancing of the darling
notion mentioned, it is like we shall hear somewhat to more purpose ere long.
Mean while

4. It may not be amiss to observe by the way, how full of stonds Mr. A's
faith is (or at least seems to be) about the particulars argued in that part of
his discourse, which is under present consideration, and how lightly he treads
the ground, on which he is now walking. First, he only conceives it is, as he
says; In this respect especially I CONCEIVE it is, etc. Next, he supposes it
is. For like reason I SUPPOSE it is, etc. Thirdly, he tells us, that it may
well be conceived that it is; Hence it is likewise, as may WELL BE CONCEIVED,
etc. Lastly, his doubtless it was, though according to the grammatical import
of the particle, doubtless, it seems to imply confidence, yet according to the
more passable sense of this word in ordinary construction, it notes some
degree of hesitance, or question-making; I do not make this observation, as
blaming in the least Mr. A's. modesty, or dubitative manner of expressing
himself in things questionable and obscure; Only herein I judge him to be in no
better case then Peter was, when Paul said of him, that he was (...), to be
condemned, (Gal. 2. 11.) viz. that he should trouble the world, rend and tear
Ch^istan societies, upon the account of such ^otions or apprehensions, of the
truth whereof himself has no better assurance, then conceit, or dubitation.

5. (And lastly) His respective senses and expositions of Joh. ^. 5. born of
water and of the spirit; and so of Tit. 2. 5. the washing of regeneration, are
so much his, that our best Expositours do not own them; nor do either the words
themselves, nor yet the scope of the Context in either place require them.
Concerning the former of these places, Calvin expressly professes, that he can
at no hand be persuaded that Christ speaks here of Baptism; adding, that it
had not been seasonable for him so to do. Quantumve^o an hunc locum attinet,
nullo modo adducor ut Christum de B^ptismo verba facere credam: hoc enim
fuisset intempestivum. Calv: in Joh. 3. 5.
And not long after this; The water (says he, of which Christ here speaks) is
nothing else but the inward purgation and vegetation of the holy Ghost;
subjoyning this rule (for the confirmation of his exposition) that it is no^
unusual that the copula^ive particle should be taken Exegetically, when the
latter member is an explication of the former. (b) Ergo nihil est aliud, quam
interior Spiritus sancti purgatio ac vegetatio Ibid.
Add quod non est insolens copulam exegetio^ sumi, quum scilicet posterius
membrum est explicatio pri^ris. Ibid
Mr. John Deodate, commenteth the place thus; Of water] He seems to intimate
two distinct and several parts of this change: and by water he means the
expiation and remission of the sin, and by the Spirit, the whole work of
regeneration. Hugo Grotius finds the figure Hendiadis in the clause, born
again of water, and of the Spirit, i. (says he) of the Spirit, who is like
unto water in his working. Est autem (...). Nam sicut in spiritu and igne, Mat.
3. 11 significat per spiritum igneum, ita hic ex spiritu and aqua est, ex
spiritu aqueo Neque obstat quod vox altera quasi limitans hic praecedat. Nam
sic Act. 17. 25 -- Genesis 3. 16. and Genesis 2. 7. and 11. -- Col. 2. 8. etc. in
Joh. 3. 5. 8 etc. Grotius.
Of which interpretation he gives a further account upon the place. Concerning
the latter place, Tit. 3. 5. Calvin indeed conceives, that the Apostle in the
phrase, by the washing of regeneration, alludeth unto Baptism; in which
apprehension I judge it not worth a while for any man to dissent from him. Yet
neither does the phrase it self, nor the scope of the Context or subject matter
in hand, enforce any such interpretation; much less do they, either divisim,
or conjunctim, so much as invite us to think the Apostle thereby means
Baptism. And Marlorat upon the place cites a Protestant Exposition (with whom
himself seems to accord) who, by the Laver, or washing of Regeneration,
understands, the v^rtue, or power, of the holy Ghost, because he is the
Author of that interra^l n^wness whereby our hearts are purged from the [filth,
or] defilements of sin. So that Mr. A. has sufficient cause for all that
tenderness, with which he cites the said Scripture passages for his purpose.

Sect. 79.
But let us (in the next place) see how like a man he quitteth himself, and
what strength he produces, in the defense of his golden dream (formerly
mentioned) viz. that men do take up the Ordinance of Baptism, about the
beginning of their repentance, IN ORDER TO THE REMISSION OF THEIR SINS. For I
confess that if he be able to make truth of this notion (in the sense, which
his words bear in ordinary understandings) he will gain the prize which he
runeth for in the second part of his discourse; viz. that necessary it is for
persons to be baptized after they believe, their Infant Baptism
notwithstanding. But what he pleads in proof of the said notion, the Reader
may find p. 18. of his discourse, beginning thus: Finally, Believing and being
baptized, are con^oyned as relative to s^lvation (Mar. 16. 16.) And a little
after; That both repentance, and the declaration of it by Baptism, is required
on man's part to interesse him in remission of sins, and sanctification of the
Spirit, the things covenanted or promised on Gods part, is too evident to be
denied by any, BUT THOSE THAT WILL NOT SEE, from Act. 2. 38, 39. Repent and be
baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost: for the
promise is to you and to your children, and to all that, etc. For answer,

1. How insupportable is he in that most heavy Sentence, which here he
denounces against many thousands, as holy, as upright, as worthy men, as ever
the earth bare any since the Apostles days, yea (in a manner) against the whole
Christian world; viz. that they are persons THAT WILL NOT SEE, i. that will
fully oppose the light of divine truth shining unto them. For how few are they
of this generation of men, but have denied, that the Declaration of repentance
by Baptism, as well as repentance it self, is required on man's part to
interesse him in remission of sins? Or do they not all (generally, and as it
were with one mouth) profess and teach, and this with the full current of the
Scripture, that there is nothing essentially requisite on man's part to in^e^ess
him in remission of sins, [i. to put him into a state of salvation] but a true
faith in Jesus Christ, which includes repentance from dead works; unto which
also upon this account, the said promise of remission of sins is sometimes
made. Indeed, speaking of that full and final remission of sins, which shall
in the hearing of Heaven and Earth be awarded by the Great Judge in his day,
unto all Believers, to the obtaining of this they require of men, over and
above either the simple act, or habit, whether of the truest Faith, or soundest
Repentance, a perseverance in both, and in the fruits or actings of both, unto
the end. The truth is, that as the notion here maintained by Mr. A. is one of
the worst and most dangerous opinions owned by him in his book; so is the
moral misdemeanour mentioned, simply the worst and most unchristian strain
therein. But

2. To detect the error of the said notion, or Doctrine, viz. that Baptism is
therefore called the Baptism of Repentance, because men are to take it up in
order to the remission of sins, (or in the latter edition of it) that the
Declaration of repentance by Baptism, as well as Repentance it self, is
required on man's part, to interesse him in Remission of sins, and
Sanctification of the Spirit, It is to be considered,

Sect. 80.
1. That as Remission of sin is no where in Scripture promised unto Baptism
apart from Faith, or from Repentance, but unto these (sometimes to the one, and
sometimes to the other) apart from Baptism, and without relation hereunto; (see
and consider Joh. 3. 16, 18, 36. Lu. 24. 47. Act. 5. 3. Act. 3. 19. Ac. 8. 22.
Ac. 11. 18. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Romans 3. 28, 30. Romans 4. 3, 5, 16, 23, 24. to omit many
other places) so is the sanctification of the Spirit promised unto Faith
simply, and sometimes unto prayer, sometimes to the love of God, yea and has
frequently been vouchsafed unto men by God upon their believing, without
Baptism. See for this express Scripture, Joh. 7. 38, 39. Act. 10 44, 45, etc.
Act. 11. 17. Gal. 3. 2. Luke 11. 13. Gal. 3. 14. Ephesians. 1. 13. 2 These. 2. 13.
Act. 6. 5. Act. 9. 17. Act. 15. 7. compared with ver. 8. Therefore certainly
Baptism is not required of men (at least in a way of necessity) to interesse
them either in remission of sin, or in sanctification of the spirit. For if so,
how could these be obtained without it?

2. If Baptism, or a D^claration of men's Repentance by Baptism, be required on
man's part to interesse him in Remission of sins, how can men besaid to be
justified by faith through the blood of Christ? or the blood of Christ be said
to cleanse men from all their sins? Romans 3. 22, 24, 25. 1 John 1. 7. (besides
other places without number.) Baptism (without all question) is no part either
of Faith, or of the blood of Christ. Therefore justification, or remission of
sins, which is attainable by Faith in the blood of Christ, may be obtained
without Baptism.

3. If Baptism be required on man's part to interesse him in remission of sins,
and sanctification of the spirit, then has God suspended both the
justification and sanctification, of men (and consequently, their eternal
Salvation) upon a ceremony, or carnal Ordinance (as Baptism by some of the
most learned of Mr. A's party, as we formerly heard, is acknowledged to be) as
well, or as much, as he has done upon Faith, or Repentance themselves; and
thus men shall be perfected by the flesh (as the Apostle speaks) Yea

4. If a Declaration of Repentance by Baptism be required on man's part, to
interesse him in remission of sins, or in Sanctification of the Spirit, then is
a Declaration hereof by Baptism, or by submitting to an outward and fleshly
ceremony, more accepted with God, then a Declaration made by mortification,
innocence, holiness of conversation, etc. The reason of this consequence is
plain; viz. because a Declaration of a man's Repentance by these, or any of
them, is not required by God, nor yet accepted by him, upon any such account,
as to interesse him in remission of sins, or to translate him from an estate of
sin and death, into a state of justification; no, nor yet to entitle him to the
sanctification of the Spirit. For he that is not a justified person before any
Declaration be made by him of his repentance, by such fruits or expressions of
it, as these, will never be justified afterward. Nor can any man bring forth
any such fruits of Repentance, as these, unless he be interessed in the
sanctification of the Spirit before hand. Therefore Baptism is not required on
man's part, nor yet a Declartion of his repentance by Baptism, to interesse him,
either in Remission of sin^, or sanctification of the Spirit.

Sect. 81.
5. If it were so, then only children of wrath, and persons not yet reconciled
unto God, should be the regular and lawful subjects of Baptism. For if Baptism
be required on man's part to interesse them in Remission of sins, all they who
are yet unbaptized must needs be under the guilt of their sins, and so liable
to eternal condemnation for them. And if the case be thus, Faith and
repentance are but dead works, until Baptism quickens them, and raises them
up from the dead.

6. If Mr. A's Position now protested, were Orthodox and sound, John the
Baptist was in his blood (I mean, in the guilt and pollution of his sins) when
he entered upon the work and ministry of baptizing with water; yea and (for
ought appears to the contrary) so lived and died, and consequently perished
eternally: for it no where appears that ever he was baptized; and if he were
not baptized by the verdict of Mr. A's Doctrine, he could have neither part nor
fellowship in the blessed business of Remission of sins, and so must perish.

7. If both Repentance, and the Declaration of it by Baptism, be required on
man's part to interesse him in remission of sins, and Sanctification of the
Spirit, then, according to Mr. A's judgment and notion about the truth and
requisite terms of the administration of Baptism, either all, or far the
greatest part of, the ancient Fathers of the Christian Church, with the
generality of Christians in their days; all, or far the greatest part of the
worthy Martyrs both in latter, and in former times; all, or far the greatest
part, of our late Protestant Divines, whose zeal, learning, labor, and
faithfulness God was pleased to use about the Reformation, and for the
Restoration and propagation of the truth of Christian Religion, as Luther,
Calvin, Musculus, Bucer, P. Martyr, Zuinglius, etc. together with our own
worthies, Perkins, Dod, Hildersham, Preston, Sibs, etc. together with the
generality of the people taught and instructed by them; against all these (I
say) we must write bitter things, and conclude, that whilst they lived, they
were in the gall of bitterness, and bands of iniquity, and that they died, and
consequently perished in their sins. For most certain it is, that these were
not baptized, as Mr. A. and men of his judgment count and call Baptism; and
consequently could not make any Declaration of their repentance by Baptism. And
if so, they must all to hell, unless Mr. A's Doctrine be content to be sent
thither in their stead.

Sect. 82.
8. If no person can make a Declaration of their Repentance by Baptism, then
cannot a Declaration in this kind, or that which M. A. calls a Declaration,
interesse any man in remission of sins. The reason of the consequence in this
Proposition is evident: That which is not, cannot act: nor can any such thing,
or Act, interest any man in^^remission of sins, which may be as well found in
those, whose sins are not remitted, as in those, whose are. Now that persons,
who are baptized, may be in the gall of bitterness, and bands of iniquity,
(and consequently not have their sins remitted) their Baptism notwithstanding,
is apparent in the case of Simon M^gus; to whom, soon after his baptizing,
Peter said, Thou have neither part* nor lot in this matter: for thine heart is
not right in the sight of God -- For I perceive that thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and bands of iniquity, Act. 8. 21, 23. Nor is the Baptism of a
very great part of those, who have been of late baptized (and this as Mr. A.
calls Baptism) amongst us, any Declaration of their repentance (at least not of
any such repentance, which has any thing to do with remission of sins, their
unworthy ways and actions proclaiming them aloud to be persons void as well of
the knowledge, as fear of God.

9. The Grandees themselves of Mr. A's party, yea and (I presume) himself also
with them, believe and hold, that amongst the Heathen, unto whom the Name of
Jesus Christ was never brought, nor the Gospel ever preached (orally, or by the
mouths of men) and consequently, who were never Baptized, there are or may be
found persons interessed in Remission of sins. If so, with what truth can Mr.
A. affirm, yea rather with what face can he avouch with a most unchristia^
censure of all those who shall deny it, that both Repentance, and a
Declaration of it by Baptism, are required on man's part to interesse him in
Remission of sins?

Sect. 83.
10. In case as well a Declaration of Repentance by Baptism, as repentance it
self, be required on man's part to interesse him in remission of sins, would the
Apostle Paul have thanked God he baptized none of the Corinthians, but Crispus
and Gaius; [i. that he interessed none of them in remission of sins, but these?
1 Cor. 1. 14] Or should he have had cause so far to underrate the office and
worth of baptizing beneath the preaching of the Gospel, as to say that Christ
sent him not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel? [i. not to do all that which
might interesse men completely in remission of sins, but only somewhat, that
might somewhat further them in the way thereunto] 1 Cor. 1. 17?

11. Suppose a person truly believing in Jesus Christ, and repenting of his
sins, being desirous withal to be baptized, but wanted an opportunity duly
(according to the light of his conscience) to partake of this Ordinance, as put
case he were not satisfied touching the lawfulnes of the calling of any person
he knows, to baptize* (which either is, or very possibly may be, the case of
many thousands in England) is it Mr. A's sense that this person is, all this
notwithstanding, in the gall of bitterness, and band of iniquity, only because
he has not been, nor is ever like to be actually baptized? Or is not his act
in refusing Baptism at the hands of those, from whom he cannot with the peace
of his conscience receive it, of better acceptance with God, then a receiving
it, with the violation of his conscience, would have been?

12. If a Declaration of a man's repentance by Baptism, be required on man's part
to interesse him in remission of sins, then was the oscitancie and
forgetfulness of the Apostle Paul inexcusable, who in all his discourses about
justification, or the means of the obtaining remission of sins; and more
especially in his Epistle to the Romans, where he professedly undertakes, and
more at large then in any other place, handles the said most important
Doctrine of justification, never so much as mentions Baptism as any ways, or
in any consideration whatsoever, conducing thereunto, much less as required on
man's part to interesse him therein; but only finds occasion for the mention of
it in the business of sanctification. Certainly a maid may sooner forget her
ornaments, and a bride her attire, and a woman her sucking child, then such an
Apostle, in arguing a point of that transcendent nature and import, as
justification is, forget any thing of an essential requirement thereunto.

Sect. 84.
13. The remission of no man's sins, no man's justification, (least of all the
justification of a true Believer) is by God made dependent either upon the
wills or pleasures of other men, or upon any such condition, which (possibly)
the person may never have an opportunity, no nor possibility to perform, at
least not without sin. Now 1. no person can compel another, how regularly
soever qualified for the act of administering, to baptize him. 2* It may very
possibly be that a true believer shall, or may, not meeet with a person whilst
he lives, from whose hand he can with the peace of his conscience, and
consequently without sinning, receive Baptism. Therefore certainly a
Declaration of Repentance by Baptism, is not required on man's part to interesse
him in Remission of sins.

14. If a Declaration of Repentance by Baptism, (at least as Mr. A. calls
Baptism) as well as repentance it self, were required by God of all men, to
interesse them in remission of sins, then should he require of many true
Repentants, and true Believers, that which would be sinful in them to perform,
to interesse them in this high privilege of Remission of sins. For there is
nothing more certain then that many, who have truly repented, want faith to
believe that Mr. A's Baptism is so much as lawful for them to submit unto. And
it is the express Doctrine of the Apostle, that whatsoever is not of Faith, is
sin, Romans 14 23.

Sect. 85.
15. By the same way, or means, by which Abraham the Father of those who
believe, was justified, or interessed in remission of sins, are all his
children, or spiritual seed, justified also. Upon this, as a foundation not to
be questioned, the Apostle builds that excellent discourse, Romans 4. all along
the chapter. See more particularly v. 23. 24. of this chapter, and v. 30. of
the next precedent Chapter. Now certain it is that circumcision was not
required of him, (nor yet any other ceremony) to interesse him in remission of
sins; but he was interessed in this blessed privilege, whilst he was yet
uncircumcised (as the Apostle expressly affirms, Romans 4. 10, 11.) by means of
his faith. Therefore certainly the ceremony of Baptism is not required of any
of Abraham's spiritual seed, to interesse them in remission of sins. Yea I am
horribly afraid lest they, who join water baptism with faith in Christ as
necessary in the business of justification, or remission of sins, incur the
same heavy doom with the Jews (mentioned, Gal. 5. 2, 4.) who judged it
necessary for them to be circumcised in the flesh (and accordingly were
circumcised) in order to their justification. For (doubtless) that which in
this casc abolished them from Christ [or, made Christ of none effect unto them]
was not that the precept injoyning circumcision was now exauthorized or
abolished by the death of Christ, but because they judging somewhat necessary
to their justification, besides Faith in Christ, practiced accordingly For
(questionless) their foot had been in the same snare, had they practiced
circumcision even whilst it stood in greatest force, upon a like account.

16. The Doctrine of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, is much differing from
that which Mr. A. delivers unto us in the point under preset debate He the
Apostle Paul) teaches us, that with the heart man believes UNTO
righteousness, To. 10. 10
[i unto remission of sins, at least] but Mr. A. teaches us (in effect) that
with the heart man believes but half way toward righteousness; and that he
must march the other half of the way by water, or else he will never come
there. For is not the tenor of his Doctrine this; men are to take up that
Ordinance (speaking of Baptism) upon their first beginning to repent [and
consequently, to beleeve] IN ORDER TO THE REMISSION OF THEIR SINS? And p. 18.
to the same tune, thus; That both Repentance, and the Declaration of it by
BAPTISM, is required on man's part to INTERESSE HIM IN REMISSION OF SINS, and
sanctification of the spirit, the things covenanted or promised on Gods part,
is too evident to be denied by any, but those that will not see, from Act. 2.
37, 38. etc. I wish for those Christian and worthy respects, which in great
numbers I bear unto him, that, being so willing himself to see, as here,
plainly enough, and somewhat more, he intimates himself to be, God will
graciously please to give him eyes wherewith to see, that so he may mistake
darkness for a vision no longer. Yet until very now he had eyes to see that
truth, which on the sudden (it seems) is withdrawn from his sight. For

17. The Lord Christ (as was observed, Sect. 18.) at his first sending forth
his Apostles to preach the Gospel ( Mat. 10. Mar. 3, Luke 9) yea and when
awhile after he sent forth seventy other Disciples about the same work, he
spoke not a word either to the one, or to the other, about baptizing any. If
Baptism had been essentially requisite unto salvation (which it must needs be,
if it be essentially requisite to remission of sins) can it be any man's
thought, or imagination, that Christ would not have so much as once mentioned
it in neither of those solemn Commissions, which he gave at several times for
the preaching of the Gospel? Or was that ministry of the Gospel, which was
by the Lord Christ himself committed unto men, without any order or direction
to baptize, ineffectuall effectually to convert those unto God, who should
believe and receive it and so to save them? Nor can it with any color of
reason, or proof, be pretended, that those, at least all those who were now
sent forth to preach the Gospel, had received a commission to baptize before,
the scripture no where affirming it, no nor so much as overturing it of them
all. Nor can it upon any whit a better account be said, that in the commission
which Christ gave them to preach the Gospel, he vertually or consequentially,
included a commission also for them to baptize. For 1. this is pretended at a
single peradventure, neither the Scripture, nor any competent reason persuading
it. 2. When Christ gave a commission for such a preaching of the Gospel, which
he intended should be accompanied with a power to baptize, he makes particular
and express mention of baptizing, as well as of preaching, Mat. 28. 19. 3.
(And lastly) Neither do we read of so much as any one person baptized, either
by the Apostles themselves, or by the seventie, by virtue of that mission, or
commission from Christ to preach the Gospel, of which we now speak.

18. (And lastly) does not himself (p. 16. of his present discourse) affirm and
teach, that Baptism may therefore be called the Baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins, because God THEREBY SIGNIFIES AND SEALS unto men the
remission of their sins UPON THEIR REPENTANCE? If God by Baptism signifies and
seals unto men the remission of their sins upon their repentance, then
certainly men are interessed in remission of sins, upon, and by means of their
Repentance, and so before Baptism be taken up by them; otherwise God should
seal unto men an untruth, and that which is not. Again, does he not (a little
after, in the same page) suppose that Baptism may be called the Baptism of
repentance, because the persons who are baptized, do thereby profess and
declare unto the world, that they look for REMISSION OF SINS FROM GOD UPON
THEIR REPENTANCE? And yet again, that it may be called the Baptism of
repentance, etc. because it seals and confirms the covenant or promises of God
made to men, touching the remission of their sins upon their repentance? If it
be the covenant or promise of God to give unto men the remission of sins upon
their repentance, certainly repentance it self by virtue of this covenant of
God, interesseth me^ in remission of sins, without the interposure of Baptism,
or without any contribution from Baptism thereunto.

Sect. 86.
But if a Declaration of a man's Repentance by Baptism, be nor requisite to
interesse him in remission of sins, as well as repentance it self, what answer
is to be given to those two texts of Scripture, which Mr. A. uses (I will not
say abuses) to prove the same, especially to the latter, Act. 2. 38, 39.
Wherein (if he speaks truth) that Doctrine of his is too evidently asserted to
be denied by any, but those that will not see?

The former of the two, is that known place, Mar. 16. 16. He that believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved. Here (says he) Believing, and being baptized,
are conjoined, as relative to Salvation. In which saying he seems to imply,
that Baptism in the letter, and properly so called, is as necessary to
salvation as believing it self. For if he will endure to be understood to speak
of Baptism metonymically, or synechdochically taken, [i. for an outward
profession of Faith, or believing, which is our Saviors sense of the word
baptized, in the Scripture before us, as we shall show presently] that which he
says is nothing to his purpose. And though Baptism (properly so called) both
in the Institution or precept of it, as likewise in a regular subjection unto
it, or reception of it, must needs be conceived to relate, in one kind or
degree, or other, unto salvation (as all the Commandments of God, and the
creatures obedience unto every of them do, and as Circumcision it self, by the
Apostles own acknowledgment, sometimes did) yet

1. It is not necessary that it should relate in one kind or other (much less
with the same kind of relation, wherewith Believing relates) unto that
Justification which consists in remission of sins* or consequently, that it
should interesse men in this Justification? For many things relate, and conduce
(and this by way of necessity) unto salvation, which are no ways necessary
to invest a man in an estate of justification.

2. Neither is it necessary that baptizing should be relative to salvation it
self, upon the same terms with believing For

Sect. 87.
1. Believing, in persons capable, is universally and indispensably in all
cases whatsoever necessary thereunto; as the clause and words immediately
following those under present consideration, do (with the whole current of the
Scriptures besides) import, But he that believes not, shall be damned. But
Baptizing, though it be granted to be in ordinary cases simply necessary
thereunto, yet in the case lately mentioned (and possibly in many others) viz.
when he that truly believes, is not s(...)ed in his judgment and conscience
touching the regular capacity of such persons, who are willing to undertake
the work, to baptize. Nor can I believe, that, in case the Eunuch baptized by
Philip, had, after his believing Jesus Christ to be the son of God, been
prevented by death before he had come to the water, wherewith he was baptized,
he should have perished eternally for want of it. And this (questionless) if
we understand our Savior to speak (in the place in hand) of Baptism literally
and without a figure, is the reason, why having in the former part of the
verse, included Baptism together with believing, condition-wise in his promise
of Salvation, thus, He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, yet
leaves it out in his opposite threatening of condemnation, denouncing this, not
against persons who shall not be baptized, but only against such, who shall not
believe; But he that believes not, shall be damned. Baptism, in conjunction
with Faith, may be available, or contributarie toward salvation; and yet the
want of it not necessarily exclusive of Salvation. When Solomon says, wisdom
is good with an inheritance, he does not imply, or suppose, that it is evil,
or not good, without an inheritance. So when the Apostle says, it is good for
a man not to touch a woman [meaning, not to marrie] he does not suppose, that
it is evil, or inconvenient for him (at least in all cases) to marry. He that
promises salvation unto a meaner qualification in conjunction with a greater,
does not hereby threaten this greater qualification with the loss of salvation
for the want of the company of the lesser, especially if in stead of this it be
accompanied with another much better, and greater, and of higher acceptance
with God, then it. But

2. Suppose Baptism were every ways, and in every respect, as necessary to
salvation, as believing (which yet is notoriously untrue, as we have proved)
yet will it not follow that Baptism in such or such a particular mode, or
External manner of administration, should be thus necessary. For certain it
is, that the Lord Jesus Christ has not suspended the eternal salvation of his
creature, especially not of those who truly believe in him, upon any modalitie
or formalitie of acting, not particularly and precisely determined and enjoined
by himself, but only co^jecturally obtruded upon the^ by men. For what if any
one man, ^r any ten men should please themselves never so highly, be never so
confident of the authentiquenesse, or legitimacie of their inferences and
deductions (in one kind or other) from the Scriptures? will their confidence in
this kind amount to an infallibility, yea or to any competent proof, that
either the belief or practice of what they upon such terms deduce and infer
from the Scripture, is essentially necessary unto salvation? Or has the Lord
Christ any where in the Scriptures determinately enjoined or prescribed the
particular mode of dipping as essential unto Baptism, or to the regular
administration thereof? Therefore (however) Baptism in this form cannot with
any tolerable face of reason, be pretended as essentially requisite unto
salvation, as believing.

Sect. 88.
3. Neither can Mr. A. with all his fellow-dogmatists substantially prove, that
the Baptizing here spoken of, is to be understood of a Baptizing with water,
considering that there is another kind of Baptism which the Scripture from
place to place makes by many degrees more necessary unto salvation, then a
baptizing with water. This is, the Baptism of affliction, or sufferings for
righteousness sake. See for this, Mat. 20. 22. compared with Mar. 10. 38. Luke
12. 50. Romans 6. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. Mar. 8. 34, 35, etc. Act. 14. 22. (besides
many other places.) Besides, the grounds and arguments of those, who judge
water baptism, at least as to the necessity of it, to have expired with the
Ministry of John the Baptist, or at farthest, with the destruction of the
temple of Jerusalem, and the dissolution of the Jewish Church, have not been
yet sufficiently answered; not yet balanced by any arguments or grounds for Mr.
A's opinion and practice, extant (that I know of) in the world. Which grounds
and arguments (I mean, for the non-necessitie of water Baptism) although I do
not yet apprehend them so demonstrative, as to overrule my judgment that way,
yet I judge them nothing so easy of solution, as those, which have served in
the warfare of Re-baptizing hitherto.

4. Suppose we the place to be understood of Water Baptism, and that some kind
of a necessity hereof unto salvation is here likewise insinuated by our
Savior, yet can it not upon any tolerable account be understood of the actual
or literal perception of Baptism, as if this were necessary to Salvation. But
of an inward obedientiall frame of heart to submit unto Baptism, when
opportunity serves; i. when there is a conveniencie of water, and a person,
who according to the light of a man's conscience, is regularly capable of
administering it, and withal, willing to perform the work. The preparation of
the heart for the performance of a duty, when opportunity serves and
requires it, as well as the performance it self, is often in Scripture enjoined
in such terms or words, which properly signify the Act, or performance it
self. See Luke 14 33. Luk 12. 33. 2 Timothy 2. 3. Mat. 5. 25, 44.

For it is against the main current of the Scriptures, and against the sense of
all considering men, that God should suspend the eternal salvation of any man,
especially of a true Believer, upon the will and pleasure of another man, or
upon the receiving of any thing, especially any external thing, which may be
withheld from him against his will, or which possibly he may never meet with an
opportunity to receive. Therefore however, such a Baptism as Mr. A. and his
have taken up, and as he presses from the Scripture in hand, is not simply or
universally, but only in particularitie of case (if this) in any degree
necessary unto salvation. But

5. (And lastly) the clear and unquestionable sense of the place, is, to
understand the Baptism, or Baptising, here spoken of, synecdochically (a form
of speech, then which there is none more frequent or familiar, in the
Scriptures) viz. for a profession of that Faith or beleevings which our Savior
speaks of, Baptism, especially in those times, when, and of which our Savior
now speaks, being a known part, or piece of this profession. In this figure of
speech, to fall by the sword, to die by the sword, with the like, signifies any
kind of death by the hand of an enemy, as well as that which is properly and
literally executed by the sword; the sword being an ordinary or known weapon,
by which men are slain in war, 2 Samuel 11. 25. Psalm. 44 3. This interpretation
is every ways consonant to a master-vein of texts in the body of the Gospel,
viz. all such which hold forth a public and open owning, or professing of the
Name of Christ, and of the Gospel, as required of all Believers in order to
their being saved. See more particularly upon this account, Romans 10. 9, 10.
(which two verses are a very plain and significant exposition of the clause in
hand) as also Mat. 10. 33, 34. 2 Timothy 2. 12. Mar. 8. 38. (to omit several
others) whereas Mr. A's sense of the place, who understands it properly,
strictly, and literally, of water baptism, has neither so much as any one text
of Scripture, nor any argument of weight, to stand by it. And how unreasonable
is it to conceive or think, that a true Faith in conjunction with a Christian
and holy conversation, on the one hand, and with sufferings for righteousness
and the Gospels sake, on the other hand, should not be as available for all
ends and purposes with God, especially for that great end, Salvation, as a like
Faith, only in conjunction with a single act of once going into water to be
baptized? All Protestant Expositors that I have had opportunity to consult upon
the place, agree in the Substance of the interpretation last asserted: yea some
of them parallel it with Romans 10. 9, 10. which passage (as we lately hinted) is
a better commentary upon the clause in hand, then we are like to receive from
any person whatsoever in these days, dissenting from it.

Sect. 89.
The other Scripture, which (it seems) has been a snare upon Mr. A. not only
to entangle him with this most dangerous Doctrine, that a Declaration of a man's
R^pentance by Baptism, is required on man's part, as well as Repentance it self,
to interesse him i^ remission of sins, but also with the guilt of this hard and
unchristian saying against his Chr^stia^ brethren, who therein dissent from
him; viz. that the said Doctrine is too evident from it to be denied by any,
but those that will no^ see, is Act. 2. 38, 39. The words being these, Then
Peter said unto them, repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the
holy Ghost. For the promise is made to you, and to your children, and to all
that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. I answer,

1. It has been lately proved by a cloud of impregnable arguments and
demonstrations, that to be baptized is not required on man's part to interesse
him in remission of sins; I here add and explain; not in any other sense, or
upon any other terms however, then any other act of obedience unto any the
precepts of God is. Therefore

2. When Peter exhorts the Jews to Repent and be baptized in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, if by being baptized, he means,
strictly and precisely, a being actually baptized with water, he cannot by
remission of sins, mean the estate of justification consisting in remission of
sins, wherein a person is invested by God immediately upon his Repenting and
believing; because then (as we formerly argued) there could none be lawfully
admitted to Baptism, but only children of wrath, or such, whose sins were not
yet remitted. For that which is necessarily required on man's part to interesse
him in remission of sins, must of necessity precede his being actually
interessed in this privilege: and consequently, persons not yet baptized, how
repentant and believing soever, are not, cannot be, interessed in remission of
sins, until baptized; and so must needs be children of wrath, and in a state
of condemnation.

Sect. 90.
If you ask me, but what can we understand by remission of sins in this place,
but only such an estate of justification, as that mentioned, and which
consists in remission of sins? I answer; We may very commodiously, and
without the least straining either word, or context, understand by it that
great and solemn Act of absolution from all sin, which the great Judge shall in
the great day pronounce over all those, who shall be found to have lived and
died in the Faith of Jesus; or else (taking the word Remission, passively,
which I judge the better) the happy effect, or co^sequent of this sentence
which is a state of blessedness and of glory. This interpretation fully
accords with a passage of the same Apostle in the following chapter, spoken to
the same people (the Jews) and (probably) to some of the same persons. Repent
ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the
times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. i. When the Lord
Christ shall return from heaven, to refresh the bowels, and make glad the
hearts of all those, who have been sufferers for his Name in this world, by
investing them with a rest glorious and blessed, and which shall never have
end; according to what the Apostle Paul writes to the Thessalonians; Seeing it
is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them which trouble
you, And to you, WHO ARE TROVBLED, REST with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, etc. 2 These. 1.
6, 7, etc.
If it be here replied, and said; be this interpretation of the words, for
remission of sins, admitted, still it will follow, there is a remission of
sins, and this absolutely necessary unto salvation, which cannot be obtained
without being baptized; I answer,

True it is, that if we speak of persons living to years of discretion, and
under the ministry of the Gospel, they must be baptized in one kind or
other, either with a baptism literally and properly so called (I mean, a
baptism with water) or else with a Baptism vertually, or equivalently, so
called. Now there are two, or rather three kinds of Baptism, which may be thus
called ( viz. Vertually, and Equivalently) The first is, an obedientiall frame,
or willingness in heart and soul, actually to submit unto a water baptism, 1.
upon a regular conviction of the necessity of such a submission (necessity I
mean, in respect of the command of Jesus Christ) 2. Upon such an opportunity
for the actual reception of it, under which it may be received without any
regret or scruple in the conscience of a man, as about the regularnesse or
meetnesse of an Administratour, about the st^ength of a man's bodily
constitution to bear the burden of a plunging under water, in case this shall
be proved, or apprehended, to be the only lawful way of Baptizing, etc.
Another kind of Baptism, Vertually or interpretatively so called, is an open
and free profession of the Gospel, and of the Faith of Jesus Christ in the
world. The third (and last) is a suffering persecution for a man's profession
sake in this kind. Now both these, divisim, but especially conjunctim, may be
termed Baptisms, much in such a sense as John Baptist, is in Scripture termed,
Elias, viz. because he served his generation with such a kind of spirit, and
upon somewhat the like terms, as Eliah served his. For a profession of the
Gospel, especially joined with sufferings for the Gospel, serve for all ends
and purposes, for which Baptism literally, and properly so called, serves, yea
and this with an higher hand, then it. Insomuch that this kind of Baptism,
(water baptism I mean, actually received) is the lowest and meanest of all
Baptisms.

Sect. 91.
Now to the Ob^ection, or reply mentioned, we plainly and directly answer, that
one or more, of the three Baptisms now specified and described, is indeed
necessary for the obtaining of such a remission of sins, as that meant by Peter
in the Text before us; and more particularly, that mentioned and described in
the first place.

If it be yet replied; but is it not evident that Peter here spoke of
water baptism it self, and that he commanded them to be baptized herewith, as
well as to repent, for the remission of sins? And was it not in obedience to
this his exhortation, or command, that they were accordingly (many of them)
baptized with water baptism, v. 41. I answer,

Be it granted that he speaks of water baptism, yet it must be granted withal,
that he exhorts no man to be baptized herewith, but upon this supposition, or
presumption, that they should be every ways and in respect of all
circumstances, satisfied in their judgments and consciences touching the
lawfulness of their act, in yielding themselves to be baptized in this kind.
Therefore that Baptism, which we speak of and allow, viz. a readiness and
willingness of mind to be baptized with water, when we are satisfied touching
the will of God concerning us in that behalf, and otherwise have an
opportunity of a like satisfaction in all points unto us, for the actual
reception of it, is the Baptism, unto which especially, and in the first place,
Peter (in the Scripture before us) exhorts men sin his exhortation unto them
to be baptized. Otherwise we must make the sense and meaning of this his
exhortation, to rise thus; Be ye baptized, whether you be convinced of the
necessity, yea or of the lawfulness of it, or no; and whether you have an
opportunity for it, which your consciences can in every respect approve of, or
no, I suppose that Mr. A. himself will not put such a construction as this upon
the Apostles exhortation unto Baptism. Therefore it is a most unquestionable
and undeniable truth, that Peter, in the Text in hand, does not simply, or in
all cases, no nor yet principally or primarily, exhort Repentants unto the
actual reception of water baptism; but only unto such a vertuall, eminent, and
constructive Baptism, as that lately described; and not at all unto
water baptism, but only upon the terms and conditions specified; under which
indeed he that shall refuse this kind of Baptism, declares himself a rebel
against the Lord Christ, (as all Anti-paedo-baptists, in the judgment of that
worthy Martyr Mr. John Philpot, do, in not suffering children to come unto
Christ by Baptism) and during this rebellion cannot be interessed in remission
of sins.

Sect. 92.
If it be yet objected, and said, that (questionless) the repenting Jews, whom
Peter exhorted to be baptized, understood him to speak of water baptism only,
and of none other: and consequently submitted unto his exhortation thus
understood, and were actually waterbaptized without any more ado I answer,

1. It cannot be proved, that the Jews, to whom he spoke, understood him in
such a sencc only, as that specified in the Objection.

2. In case this could be proved, yet will it not follow from hence, that
either they did well in not apprehending a further sense in his words, or that
Peter himself did not intend a further sense (some such as that represented) in
them.

3. Nor does their ready and speedy betaking themselves unto Water Baptism, at
all argue, that they understood him to speak of this Baptism simply, or only;
because they being already, before they came at the water, baptized with that
inward Baptism of the heart we speak of, and being under no scruple or doubt,
whether it was the mind and will of Jesus Christ that they should be
Water-baptized, or no, or whether the opportunity before them was in all
points legitimate, or no (the Apostles express order for their baptizing,
either by himself, or by others authorized by him, being a sufficient ground
for their satisfaction in all these particulars) they were obliged in
conscience without any more ado to be actually Water-baptized: and it is
freely acknowledged, that all persons whatsoever being under the same terms of
satisfaction with them, both as touching a necessity, as touching a complete
legitimatenesse of an opportunity, are bound in conscience to be baptized with
water, as well as they; Only with this proviso, that though persons now be as
fully satisfied touching a necessity of being baptized, as they were, yet if
the grounds of men's satisfaction in this kind now, be unsound and sandy, (as
they must needs be, in case their opinion be true, who judge the date of the
necessity of Water Baptism to be now expired) their submission unto this
Baptism, though less sinful, then the contrary, yet is it not justifiable.

Sect. 93.
If it be yet said, that it is no ways probable that Peter himself had any
other meaning in his words, when he commanded them to be Baptized, but simply
and plainly, that he would have them forthwith to be water-baptized, and
consequently that he had no thought of any such Baptism (eminently, or
vertually so called) which you put upon him. To this also I answer (as has, in
part, been answered already)

That it is somewhat, yea much more then probable, that though Peter did not
formally or explicitly mean any thing more in the words in question, then what
the Objection pretends, yet he presupposed that kind of Baptism which we
plead, and that he would not have exhorted them to be baptized (with water)
unless he had known them to be baptized already with that other Baptism. The
reason is evident, because had he not supposed them, either already satisfied
before his exhortation directed unto them, or at least that they would be
satisfied by it, that it was the will of Jesus Christ that they should be
Water-baptized, and that there was an opportunity before them every ways
legitimate for their reception of this Baptism, he would in the first place
rather have endeavored to satisfy them, that this was the will and pleasure
of Christ concerning them, and that the opportunity before them for receiving
Baptism was every ways legitimate, and approveable, then have either
commanded, or exhorted them to be presently baptized.

The result of this clear and through Examination of Peter's exhortation to the
Jews to be baptized for the remission of sins, amounts to this, that the said
Exhortation imposes a necessity upon no man of being waterbaptized for the
remission of sins in the great day, but upon such persons only, who stand under
the like terms of satisfaction every ways touching the said baptizing, under
which he exhorted the Jews to be thus Baptized. If so, then Mr. A's Notion or
interpretation of this exhortation must needs fall to the ground, which
bears, that the said exhortation makes it evident (yea too evident to be
denied by any, but those that will not see) that a Declaration of the
repentance by Baptism [he means, by an actual reception of Water-baptism] is
required on man's part [he means, universally, and in all cases, otherwise he
would have distinguished] to interesse him in remission of sins [he means, in
such an estate of justification, as the Scripture so frequently appropriateth
unto true Believers, immediately upon their beleeving] Such an inference or
notion as this has no more communion with those words, for whence it pleads
(with such an unseemly confidence) legitimacie of descent, then shows have with
substances, and mere appearances with realities and truths.

Sect. 94.
3. Our Protestant expositours generally leave Mr. A's confidence and conceit
upon the Text (in the point in hand) for the Papists to gather up, who fall
greedily upon them, and make great treasure of them. Although (says Calvin) in
the contexture of the words, Baptism goes before remission of sins, yet in
respect of order it follows after, because it is nothing else but an
obsignation [or sealing] of those good things, which we obtain by Christ, that
they may be ratified in our consciences. Tametsi in contextu verborum (...)
remissionem peccatorum hic praecedit, ordine tamen sequitur; quia nihil aliud
est quam bonoru^, quae per Christum consequimur, obsignatio, ut in conscientiis
nostris rata sint. Calv. in Act 2. 38.
Gualter says, that Peter admonishes them of outward Baptism, which he
commands them to receive for the remission of sins, which words are not to be
taken in any such sense, as if Baptism washed men from their sins. And a little
after. Unto those who are justified, Baptism is administered, for the remission
of their sins, 1. the righteousness of God, which he confers upon us by
Christ, is sealed i^ [or by] Baptism. Deinde de baptismo externo admonent, quem
ipsos in peccatorum remissionem accipere jubet. Quae verba non eo sensu accipi
debent, quasi baptismus a ^eccatis abluat. Et postea: lis qui -- justificati
sunt, baptismus in remissionem peccatorum datur, id est* baptismo obsignatur
justicia Dei, quam ita per Christum nobis contulit. Gualter. Homil in Act.
P. Martyr says, that the head [or, principal ground] of the superstition is,
that these men (speaking of the Papists) are of opinion that sins are first
remitted by Baptism. Sed caput superstitionis illud est. quod isti homines
opinantur, baptismo externo primum condonari peccata: sed vehementer falluntur.
P. Mar. Loc Class. 9. 8, ^8.
And Lorinus the Jesuit, who speaks the common and known sense of his fellow
Pontificians herein, boldly says, that Baptism was directly instituted, as an
efficacious sign, AND CAUSE OF THE REMISSION OF original sin, and of other
SINS also, if there be any other found with it. Baptismu per se insti^^t^, est,
ut signum efficax, and causa remission is originalis peccati, and aliorum
qu^que si quae cum illo reperiantur, Lorinus in Act. 2. 38.
So also Eugenius the Pope in the Floren^ine council, made this an article of
Faith, that the effect of the Sacrament of Baptism is the rem^ssion of all sin,
both original, and actual, and of all punishment also due unto both. Hujus
Sacramenti effectus est remissio culpae originalis and actualis, omnis quoque
poenae quae pro ipsa culpa debetur. Council Florent.
Consonant thereunto is the Doctrine of the Trent Catechism. This (says this)
is first to be taught, that sin, whether originally contracted from our first
parents, or committed by our selves, although it be so above measure heinous,
that it seems to be even beyond all magination, is [notwithstanding] by the
admirable virtue of this Sacrament [Baptism] remitted and pardoned. It were
easy to show by an Induction of many Authors of the Romish Credulity, that
they (generally against f) Ho^ primum tradere oportet, peccatum, sive a primis
parentibus origin contractum, sive a nobis ipsis commissum, quamvis etiam adeo
nefarium sit, ut recogitari quidem nonposse vid^atur, admirabilis hujus
saecramenti virtute remitti, and condonari. Catcehism. Trident.
the Truth) require Baptism of men to the interessing of them in remission of
sins; and no whit more hard on the other hand to show by quotations from
Protestant Writers, that they generally hold the contrary against them. So that
Mr. A. giving sentence, that a necessity of Baptism for remission of sins, is
too evident to be denied by any, but those that will not see, from Act. 2. 38,
39. condemns all Protestant Writers (almost, without exception) of a wilful
shutting their eyes against the light, and justifyeth all Popish writers as men
willing to open their eyes that they may see the truth. But

Sect. 95.
4. Suppose it should be granted, that Peter required Water Baptism of those,
to whom he now spoke, as well as repentance, for the remission of their sins,
yet will it make but a loose consequence, to infer from hence, that therefore
the like Baptism is required by God of all other persons whatsoever to
interesse them in the like privilege. When Christ enjoined the young man to go
and sell whatsoever he had, and give to the poor, promising him upon this that
he should have treasure in heaven; if such a conclusion as this could be drawn
from hence, that therefore no person shall have treasure in heaven, but he that
actually practices, what the young man was commanded by Christ actually to do
in order thereunto, the best part of the world have far more reason to be
astonished at it, then the Disciples had to be astonished at these words of Christ;
How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! Mar. 10.
23, 24. And yet there is much more reason to think that obedience to a moral
command, though particularly, and upon a special occasion, given, should be
generally required to the justification, or salvation of men, then that a like
obedience to a ceremonial command of a like particular direction, should be
required thereunto. God may upon some particular occasion, under some
circumstances, require such or such a thing of some men, in order to their
obtaining such or such a benefit, or privilege, without subjecting all men
without exception, and in all cases, to a necessity of using the same means
for obtaining that same or like end; especially when he has no where declared
himself to such a purpose, yea and much more, when he has declined all
declaration of himself in such a way, even when he had an opportunity inviting
him to such a declaration, in case he had been in any degree disposed to it. If
his purpose had been to exclude men from salvation for want of being baptized,
would he not have expressed as much, when, having said, He that believes, and
is baptized, shall be saved (by way of Antithesis) But he that believes not,
shall be damned? But of this passage formerly.

That which Mr. A alleges to prove, that to require Baptism as well as
Repentance, for the obtaining of remission of sins, was Gods standing me had
through generations, and not appropriate to the persons now spoken unto, is not
much valuable. The Apostle (says he) says, that the promise, [To wi^, of
remission of sins and guilt of the spirit] which was made on condition of
repentance and Baptism, was made, not only to them then, and their children,
but to those that were further remote, etc. I answer,

1. It is none of the best advised, sayings in his discourse, to say, that the
promise of remission of sins, and gift of the Spirit, was made upon condition
of Faith and Baptism. God is not wont to make his promises upon any condition,
or conditions whatsoever, but freely, and of himself. Only he makes many of
them of such a tenor or form, wherein the performance of them, or the actual
exhibition of the good things promised, is suspended upon the performance of a
condition, one or more.

2. Neither can Mr. A. show us, where God ever made any promise of remission of
sins, and gift of the Spirit, upon condition of Repentance and Baptism [I mean,
of giving remission of sins, and the spirit, upon these conditions] at least
any promise with exclusion of those from these privileges, who shall not
perform both these conditions. He is not able to show, where God has either
said, or intimated, that whosoever is not baptized, shall never have remission
of sins. But

3. (And lastly for this) the promise which Peter here says was to them, and
to their children, and to all those that are afar off, even as many, etc. is
a great and general promise of life and Salvation, and consequently of all
things necessary hereunto, as forgiveness of sins, Sanctification by the
Spirit, etc. which God has made unto all mankind; but with this proviso, or
clause of exception, that they only shall partake of the good things of this
promise, not who shall be baptized, but who shall truly repent and believe in
him. For evident it is that the promise asserted by the Apostle in this place
to the Jews, their children, to all those afar off, etc. was delivered by God
long before now, even under the old Testament, where there is frequent mention
made of Faith and repentance, and of Gods requiring these of men to render them
capable of blessedness from him; but there is altum silentium, profound
silence all along, and not a word spoken of Baptism. To him (says Peter, Act.
10. 43.) give all the Prophets witnesses that through his name whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins. So that the performance of
the said promise could not be suspended by God, either in whole, or in part,
upon Baptism. For as the Apostle Paul reasons for justification by faith in
the promise of Grace, against justification by the Law, which was not given
until a long time after the said promise, And this I say, that the Covenant
that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and
thirty years after, cannot disanull, that it should make the promise of none
effect, (Gal. 3. 17.) so may we argue the case in hand; the Law of Baptism,
which was given many hundred years after the promise of life and salvation unto
those that should repent and believe, cannot disanull this promise; which
notwithstanding it should do, if the said terms or qualifications of Repentance
and Faith could not interesse men in the said promise; (I mean, in the good
things promised) without Baptism.

That clause in the latter end of ver. 39. even as many as the Lord our God
shall call (to add this by the way) is not so much, (nor indeed, at all)
restrictive, but encouraging and extensive; importing, that no person, or
persons whatsoever, to whom the word of promise, or the Gospel, shall come,
need be at all troubled, or afraid, that though they should repent, yet they
should not partake of the good things promised, in as much as the promises, be
they never so many, be they the whole world, is comprehensive of them all. But
about this (I suppose) there is no difference between Mr. A. and me.

5. When two several means (as here, Repentance, and being baptized) are
prescribed in order to the obtaining of such or such an end (as the said two
means here are spoken of, be, in order to remission of sins) it does not
presently follow, that both these means, no nor yet that either of them, are
simply, absolutely, or universally necessary to the obtaining of this end; or
that this end is not attainable by any other means whatsoever, in case either
of these, yea or both of them, be wanting; especially when one of them is but
of an inferior import, and has neither in the nature of it, nor by any
institution from God, any essential or indispensable connection with this end;
least of all does such a thing follow, either when a third means of a richer
and fuller contribution toward the said end, shall be used in stead of this
latter, or when the end is elsewhere declared by God himself, to be attainable,
yea and that it shall certainly be obtained, by the former means alone; as
remission of sins is often in scripture secured unto Repentance, where there is
not the least whisper of any necessity of Water Baptism to be joined with it
to render it effectual in this kind. See Act. 3. 19. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Luke 15. 7,
10. Luke 24. 47. Act. 11. 18. (to omit other places) When the Apostle Paul
says, that his hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel was, (...), that
they might be saved, Romans 10. 1.
he does not suppose that it had been impossible for Israel to be saved without
such his hearts desire, and prayer, for them. So when writing to the
Corinthians, he says, that they may ALL prophecy one by one, that ALL may
learn, and ALL may be comforted, 1 Cor. 14. 31.
it cannot reasonably be inferred from hence, that unless they did ALL
(understand we it, ALL that had the gift of prophesying amongst these)
prophecy one by one, ALL [i. the whole body of the Church, and every member of
it] could not possibly learn, or be comforted. For certain it is, that all
might have learned, and so have been comforted, although only some few of the
prophets amongst them had prophesied. So when it is said, John did baptize in
the wilderness, and preach the Baptism of repentance FOR the remission of sins
(Mar. 1. 4.) it cannot be concluded from hence, that therefore without John's
preaching, there could be, or have been, no remission of sins. Therefore the
prescribing of Baptism together with Repentance, for remission of sins, does
not necessarily suppose, that without Baptism Remission of sins cannot be
attained.

Sect. 96.
6. What if there be another sense, which I suppose Mr. A. never thought of, of
this Clause, or Phrase, (...), for the remission of sins; as viz. wherein the
Proposition, (...), shall not relate to any thing future, or which is yet to be
obtained, but to something either past or present, and shall signify as much
as, for the sake of, because of, or the like; and so the meaning of these words
may rise thus; and be baptized every one of you in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS, i. for the remission of sins sake, which the Lord
Jesus, has upon your repentance bestowed upon? you This interpretation of the
place, 1. agrees very well with the signification of the Preposition, (...);
and 2. makes a commodious and worthy sense of the passage, and this without any
unkindnesse at all to the Context.

1. The Proposition, (...), is by the Authors in the Greek tongue sometime used
for, (...) (and they are accordingly cited by our best Greek Lexicons) which
(as was lately said) signifies because of, or for the sake of (...); for
therefore came I forth; Mar. 1. 38:
i. for that work's sake (speaking of his preaching the Gospel) meaning, that
the work of preaching the Gospel, is of such dignity, of such transcendent
consequence, both for the glory of God, and good of men, that he thought it
worthy his coing into the world to be a witness and preacher of it; according to
what he speaks else where in the same Phrase, (...), etc. For this cause came
I into the world, that I might bear witness to the truth. Ioh. 18. 37
And thus the said Preposition might be rendered (and perhaps better then now it
is) Mat. 15. 24. Col. 1. 20. vi. Redemption redeemed. p. 44
and (I suppose) in several other places, which do not at present occur.
According to this construction of the particle, (...), the meaning of the
exhortation, be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, (...), for the
remission of sins, arises to this effect; Since upon, and by means of, your
repentance, you obtain so rich a privilege, as remission of sins is, through
the Lord Jesus, be not ashamed to be baptized in his Name, i. to own him for
your sovereign Lord and master in the face of the world. Now

2. That this interpretation of the clause is savourie and Evangelicall, is of
ready demonstration. For what can be more reasonable then that men should
publicly, and without being ashamed, acknowledge and own him for their
Gracious Benefactour, for whom they have received favors of high concernment
unto them; and this in consideration of these worthy favors received? And
unless we shall admit of some such co^struction of the particle (...), as this,
Mat. 3. 11. we must make Baptism as well required on man's part to interesse him
in Repentance, (or make impenitents* either the only, or the best capable
subjects of Baptism) as well as in remission of sins. For here John Baptist
says expressly to the people: (...), i. I indeed baptize you with water FOR [OR
VNIO] REPENTANCE.

3. (And lastly, for this) the sense given no ways disaccommodates the Context
any whit more, then Mr. A's interpretation it self does. Nor can there any
account be given of such a dis-accommodation.

Sect. 97.
7. Yet once more to the Scripture in hand; these words, for the remission of
sins, may be well conceived to relate only to the word Repent, in the beginning
of the ver^e; and the words coming between [ and be baptized every one of you
in the Name of the Lord Jesus] to be inserted after the manner of a
parenthesis, directing the Jews what to do upon their repentance, not for the
procuring or obtaining the forgiveness of their sins (which as we already
showed from the current of the Scriptures, is promised unto repentance, not
unto Baptism) but for a sacred testimony unto the world that at present they
were, and as a solemn engagement upon themselves, ever to remain and be, the
true and loyal Disciples of Jesus Christ.

8. Some interpret, and be baptized, figuratively, as if Peter, by the sign,
understood the thing signified, or professed by it: of which Dialect there are
many instances in Scripture. According to this interpretation, Repent, and be
baptized, is no more then, Repent, and believe; Baptism in capable subjects (as
all these were to whom Peter now speaks) signifying and importing Faith, and
the profession of it.

9. This clause, for the remission of sins, may be understood in a kind of
declarative sense (as many such scripture expressions likewise are) and so
signify, for the secureing or assuring your selves of the remission of your
sins. It is a true rule, that words and phrases, which more frequently signify
such or such spiritual privileges, at present obtained by Faith, are
sometimes used to signify the actual and real fruition of these privileges,
and their complete manifestatiom. Thus Romans 8. 23. -- even we do sigh in our
selves, waiting for the ADOPTION, etc. i. for the full enjoyment or
manifestation of our adoption, etc. So Gal. 5. 5. We through the Spirit wait for
the hope of righteousness by Faith; i. for the actual and complete
manifestation, and fruition of those good things, which we now expect and hope
for upon the account of our justification before God by believing. Thus also
Mat. 6. 12, 14. Forgiveness of sins, is put for the knowledge, comfort, or
assurance of this forgiveness (to omit other instances of a like dialect.)
Some such sense as this of Remission of sins, (in the ^cripture before us) is
very proper for the place, because it so fitly agrees with this part of Peter's
exhortation, and be baptized, one special use and end of Baptism (as Mr. A.
himself acknowledges, and this more then once, if I mistake not, in this very
discourse) being to seal, ratify, or insure unto men the remission of their
sins upon repentance. Besides, in emphaticallnesse of language (wherein the
holy Ghost much delights also) Remission of sins, is not it self, is not what
it may be made unto those, in whom it is vested, until it be known unto them,
and so enjoyed by them. This construction of the place, makes not remission of
sins it self (which is Mr. A's sense) but the knowledge, comfort, or enjoyment
of this remission, to be dependent (at least to a degree) upon Water Baptism in
conjunction with repentance.

Though some of the interpretations of the passage, Act. 2. 38, 39. now
insisted on, and explained, may possibly seem somewhat more hard, and scant of
satisfaction, then their fellows, yet is the hardest of them all better
comporting with the general notion and doctrine of the Gospel, and no less
with the words and phrases themselves, then that sense which Mr. A. labors in
the very fire to fasten on them.

Lastly (for this) suppose we that Mr. A's conceit about the meaning of the
said Scripture, should (against Scripture light) be admitted, yet would neither
his Anti-paedo-baptismall conceit, nor his conceit about the necessity of
water-dipping, receive any encouragement, or credit at all hereby. Not the
latter, because here is only mention made of being baptized; nothing at all so
much as hinted at the greatest distance, touching the necessity of any
determinate manner of the performance or reception of it. Nor yet the former;
because, 1. from the order of the two duties, as they are here expressed and
named, first, Repentance, and then being baptized, nothing can be concluded for
an universal necessity of the one to precede the other in time, there being
scarce any thing of more common observation in the Scriptures, then that the
order of things, as well that of time, as of nature, is here frequently
interchanged, and that mentioned in the first place, which in respect of Order,
as well the one, as the other, is latter. Joh* 3. 5. Water (which Mr. A.
understands of Baptismall water) is mentioned before the Spirit, in the work of
regeneration. Baptizing (Mat. 3. 6.) is mentioned before confessing of sins,
yea and ver. 11.) before repentance. Confession with the mouth (Romans 10. 9.) is
mentioned before believing with the heart. So the Greek is mentioned before the
Jew, Colos. 3. 11. as the Jew before the Greek, Gal. 3. 28. So again, joy is
mentioned before peace, Gal. 5. 22. and yet peace before joy, Romans 14. 17.
Melchizedeck's act in blessing Abraham, is mentioned in the first place, and
his blessing the God of Abraham, in the latter, Genesis 14. 19, 20. So likewise,
the burnt-offering is named before the sin-offering, Levit. 12. 8. whereas the
sin-offering was in order of time to go before it, as appears* Levit. 8. 14,
18. and so again, Levit. 9. 7, etc. It were easy to multiply instances in
this kind, I mean both where there is an interchangable expression of the same
things in respect of prioritie and posterioritie; as likewise where that which
precedes in time, is mentioned after that, which in time comes behind it.
Therefore from the Order in Peter's exhortation between Repentance and Baptism,
nothing can be argued to prove a necessity, that Repentance always ought, in
respect of time, to precede Baptism; as neither did it precede in the Baptism,
of which notice was taken formerly.

2. In case it were granted, that from the Scripture yet on the stage, it could
be proved (yea, or were so evident, as Mr. A. gloryingly over his adversaries,
pretends) that remission of sins depends in part upon Baptism, and that
neither Faith, Repentance, Love, Humility, Self-denial, Mortification, with
all the heavenly retinew of the Graces of the Spirit, can do any thing to the
interessing men in this privilege, but only in conjunction with Baptism, yet
neither from hence will it follow, that therefore Infant Baptism is unlawful,
yea, or not as available in this kind, as Mr. A's afterbaptism is. Evident it
is that there is no rational footing for either of these inferences in either
of the premises. For the lawfulness of Infant Baptism supposed, the contrary
whereof (as we even now demonstrated) cannot be proved from the Scripture in
hand, there can be no reason to dis-interesse it in any privilege, or
blessing, which is vested in any Water Baptism whatsoever.

Sect. 98.
Thus at last we see as by a noonday light, how unadvisedly, and upon how
slight grounds, Mr. A. has fallen un-Christianly foul and heavy upon his
Christian Brethren dissenting from him in his sense about Baptism, by adjudging
the case against them, thus: It is too evide^t to be denied by any, but those
that will not see, from Act. 2. 38, 39. That both Repentance, and the
Declaration of it by Baptism, is required on man's part to interesse him in
remission of sins, and sanctification of the spirit. And as touching this
latter, the Sanctification of the Spirit, that Baptism is not necessarily, or
universally required on man's part, to interess him herein, is of much more
easy demonstration, then the former. But enough upon this account has been
said formerly, considering how point blank the Scripture lies in many places
against this conceit. Review the eighth Section of this Discourse.

Although Mr. A. (for cause best known to himself) waves the impanelling of
Act. 22. 16. to serve upon his Jurie as has been formerly noted) yet because
Gehezi thinks himself wiser at this turn, then his Master, and will not lose
the opportunity and advantage (so seeming to him) of such a Scripture, though
the other lets it pass, let us bestow a few lines in the examination of it
also. The words are these: And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized,
and wash away thy sins, calling upon the Name of the Lord. Paul himself
reports these words as spoken unto him by Ananias, upon his sight restored,
of which he had been for a season deprived by means of the glory of that light,
wherein the Lord Christ had appeared unto him from heaven, as he was journeying
toward Damascus. Now because Ananias expresses himself unto Paul, thus, -- be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, some (according to the tenor of Mr. A's
Doctrine) infer, that therefore Baptism washes away sins, i. procures
Justification, or pardon of sin, in the sight of God. But to this we answer,

1. Substantial proof has been made, and this by many arguments, that
remission of sins is the purchase, or procurement, of the blood of Jesus
Christ, and is obtained, or received, by such a Faith, which is accompanied
with a true Repentance: and that it is not suspended either in whole or in
part, upon Waterbaptism.

2. Evident it is that Paul, when, and before, the words in hand were spoken
unto him by Ananias, was in an estate of Justification before God, and had
obtained a remission of all his sins. For 1. Ananias saluteth him, BROTHER
Saul, (Act. 22. 13.) before he baptized him: which (doubtless) had he judged
him to be in an estate of Reprobation, he would not have done. 2. He prayed,
and this with acceptance in the sight of God, before he was baptized ( Act. 9.
11.) This also evinceth him to have been in favor with God before his said
baptizing, and consequently that his sins were forgiven him. 3. When Ananias
replied unto the Lord Christ speaking unto him in a vision, and injoyning him
to seek out Paul, that he had heard by many how much evil he had done to the
Saints at Jerusalem, the Lord made him this answer; Go thy way: for he is a
chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the
children of Israel. For I will show him how great things he must suffer for my
Names sake, etc. These things sufficiently declare him to have been in favor
with Christ, whilst he was yet unbaptized; and so not to have been in a state
of condemnation, or under the guilt of his sins, and consequently, that his
sins were not for given him, either by means of, or upon, his baptizing. 4.
The Lord Christ had in a most extraordinary and glorious manner revealed
himself from heaven unto him, telling him plainly, that he was Jesus whom he
persecuted; and Paul believed him accordingly. Act. 9. 5, 6. Therefore
(certainly) by this time he was in a state of acceptance with Christ, and so
cleansed from his sins. 5. (And lastly) if his sins were in any such way, or
sense, washed away, in, or by his Baptism, as if until now he had been in a
state of wrath through a retainment or non-forgivenesse of his sins by God,
then had Ananias admitted an unclean person, and a child of Satan, unto
Baptism, when he admitted Paul: and consequently neither Faith, nor Repentance,
nor yet the profession of either, shall be necessary to qualify for Baptism,
unless it be said that Ananias acted contrary to Gospel rule in baptizing
Paul. Therefore (certainly) Ananias his meaning, in saying unto him, Arise, and
be baptized, and wash away thy sins, etc. was not that by being baptized he
should be justified in the sight of God, or obtain the pardon and forgiveness
of his sins (These, as has been proved, having been forgiven him before his
baptizing) but that either, 1. he should wash away his sins, Typically, or
Sacramentally; or else (and rather) 2. that upon his being baptized, he should
wash away his sins, i. (in his own expression and phrase) cleanse himself
from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, serving God in righteousness
and true holiness all the days of his life. So that these words, and wash
away thy sins, do not express, or relate unto, matter of justification, but
of Sanctification.

This latter Interpretation might be abetted by the enlargment and pressing of
these, and such like considerations.

1. Men are no where in Scripture commanded to justify themselves, at least
not in that sense, wherein some Anabaptists interpret the words in hand, and
against which we now argue) but frequently to sanctify themselves. See Levit.
11. 44. Levit. 20. 7. Joel 3. 5. 2 Chronicles. 29. 5. (to omit other places.)

2. The work, or duty of Sanctification, is often expressed by the Metaphor of
washing, Wash you, make you clean: put away the evil of your doings, etc. Isa.
1. 16. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, etc. Jer. 4. 14. But ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 11.

3. It has been proved, that Paul before his baptizing, was in a justified
condition; and consequently, could not be exhorted by Baptism to wash away his
sins in any such sense, which imports Justification, or remission of sins.

4. The sense we now plead of the words, and wash away thy sins, well
accommodates both the former, and the latter part of the verse; whereas the
sense opposed, falls in kindly with neither. For the former, thus: Be
baptized, and wash away thy sins,] i. be baptized, and then be careful to
observe the holy engagement, which thy submission unto Baptism imposes on
thee. For the latter, thus: Wash away thy sins, calling upon the Name of the
Lord] 1. Cast away from thee the evil of thy ways, depart from iniquity, so
shall thou call upon the Name of God, or of Christ (as some expound the word,
Lord) with acceptance; according to that 2 Timothy 2. 19. (as the Geneva
Translation reads it) Let every one that calls on the Name of Christ,
depart from iniquity. Whereas on the other hand, to make Ananias to speak unto
Paul, thus: Arise, and be baptized, and so ^ust^fie thy self; etc. is to make
him speak an uncouth Dialect, and unknown to the Scriptures.

Allthough I rather incline to the interpretation of the place now asserted,
yet the other, which understands Ananias to speak of a Typical washing away
of sin by Baptism, is probable, and of good accord with Scripture notion, and
Phrase. This interpretation supposes Ananias speaking unto Paul to this
effect. Arise, be baptized, and wash away thy sins, etc. q. d. The Lord
Christ has appeared from Heaven unto thee, he has prevailed with thee to
believe on him to the justification of thy person, and forgiveness of thy
sins. Why then should thou delay the receiving of the seal or confirmation
of this thy blessedness, and not make have to be baptized, seeing Baptism is a
Type or Figure of an Heavenly institution, wherein the washing or cleansing of
the conscience from the guilt and defilement of sin, is shadowed, and
Typically, or Sacramentally transacted. In Scripture, things are frequently
said to be done, simply, and without explication, when they are done only in
their Type, or Sacramentally. Thus Ezekiel calls his declaring the
destruction of the city, the destroying of it, simply; When I came to destroy
the city, Ezekiel. 43. 3. So likewise he is said to bear the iniquity of the
house of Israel, and so to lay siege against it, etc, (Ezekiel. 4. 3. 5.) when as
he did these but in Type and figure only. Therefore WE ARE BVRIED with him by,
or through Baptism, etc. Romans 6. 4. i. we are Typically, or Sacramentally
buried with him, etc. So Col. 2. 12. buried with him in Baptism. Thus 1 Pet. 3.
21. The figure of Baptism is said to save men (of which formerly, viz. Sect.
130.) In this kind of Dialect likewise the Apostle tells the Galathians, that
Christ was crucified among them, [meaning, Sacramentally, or representatively
only] Gal. 3. 1. (to omit many the like) I find our Protestant Expositours
more generally leaning rather to this interpretation, then the other. Water
(says B^llinger) does not wash away sins, but grace which is signified by
water. Non enim aqua abluit peccatum. sed gratia qua significatur per aquam.
Calvin says; that no such thing is intimated, as if any thing taken away,
either from the Holy Ghost, or from the blood of Christ, were [put into, and]
shut up in the element: but that God is willing that the Element should be a
prop or support to our we^knesse. Therefore in as much as Baptism helps our
Faith in the receiving the forgiveness of our sins by the blood of Christ
only, it is called the Laver or washer of the soul. Non quod quicquam vel ex
Spiritu Sancto, vel ex sanguine Christi detractum in elemento includatur. Sed
quia signum ipsum Deus vult infirmitatis nostrae adminiculum esse. Quatenus
ergo fidem nostram adjuvat Baptismus, ut remissionem peccatorum accipiat ex
solo Christi sanguine, lavacrum animae vocatur. Calvin. in locum.
I forbear plurality of quotations. They who make Justification, or remission
of sins, to depend upon Baptism, do (as Calvin upon the place in hand aptly
expresses it) Baptismo Christum obruere, overwhelm Christ with Baptism.

Nor is there any thing pertinent to the business in hand in what Mr. A.
subjoyneth in the close of this discourse. And (says he) if this be one End
and Use of Baptism, as you see, for persons thereby to enter their public
assent and consent unto the terms of the Gospel upon their cordial embracing
it, then the Baptism of Infants is voided as to this use also, in as much as
they are incapable of exerting any act of heart, and. For

1. Every man's assent and consent unto the terms of the Gospel, is not
public. With the heart (says the Apostle) man believes unto righteousness.
Indeed no man's assent or consent hereunto, is public, but very secret and
private. The Lord [and no other] knows [certainly] who are his. Yea, not so
much as the probability of any man's assent and consent is public, until it
be by one means or other made public. Now then if it must be [made] public,
before it be entered by Baptism, Baptism cannot be the publication or
manifestation of it, at least not the first or immediate publication of it. Nor
can the declaration, or publication, of any man's Faith or Repentance, be any
end worthy Baptism, in case they be declared and made public, before Baptism
interposeth for this declaration. When the battle is fought and the day won,
there is no need of fresh soldiers.

2. If it be one end and use of Baptism, for persons hereby to enter their
public assent and consent unto the terms of the Gospel upon their cordial
embracing it, then is both Mr. A's own Baptism, yea and the Baptism of a very
great part of those baptized in his way, voided as to this use, as well as the
Baptism of Infants. For 1. Mr. A. himself was not baptized upon his cordial
embracing the terms of the Gospel, but long after. 2. If, when he was
baptized, he did thereby enter his public assent and consent to the terms of
the Gospel, I believe he entered that which was public, very privately, and
in a book legible by very few. 3. It is too too manifest that a very great part
of those, who are baptized in his way, neither cordially embrace the Gospel,
nor yet well understand what the terms of it are. How then can they enter their
assent and consent unto the terms of the Gospel, upon their cordial embracing
it? Therefore by the verdict of Mr. A's Doctrine, their Baptism also is voided
as to that end and use of it, of which he here speaks. Yea 4. (and lastly) no
man can certainly tell when, or by whose Baptism, Baptism is not voided as to
that end and use, which here he ascribes unto it; because it cannot certainly
be known who amongst those that are baptized, do either assent or consent unto
the terms of the Gospel, much less who they are, that cordially embrace it.
So that he has brought that end and use of Baptism, by which in this place he
endeavors to void Infant Baptism, to a very bad market.

3. (And lastly, for this) suppose that end and use of Baptism, which here he
asserteth unto it, were legitimate, and really such, yea and that the Baptism
of Infants were voided as to them, yet it follows not from hence, that
therefore the Baptism of Infants is unlawful. One end of marriage is
legitimate procreation; and marriage, as to this end of it is voided unto
those, who marry, and never procreate; yet it follows not that the marriage
of such as these, is unlawful. See more of this, Sect. 67.
If any one end of Baptism be competent unto children, this is sufficient to
justify their baptizing, though others be not. Mr. A. advances, p. 19.

Sect. 99.
Another excellent effect, and use of Baptism is, thereby to justify God in
the sight of the world, as touching the truth of his sayings in the Gospel,
for so it is said, Luke 7. 29. That all the people that heard him, justified
God, being Baptized with the Baptism of John. And soon after: They are said to
justify God in being Baptized, because by their voluntary submission unto
that Ordinance, they did declare, that they judged the Doctrine and Precepts of
the Gospel, of which Baptism is a part, most worthy belief and obedience, as
coming from God. But inasmuch as Infants are only passive in Baptism, and not
active or voluntary, they cannot contribute any thing toward the justification
of God, etc.

Nor is the cause of Infant Baptism like to suffer by any thing that is said
here. For

1. The justification of God in the sight of the world, is no effect of
Baptism; especially not as taken up, or practiced by Mr. A. and most of his
way. For how can God be justified in the sight of the world, by any such
transaction of men, which is transacted by them out of the sight, view, and
cognizance of the world? And we have often had occasion to consider, that most of
those baptismall transactions, which are practiced in Mr. A's way of Baptizing,
are wont to be, little other then clandestine, and beheld only by a very few.

2. Neither can God be justified in the sight of the world, by any act,
Baptismall or other, which either is in it self doubtfully and disputably good
(at the best) or, 2. is in itsself irregular or unlawful, or 3. which is so
apprehended by the world. Now such Baptismall actions, as Mr. A. contends for
and practices, are 1. doubtfully good, at the best, the far greater part of
men Grave, Sober, and Judicious, judging and condemning them as unwarrantable
and unlawful. And 2. by the generality of the world, they are censured not
simply and singly as unlawful, but as actions hateful, and much displeasing
unto God. Therefore the ^ustifying of God in the sight of world, can be no
fruit, or effect, much less any excellent effect of such actions.

3. When wicked and unworthy persons are baptized (a kind of traveller too
often met with in Mr. A's way) God is so far from being justified hereby, that
he is rather dishonored and reproached. But unto the wicked God says, what
have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant
in thy mouth, Psalm. 50. 16. Therefore however, the justifying of God in the
sight of the world, is no effect of Baptism simply, but, at the most, of
Baptism, as, and when, regularly administered unto persons judged by God himself
in the Scriptures meet for part and fellowship in that Administration.

4. Neither does the Text cited by Mr. A. necessarily prove, that the
justifying of God touching the truth of his sayings in the Gospel, in the
sight of the world, is any effect or use of Baptism. His gloss upon it is not
cogent. For they are not said to justify God IN being baptized: the words give
not this sound: but only that having been baptized with the Baptism of Johhn
[(...)] they now justified God, viz. by believing that testimony, which God by
the mouth of his Son Christ had now given concerning John. See ver. 24. 25, 26,
etc. intimating, that their having been baptized of John, inclined them readily
to embrace that honorable testimony, which the Lord Christ had now given unto
him: whereas the Pharisees and Lawyers, (...), not having been baptized of him,
[i. of Iohn] are said to have re^ected the counsel of God (...) against
themselves [or, concerning themselves] i. by not receiving Christ's testimony
of John, to have made frustrate and void as to themselves, the Gracious
intention of God toward them therein; which were to have reduced them to an
honorable and worthy esteem of John, his Ministry and Doctrine, that so they
might have believed in him, whom John in his ministry so highly magnified,
and commended unto the world. Or,

Sect. 100.
5. Admit we Mr. A's gloss upon the said place thus far (which, I confess,
upon second thoughts, I judge not improbable) vi. that all the people that
heard John, and the Publicans, justified God, IN, or BY, their being baptized
with his Baptism; yet 1. it does not follow, that hereby they justified him, as
touching the truth of his sayings in the Gospel. For as yet, I mean, whilst
the great recourse of people (here employed) unto John's Baptism, continued, the
Gospel was not known, neither had been preached in the world; nor did the
world understand what the sayings thereof were, or rather, what they would be,
or were like to be. Therefore the justifying of God as touhing the truth of
these, could be no such effect, or use, of Baptism, no not of the Baptism of
the persons baptized by John, as Mr. A. pretends. They are said to have
justified God in, or by submitting unto John's Baptism, in as much as by this
submission they did acknowledge his ministry and Baptism to be from heaven,
i. from God, and withal, that the tenor and substance of his ministry,
(which was, that upon the Repentance of those who had sinned, their sins should
be forgiven them) was very gracious and good. 2. Nor does it follow, that
though they justified God, in these respects, by being Baptized by John, that
therefore they justified him in the sight of the world, there being little or
(perhaps) nothing, of the world present, when they were baptized. They rather
justified God [I mean, did that which was proper to justify God] in the sight
of the world, by their public owning and professing this their Baptism
afterward, then simply by their receiving it. Therefore

Sect. 101.
6. Whereas he assumes, that Infants being only passive in Baptism, and not
voluntary, cannot contribute any thing to the justification of God, etc. he
alters the state of the Question between him, and his adversaries; which is
not, whether Infants, but whether Infant Baptism, contributes any thing to the
justification of God; although neither is this indeed the state of the
Question, no nor yet of any considerable connection with it. For many things may
be lawful, which do not contribute any thing to the justification of God in
the sight of the world. Yet 2. that Infant Baptism contributes every whit as
much (or rather more) to the justification of God as to the truth of his
sayings in the Gospel, in the sight of the world, as the baptizing of men and
women, is evident from hence. The Parents, who offer their children unto
Baptism, are (for the most part, and should be, always) experienced
Christians, and of long acquaintance with the Gospel; and consequently cannot
reasonably but be presumed, to have better knowledge and assurance both of the
truth, and likewise of the goodness of the sayings of God in the Gospel, then
men and women who are newly converted to the Gospel; who notwithstanding
according to Gospel rule (in case of a non-pre-baptism) yea and according to
Mr. A's principles themselves (whether in such a case, or otherwise) are the
only men and women that ought to be baptized (excepting the case of oversight)
Now 1. it cannot be thought, that Parents, being long experienced Christians,
would offer their children to be baptized, unless themselves were verily
persuaded both of the truth, and goodness, of the sayings of God in the
Gospel. And 2. the testimony of those concerning the truth and goodness of
things, or sayings, who have best known, and had the most experience of them,
amounts to a richer and fuller justification of them, and so of him who has
spoken them, then the testimony of such persons, who are (at least
comparatively) strangers to them. Therefore though Infants themselves cannot
contribute to the justification of God in the case before us, yet
Infant Baptism may, and does, contribute altogether as much (or rather more) as
the Baptizing of men and women, especially if baptized in these years, when and
as soon, as by rule they ought.

Sect. 102.
3. That which Mr. A's most regular actives and voluntaries in their Baptism
contribute to the justifying of God in the truth of his sayings in the Gospel,
and sight of the world, is not so much (as has been already observed) by their
being baptized, as by their public owning and professing this their Baptism
afterward in the face of the world. If so, then may Infants themselves living
unto the age and years of men, by a like public owning of their baptism, with
the other, contribute as much to the justifying of God in the sight of the
world, as they.

4. (And lastly for this) The Infants of the Jews were no whit more active or
voluntary in their circumcision, then the Infants of Christians are in their
Baptism. Yet God judged himself as much (or more) justified in the sight of the
world by the circumcision of those Infants, as he did by the circumcision of
men: otherwise he would rather have enjoined the circumcision of men only, and
not of children at all.

5. Whereas Mr. A. calls Baptism, a part of the Gospel, he might more
properly, and truly, if we respect either the institution, or first practice
and administrations of it, (in which consideration Mr. A. discourses of it)
call it a part of the Law. For John's Doctrine was, not that the kingdom of
heaven (by which all understand, the state of the Gospel it self, or else the
state of the Church under the Gospel) was already come, but only that it was
nigh at hand. Mat. 3. 2. Nor were the Legal or Mosaicall administrations
abolished, so much as to the precept, or necessity of them, in John's days:
and consequently there was no opportunity for the introducing or erecting of
any Evangelicall Ordinance, whilst his ministry continued. Besides, we read
(Gal. 4. 4.) that Christ was made under the law; but no where, that he was made
under the Gospel. And himself says that he came to fulfill the law. Mat. 5.
17. which he had in other words expressed before (Mat. 3. 15.) saying, that it
became him to fulfill all righteousness, (giving this unto John for a reason,
why it was meet for him to subject himself unto Baptism, as well as he had done
unto circumcision, and other legal observations) Or however, if we notion
Baptism as a Gospel Ordinance, it is very improperly, yea untruly, termed a
part of the Gospel. The Gospel is the Covenant: Baptism the Seal of this
Covenant (as Mr. A. and the Generality of Rebaptizers with him, do
acknowledge: for in hoc, as it seems, non tenetur Magister Fisher) and
therefore can be no part of it, as the seal annexed to a writing, is no part of
the writing. But finis unius mali gradus est futuri; and Mr. A. proceeds Mr.
A. p. 19. 20.


Sect. 103.
5. Lastly, Another great end of Baptism, when taken up by persons under due
qualifications, is to distinguish and difference them from the world, and to
characterise them as peculiarly relating unto God; in which respect (amongst
others) al those that are baptized into Christ, are said, to put on Christ*
Gal. 3. 27. they thereby declare themselves to belong to him, as the servants
of great men are known to belong to them, by their badg and livery which they
put on, when they enter themselves servants to them. After a little less
pertinent discourse about the distinguishing use of the Law, he assumse thus:

But now this way the differencing men lasted but till such time as Faith came,
as the Apostle notes; But after Faith is come (says he) we are no longer under
a Shoolmaster, v. 25. i. no longer known to be Disciples or Scholars, as
formerly we were by our keeping of the Law. The Mosaicall dispensation
continued till faith came, i. e. until the time of the gospel dispensatio^:
and then faith became of the same use to denominate and distinguish who were
the children of God, and who not, which the law and ceremonies were of before.
For so the Apostle says, v. 26. For ye are (i. e. now ye are) all the children
of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. By Faith, (which is here said to have come,
when the Schoolmastership of the Law ended) is meant, I conceive, the
confessing or acknowledging Christ Jesus to be come in the flesh, and to be the
Son of God, etc. Upon this, he labors in the very fire to prove this his
conceit from the Scriptures.

Sect. 104.
The basis of this longsome discourse, (as the attentive Reader may easily
perceive) is (as himself terms it) his conceit, that by Faith, Gal. 3. 25,
26. is meant, the confessing or acknowledging Christ Jesus to be come in the
flesh, to be the Son of God, and Savior of the world. If this conceit will
burn, all the fat here is in the fire. Now that by Faith, in the said passages,
cannot be meant such a confessing or acknowledging, as is conceited, at least
not in both the verses (nor indeed, in either) is as evident, as evidence it
self can make any thing evident. For,

1. (To speak to v. 25. the former of the two) what ear, that has any taste of
words, can find an Apostolical relish in such a saying as this: But after the
confessing and acknowledging Christ Jesus to be come in the flesh, came, we are
no longer, etc. It must be by a Metaphor of a new and strange foundation, by
which Faith shall signify, the confessing and acknowledging Christ Jesus to be
come in the flesh, etc.

2. No Expositor, whether Ancient, or Modern, Popish, or Protestant, that I
have consulted upon the place, gives the right hand of fellowship, but the left
(b) Postquam venit fides, id est, tempus fi: dei, postquam revelata est fides
in Chrisstum, in quam; etc.
of contradiction, to that interpretation. Calvin, by Faith here understands,
a more clear revelation of Grace, upon the rending of the veil of the Temple,
which was caused by the exhibition of Christ. Quis sit adventus fides, jam
dictum est, nempe clarior gratiae revelatio, postquam velum templi scissum est,
quod factum esse scimus Christi exhibitione.
Upon ver. 23. he had said, that Faith (there) signifies the full revelation
of those things, which were hid under the obscurity of (d) (...)] id est,
prius quam veniret Evangelium, quod (...) fides dicitur.
the shadows of the Law. Musculus, by Faith here understands the time of Faith.
Hugo Grotius, the Gospel (by a Metonymie) (c) Estius, the time of Faith
revealed. At posti quam advenit tempus revelatae fidei, etc.
Mr. Perkins, the Gospel, or Doctrine of remission of sins, and life
everlasting by Christ, exhibited in the flesh. Doubtless the sense of no
Commentator upon the place holds any affinity with Mr. A's notion. Yea

3. Himself contradicts himself in that sense of the word Faith, which now we
oppose. For are not his words these? The Mosaicall dispensation continued till
Faith came, i. e. until the time of the Gospel dispensation. Are, the time of
the Gospel dispensation, and, and the confessing and acknowledging Christ to
become in the flesh, of an equivalent, or synonymous signification? But

2. Concerning the word Faith, ver. 26. the case is yet more clear, that it
does not signify Mr. A's signification, viz. a confessing or acknowledging
Christ to be come in the flesh, etc. Because

Sect. 105.
1. This Faith, is by the Apostle exegetically termed, Faith in Christ Jesus.
Now since the mountains and the hills were brought forth, it was never heard
that Faith in Christ Jesus, signified, a confessing and acknowledging Christ to
be come in the flesh, etc.

2. Neither can the hardness of such a sense, or signification of the phrase,
be any ways mollified, or so much as tolerably acccommodated, by the mediation
of any figure, whether in Rethorique, or Grammar.

3. The Apostle here informs the Galathians thus: ye are all the children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus. Now no man IS [i becomes, or, is made] ^ child of
God, by confessing and acknowledging Christ to be come in the flesh, etc.
especially not by an outward confessing and acknowledging hereof, (of which Mr.
A. will needs be understood) but every man becomes, and is made, a child of
God, by Faith in Christ Jesus, properly and truly so called.

4. Neither can the necessiitie, no nor yet the reasonable expediencie, of such
a declarative sense of the verb substantive, are, as Mr. A. contendeth for, be
evicted from the scope of the place, or subject matter in hand. For evident it
is from ver. 24. that the Apostle here discourses of such a Faith, by which
men are justified; not, declared to be justified. Wherefore (says he) the Law
was our Schoolmaster, to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by
Faith [meaning, without the help of the Law, as appears from ver. 25.] But
after that Faith is come, i. after our Faith in Christ as being now come, and
having suffered in the flesh] we are no longer under a Schoolmaster [i. we are
not under any necessity of legal observations] The reason hereof follows,
verse. 26. For ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, [i. by
believing that Christ Jesus is come, and has suffered in the flesh, ye are
all, who thus believe, actually made the children of God;] For the words (...)
(to note this by the way) should not be translated, children of God, but
(according to the proper signification of the word, (...)) sons of God; the
Apostle in this discourse, putting a signal difference, yea making an
opposition between (...), a child, and (...), ^ son. Compare v. 1. and 3. with
ver 5, 6, 7. of the following Chapter: in which passages we find the Apostle
using the word (...), children, to express the state and condition of the
Church, and the members thereof, under the Law; and on the other hand, the word
(...), sons, to signify the condition of Believers under the Gospel. Which
Observation cuts a sunder the sinews of Mr. A's notion (or, conceit, as himself
terms it, p. 21.) viz. that the Apostle does not here difference Faith under
the gospel, from Faith under the Law. For evident it is that he does difference
the one Faith from the other, saying (in effect) that however Believers under
the Law were justified by Faith in him who was to come, as as well as Believers
under the Gofpell, by Faith in him who is come; yet the former Faith justified
them only as (...), ch^ldre^, [or, little children] or (as the Apostle varieth
the expression) as servants; i. so justified them, that they still remained
under Tutours and Governors (as he speaks) and Pedagogie of the Law; whereas
the latter Faith justifies them, as (...), Sons; i. as persons who have
out-grown their Pupillage, and received (...), (translated) the adoption of
sons; the word here imports the privilege, or accommodation, of Sons,
permitted unto them by their Fathers, when they come to maturitie of years, and
discretion; which accommodation chiefly consists in an enlargment of their
liberty, and exemption from that servile subjection, unto Tutours and
Governors; under which they were whilst children.

Sect. 106.
5. (And lastly, for this) Nor can I believe that any judicious Expositor,
either Ancient or Modern, was ever tempted with Mr. A's declarative sense of
the verb substantive, are, in the Text before us. Calvin (upon the place)
assigns this for a reason, why the Law should not always detain Believers in
bondage, viz. because they ARE the Sons of God. And further says, that the
Apostle evinceth their liberty by this, that they ARE the Sons of God. How? By
faith in Christ. For whosoever believe in him, this prerogative is conferred
upon them, that they ARE the sons of God. Probat alia ratione iniquum esse ac
minime consentaneum, ut lex perpetua servitute astringat fideles: quia silicet
SVNT filij Dei -- libertatem inde probat, quod SINT filij Dei. Quomodo? per
fide^ these.] in Christam. Nam quicunque in eum credunt, datur illis haec
prerogativa, ut SINT filij Dei.
Musc^lus likewise (upon the words) is express for this substantive sense,
against the declarative. Omnes enim filij Dei estis per fidem in Christo Jesu]
Sensus est, quotquot in Christo Jesu estis, filij Dei ESTIS, per fidem.
Grotius, you who have believed in Christ as you ought, and continue thus
believing, are the sons of God [viz. adult, or come to maturitie of years] they
who are such, begin to en^oy their fathers goods. And thus ye have received the
Spirit of your Father. Vos qui in Christum credidist is ita ut oportet, ac sic
credere perseveratis, estis filij Dei (nempe, adulti) tales qui sunt, incipiunt
bonis paternis frui. Sic and vos accepistis Patris Spiritum. (d) Omnes filij
Dei estis, etc. Q d. Etiamsi per Legem sitis vexati, humiliati and occisi,
tamen Lex non fecit vo^ justos, non fecit vos filios Dei, sed fides.
Luther, (to name no more) commenteth this notion on the words, ye are all the
sons of God, etc. As if he should say, Although ye are vexed, cast down, slain,
by the Law, yet has not the Law made you righteous, it has not made you the
Sons of God, but Faith [hath done these.]

These things considered, how importune is Mr. A's deduction from these words
ver. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. From hence he concludes ( fidenter satis) So that the Faith, what ever
it is, by which they were said to be the children of God, in ver. 26. Must be
the same in effect with that, which he calls the putting on of Christ in
Baptism. I cannot but marvel, and this not a little, upon what basis he should
found this consequence, or collection; or what relation he can apprehend
between the two verses, ver. 26. and ver. 27. which should entice a considering
man to this belief, that Faith in the former should be the same thing in effect
with putting on Christ in Baptism, in the latter. The aspect which the latter
verse has upon the former, is plainly this. The Apostle in the former, having
delivered this for truth unto them, that they were all, [viz. who truly
believed] the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; (viz. without any Legal
observation, as we formerly expounded) in the latter gives this for a reason,
why they should the rather believe it, [I mean, that they were the Sons of God
by Faith in Christ Jesus, without the help of any legal ceremonie] because
many of them had submitted unto Baptism, had been baptized into Christ; by
which act of submission they put on Christ, i. solemnly professed and engaged
themselves totally to conform and adhere to the Discipline of Christ in the
Gospel, where no Law-ceremonie has place, or is allowed, much less imposed
upon any man. So that the strength of the Apostles arguing in the place in
hand, stands in this principle, or ground, in reason: what many, according to
the will of God, solemnly and publicly profess that they believe, and engage
themselves to adhere unto, must of necessity be a truth. The Apostle here
supposes, or takes for granted, (as well he might) that all those amongst
them who had been baptized into Christ, had been thus baptized, by, or
according to, the will of God. This interpretation of his argument in ver. 27.
to prove what he had affirmed, ver. 26. viz. that they were all the complete or
adult, Sons of God, by Faith in Christ, without the observation of Moses Law,
makes him to speak and argue like himself, and with pregnancie of conviction.
Whereas Mr. A's comment puts him upon that absurdity in his discourse, which
Logicians call, idem per idem, which is, when the conclusion to be proved, and
the medium, by which this proof should be made, are, either formally, or
materially, (and to use his own term) in effect, the same. If Mr. Fisher should
take any of his Adversaries arguing at such a rate, as Mr. A. makes the Apostle
to argue here, he would, tell them that as the wheele-barrow goes rumble to
rumble, so their conclusions follow from their premises.

Sect. 107.
By the way, when the Apostle says, that as many of them as had been baptized,
had put on Christ, he does not necessarily suppose, or imply, that such of
them, who had not been thus baptized, had, in no sense, or upon no account, put
on Christ. For when a thing may be done after several and different manners,
they that do it not after one manner, may very possibly do it after another.
The same garment may be put on several ways; and the same Christ may be put
on, i. publicly professed and owned in the world, by different forms of
profession. He that eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks: and
he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and give^h God thanks. Romans 14
6. He that came neither eating nor drinking, yet came in a way of
righteousness, as he also did, who came both eating and drinking, Mat. 11. 18,
19. compared with cap. 21. 32. And (doubtless) the Apostle would not have here
made those of them, who had been baptized, the same body or Church, with those
who had not been baptized (which I have elsewhere proved, I suppose beyond all
reasonable contradiction, that he does) See warer. dipping. page 85 86
if these latter had not made some public profession of Christ and the
Gospel, as well as the former. But this discourse is a little eccentricall to
our present business.

From the premises it sufficiently appears how contrary to reason Mr. Alleu
reasons, when he says (p. 21. toward the end) Besides, their putting on of
Christ in Baptism, would be no reason why they were the children of God by
Faith in Christ, if we should understand their being the children of God
constitutively, aad not declaratively, unless we will suppose that man is the
child of GOD in his account, notwithstanding his believing in Christ, until he
be baptized into Christ. This latter clause, unless we will suppose, etc. I
suppose is dis-sensed by his Printer, by leaving out the particle, a, before,
man; and the negative particle, not, after, is. But were it thus accommodated,
and supplied, it would do no feats for the accommodation of Mr. A's arguing.
For how their putting on Christ in Baptism is no effectual argument, or
reason, to prove, that they were the children of God constitutively, and could
be no reason to prove them declaratively such, has been already debated even
to evidence.

Sect. 108.
Whereas he says (p. 22. in process of the same discourse) that the Apostle
supposes them to be Christ's, upon that very account of their being baptized
into him, and that this appears from ver. 27, 28, 29. compared together; the
very truth is, that he rather supposes them to have been Christ's before they
were baptized into him; otherwise he must suppose them to have been infidels,
yea strangers and enemies unto Christ, when they were thus baptized, or until
they had been baptized; which does not look like an Apostolical supposall. And
as touching any appearance from ver. 27, 28, 29. compared, that the Apostle
should suppose such a supposition as he asscribeth unto him, I know no man that
sees the apparition, but himself. When the Apostle, ver. 29. concludes thus;
If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, etc. his meaning (alas) is not, if
ye be, or have been, baptized, then are ye Abraham's seed; but if ye be Christ's,
i. if ye relate unto him (and so become his) by a true and unfeigned Faith.
Thousands have been Baptized, who yet are none of Abraham's seed.

About the middle of p. 22. he draws us up the upshot or result of the
Apostles discourse (in the verses lately argued) thus; That persons by Baptism
do make such a profession of Christ, as by which they are characterised to be
his. If he means, his, by profession only, and no further, what he says may
pass for truth; but certainly this is no part of the result of the Apostles
discourse he speaks of. If his meaning be any thing more, and that by Baptism
men make such a profession of Christ, by which they are characterized to be
his, i. true, or sound believers in him, Mr. A. must prove that such a
characterizing virtue is essential unto, and inseparable from Baptism, before
he can make this passable with any considering man for a truth.

That which follows, is of the same impertinent resentment; If this then be
[that which is not, as has been proved, viz.) the characteristicall mark to
distinguish the children of God from the world, then it will follow [but as the
case is, it will not follow] that no other acknowledgment of Christ without
this, or with neglect of this, is to be looked upon as any other then a
partial owning of Christ, and not a complete putting him on, so as to be
esteemed thereby visibly the children of God. But most assuredly the putting on
Christ by Baptism, without putting him on by mortification, holiness of life,
etc. is scarce so much as a partial owning of him, but rather a putting him to
open shame (as the Apostle speaks) and that which may be found in wicked men
and of a Pagan conversation, cannot reasonably be thought to add much unto, or
to complete the visibilitie of a child of God.

Sect. 109.
But because Mr. A. does so importunely hammer this nail, here and afterward,
over, and over, and yet over again, contending, that Baptism, and Baptism only,
gives visibilitie to a Christian, or Child of God, and that no person
whatsoever is to be esteemed visibly a child of God, by means of all other
visibilities in him whatsoever, without this (although the winning of this
ground would yield him little or no advantage of standing, to fight his battle
of Ati-poedobapism) let us briefly consider, how friviolous and empty, how
unworthy a considering man such a notion, or conceit is. For

1. Does not himself, and men of his judgment, esteem those visible Saints, or
children of God, whom they judge meet to be baptized, and whom they are now
about to baptize, before, or until they have baptized them? Or do they judge
none but the children of the Devil, or at least such, who for ought they know,
may be such, (the children of the Devil) meet to he Baptized? Or in what
capacity, or relation do they look upon those, whom they are about to Baptize,
before they are baptized? Either they must look upon them, as Saints visible,
or as Saints invisible, or as no Saints at all, or as persons who may, or may
not, be saints for any thing they know, or can judge, in one kind or other* and
under one or other of the^e considerations they must baptize them. If they look
upon them, as Saints visible, and in this capacity baptize them, how then does
Baptism give visibilitie of Saintship unto them, when as they were visible
Saints, before baptized? If they say, they look upon them as Saints invisible,
what do they speak less then a contradiction? taking the words, visible, and
invisible, in such a sense, wherein they must of necessity be understood in
the case or question in hand? For how can I judge a person to be an invisible
Saint, whom I have no visible, i. no sufficient or competent ground whereof I
am capable, to udge him any Saint at all? Or if I have any such ground, is he
not now a visible Saint unto me, or a person whom I ought to esteem such? If
they look on them as no Saints at all, and in this capacity baptize them, then
they baptize men, quatenus the children of the Devil, or quatenus esteemed
such: and if so, they are bound to admit none to Baptism, but those who can
give an account of their unbelief, and of their relation of Sonship to the
Devil. Or (4. and lastly) if they look upon them, as persons who may, or may
not be saints, for any thing they know of them, and in this condition baptize
them, then are they bound to receive none unto Baptism, concerning whom they
have any testimony or ground to believe that they are the children of God; nor
indeed any but only such, who are mere strangers unto them, and of whom they
never heard either good, or evil. Therefore Mr. A's conceit about the
visibilitie of Saintship by means of Baptism, is evidently overthrown by his
own Doctrine and practice of baptizing.

2. How can that give visibilitie of Saintship unto men, which is altogether as
visible in men, who are no saints, as in those, who are? Does the greenness of
the leaves, in a fig tree, prove this tree to be a fig tree, when as the leaves
of all, or most other trees are green, as well as this? Or does whiteness of
color in an horse, prove him to be that kind of creature, which indeed he is
(I mean, an horse) when as many Cows, and Sheep, are white of color, as well
as he? These are strange kinds of reasonings from the tongues and pens of sober
men. Or were there not many in the primitive times themselves, who wore the
liverie of Baptism, and yet were no Saints, or children of God? Or are there
not multitudes amongst us at this day, who in this liverie serve Satan, and
consequently, are no visible Saints, unless it be of a very late edition, and
unheard of until now.

Sect. 110.
3. Baptism gives no visibilitie, or estimation of saintship, no not in the
regular or due administration of it: therefore much less, simply, or
universally. We all presume that John Baptist, and the Lord Christ himself with
his Disciples, administered Baptism regularly and duly; yet was the Baptism
administered by these no argument of Saint-ship in those who received it. For
notwithstanding Jerusalem, and ALL Judea, and ALL the region round about Jordan
were first baptized by John, (Mat. 3. 5, 6.) and afterward such vast
multitudes by Christ and his Disciples, that the Disciples of John repined at
it, and with much regret informed him, that ALL MEN came unto him [meaning,
Christ, to receive Baptism from him, Joh. 3. 26.] yet how few of these were by
John himself esteemed visible Saints, or children of God, by means of their
Baptism, sufficiently appears from that his complaint in the ears of his own
disciples, and other Jews; And what he has seen and heard, that he testifies
(speaking of Christ) and NO MAN receives his testimony, Ioh. 3. ^2. And John
the Evangelist had not long before said; He came unto his own, and his own
received him not, Ioh. 1. 11. Nor were there any more then an hundred and
twenty that appeared at that solemn rendevouz of Saints at Jerusalem (Act. 1.
15.) after the ascension of the Lord Christ, where all the Apostles now
remaining were present. All which passages, with several others which might be
laid to them, plainly enough show, that though the number of the Baptized ones
in these times, were as the sand on the sea shore, yet was there a remnant
only, and this very small, who were Saints, or children of God amongst them.
How then did, or could Baptism prove them to be visible Saints, when as it did
not prove them to be saints at all?

4. In respect of whom, or how many, was the Eunuch (Baptized by Philip in a
desert) made a VISIBLE saint by his Baptism; Possibly his servants, if there
were any number of these with him, did not know what his Baptism signified, nor
upon what account he was baptized. And much more probable it is, that in his
own country of Ethiopia, his baptism was vox non sign^ficativa, and so no
esteem of Saint-ship unto him there; as neither does Mr. A's baptism, nor the
Baptism of any others baptized amongst us upon the same account with him, give
any esteem of Saint-ship unto them, in the judgment or opinion of those who
know what belongs to Saint-ship, and by what an estimate ought to be made of it.

Sect. 111.
5. The Scripture teaches us to estimate the visibilitie of Saintship by other
manner of characters and properties, then by a being baptized; yea and not by
this at all* as far as I am able to understand. By this (says Christ himself
shall ALL MEN KNOW THAT YOU ARE MY DISCIPLES, IF YE HAVE LOVE ONE TOWARD
ANOTHER. Joh. 13. 35. Doubtless there can be no better character, or ground of
satisfaction, whereby to judge or esteem men visible saints, or visible
children of God, then that, by which the Lord Jesus himself has so plainly
determined that all men many know who are his d^scipl^s. And whether for
Believers to have love one toward another, be the same with their being, or
having been baptized; yea or whether many believers have not love one toward
another, who yet never were baptized as Mr. A. calls Baptism, I am content Mr.
A. himself shall judge and determine. The Apostle John in several passages
fully accords with his great Lord and Master touching the visibilitie of the
children of God, and that which differrenceth them from the world. In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil: whosoever does
not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother, 1 John 3. 10. Again, If ye know that he is righteous, YE KNOW that every one that
does righteousness, is born of him, 1. Joh. 2. 29. See also chapter 2, 3, 9, 10.
chapter 3, 7, 14. chapter 4, 7, 24, etc. So likewise the Apostle Paul judged it meet
for him to esteem the Philippians visible Saints, in as much as both in his
bands, and in the defense and confirmation of the Gospel, they were all
partakers of his grace [meaning, as well of that grace, by which he was enabled
to suffer, as of that by which he was called actually to suffer] Phil. 1. 7.
See upon the same account, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. So likewise he commends
Epaphroditus unto the Philippians as meet to be received in the Lord (and
therefore as a Person whom they ought to esteem a visible Saint) because that
for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, etc. Philip. 2. 29, 30. The
Scripture in very many places speaks of mortification, self-denial, love,
faith, etc. uttering, and expressing themselves by a suitable conversation; and
most frequently, of ^uffering for Christ and for righteousness sake, as things
rendering persons meet to be esteemed Saints, and children of God: but as
concerning Waterbaptism, it never came into the heart of it to ascribe unto it
any such thing.

Nor do any of, nor all, those three Texts of Scriptures, which Mr. A. draggs
by head and shoulders, to serve him in his warfare, do him the least service
herein. For 1. we have elsewhere demonstrated that his first Text, 1 Cor. 12.
13. For BY ONE SPIRIT are we all baptized into one body, etc. makes notably
against that very notion or conceit, which here he attempteth to build upon it,
See waterdipping no firm footing for Church Communion, p. 44, 45, 46, etc.
And concerning his two remaining, viz. Romans 6. 3, 5. and Gal. 3. 27. we have,
partly in this discourse formerly, Sect. 104, 105, etc.
and partly elsewhere, Water-dipping. Postscript p. 66. 67
made it plain and evident enough to those that are not loath to see, that
neither of them have any right hand of fellowship to give unto him in his said
notion.

Sect. 112.
How bottomless then are these, and some other like assertions, and
inferences, wherein he so much rejoyseth, p. 23? Baptism is a wall of partition
between the world and the Saints; as if all that were on the other side the
river of Baptism had no communion with the world, and were neither proud, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor deceitful, nor fornicatours, nor adulterers, nor
railers, nor extortioners, nor any thing, but what it excellently becomes
Saints to be; and on the other hand, as if all on this side the said river,
were either one or other, some, or all, of these abominations. If Mr. A. could
make good his word, in saying that Baptism is a wall of partition between the
world and the Saints, it should be no longer a partition wall between him and
me, but I would either digg through it, or leap over it, to make my way unto
him. So again having only pointed us to the two places last mentioned, Romans 6.
3, 5. and Gal. 3. 27. he jollyeth it thus: For can we conclude less hence
[yes, you might conclude less by the whole, if you concluded no more then you
should] then that men's visible being in Christ is to be reckoned from the time
of their Baptism? that being as it were, the immediate instrument or means of
their visible ingression into him. For otherwise if they were to be looked upon
as having a visible being in Christ, by any act, endowment, qualification,
preceding Baptism, why should their ingression, their entrance into Christ, be
attributed unto their Baptism? Here is a great deal of triumph without any
conquest: yet were all given up, that in this flourish is pretended to be won,
it would be no advance at all to the cause now in pleading. For why may not
Infants be baptized, as well as men, although it be supposed, that a visible
entrance into Christ ought to be attributed unto Baptism? But

Sect. 113.
1. I cannot but marvel a little, why he speaks so much of men's being locked
upon as having a VISIBLE being in Christ, as if men could be looked upon as
having a being in Christ, and yet this being not be visible. Or does he suppose
that any man's being in Christ, is externally, or to the eye of the outer man,
visible? I suppose his understanding stands in his way against such a
supposall. If then no man's being in Christ is to the outward sense visible, but
only such outward expressions and effects, which by the mediation of discourse,
render it visible to the eyes of the inner man, it undeniably follows; 1. that
there must be somewhat preceding Baptism that must render a man's being in
Christ, visible; otherwise (as we argued formerly) Baptism must only be
administered to those, who are looked upon as having no being in Christ at all.
2. That there are other fruits and effects of a man's being in Christ, which
render it visible (yea more visible) besides Baptism; viz. all such which have
a more natural and intimous connection therewith, then Baptism, and yet are
altogether as visible, yea more visible then it, such as holiness of life,
unblamablenesse of conversation, fruitfulness in well-doing, suffering for
righteousness sake, etc. yea doubtless in that very example of persons
Baptized, which himself so lately traversed, and we after him, Act. 2. 37, 38,
etc. their being in Christ was visible unto Peter and the rest, before they
were baptized, otherwise (it is like) they would not have Baptized them; yea it
was much more visible unto them, partly by their being pricked in their heart,
manifested by their earnest and zealous inquiring of them, what they should do,
ver. 37. partly and more principally by their glad resenting and receiving the
words which Peter, by way of answer to that their demand, spoke unto them (ver.
41.) by these things (I say) which were found in them before they were
Baptized, their being in Christ was much more visible, then it was by their
being baptized afterward. Baptism, as we have once at least taken occasion to
prove, and often met with occasion to affirm, renders no man's being in Christ,
visible; visible I mean upon such terms, either as if he must needs have a true
being in Christ, who is Baptized; or as if it could not be altogether as
visible before, as it can be afterward by means of it. Therefore

Sect. 114.
Neither can Mr. A. conclude [workman-like, or with truth] either from one, or
both the Texts he points at, that men's visible being in Christ is to be
reckoned from the time of their Baptism; or, that Baptism is the immediate
instrument of their ingression unto him. These as well for Notion, as Phrase,
are exotique to the Scriptures he mentions, and (indeed) to all others: and
enough, with a surplusage, has been argued formerly to cut the sinews of all
such deductions as these from the Scriptures, unto which they pretend. Men are
said, Romans 6. 3, 5. to be baptized into Christ, to be baptized into his death,
to be buried with him by Baptism. This is all that is here said concerning
Baptism, and baptizing. Now which of these is the figtree, from whence this
Figg should be gathered, that men's visible being in Christ is to be reckoned
from the time of their Baptism? As for that which follows, ver. 5. For if we
have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in
the likeness of his resurrection; it is evident from the consequent, or
promise in the latter part of the verse, that he does not speak of Baptism,
especially not of Water Baptism, in the antecedent, or former part of the
verse. For then it would follow that all they, that are Water-baptized, should
be saved, or be partakers of a resurrection alike in perpetuity of glory unto
the resurrection of Christ himself. Water-dipping, etc. Postscript p. 66, 67
But we have opened and argued the sense of this verse elsewhere, as we have
done likewise by the other Text, Gal. 3. 27. in this very discourse. Sect. 104.
105, etc. where we found not so much as the dawning of Mr. A's day in this
place.

Sect. 115.
His similitude and comparisons borrowed from men in their affairs (p. 23, 24.)
to prove, that none are to be esteemed in Christ, but those who are baptized,
etc. are defective to his purpose, and mere impertinencies. The reason why the
Husband and wife receive that conjugall relation, and matrimonial being,
proper to them, from some solemn act done at the time of their marriage, is, 1.
because either the Law of nature, or the civil constitutions of the state
where men and women live, or both, do appropriate and confine the entrance into
a conjugall relation, unto sunch or such a solemn act, one or more, to be done
by the parties; so that there can be no entrance into this relation, or
matrimonicall being by any other act, or way. Whereas a being in Christ, or the
entrance hereunto, is not tied or appropriated unto a being baptized, but unto
believing: and for the visibilitie of this being, or esteemablenesse of it with
men, neither is this, either by any Law of God, nor by any principle in reason,
annexed unto, or made to depend upon Baptism, so that it should not be lawful
for any person, or Church, to esteem such a man a visible member of Christ, who
has not been baptized; no, it has been proved over and over that every such
person lawfully may, yea and of duty ought to be esteemed a member, yea a
visible member of Christ, who gives a sober and sound testimony of his Faith
in Christ, (which, as has been showed, may be given several other ways
besides Baptism) yea and that that testimony in this kind which is given by
Baptism, is but faint, and of little or no authority with understanding and
considering men; especially being compared with that testimony which is given
by a godly, righteous, and sober conversation in the world. Again,

2. Another reason why a matrimonial being, is, and must needs be computed, or
estimated, by such or such a solemn act done by the parties at the time of
their marriage, is, because such an act as this (I mean, by which the Husband
and Wife receive their matrimonial being) is not permitted unto, nor is wont
to be practiced by any others, but unto, and by, those only, who receive this
being. Whereas persons may in some case be baptized, and this by the will, and
according to the word of God, who have no being at all in Christ, much less
any visible being, as the case was with Simon Magus baptized by Philip, and
with multitudes of those who were baptized by John (as was formerly observed.)
Upon this account no man's, either being, or visibilitie of being in Christ, can
be reasonably Estimated by his being Baptized. But this point we argued home
lately.

Sect. 116.
There is the same consideration of Mr. A's other comparison, p. 24. As a man
(says he) receives a relative being, as member of such a corporation, by some
solemn act done at the time of his enfranchisement; even so -- men and women
receive that relative Being, which they have in Christ, and as visible members
of that spiritual Corporation, whereof Christ is head and chief, from that
solemn act of their being baptized into him. This similitude also halts
right-down on that leg, on which it should stand upright and strong, to
support the weakness of Mr. A's cause. For the reason why a man must perform
such or such a solemn act at the time of his infranchisement, to receive a
relative being, as a member of such a corporation, is, because it is a by-law
enacted in, and by this corporation, that no person shall be, or shall be
reputed to be a member hereof, but such, who shall perform this solemn act; and
that whosoever shall perform it, shall be thus reputed. Whereas God has made
no such Law or Statute as this, that no man shall be reputed a member of
Christ, or a visible member of his, but only they who shall be baptized; we
have demonstrated the contrary formerly. Nor has he any where determined or
adjudged, that whosoever shall be baptized, how unworthy or wicked soever
otherwise he shall be, shall notwithstanding upon the mere account of his
Baptism, be esteemed such a member. Therefore Mr. A. feeds but upon ashes, when
he nourishes himself in his notion as well negative, as affirmative, of a
Baptismall visibilitie of Saintship, with such similitudes and comparisons as
these. But

Sect. 117.
Having with much ado at last satisfied himself (though no man besides, unless
pre-satisfied) with spreading this his conceit upon much paper, he makes this
brief apology by the way, for the lenghth of that discourse. I have insisted
(says he, p. 24.) the more largely upon this particular, to detect the
repugnancie of that opinion against the plain current of the Scripture, which
holds Baptism needless, useless, amongst those who have made long profession
of the Gospel, though they as yet never were Baptized. How Mr. A. may
otherwise acquit himself in detecting the repugnancie he speaks of, I shall not
prejudge; But if he has no better light whereby to make the detection, then
what he has shined from his pen in managing his last particular, I am certain
the opinion he speaks of will never be detected of any repugnancie, either
against the plain current of the Scripture, or any more retired vein of it. For
if the main and principal end of Baptism be to make men visible members of
Christ, they who already are, and who of a long time have been, as visible
members of Christ, as Baptism can make them, yea and more visible, have no need
of being Baptized; more then he has of a candle, who enjoys the brightness
of the Sun at noon day.

Upon the ground which he has bought with a great sum of discourse, although
his title to it be crasie (as has been proved) yet he builds with confidence
enough, p. 24. If then (says he) that public owning of Christ in Baptism, by
which men put him on, and by, and upon which they are incorporated into Christ
visibly, be another end or use of Baptism, as you see it is, (truly if Mr. A.
speaks this to me, he speaks not truly) most clear and evident it is, that this
end and use is not to be found in the Baptism of Infants. For further argument
sake, give we back again unto him his If, or antecedent in this place, which we
have taken from him, and let us weigh the reason he gives for his drawing the
consequent here held forth unto us from it. And the reason (says he, p. 24,
25.) hereof is, because Infants neither do, nor can, put on Christ in their
baptism, i. make an actual declaration and profession unto the world, that
they own and acknowledge Christ to be come in the flesh, to be the Son of God,
and Savior of the world, to be their Lord and Lawgiver, as they do who put
him on in Baptism, etc. But

Sect. 118.
1. From what quarter of the Scriptures can Mr. A. give us any steady
intelligence, that to put on Christ in Baptism, is, or signifies, to make an
actual declaration and profession to the world, that they own and acknowledge
Christ Christ to be come in the flesh, etc. whether does he think that all
those who were baptized by John, made such a declaration and profession as he
speaks of, viz. that they owned and acknowledged Christ to have been come in
the flesh, etc. considering that the generality, (as it seems) or (however) a
very great number of these persons were in doubt, and mused in their hearts of
John, whether he were the Christ or no, Luk 3. 15? Or does he think that the
three thousand that were Baptized in one day by Peter, or by his advice and
order, made every man and woman of them a part such a formal actual
declaration and profession as he speaks of? If he thus thinks, I must
profess that his thoughts are not mine. Or can he find that such a declaration
and profession was ever made by any person, man or woman, at the time of their
baptizing? yea or can he find where ever the making of such a declaration or
profession was required at any man's hand, at the time of his baptizing? For
though Philip said to the Eunuch, If thou believe with all thy heart, thou
may [be baptized] this does not amount to an injunction laid upon him to
profess it, much less actually to declare and profess it unto the world. Nor
did the Eunuch, when he said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
actually declare this his belief unto the world, unless Mr. A. thinks that
Philip here signifies the world.

2. In case it should be granted that such a declaration and profession as that
specified by him, was made by those that were baptized in Scripture times, unto
the world, I would willingly learn of him, 1. whether this Declaration was not
made by them before their baptizing: 2. whether this Declaration did not make
them every which as much (if not more) visible Saints or members of Christ, as
their Baptism did. If so, how can Mr. A's Doctrine (lately taught by him as we
have heard) stand, viz. that no person is to be looked upon as having a visible
being in Christ, by any Act, Endowment, or Qualification preceding Baptism? But

3. Gratify we Mr. A. with this, that a public owning of Christ in Baptism,
by which men put him on, and by and upon which they are incorporated into
Christ visibly, etc. be one end and use of Baptism, yea and that Infants
neither do, nor can [viz. by themselves, and in their own persons] make such a
declaration and profession to the world as that mentioned, yet from all this
train of premises it does not follow, that therefore the said end and use of
Baptism is not to be found in the Baptism of Infants. The reason of this
nonsequitur, besides that it is in it self apparent enough, has been formerly
given, Sect. 67, 68, 69, 73, etc.

4. (And lastly, for this) Be we yet more openhanded to Mr. A. and bestow upon
him the grant, that the end and use of Baptism of which he speaks, is not found
in the Baptism of Infants, yet neither would this forbid water that Infants
should not be Baptized, because there being (according to Mr. A's own
principls) several ends of Baptism, in case any one of these be attainable by
the baptizing of Infants, Infants lawfully may, yea and of duty ought to be
baptized. See this further argued and proved formerly, viz. Sect. 67. and 98.

Sect. 119.
Whereas he says (p. 25.) that infants cannot with any propriety of truth of
speaking, be said to put on Christ in Baptism; 1. I suppose that neither can
men or women, with propriety of speaking, be said to put on Christ in Baptism.
To put on Christ, whether in Baptism, or otherwise, is a Metaphorical or
borrowed expression, not a proper. 2. Why may not Infants with as much
propriety, yea and truth of speaking, be said to put on Christ in Baptism, as
Infants under the Law may be said to have put on Moses in circumcision? Or did
not infants in their circumcision, as properly and truly put on Moses, as men
themselves did in theirs? 3. Neither does the Apostle say, that they who have
been baptized, have put on Christ, in, or by Baptism: this is Mr. A's gloss,
not the Apostles Text. His words are only these, Gal. 3. 27. For as many of you
as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. It is not denied but
that persons baptized may with good congruitie of sense, be said to put on
Christ in Baptism; only this is denied, that Mr. A. can evince or justify such
an expression, or sense from the said passage of the Apostle. For they who have
been baptized into Christ, may very possibly have otherwise put on Christ, and
not by this their baptizing into him. This proposition, They that have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, may be (as Logicians speak)
propositio consecutiva, and not, formalis; a proposition, wherein the
consequent is predicated of the antecedent, not the thing signified, or
typified, of the thing signifying, nor yet the effect of the cause. As when the
same Apostle says, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons
of God, (Romans 8. 14.) he does not suppose, that men are constituted or made the
sons of God by being led by the Spirit of God, but only declared to be so:
their constitution in this kind is by another cause, or means. In like manner a
baptizing into Christ may be an argument, or sign, that men have put on Christ,
and yet not be that act, by which, or in which, they formally put him on. Nay
the truth is, that, to put on Christ, being, or importing, an act, it cannot be
transacted, or performed, in, or by, a man's being baptized, because this
imports a passion. If it be said; yea but a submission, or voluntary
offering of a man's self, unto baptism, imports an action, and by this, or in
this, he may be said to put on Christ, I answer, If Christ be put on by a man's
offering himself unto Baptism (which for ought I see at present, may be
granted) then is he not put on by Baptism, but before it; yea and they may as
properly be said to put on Christ, who never are actually baptized, as they who
are. For evident it is, that in the baptizing of men and women, the offering of
themselves unto Baptism always precedes their Baptism itself: and as evident
again it is, that men and women may offer themselves unto Baptism, and yet
(possibly) never be baptized: as viz. when there is no person present that is
willing to accept of their offer in this kind, or to administer baptism unto
them.

Sect. 120.
Mr. A. having risen up early, and gone to bed late, and eaten the bread of much
carfulness, to give the best complexion and color to his second Argument
against the lawfulness of Infant Baptism, which he was capable of giving, and
that of receiving, and being loath that what he had so carefully planted, should
be presently plucked up by the hand of an objection, he prepares and arms
himself to discomfit (if it may be) that objection, which (in his apprehensio^)
threatened him with this damage. First he takes a view of, and describes his
adversary, and then considers where he may find the best advantage against
him, and accordingly encounters him.

Against this whole argument (says he, p. 25.) which concludes Infant Baptism
unlawful, because the ends of Baptism, (concerning which we have heard all
along the said argument that he is very doubtful what they are) are better
attained in the Baptism of Believers (and consequently, are attained also, at
least to a degree, and competently, in the Baptism of Infants likewise) it is
objected: That this might have been an argument as well against the
c^rcumcising of Infants under the Law, as against the Baptism of Infants under
the Gospel; because there is the same reason to suppose, that circumcision
should have less answered the ends thereof when applied to Infants; as there
is to conceive, that Baptism should less answer its ends, when it is applied
to Infants; and yet we well know that this was no bar to Infant-circumcision
then, and therefore why should it be any against their Baptism now? This
argument, or Objection, is the great dread and abhorring of Mr. A's soul,
fearing (it seems) least his second argument against Infant Baptism should die
by the hand of it. And the truth is that were it yet alive, he had reason
enough for such his fear: but we have seen it a dead corpse already, a body of
words without any soul of sound reason, or truth in it. And how vain a thing is
it to be solicitous about the rescue of a dead man's life from the hand of an
enemy? Nor is it so proper, when a man has lost his life by one hand, for any
man to undertake to prove, that had he escaped this hand, yet he would have
fallen by another. Notwithstanding since we have, in our canvasse of the said
argument, now and then intersprinkled somewhat of that notion (I mean, about
the proportion between Infant-circumcision, and Infant Baptism) the
disparagement whereof Mr. A. here undertaketh, let us see Mr. A's Objection,
and his Answer, play a little before us.

Sect. 121.
His objection (as ye have heard) pleads, that there is the same reason to
suppose, that circumcision should have less answered the ends thereof when
applied to Infants, as there is to conceive, that Baptism should less answer
its ends, when applied unto Infants, etc. This Mr. A's answer denies: and no
marvel: for what should it else do, unless it meant to be an answer by
concession only? But nothing is more easy, then to deny: but in many cases to
give a substanticall account of a man's denial, hic labor, hoc opus est; this
will try the ingenuitie and strength of a man. And at this turn Mr. A. with
his Answer fails. For of all the three Grounds or Reasons, which he
commends unto us for that his denial, there is none competent to justify it.

First be says (p. 26.) that Circumcision, and the Covenant to which it
related, remained in the flesh of him, who was circumcised, all the days of
his life, as visible to him, and as capable of improvement to spiritual ends
many years after it was made, as if it had been but newly acted and done before
his eyes. -- Whereas Baptism is a transient act, and leaves no such visible
impression in the Infant, as matter of memorial, signification, or instruction
unto him when he comes to be a man, as that of Circumcision did. So that w^ see
there is not the like reason, but an apparent difference in this respect. But
for answer to this*

1. The remaining of Circumcision in the flesh of the circumcised, as matter of
memorial, signific^tion, etc. could be no reason why Infants were appointed by
God to be circumcised. Because had men only been circumcised, their
circumcision would have remained every whit as much, or rather more, in their
flesh, and have been altogether as competent matter of memorial,
signification, and instruction, unto them, as now it was, being received in
their infancy. Nor was it any advantage unto them by way of memorial,
signification, etc. during all the time of their infancy, or until they came
to years of discretion. So that in this respect, the end of Baptism by way of
memorial, signification, instruction, etc. is as well answered, as fully
attained, by the baptizing of Infants, as the same or like end of Circumcision
was attained by the circumcising of Infants.

Sect. 122.
2. Whereas he says that Circumcision remained in the flesh as visible to him
that was circumcised, etc. If he would be understood generally, and with
reference to all persons whatsoever that were circumcised, I know not what
ground he has so to affirm. For what thinks he of the circumcision in the
flesh of Isaac, after his eyes were dim, and that he could not see, Genesis 27. 1.
and so of the circumcision of him that was born blind (Joh. 9.) were these
visible unto them? There is the same consideration of the Circumcisions of all
that were blind among the Jews. Besides, if it be supposed that there were any
men in this Nation as corpulent as Eglon, (Judge. 3. 17.) seems to have been,
their circumcision was hardly visible unto them, unless (happily) by reflection
in a looking glass. And yet (doubtless) the Circumcision of all these was as
competent matter of memorial, signification, etc. unto them, as the
circumcision of those to whom it was visible. Therefore Baptism, though not
visible in the flesh to the Baptized, may notwithstanding be as pregnant matter
of memorial, signification, etc. unto them as Circumcision was, at least unto
many, notwithstanding any such visibilitie in it, as Mr. A. pretends.

3. Neither does the Scripture any where insist upon any such visibilitie of
Circumcision, as any such advantage unto the circumcised, as Mr A. conceiteth:
nor does God any where exhort, counsel, or command any circumcised person to
look (with the eyes of his flesh) upon his circumcision, either to he put in
mind of, or to be instructed in any thing signified thereby. Therefore an
external visibilitie is no Scripture-difference between Circumcision and
Baptism; nor (indeed) is it in it self any such difference, which should make
the former any whit more spiritually advantageous unto the subject thereof,
then the latter (Baptism) unto its subject. So that this difference is only an
impertinent shift thought upon, and talked of, by the adversaries of
Infant Baptism to relieve their cause against such an argument, which grindeth
it to powder.

4. Whereas Mr. A. advances his discourse in the point in hand, in these
words, (p. 26.) Nor can it be truly said, that either the report of Parents, or
neighbors, or any Parish, or other Register, is, or can be, equivalent unto
the sign in the flesh before mentioned, as to the ascertaining of men and women
of their being baptized in their infancy; 1. because there is not the like
certainty nor satisfaction in reports and hear says, as there is in seeing
and beholding, which difference notwithstanding we have in the two cases in
hand: 2. Because opportunity of such satisfaction, as these reports are capable
of giving, may be cut off by the death, or other removal of such from whom it
is to be received, or else by the removal of such Infants themselves into
places far remote, before ever they came to age, etc. he only seweth a few
fig leaves together to cover the nakedness of his cause. For

Sect. 123.
1. In the beginning of this transcription, he reproacheth that Law of the
living God, established by him long since under Moses, and repeated by him over
and over upon several occasions in the Old Testament. Number. 3. 30. Deuteronomy. 17. 6.
19. 15.
and again revived and confirmed by the Lord Christ himself, and by his
Apostles, in the New Testament, In the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word shall be established. Mat. 18. 6.
It is also written in your Law, that the testimony of two men is true. Joh.
8. 17.
In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established. 2 Cor
13. 1.
God himself having sanctified the mouth of two or three witnesses, to
establish, i. to ratify and confirm, every matter of fact, even those which
concern the precious lives of men, so that any thing which shall be attested by
these, shall be taken for true, does not Mr. A. presume to make that common,
which God has thus sanctified, by disparaging the testimony of Christian
Parents, neighbors and others, as insufficient to ascertain the Baptim of a
person Baptized in their presence and sight?

2. By another Law of God, the child stands bound to honor his Parents, how
much more when they are Christian, and holy? Now whether it be consistent with
this Law, or with that honor which children owe, by the tenor and authority
of it, unto their Parents, to give them the lie, yea or to suspect them of
untruth, and not to believe them, when they shall affirm unto them that they
have been Baptized, let Mr. A. himself judge, especially considering that there
is no color or pretense imaginable why Parents should lie unto their children
in this kind.

3. Men and women stand bound in conscience to believe some things, and these
of greater moment, yea and to act according to this belief, upon far weaker
testimonies, and grounds, then the reports of Parents, and Neighbors, and the
records of registers, for their baptizing. The reason or ground which children
of any growth, or years have to believe, that such persons, especially one of
them, who are commonly called and reputed their Parents, are so indeed, is
nothing so authentic or full of proof, as the foresaid testimonies and
grounds of their baptizing. Jealousies and suspicions about the legitimacie of
many Children, are (we know) rife in the mouths of men: but (I believe) never
did Mr. A. hear the Baptism of any person questioned, which either was attested
by the Parents, or by any Parish Register, or Record. And yet persons stand
bound by the Law of God, to honor those, as their Parents, and to perform all
other duties and respects unto them, which are due from children unto Parents,
who are commonly called and reputed their Parents, although they have no
demonstrative proof of such a relation to them. Therefore much more, if persons
be reported, both by their Parents, and others, to have been baptized, and are
generally reputed so to have been, they stand as well, and as much bound to
look upon themselves, as baptized, and to act and walk accordingly, as if they
knew with the greatest certainty that they had been baptized.

4. The Jews themselves circumcised in their infancy, notwithstanding the sign
of Circumcision in the flesh, yet could have no other knowledge or certainty,
that this sign was applied to them, or received by them, according to the mind
of God, or as the Ordinance of God, but only from the testimony of their
Parents, or others present at their Circumcision. For how could Paul (for
example) tell or say, that he was circumcised on the eight day, (Phil. 3. 5.)
but by the testimony and report of his Parents, unless we shall suppose that
it was supernaturally revealed to him; which (I think* is no supposition worthy
a considering man? Or however, it is broadly ridiculous to suppose that every
Jew, who according to the precept of God was circumcised on the eight day, had
this supernaturally revealed unto him, or came to the knowledge of it in any
other way then by the testimony of his Parents, etc. Besides, other Nations in
the world using to circumcise their children, besides the Jews, with whom God
made no such covenant, as he made with Abraham and his posterity by Jacob, how
could any Jew know that he was not circumcised in some or other of these
idolatrous Nations, (and so contrary to the will of God) but only by the
affidavit of his Parents, or others brought up with him?

Sect. 124.
5. Neither was Circumcision it self any such sign in the flesh, but that it
might be obliterated and defaced, (and so forgotten) according to that of the
Apostle Paul; Is any man called being circumcised? Let him not become
uncircumcised. 1 Cor. 7. 8.

6. Nor could any circumcised person amongst the Jews know, but by the report
of his Parents or others, that he was so much as circumcised. For the Scripture
does nor report or affirm, that every particular person of the male Sex is born
with a foreskin upon his flesh; (I mean with such a superfluity in this skin,
which was wont to be cut off by Circumcision) or that every male, who wants as
much, or more of this foreskin, as any other not circumcised, must needs
therefore have been circumcised. Yea I believe there are males, or men, in this
Nation, who though never circumcised, yet have as little of that superfluity,
on which only circumcision wrought, as many of those, who have been circumcised.

7. Neither is the receiving of Baptism by men and women, when come to years of
discretion, always capable of improvement to Spiritual ends, many years after
it is received, as if it had been newly acted and done before their eyes. For
why may not the senses of some baptized in these years, be as well sodden into
Trapezuntius his temper, as the senses of one of Mr. Fishers Antagonists (it
seems) were? See Mr. Fisher Baby-Baptism. p. 367.
This Trapezuntius was a learned Grammarian, and great Scholar; but through the
violence of a sickness, sustained the loss of memory to such a degree, that
he quite forgot, not only all his learning, but even his own name.

8. (And lastly) In case it should be supposed that a person who is born in
hand by his Parents, Neighbors, or Parish Register, that he has been
baptized, should yet be deceived by all these, and be made to believe that,
which was not, what grand inconvenience, danger, or loss can reasonably be
conceived that this person shall sustain, or incur, hereby? For whils^ the
sense of his conscience bears upon him, that he has been really and truly
baptized, especially being otherwise really and truly willing to be baptized
with the first, what greater improvement can they make of the remembrance of
their baptism, who have indeed been baptized, then he is capable of making by
his apprehension and belief of his being baptized? Yea as the Apostle, while
Circumcision was yet in some request, speaks of a way or Method, how men might
make their un-circumcision turn to as good an account of benefit unto them, as
Circumcision it self; Therefore if the uncircumcision shall keep the
righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumsion be coun^ed for
circumcision, [i. shall he not be equal in account with God, with him that is
circumcised, though as righteous as he, Romans 2. 26.] in like manner, if he who
verily thinks he has been baptized, shall as really, and co^scie^tiously
perform all the ingageme^ts which Baptism imposes upon men, shall not his
nonbaptism be counted Baptism unto him? and for any matter of benefit which Mr.
A. can pretend should accrue unto a person actually baptized, by means of this
his Baptism; the same, or as much, (questionlesly) shall be conferred by God
upon him, in whom he finds a willing heart, and ready mind to be baptized,
and who refraineth from being actually baptized, only out of conscience toward
God, and fear of offending him.

Sect. 125.
Whereas Mr. A. pretends that opportunity of satisfaction by the means
specified touching man's having been baptized, may be cut off, by the death, or
other removal of such from whom it is to be received, or else by the removal
of such Infants themselves into places fa^re remote, before they come to age,
etc. answer (in part) has been made already, where it was showed, that little
or no inconvenience accrueth unto any man, by his not having been baptized, in
case he be verily persuaded that he has been baptized, and with all is
inwardly and cordially willing and ready to be baptized, in case he deemed
himself unbaptized. I here add,

1. That in case the general usage and custom of the Church, or People of
God, in any place, be to baptize their children, though all ocular witnesses,
as Parents, neighbors, kindred, etc. of the baptizing of any person, should be
cut off by death, or however, yet the known custom of the place is security
in abundance to such a person that he has been baptized. Therefore Mr. A's
supposall in the case before us is impertinent and slight. And

2. The course which Mr. A. himself steers with his children, (I mean, in not
causing them to come unto Christ in Baptism) the more general practice of the
Churches and people of God in the Nation (which stands for baptizing children)
considered, is far more likely, in case of his removal by death, or of his
childre^s removal into places far remote, before they come to age, to deprive
them of all means of satisfaction touching their baptizing, then the baptizing
of children in a co^currence with the general practice of the Saints where
they were born, is to draw them into a snare of uncertaintie whether they were
baptized, or no, whatsoever may befall to disadvantage them in this kind. For
in case the Parents of Mr. A's children shall be both dead before they (the
said children) come to age, what means is there for them to receive
satisfaction, whether they were baptized, or no?

3. (And lastly) according to M. A's own principles it is little or nothing
material, wheither a person being come to years of understanding, knows that
he was baptized in infancy, or no. For in case he were baptized, this Baptism
(with Mr. A.) was but a nullitie; and consequently the person remains,
notwithstanding this Baptism, unbaptized: and in case he were not then
Baptized, he is but in the self same condition.

Sect. 126.
All these particulars duly weighed and considered, it is too evident to be
denied by any, but those that will not see, that Mr. A. had very small reason
to affirm, that there is not as good reason for the baptizing of Infants, as
there was for their circumcising, only because circumcision was no transient
thing but permanent in the flesh, whereas Baptism is transient, and leaves no
visible impression in the flesh of the Infant: and that he might with as much
reason argue thus, there was not the same reason why Matthew should be an
Evangelist, which there was for Luke, because Matthew had sometimes been a
Publican, whereas Luke was a Physician: or thus: there is not the same reason
why Ma^y should be saved* which there is why Lazarus should be saved, because
Lazarus is a man, whereas Mary is a woman. These are very genuine parallels of
Mr. A's reasoning in the first point of difference assigned by him, between the
Circumcising of Infants, and their baptizing. Nor does he quit himself any whit
more like a man in his second, the tenor hereof being this, (p. 27.)

2. I answer yet further, that the end of Circumcision, though administered to
infants, was better attained, then the end of Baptism can be, when it is so
applied; because much of the benefit of Circumcision did accrue to the
circumcised upon the work done, without respect to any inward qualification or
endowment: whereas the benefit of Baptism does not accrue merely upon the work
done, but is suspended upon the knowledge, faith, etc. of him that is baptized.
This somewhat also, being cast up, amounts to just nothing. For

1. The main hinge upon which this peiece of discouse turns, is crazie, and
crakt quite through. For it is a not orious untruth, that much of the benefit of
Circumcision did accrue to the circumcised upon the work done. Against such a
notion as this the Scripture rises up like an armed man. For Circumcision
(says the Apostle) verily profits, if thou keep the Law: but if thou be a
breaker of the Law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. Romans 2 25 If much
of the benefit of Circumcision did accrue to the circumcised [meerly] upon the
work done, Circumcision would have profited them, and that to a considerable
degree, whether they had kept the Law, [i. the rest of the Law] or no. And
Circumcision would have been, not only that in the heart, but that which was
outward also in the flesh; which notwithstanding the Apostle (ver. 28. 29.)
denies it to be. Yea

2. It is so far from being true that much of the benefit of Circumcision did
accrue to the circumcised upon the work done, that without righteousness, and
worthy walking, it rendered the Circumcised so much the more obnoxious to the
displeasure and judgment of God. And shall not uncircumcision (says the
Apostle) which is by nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by the
letter and Circumcision do transgress the Law? Romans 2. 27. Yea

Sect. 127.
2. Such observations of the Law, from whence there is much more reason and
likelihood that much benefit should have accrued to the observers upon the work
done, then from Circumcision upon these terms, were yet so far from being
beneficial unto them upon any such account, that they were an hatred and
abomination unto God. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices? --
When you come to appear before me, who has required this at your hands to
tread in my courts? Bring no more oblations: incense is an abomination unto me.
The new moons, and Sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with,
your new moons, and your appointed feasts my soul hates, etc. Isa. 1. 11, 12,
13, 14. Yea Solomon says, The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination unto
the Lord. Pro. 15. 8. 21. 27. These places (with many more of a like import,
that might readily be added unto them (do with a surplussage of evidence
prove, that much benefit did NOT accrue to the doers of the things specified,
upon the account of the deed done. And yet of the two, there is much more
reason, why benefit should accrue unto the doers of such things of the Law, as
these, upon the work done, then upon their being Circumcised. For

4. Whereas he says, that much of the benefit of Circumcision did accrue to
the circumcised upon the work done, if he speaks of those that were circumcised
according to the standing Law, viz. on the eight day (who were far the
greatest part of the Jewish nation) the work it self of Circumcision was not
done by them, but by others to them unknown. Whereas the offering of incense,
and of sacrifices, the observation of the new moons, sabbaths, and other feasts
appointed by the law, were works done by persons themselves. Now
(questionless) if there be any benefit accruing unto men upon the work done,
it is more like to accrue in this kind upon works done by persons themselves,
then upon works done totally by others, and without their knowledge, desire, or
consent. Nor does, nor can Mr. A. give us any substantial account, either from
the Scriptures, or otherwise, why the benefit of Baptism should be more
suspended upon the knowledge, faith, etc. of him who is baptized, then the
benefit of Circumcision was suspended upon the like qualifications of the
circumcised. For

Sect. 128.
5. The Texts of Scripture which he cites, prove no such difference as this
between the two Ordinances, Circumcision, and Baptism; nor do they, either
divisim, or con^unctim, prove (or so much as color with a proof) that much of
the benefit of Circumcision did accrue to the circumcised upon the work done.
For what though the Apostle says, and this by way of contradistinction from
the voice of the Gospel, or righteousness of faith, The man that does those
things, shall live by them, yet is it no part of his meaning to implie, or
teach, that by the literal performance of the Legal ceremonies, men, either
were, or might have been saved? The Law of which the Apostle speaks, is not the
Law of Ceremonies, which Mr. A. understands, but the whole system or body of
precepts and commandments delivered by Moses. Nor is the Apostles doing those
things, the same with Mr. A's doing them. The Apostle must needs be conceived
to speak of such a doing of the things of the Law, which includes as well the
spiritualitie, or perfection of the Law, and of the several precepts thereof
(at least in will, desire, and endeavor) as the bare letter or externalitie of
it. For God never made any such Covenant with, or promise unto any man, that by
doing externals only he should be either justified, or saved; which Mr. A's
doing evidently supposes. Nor does his second Scripture stand any whit closer
to his cause, then the first. For when the Apostle says ( Gal. 3. 12.) The Law
is not of Faith, but the man that does them, shall live in them, his meaning is
not, that the Law required not as well the conformity and subjection of the
inward man unto it, as viz. in Love, Faith, Holiness, Humility, etc. as of
the outward, consisting of a mere bodily observation of so much of it, as
might thus be observed; but that the voice, purport, or tenor of the Law, did
exact of all those, who expected justification by it (yea in a sense, of all
men, simply) an universal and constant obedience and subjection unto it in the
whole compass and extent of it, according to what he had more plainly said a
verse or two before; Cursed is every one that CON^INUETH NOT IN ALL THINGS
which are written in the book of the Law to do them; in which respect it is
said not to be of Faith, i. not to promise justification unto any act of Faith,
or believing in another. Whereas the tenor of the Gospel, although it simply
requires as perfect and through an obedience unto all the precepts of it, as
the Law did to all the precepts thereof, yet it exacteth not this obedience
upon the same inexorable terms; nor does it threaten every person, no nor any
person, with a curse, who shall not con^nue in all things which are written
therein to d^ them, in case they shall truly and unfeignedly believe in Jesus
Christ. So that these two Scriptures rightly understood, know nothing either of
reason, or truth in Mr. A's cause.

Sect. 129.
His other Scriptures levied upon the same account (p. 27. 28.) do scarce so
much as face the design, which they are brought into the field to advance. For
what though the ministration of the Law be called, the ministration of the
letter, and the Ordinances thereof, carnal Ordinances, and such as did no^
make perfect as pertaining to the conscience? or again, that the Apostle to
show wherein the Gospel or new Covenan^, exceeds the Law, or old one, says,
that according to this God puts his Laws in the minds of men, and writes them
in their hearts. Heb. 8. 10? Or again, that the true worshippers shall worship
the Father in Spirit and in truth; what is there (I say) in all, or in any of
these, or in twenty more of a like import, to prove that much of the benefit of
Circumcision did accrue to the circumcised upon the work done; or that the
benefit of baptism is any whit more suspended upon the knowledge, Faith, etc.
of him, who is baptized, then the benefit of Circumcision was, etc? All that
can be inferred from these and such like passages, are only these and such like
notions; That God is more communicative of the clear knowledge of himself, and
of the mystery of his will concerning the salvation of the world by Jesus
Christ, under the Gospel, then he was under the Law; that the anointing of the
generality of the Saints with the Spirit, under this dispensation (the Law)
was nothing so rich or full, as it now is under the Gospel; that the instituted
worship, especially the public worship, and service of God under the Law,
consisted in a far greater number and variety of external rites and
observations, then now under the Gospel; that the hearts of the people, yea of
the people of God themselves, were (generally) nothing so raised, or enlarged
to the obedience of God under the Law, as they are, and especially will be when
the time comes, under the Gospel, etc. But none of these things prove, so
much as inshew, that according to the nature of the legal ministration children
void of understanding and faith were any whit more capable of holy things; or
of the end^ and benefits of them in part, upon a literal administration or
reception of them, then children now are under the Gospel. For my better
information I would willingly sit at Mr. A's feet to learn of him, how, why, in
what consideration or respect, children under the Law should be more capable of
holy things, or of any part of the ends or benefits of them, then children
under the Gospel; or what there was in the Legal ministration, that did
accommodate or comport with the natural infirmity, or condition of children,
above what there is in the ministration of the Gospel. Certain I am that
Baptism is an Ordinance more indulgent unto, and better comporting with, the
tenderness of Infants, then circumcision was: and for matter of Spiritual
signification, upon the understanding whereof all the material and principal
ends and benefits of both Ordinances alike depend, children are as much, and as
soon, capable of the interpretation, or signification of Baptism, as they could
be of Circumcision. Therefore Mr. A's cause is no whit beholding to those
Scriptures, which he has hitherto importuned for the advocation of it.

Sect. 130.
Nor does 1 Pet. 3. 21. any whit more befriend him: nor is his introductorie
gloss to the words here, so far as he presents them, over-ingenuous, or
true. But (says he, p. 28.) the case is far otherwise now under the Gospel,
[how far otherwise, and how far not, we have both lately, and formerly
shewed] which is the ministration Mr. A p. 28
of the Spirit. It is not the work done, but the manner of doing it in
knowledge, faith, and fear of the Lord, that entitles men to the benefit, and
blessing of Gospel Ordinances. For so the Apostle affirms concerning BAPTISM IT
SELF, 1 Pet. 3, 21. where he says, that it saves us now, as the Ark did some
in the days of Noah; not (says he) the putting away of the filth of the flesh
(i. not by the external letter of the ordinance) but the answer of a good
conscience toward God, i. when accompanied with such a frame of mind and
conscience, as does answer Gods in^endments of Grace in that Ordinance. For

1. He says that Peter (in the words cited) speaks concerning BAPTISM IT SELF,
when he says, that it saves us now, etc. whereas it is evident, that that
Baptism, to which he ascribes salvation, is not Water Baptism, or Baptism in
the letter of it (which any reader will think that Mr. A. means by BAPTISM IT
SELF) but Baptism in the Spirit, or the answer of a good conscience toward
God, as we have the Original, (...), translated; which words notwithstanding
were better rendered, but the demand of a good conscience God-w^rd, or, toward
God; [or, as some translate, the stipulatio, or promise, of a good conscience
(a) vi. Grotium. in. 1 Pet. 2. 21.
unto God.] Yea he expressly rejects waterbaptism as insufficient to save men,
in these words, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh. Now the demand
of a good conscience toward God, [i. of a conscience good and pure in his
sight] is said to save us by the resurrection of Jesus Christ (which clause is
wholly omitted by Mr. A.) because such a conscience, taking the blessed
advantage of the resurrection of Christ for its encouragement, (as it were)
demands, claims, and expects with boldness, salvation from God, as due upon
promise, and this made upon a valuable consideration, viz. the death and
sufferings of Christ. This demand, or claim, may be said to save us, much in
such a sense as hope is said to save us, (Romans 8. 24. For we are saved by hope)
viz. as it exhibits and yields unto men, a first fruits, and so a kind of
possession, of salvation, in abundance of comfort, peace, and joy. The reason
(it seems) why Peter mentions Water Baptism as typically saving us, as the
demand he speaks of saves us (in part, and to a degree) really, is, because
having had occasion to speak of the preservation of Noah and his family from
perishing in the general deluge, wherein all the world besides perished, by
means of the ark, he conceived there was a kind of typical resemblance thereof
in Baptism, or rather a typical overture made herein by God of such a like
preservation unto Godly persons, when the whole world of unrighteous ones round
about should be destroyed, and perish in their sins. So that Peter in this
place, ascribes no other salvation, or salvation in no other sense, unto
Baptism it self (I mean, unto Water Baptism) then wherein it was altogether as
ascribable unto the carnal Observations, as viz. to the offering of Bulls and
Goats, etc. under the Law. For as these did overture, and (after a sort)
promise salvation, by the true sacrifice of the Messiah, yet to be obtained and
enjoyed by those only, who believe; (we always in this case speak only of
persons capable by years, and discretion of believing) so does Water Baptism
hold forth pardon and forgiveness of sins, and consequently salvation, as
attainable by all those, and those only, who repent, and consequently believe.
And as Baptism edifieth, profits, blesses no man, but only those, who repent
and believe; so neither did Circumcision (as we formerly heard) nor other
external Observations under the Law. Therefore Mr. A. has caught nothing at
all by fishing in these waters, for the relief of his cause. Nor needed he at
all have troubled either himself, or his reader, with quotations from the
Scriptures, to prove, that a baptizing with water without a baptizing with the
Spirit also, makes more against, then for, him, that shall be baptized: nor
has he ministered any thing to the necessity of his cause hereby. This
required at his hand, that which he had not to give unto it, I mean, a
substantial proof, that the nature of the ministration of the Law was such,
that the literal and external performance of the Ceremonies and carnal
Ordinances thereof, were, without repentance or faith, of better acceptance
with God, and more available to the salvation of the Performers, then Gospel
Ordinances are without the like qualifications.

Sect. 131.
2. Whereas he says (p. 28.) that Infants, as they are not capable of acting
this faith, or making this answer of a good Conscience, so they are not capable
of those blessings and benefits intended by God in Baptism, in as much as he
has suspended the donation thereof upon these, in conjunction with Baptism; I
answer,

1. It has been sufficiently proved, that Infants are capable (though with a
mediate, or remote capacity) of acting Faith, as well as men. See Sect. 64,
65, 68, 69. (In which respect also they are capable of making the answer of a
good conscience, as well as men) where it was proved likewise, that neither are
believers themselves always in a present or immediate capacity of acting
their Faith.

2. Full proof has been made likewise (and the thing is evide^t enough in it
self) that children are capable of those benefits and blessings intended by God
in Baptism, as well as men; as the children of the Jews were capable of the
blessings and benefits intended by God in Circumcision, as well as men. But

3. (And lastly, for this) whereas Mr. A: says, says, that He has suspended
the donation thereof upon these, in conjunction with Baptism, he only says it,
and this (indeed) is more then enough, being ill consistent with his own
sayings elsewhere, and much more with the truth; I would gladly know of him
what those benefits and blessings are (or if it were but some of them) the
donation of which he conceives is suspended by God upon the acting of Faith,
and making the answer of a good Conscience, in conjunction with Baptism. If he
supposes remission of sins to be any of these blessings or benefits, this,
both according to his own Doctrine, p. 16. and the clear truth it self, is
annexed by God covenant-wise unto Repentance; which being required
antecedaneously (at least according to the pleasance of Mr. A's principle) unto
Baptism, the donation of it cannot be suspended by God, upon the acting of
Faith, or any thing else, in conjunction with Baptism. For the donation of
that, which is promised, and given accordingly, upon the antecedent, cannot be
suspended, either in whole, or in part, upon the consequent, nor upon any thing
in conjunction with it. Mr. A. in the said 16. page, supposes, that Baptism,
either is, or may be, called the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of
sins, because God thereby signifies and seals unto men the remission of their
sins UPON THEIR REPENTANCE; and not long after; that it is, or may be so
called, because the persons who are baptized, do thereby profess and declare
unto the world, that they look for remission of sins from God UPON THEIR
REPENTANCE. The Fountain at this hole sends forth the sweet waters of the
truth, asserting remission of sins unto, and upon, Repentance: but at that
before us, the bitter waters of error, which suspendeth remission of sins (at
least, if this be any benefit intended by God in Baptism) upon the acting of
Faith, etc. in conjunction with Baptism. I confess there are blessings and
benefits intended by God in baptism: but when Mr. A. shall declare unto me,
what blessings and benefits he means, when he says the donation of them is
suspended, etc. in conjunction with Baptism, I shall take his declaration in
this kind into further thoughts. In the mean time my sense is, that such
blessings and benefits may be intended by God in baptism, the donation of which
is not absolutely, universally, or in all cases, suspended either upon Baptism,
or upon any thing in conjunction therewith.

Thus we see that Mr. A's second difference, whereby he seeks to disparallel
the circumcising of Infants, and their baptizing, is before the light of the
truth, but as chafe before the wind. The spiritual benefit of Circumcision
did no more accrue unto the Circumcised upon the work done, then the benefit of
Baptism unto the baptized.

Sect. 132.
His third and last difference may be well bound up in Mr. A. p. 28 29.
the same bundle of impertinencie with the two former. The sum and substance of
it as the Reader may find it p. 28. 29. of his discourse) amounts only to this;
That the Ordinance of Circumcision was so much the less Spiritual, and so much
the more weak, and savouring of the Legal ministration, and suited to the then
childish condition of the Church, because administration thereof was made to
infants. From whence he soon after inferrs: however such a mean, low way and
method of enjoying Ordinances, as was accommodated to the capacity of Babes,
was not uncomly whilst the Church was in the condition of children, as the
Apostle speaks Gal. 4. 3.) no more then it is for a child, whilst he is a
child, to speak and act as a child; yet to retain this poor, and low, and
barren way of administering a Gospel Ordinance to Infants, now the Church is
raised both in capacity, and administration to its manly condition, is as
inco^gruous and uncomely, as it is for one still to speak and act as a child,
when he is become a man. This with the two former particulars, is (it seems)
all that Mr. A. has to say, to destroy the analogy between Infant Baptism, and
Infant-circu^cision. How little this analogy has suffered from his two former
considerations, has been lately showed; and that it suffers no whit more by
this third and last, is a matter of easy demonstration. For

1. The groundwork and foundation of his building here is sandy and loose. For
he supposes that Circumcision was therefore, in that consideration, a weak, or
less Spiritual Ordinance, because the administration of it was made unto
children; and semblably, that Baptism would be, or must appear to be, a weaker
and less spiritual Ordinance then it is, in case it were to be administered
unto children. Whereas the evident truth is, that the strength, richness, or
spiritualnesse of an Ordinance, does not so much (if at all) consist in the
strength or spiritualnesse of the subject, to which it is administered, or is
administrable, as in the intrinsecall nature of it, richness of signification,
or promised presence of God with it. Circumcision was the same Ordinance,
equally spiritual, and no whit more weak, when it was administered unto Isaac,
and afterward unto Paul, on the eight day, then it was when administered unto
Abraham himself, and afterward unto those who were circumcised men, Josh. 5.
As suppose we (that which I know Mr. A. supposes) those members of the Church
of Corinth, whom Paul could not look upon as spiritual, but as carnal, and
BABES in Christ, (1 Cor. 3. 1.) to have been all baptized, was the nature of
this Ordinance altered, or changed, from the greater to the lesser
spiritualnesse, by the administration of it unto such babes, as these? Or was
it an Evangelicall Ordinance when administered unto Paul himself, and Legal,
when administered unto weaker christians?

Sect. 133.
2. I would know of Mr. A. whether the Lord Christ, when he laid hands upon the
little children that were brought unto him, Mat. 19. 15. Mar. 10. 16. did not
retain that poor, and low, and barren way of administering a Gospel Ordinance
unto children, (as Mr. A. is not afraid to term it) Or does he think that that
imposition of hands, which he administered unto these children, was not a
Gospel, but a Law-ordinance? or does he not think that children are capable
upon the same terms, and in the same respect, of the ends and benefits of
Baptism, whatsoever these may be supposed to be, as they were, or are, of the
ends or benefits of imposition of hands, whatsoever these be?

3. To the shame and confusion of those rational principles (falsely so called,
which notwithstanding Mr. A. dares avouch to be consonant to the Scriptures) it
has been proved and evinced, that Baptism is as much, or more, spiritual,
profitable, and edifying, when applied to children, as when it is administered
unto men professing the faith; even as Circumcision was as much, or more,
edifying, etc. when applied unto children, as when it was administered unto men.
See Sect. 56, 73. and el^ewhere.

4. Whereas Mr. A. makes the weakness and unprofitablenesse of the
Commandemen^ [i. the Law] for which the Apostle says it is d^sannulled, to
stand in this (or at least to comprehend it) that it enjoined an Ordinance,
one, or more, to be administered to little children; 1. herein he makes himself
wise about that which is written, the Scripture no where placing any degree, or
part, of the weakness or unprofitablenesse of the Law, in any such thing. Nay,
2. The enjoining of an Ordinance (circumcision by name) to be administered unto
little Children, was so far from being any part of the weakness and
unprofitablenesse af the Law, that it was a material vein, or part, of that
strength or profitablenesse, that was in it. For weakness und
unprofitablenesse are not simply and absolutely ascribed unto the Law, but
comparatively only, viz. in respect of the superabundant strength and
beneficialnesse of the Gospel: otherwise, in simple consideration, the law was
excellently beneficial, and of great power to advance the peace, and co^forts,
and salvation of men. The Scripture gives large and frequent Testimony
hereunto. He shows his word (says David) unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel: He has not dealt so with any nation: and as for his
judgments they have not known them. Psalm. 147 19* 20.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the Testimonies of the
Lord are sure, making wise the simple. The Statutes of the Lord are right,
re^oycing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes
-- the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether, Psalm. 19. 7.
8, 9.
So the Apostle: what advantage then has the Jew? Or what profit is there of
Circumcision? Much every way: chiefly because that unto them were committed the
Oracles of God. To. 3. 1, 2.
Read and consider at your leisure, Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6, 7, 8. Romans 9. 4. Psalm. 119.
72, 98, 111. (to omit other places of the same purport without number.) Now
then this is that which I say and affirm; viz. that the administration of the
Ordinance of Circumcision unto Infants, or the injunction hereof, was a part of
that wisdom, of that excellency, of that profitablenesse, which were found in
the Law; and did contribute its proportion of efficacy together, with the rest
of the branches and precepts of the Law, toward the blessed effect (mentioned
by David) of converting the souls of men. And (doubtless) there would have
been a greater weakness and defectivenesse in the Law, in respect of this, and
such like gracious effects, had the precept or commandment of circumcision been
otherwise framed, then now it was, and the standing administration of it
enjoined to be made unto men.

Sect. 134.
The Premises considered, I suppose the Reader cannot lightly but think, that
Mr. A. was far better conceited, then he, of his late discourse touching the
differences between circumcision, and Baptism, inasmuch as he concludes it
thus:

By this time I hope it appears, that there is not the same reason why Baptism
administered unto Infants should reach Mr. A. p. 29
the ends thereof, as there was why Circumcision, though applied to Infants
formerly, should attain its end. For the nature of the two Ordinances differ,
the terms of their administration differ, and the respective capacities of the
Church then, and the Church now, differ: and according to that rule in Logic,
where the things them selves differ, there the reason of those things differ
also. I answer briefly;

It has been sufficiently proved, and this lately enough, that there is the
same reason altogether why Baptism administered unto Infants should reach the
ends thereof, which there is or was, why circumcision being administered unto
Infants also, should attain the ends of it. Neither does any difference found,
either in the nature of the two Ordinances, or in the terms of their
Administration, or in the capacities of the Churches, then and now, diversifie
the said reason, or prove in the least, that Infant Baptism should be less
sufficient to atchieve and compass all Baptismall ends, then
Infant-circumcision was to attain the ends of Circumcision. Old relics, and
new-made Idols, differ in their natures: they differ, or may differ, in their
administrations, or communications, unto the people: Papists and Protestants
may be in a different capacity to understand the evil of them: and yet all
these, and ten times more, differences like unto these, notwithstanding, there
may be the same reason why the one should occasion, or produce the evil which
is proper for it to produce, which there is for the other to do likewise.

Nor is it true that the Church, during Circumcision, was, in that part (at
least) or in those members* of it, who by the standing law were to be
circumcised, (I mean, in the children or Infants belonging to it) in a
different capacity from the church now (under Baptism) in the Infants hereof.
The Infants of the church, or of Believers, now are as capable of the ends of
Baptism, as the Infants of the Jewish church were of the ends of circumcision.
Therefore Mr. A. all the while he has been laboring to overthrow the parallel
between Infant Baptism, and Infant-circumcision, has dwelt at the sign of the
Labour-in vain. And this is the unhappy end of his second argument magnifying
it self against Infant Baptism. His third Argument waits the leisure of this
preface.

Sect. 135.
My next argument shall be taken from the different nature of the two
ministrations of the Old and New Testament, M. A. p. 30.
as rendering Infant Baptism, in that precise consideration of it as APPLIED TO
INFANTS, disagreeable to the ministration of the Gospel, but withal more
correspondent with the ministration of the Law. Therefore thus I further argue.

I suppose we had the strength of what he is able to argue from the different
ministrations of the Law, and of the Gospel, against Infant Baptism, in the
prosecution of his former argument. Nor do I apprehend what purchase he has
made with this Preface, unless it be of a blot of disparagement, in supposing,
that Infant Baptism Infant Baptism is very unproperly said to be applied unto
Infants.
may be considered, as applied to Infants, and in this consideration, to be
disagreeable to the ministration of the Gospel. If Infant Baptism, be in no
other respect d^sagreeable to the ministratio^ of the gospel, but only in the
precise consideration of it as applied unto Infants, it will be found
sufficiently corresponding with this ministration. But though the usherie of
the argument approaching be but weak, yet it is possible that the argument it
self may be strong. A man that stumbles at the door, may behave himself
worthily in the house. Therefore let us now see whether Mr. A. does not ga^her
up as much, or more, in his argument, as Mr. A's third Argument, p. 30.
he scattered in the Introduction. His third argument then is this.

If Infant Baptism be disagreeable to the ministration of the new Testament,
then Infants ought not to be baptized,

But Infant Baptism is disagreeable to the ministration of the new Testament.
Ergo,

If the minor in this argument had been a meet helper, or match, for the major,
they had between them established

A^tera pars vivit, rud's est pars altera tellus; i.
One part's alive, the other, unformed earth.
And that Proposition which is strong, and which needs no proof, Mr. A. proves
very substantially: but that which is weak, he supports with strawes instead of
props and pillars;

Dantur opes nullis nunc, nisi divitibus;
Rich gifts to rich men only given are:
What refuse is, falls to the poor man's share.
Sect. 136.
However, suffering Mr. A. to enjoy his major Proposition, with the proofs
thereof, in peace, let us fairly and freely consider, whether there be the same
reason, why he should enjoy his minor, with the proofs thereof, upon the same
terms.

1. (Says he) the Truth hereof (meaning, of his minor Proposition) in the
first place, is conspicuous and perceptible, [i. is fully manifest, and may by
a narrow inspection happily be discerned] by what has been made good in our
former argument. For there we proved, Baptism, as administered to Infants, less
edifying, as to the several ends of it, then when administered unto Believers:
and if less edifying, then the more suitable and comformable to the
ministration of the Law, which was a ministation of less light and
edification: and to the same proportion, disproportionate to the ministration
of the Gospel, etc. I answer;

1. If Mr. A. has nothing else to make good his minor Proposition in this
argument, then what he made good in his former, the Proposition must stand upon
its own bottom, and shift for it self. For it has been made good, that in that
argument he made nothing good at all, at least nothing relating to his
Proposition here.

2. Whereas he bears upon this Principle, that what is less edifying is more
suitable and conformable to the ministration of the Law, because this was a
ministration of less light and edification, does he not lean upon a broken
reed, that will pierce his hand? For suppose we (that which is little
questionable, or however, possible) that the ministry, or preaching of Andrew,
Bartholomew, or or any other of the Apostles, was less edifying, then the
Ministry or preaching of Paul, does this prove that their Ministry was in
any degree suitable, or conformable to the ministration of the Law; or however,
unsuitable unto, or unlawful under, the Gospel? But this reason we formerly
weighed in the balance, and found it light* See Sect. 53. 118. and elsewhere.

3. (And lastly) it has been sufficiently also proved against Mr. A's notion,
that Baptism as administered [i. as it may, and ought to be administred] unto
Infants, is not less edifying, but rather more, then when administered unto
men. For this see Sect. 56. Thus we see that Mr. A's first demonstration of his
minor Proposition, being truly cast up, amounts to just nothing. Hear we
therefore his second.

Sect. 137. Mr. A. p. 30 31.

2. I might, in the second place, well suppose Infant Baptism to savor
strongly of the Legal Ministration, because the principal arguments, produced
in defense thereof are such as do arise out of, and are deducted from the
example of Infant-Circumcision, a principal part of the legal ministration,
and from the analogy or proportion, which is supposed to be between them, and
not only so, but likewise because such arguments and pleas tend to draw down
this part of the Gospel ministration, as applicable to Infants, unto the line
and level of the Legal. For answer;

1. This proof is guilty of the capital crime of untruth, affirming, that the
principal Arguments produced in the defense of I^fant-Baptism are deducted
from the example of Infant-circumcision. A little after (to the same purpose)
he says, that these arguments for Infant Baptism, are as the axletree upon
which the controversy on the Poedo-baptists side turns, and as the we^p
running all along that piece of that discourse.
I believe Mr. A. himself knows the contrary; as viz. 1. that we do not at
all plead Infant Baptism from the example of Infantcircumcision: we knowledge
and profess, that Infantcircumcision, under the Law, would be no ground, or
warrant of Infant Baptism under the Gospel, did not the Gospel it self
commend the Ordinance of Baptism unto us; and 2. that our principal arguments
(as he calls them) for Infant Baptism, are founded upon New Testament
passages, and Evangelicall considerations; as our writings and arguings do
sufficiently testify. 3. That we do not (however) draw arguments (as he twice
charge us, in the plural number, as if, not only our principal arguments,
but the greatest part of the whole number of them, were drawn) from the example
of Infant-Circumcision. He cannot prove, so much as with color, that we draw
any plurality of Arguments for Infant Baptism from that example. 4. That we do
not in our disputes about Baptism, so much mention, or insist upon the example,
as the precept or institution it self, of Infant-Circumcision. Therefore the
very head, groundwork, and substance of this second proof of his said
Proposition, is a notorious untruth: and consequently, all that he builds
upon, it (p. 31, 32, 33. I mean, upon this supposition, that our principal
arguments for Infant Baptism, are deducted from the example of
Infant-Circumcision) must needs be eccentricall to his cause. But

2. Suppose we should build our Tenent of Infant Baptism under the Gospel,
upon the example of Infant-Circumcision under the Law, (which notwithstanding
we are free and far from, as has been showed) were we not as justifiable as
Mr. A. himself in building his Tenent (and practice answerable) concerning the
unlawfulness of Church Communion with persons by him called unbaptized, upon
that Legal precept, by which uncircumcised persons were excluded from
communion with the Jewish Church in their holy things? See page 109. of this
his discourse: and page 11. of his answer to the 40. Queries. But the rudiments
of the world (it seems) are substantial and firm ground for Mr. A. to build
upon, but Boggs and Quicksands to his Baptismall Adversaries.

Sect. 138.
3. Suppose there had been no such Ordinance as Circumcision under the Law, no
precept that Infants should have been circumcised; yet upon a supposall of this
Ordinance given, or to be given, there would have been the same reason, one or
more, which now there was, why it should be administered, and consequently, why
God should enjoin it to be administered to Infants. Now that we interesse the
mention, either of the example, or of the precept, of Infant Circumcision, in
our disputes about Baptism, we do it not so much, if at all, for the letter of
either, as for the spirit of them; i. for those reasons sake, upon which we
judge them to have been founded by God. For though the letter of the Precept
enjoining Circumcision, and so the practice of Circumcision conformable
hereunto, be purely Legal; yet the reasons upon which the precept was given,
and the practice stood, or ought to have stood, were Evangelicall; my meaning
is, that the Precept of Infant-circumcision was calculated by God for this end,
and with this intention given by him, that by such an Administration, as the
precept directs unto, and injoyneth, the Ordinance might be the more richly
edifying to the Church now in being. There is the same consideration of all
other ceremonial precepts and injunctions under the Law. Though the matter of
every of these precepts (respectively) or the external ceremony it self
enjoined, was such, that by no form whatsoever put upon it, or by no ordering
or disposing it, it could be reduced to an equal serviceablenesse in matters
of edification, with the rich and high discoveries of the Gospel; yet was it
so ordered and disposed by God in the use and practique of it, that it might
yield to the Church the most spiritual benefit, and best degree of
edification, which it was regularly capable to do. And if any thing
appertaining to the manner of any legal service or ceremony enjoined, had
been altered or changed in the command, and so in the practice, from what was
now directed and prescribed, it would have been prejudicial to the benefit and
edification, which the Church now received, or might have received, by those
ceremonial services. Otherwise we must say, that men themselves (the Jews)
might possibly have bettered their spiritual condition, by altering and
changing, at least in some particulars, the Law given by God himself unto them,
and this for the advancement of such their condition. The clear amount or
consequent of this discourse is, that in case there be any ceremony, or
ceremonial service, enjoined by God under the Gospel, of like nature and
consideration with any of those, which were prescribed in the Law; unless the
manner and terms for the use, practice, or administration of it, shall be the
same (at least in the main) with those directed for the practice of the
corresponding ceremony under the Law, this Gospel ceremony must of
necessity be the less edifying by means of a variation in this kind. Now that
Baptism is a ceremony, or ceremonial service under the Gospel, corresponding
with Circumcision under the Law, is in it self so manifest, and so generally by
sober and considering men acknowledged, that I suppose Mr. A. is too tender of
forehead to deny it. If so, then it roundly follows, that, inasmuch as the
Law prescribed the ordinary administration of Circumcision unto children, the
Gospel must allow, or intend, the like administration of Baptism unto children
likewise; otherwise the administration of it must be less beneficial and
edifying to the Christian Church. Therefore

Sect. 139.
4. Whereas Mr. A. says, that such Arguments and Pleas [he means, which are
deduced from the example of Infant-Circumcision] tend to draw down this part of
the Gospel ministration [he means, the administration of Baptism] as
applicable unto Infants, unto the line and level of the legal, doubtless he
understands not what he says. For 1. if Baptism be no part of the Gospel,
but an appendix only, (which I suppose was sufficiently proved, Sect. 102.)
then is not the administration of Baptism properly any part of the Gospel
ministration, but only an administration collateral hereunto. But 2. grant we
the administration of Baptism to be a part of the Gospel ministration, Mr. A.
had small reason to complain, that we by applying it unto Infants, draw it down
TO the line and level of the Legal, when as himself, and his, by denying it
unto Infants, draw it down many degrees beneath the Legal ministration he
speaks of. For this (as we lately showed) made the best improvement of the
Ordinances and ceremonies then on foot, for the spiritual benefit and
accommodation of the Church in edification and comfort, that well might be; and
upon this account ordered the standing administration of Circumcision unto
Infants. Nor is the Gospel ministration it self, in any such respect preferred
before the Legal, either by Christ, Paul, or any other Apostle, viz. that the
administration of the Gospel ceremonies is contrived either with more wisdom,
or more goodness by God, for the accomplishing of the gracious ends intended
(respectively) in them, then the Law-ceremonies and services were in reference
to their respective ends: but, partly because the ceremonies of the Gospel,
are more rich in signification, then those of the Law were, and consequently
their respective ends are more rich and gracious; partly because Gospel
discoveries of God, and of the mystery of his will concerning the salvation of
men, are much more full and glorious, then the Legal were; partly also because
there is a larger donation, or effusion of the Spirit, and so the hearts and
consciences of men more effectually dealt with, under the Gospel, then under
the Law. So that that administration of Baptism, which Mr. A. censureth,
compared with that which he approves, is rather a drawing up, then a drawing
down, of the Gospel ministration, if, and so far as, this is concerned in
it, to the line and level of the Legal.

Sect. 140.
Whereas in process of his second proof of his minor Proposition (which hangs
heavy on his hand) speaking M. A. p. 31.
of Arguments drawn down by Poedo-baptists from the example of circumcision,
demands, what are they else but such, which are after the rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ, i. e. such as are according to the ministration of
the Law, which was by Moses, and not according to that of the Gospel which is
by Christ (p. 31.)

1. Answer has been made, that in his sense of the clause, after the rudiments
of the world, his Argument drawn down from Circumcision, to prove the
unlawfulness of Church Communion with Saints by him called unbaptized, is as
much, (or more) after these rudiments, as any the Arguments derived from the
same fountain for Infant Baptism. I here add;

2. That by, the rudiments of the world, Col. 2. 8. according a) See Calvin,
Grotius, Estius, and others upon the the place.
to very able Expositours, is not meant the Mosaicall ceremonies, but
Philosophical Institutions and disputes: And indeed, the scope of the place
well considered, this interpretation will be found the most genuine and proper.
Therefore all that Mr. A. builds upon his ceremonial sense of the Phrase, to
fortify his second proof of his Proposition in hand (which is, upon the
matter, the whole building here) is built upon a very slipperie and loose
foundation, and which it self needs establishment; if any thing can be said
to need that, which it is incapable to receive. Yet

3. Understand we by the rudiments of the world, Mr. A's understanding, I mean,
Mosai^all Ceremonies; yet have we no ground at all to think, that the Apostle
rejects Philosophy, or things of humane tradition, as being after the
rudiments of the world in such a sense as this, viz. because they are managed
and ordered by such principles of wisdom, as those by which the Mosaicall
ceremonies were ordered by God, which yet must be M. A's sense, to make his
citation of the words any ways pertinent to his purpose. But if we must needs,
for Mr. A's sake, though contrary to reason, interpret the rudiments of the
world, the ceremonies of Moses; that character of evil, or of danger, upon
things, which the Apostle places in this, that they are after the rudiments of
the world, must be conceived to stand in this, that they are of like nature and
consideration (in appearance) with the old ceremonies of the Law, viz.
external and carnal rites and observations, having no communion with the
spiritualnes or inwardnes of the Gospel, which has chiefly to do with the
hearts and souls and consciences of men, and injoyneth such ways, and actions,
and exercisings of themselves unto men, which are proper to arise and proceed
from an heart sanctified through Faith, and filled with the love of God. Now
Baptism, to whomsoever administered, cannot in any such sense as this be* said
to be after the rudiments of the world, or the Legal ceremonies: because it is
an Evangelicall Ordinance, and commanded by Christ himself: or if it be after
these, it is as well, and as much after them, when administered unto men and
women, as when unto children; inasmuch as the nature of it is not altered or
changed by being administered unto men. So that Mr. A. is extremely out of his
way, to think that the Administration of Baptism unto Infants, is any ways
touched or concerned in that clause of the Apostle, wherein he censureth things
as dangerous, and of threatening consequence, for being after the rudiments of
the world, and not after Christ.

Sect. 141.
Although it nothing concerns the cause in hand to follow him in his Answers to
that objection, which he falls upon (though very unseasonably and irrelatively
to the business before us, and led unto it by the false light of his
understanding the clause lately mentioned, after the rudiments of the world) p.
32. yet to afford him an opportunity to reflect upon his importunity in
opposing Infant Baptism, let us endeavor to show him the Mr. A. p. 32
weakness of his answer thereunto.

The Objection (as himself propounds it, p. 32.) is this, That both our
Savior, and his Apostles, vindicate and assert practices under the Gospel,
from the examples and practices under the Law; as the disciples gathering ears
of corn on the Sabbath, from David's eating the show bread, etc. Mat. 12. 3, 4,
5. The ministering in carnal things to Ministers of the Gospel, from the not
muzling the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn under the Law, 1 Cor. 9.
9, 10.

To this Objection he answers, 1. that it does not appear that men of private
spirits, wanting that infallible guidance of the holy Ghost, which Christ and
his Apostles had, may use like liberty in this behalf. But (for answer to this
answer)

1. Are not seeing men competent guides unto those that are blind? And if it
be not lawful, or safe for us to follow or imitate Christ and his Apostles in
any thing they did, because we want the infallible guidance of the holy Ghost,
which they had, what Christian or worthy way (almost) is left for us to walk in?

2. Whereas he seems to distinguish between the guidances of the holy Ghost,
and to make some infallible, and others fal^ible, I can at no hand subscribe
his distinction. I cannot believe any guidance whatsoever of the holy Ghost, to
be fallible, i^ such which may mislead, or deceive, those that are guided by
it. Only if by an infallible guidance, he means such a guidance, which they who
are partakers of it, know certainly to be such, (I mean infallible) and by a
fallible guidance, such, that they who are guided by it, may possibly doubt
whether it be his guidance, and so infallible, or no, and in this respect may
deceive them, his distinction (I suppose) may pass. But then

^. Of what guidance of the holy Ghost can we be more confident that it is his,
and consequently, infallible, then when we are led by him to such grounds and
principles of arguing, upon which he taught those to argue and conclude, in
whom his guidance was infallible, and known to be such by these persons
themselves, and acknowledged for such by us also?

Sect. 142.
And whereas Mr. A. endeavors to strengthen his Answer thus: Nay, has not the
presumption thus to do, been the sluice, through which many popish superstitions
have first entered into the world, as supposing them to hold an analogicall and
equitable proportion with many the Jewish customs? I answer;

That what sluice soever a PRESVMPTION of imitating Christ and his Apostles in
the methods and grounds of their arguings, may be for the letting in either of
Popish superstitions, or other erroneous opinions; certain it is, that a duly
considerate and real imitation of them in this kind, must needs be an happy
sluice to let in many necessary and important truths into the world. For how
small a portion of those truths, which are importantly necessary to be known,
are expressly, or (as we use to say) totidem verbis, delivered in Scripture? And
if it be not lawful, or safe, to draw conclusions from Scripture-Principles, or
grounds, the christian world must bear an intolerable burden of darkness and
ignorance, or of hesitancie and doubtfulnesse at the best (which is little
better then ignorance, if not the same) in things of highest concernment unto
it. Yea, if it be not safe to draw conclusions upon the terms now mentioned,
Mr. A. with all his Anti-poedo-baptismall train, have run a dangerous course in
opposing Infant Baptism, there being (as is notoriously known) no plain or
express Scripture against it, no not yet (the truth is) of any more remote or
obscure overture.

But Mr. A. seems to be a little jealous that his objection would ride over the
head of this answer; therefore he brings a second to encounter it. The tenor
hereof, is, 1. Though Christ and his Apostles did both back and illustrate
their Doctrine and Precepts from instances and examples under the Law, yet*
they never made these examples the sole ground and foundation thereof, but
these are still built upon that authority, which they had from God otherwise.
-- 2. The things which both Christ, and the Apostle, in the cases ob^ected,
plead for examples out of the Law, were not merely and barely institutive and
positive, but of a moral consideration, and so of a more ready perception and
deduction from those examples. For answer:

Sect. 143.
1. Are the two members of this answer of any good accord between themselves?
or when the things which they ( Christ and his Apostles) taught, were of a
moral consideration, and so of a more ready perception and deduction from
Scripture-examples, was it proper for them to insist upon that authority which
they had from God otherw^se, for the confirmation or avouchment of such things?
Especially considering that the Jews, with whom they had, either only, or
chiefly to do, in these reasonings, subscribed to the Authority of the
Scriptures, but rejected the Authority of the persons, who argued from them,
and did not own them as teachers sent from God. And however, the Apostle Peter
makes the word of Prophecy, [i. the Scriptures of the old Testament] more
sure [i. of greater, and of a more rational authority for a man's satisfaction
and conviction, touching the truth of what they deliver] then a voice from
heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19. when things taught are of a ready perception and
deduction from the Scriptures, and the Divine Authority of the Scriptures
acknowledged by the persons, to whom these things are delivered, it is very
unreasonable for the Teachers to bear themselves with a strong hand upon their
extraordinary Commission or Authority from God to teach, especially toward
such hearers, who are hard to be convinced hereof. Nor are the
scripture-instances produced by Mr. A. to show the contrary, any ways
pertinent to such a purpose. And that he is mistaken in that, wherein he
places his greatest trust, Mat. 12. 8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the
Sabbath day, I have showed elsewhere, Waterdipping* Consider. 1. page 6.
directing the Reader where he may find a very sufficient account given, that
by, the Son of man, in that saying, is not meant the Lord Christ himself, but
any person of mankind, as the the phrase often signifies in scripture, Job 25.
6. 35. 8. Esa. 51. 12. 56. 2. Psalm. 8. 4. 144. 3. 146. 3. (to omit others.)

2. If neither Christ, nor his Apostles, ever made the Scriptures, or those
scripture-examples, upon which they argued and avouched their Doctrine, the
sole ground and foundation hereof, by what Authority can we do it? Upon what
account can we raise Doctrines from, and build conclusions upon any
scripture-examples, yea though the Doctrines we raise and build in this kind,
be but of a moral consideration, and of the easiest and readiest perception
and deduction from these examples? Or are they, who do raise any Doctrinall
conclusion from any Scripture example, worthy reproof for so doing? Or if Mr.
A. teaches this, does he not make a rod for his own back?

Sect. 144.
3. Whereas he pleads, that the things which Christ, and the apostles, in the
cases objected, plead for examples out of the Law, were not merely and barely
institutive, but of a moral consideration, and so of a more ready perception,
etc. pretending, that Infant Baptism has no moral equity, in, and of, it self
discernable to commend it; I clearly answer; that though Baptism it self be
institutive and positive, yet Baptism, with the several gracious ends intended
by God in it, supposed, (which is nothing, but what Mr. A. himself, as well as
his adversaries, supposes) the baptizing of Infants is of a moral
consideration, and has equity, in, and of, it self to commend it. If God
intended good by Infant-circumcision, either to the Jewish Church in general,
or to the children themselves who were to be circumcised, the administration of
circumcision unto children, was of a moral consideration, and had a moral
equity in it self to commend it: and they upon whom the duty of the said
administration at any time, and in reference to any person, lay, should have
sinned against the Law of charity to neglect it. Now there being the same, or
as much reason to judge (as has been formerly argued, and may be further, in
due time that God by Infant baptism, intends spiritual good, either unto the
Infants themselves, who are or should be baptized, or to the Christan Churches
(respectively) as that he did intend the like good, either to the circumcised
Infants, or Church of the Jews, by Infant circumcision, it roundly follows,
that Infant Baptism, notwithstanding Mr. A's opinion to the contrary, is of a
moral consideration, and in this respect of a ready perception and deduction
from the example of Infant-circumcision; yea and that they who do deprive their
children of it, walk uncharitably toward them, and deserve reproof; according
to the saying of Beza; Baptismus sine impietatis scelere contemni nequit, and
gravissimam reprehensionem coram Deo and hominibus merentur, qui tantum
beneficium differunt, vel sibi, vel suis liberis accipere. Beza. Opnsc. p. 334.
Baptism cannot without the great sin of impiety be despised: and they deserve
a most severe reproof both before God and men, who delay the reception of so
great a benefit, either for themselves, or THEIR CHILDREN; So that things duly
and unpartially considered, Mr. A's Objection is too hard for his Answer, the
spirit of the former, is the greater spirit. And thus we see, that his minor
Proposition, which he has been all this while laboring in the fire to make
straight, remains as yet crooked. His two former probations have afforded no
Protection at all to it. But it may he has kept his best wine to the last; and
his third Answer will recover the credit, which his two former have lost. Let
us therefore with patience, and without partiality, hear and consider what
this has to say unto us.

Another thing by which it may appear that Infant Baptism is not agreeable to
the Gospell-ministration, is, in that it M. A. p. 34.
differs from it in this property of it, viz. as it is a ministration of the
spirit; for so it is called, 2 Cor. 3. 8. It Is the ministration of the spirit
in two respects: 1. because, in, and by, this ministration, the spirit is given
unto men. 2. Because the worship and service, which God receives from men under
it, is, or ought to be, more spiritual, then that was under the Law: in both
which respects Infant Baptism will be found disagreeable to it. I answer,

Sect. 145.
1. This argument, or probat, is to be commended in this before either of the
former: it promises full, and undertakes home, in the cause of the Proposition
to be secured; the Proposition (as we heard) being this: Infant Baptism is
disagreeable to the ministration of the New Testament. Now his first proof
undertook for no more, but to prove Infant Baptism, not simply disagreeable,
but only less agreeable, to this ministration. His second, that
Infant Baptism, as he might well fuppose, savors strongly of the Legal
ministration. But this proof, it be as good as its word, will prove
Infant Baptism, simply and right-down, disagreeable to the said ministration.
But

2. Whereas he attempts to prove this disagreeablenesse by this argument, viz.
that it differs from it in one particular prop^rtie, his attempt amounts to no
more then the beating of the air. For what though it should differ from it in
two properties, which are more then one, yet if it agree with it in others,
especially in more, why should it not be judged, rather, or more, agreeable
with it, then disagreeable? yea one thing may be agreeable enough with another,
when there is a disagreeablenesse between them in many properties, and scarce a
similitude in any. Righteousness is agreeable enough with Christ, (and so with
a regenerate soul) yet in how many properties or considerations, do they
differ? The meat which a man eats, if it be wholesome, though Mr. A. p. 32. 33.
it be dead or without life, yet may it be agreeable enough to his body, which
is alive. So that this argument, has not so much as the face or color of a
proof in it.

And

3. When he says that the Gospel-ministration is therefore called the
ministration of the spirit, because the worship and service which God receives
from men under it, is, or ought to be, more spiritual, then that was under the
Law; 1. I do not very well understand what he means by the Gospel-ministration;
as viz. whether, the publication or manifestation of the Gospel, which was
made by Christ and his Apostles, unto the world, in their days; or whether,
that publishing or preaching of it, which has been made since in generations
succeeding* by the ordinary ministers and Preachers of it. If he means the
former; I confess the ministration of the Gospel may well be termed (as it is
by the Apostle) the ministration of the spirit: for the spirit was abundantly
poured out, under, and by this ministration. But if the latter, I make a great
question whether the Apostle intended to style this, the ministration of the
spirit; considering how sparingly, (and for the most part) imperceptibly and
without observation, the spirit has been, or in these our days, is, given
under it. This by the way. 2. Neither is it so demonstratively true, that the
worship and service, which God (generally) receives from men under the
Gospel-ministration (in the latter sense) either is, or ought to be, more
spiritual, then that was (in reference to many persons at least) or ought to
have been, in respect of all, under the Law. For it is no great shame for any
man to believe, that the worship and service, which Moses, Aaron, Joshua,
David, (with others in great numbers) exhibited unto God under the Law, was
altogether as spiritual, i. had as much of their spirit, heart, and soul in
it, as any worship or service which is no^ (at least, ordinarily) performed
unto him under the Gospel. And it is yet less questionable (of the two) that
that worship and service, which Moses, Aaron, Joshua, David, did perform under
the Law, were no works of Supererogation, and consequently, not more
spiritual, then they ought to have been, or then the Law required. So that
this third and last proof levied by Mr. A. upon the account of his said
Proposition, has less in it then either of the former.

Sect. 146.
Nevertheless Mr. A. makes a long business to fill up with words an argument
so empty of weight and truth, as we have heard. But he that pleads an evil
cause, cannot do it effectually by speaking truth: and pity it is that Mr.
A's understanding should be so over-mated with an unfeasible undertaking, as I
find it here.

1. He says, that Baptism is a part of the Gospel-ministration. If it be so,
then is an Ordinance, a piece or part of an action. For certain it is (I
suppose, to Mr. A. himself) that Baptism is an Ordinance: and suppose no less
certain, that the Gospel-ministration is an action. But who ever notioned, or
conceited an Ordinance, to be a part of an action? If he had said, the
administration of Baptism is a part of the Gospel-ministration, it had been
more regular and proper; though (happily) no whit more a truth. For as Baptism is
rather an appendix unto the Gospel, then a part of it (as was formerly showed,
Sect. 102.) so is the administration of Baptism rather an Appendix to the
ministration of the Gospel, then any part of it. And (doubtless) if Paul had
included the Administration of Baptism in the Gospel ministration, when he
termed it, the ministration of the spirit, he would have been so far from
thanking God that he had baptized so few, as those mentioned by him, 1 Cor. 1.
14, 16. that he would rather have been humbled, or sorrowful, before God, that
he had baptized no more. yea in the very next words (ver. 17.) he makes a plain
opposition between Baptizing, and Preaching (i. ministering) the Gospel, For
Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. Yes, 2 Cor. 5. 18. he
expressly says, that God had given, or committed unto him (with the other
Apostles) the ministry of reconciliation [what is this, but the ministration
of the Gospel?] again, 1 Cor. 9. 17. that the dispensation of the Gospel was
commitred unto him. Therefore certainly had he judged the administration of
Baptism any part of the Gospel ministration, he would not have affirmed, that
Christ sent him not to baptize.

Sect. 147.
2. Concerning what he argues from Act. 2. 38. to prove that Baptism, when duly
administered and received, contributes toward men's receiving the spirit, etc.
has been answered at large already, viz. Sect. 89, 90, 91. etc. I here add,
1. I presume Mr. A. will acknowledge, that when John baptized, Baptism was duly
administered and received: yet he did not look upon his Baptism as much
contributing toward the receiving of the spirit in respect of a greater
presence and operation, nor did he bear his baptized ones in hand, that any
such thing was to be expected by it, or from it, but represented it unto them
as a matter of inferior concernment, declaring unto them from whom they might
expect another Baptism, which was of a rich and high concernment indeed. I
indeed have baptized you with water [meaning, that his Baptism was of mean
consequence] but he, [viz. Christ, who came after him] SHALL baptize you with
the holy Ghost. Mar. 1. 8. Mat. 11. 11. Luk: 3 16.
If upon, or by means of John's Baptism, they had received the Spirit, or had
bin baptized with the holy Ghost, he would not have said, he SHALL baptize you,
or, ye SHALL be baptized with the holy Ghost, but, ye have been already
herewith baptized. So likewise, Act. 19. we read of Disciples, who had been
baptized by John, or by some authorized in that behalf by John, and therefore
their Baptism (doubtless) had been duly administered and received; yet this
notwithstanding they had been so far from receiving the Spirit by their
Baptism, that they professed that they had not so much as heard whether there
were an holy Ghost, or no. And Paul's question unto them, Have ye received the
holy Ghost since ye BELIEVED, plainly imports, that the receiving of the holy
Ghost, either depended upon, or was a consequent of their believing, not of
their being baptized, according to that of our Savior; He that believes on
me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly (b) Ioh. 7. ae 8, 39.
shall flow rivers of living waters. But this he spoke of the Spirit, which
they that BELIEVE on him [not they, who should be Water-baptized in his Name]
should receive. Gal. 3. 2.
So again by a like question put to the Galathians by the same Apostle,
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith. [c.
i. of the doctrine of Faith, the Gospell] he plainly enough supposes, that the
receiving of the Spirit, was, and is, the gracious and bountiful reward of God
unto men's Faith, annexed by promise hereunto, not of their being baptized. And
accordingly we read, Act. 10. that all they, who heard Peter preaching the
Gospel, upon their believing, received the holy Ghost, before there was any
thing done, or spoken of, about their baptizing. While Peter yet spoke these
words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them, which heard the word. Act. 10. 44.
Yea their Baptism was so far from contributing to their receiving the holy
Ghost, that on the contrary, their receiving the holy Ghost contributed toward
their baptism. Can any man (says Peter) forbid water that these should not be
baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Verse 47
To the same purpose, and with reference (I suppose) to the same thing, the
same Apostle declares to the Council at Jerusalem, that God gave the holy
Ghost unto the Gentiles, as he had done unto them, upon the purifying of their
hearts by Faith, and by way of testimony of their believing. God (says he)
made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear ^he word, and
bel^eve. And God who knows the heart, bare them witness, giving them the
holy Ghost, even as he did unto us. And put no difference between us and them,
having purified [(...)] their hearts by Faith. Act. 15. 7, 8, 9. See ^ more
upon this account,
To these we might add, Gal. 2. 14. Ephesians. 1. 13. (with others) And though we
read of several persons, and sometimes of great numbers, and at several
times, baptized, yea oft-times of persons receiving the Spirit before their
being baptized, yet (to my best remembrance) we never read of any receiving the
spirit, either immediately upon, no nor yet by means of, their baptizing. The
report or mention whereof without all controversy, would not have been passed
over in silence by the holy Ghost, had there been any such remarkable
dispensation; especially considering that he sometimes reports the receiving of
the spirit upon the laying on of hands, as Act. 8. 17. and 9. 17. and 19. 4. 2 Timothy 1. 6. So that Mr. A's Notion about the contribution of Baptism toward the
receiving of the Spirit, is clearly, Anti-Evangelicall. Therefore I add.

Sect. 148.
2. That when Peter speaks thus to those Jews, on whom his preaching had
wrought so far, as to cause them to ask, men and brethren what shall we do
etc, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, his
meaning is not, cannot be (the Scripture passages lately insisted on, duly
considered) that Baptism should contribute toward their receiving of the
Spirit, but Re^entance; which is (as has been formerly showed, if my memory
fails me not, or however is of ready demonstration) both of the same nature
with Faith, and inseparably accompanying it, and has the same promises made
unto it. For though Baptism be joined in the same exhortation with repentance,
and the promise of receiving the holy Ghost made unto those, who shall be found
obedient unto it, yet since the same promise appertains unto repentance, apart
a) See p. 244.
from, and without Baptism, and has been. performed accordingly (as we have
both lately and formerly proved) there is no ground to think, that the promise
made to those, that shall obey the said exhortation, should be made with an eye
or reference unto Baptism, or as not intended to be performed without this,
unto all those who shall. repent. When Christ faith, And this is the will of
him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may
have everlasting life, Ioh. 6. 40
he does not imply, that a seeing of him is as necessary to the obtaining of
everlasting life as a believing on him; no nor yet that everlasting life does
in any degree depend upon a seeing of him, although as well seeing, as
believing, is mentioned in this promise. Thomas (says Christ unto him) because
thou have seen me, thou have believed: Blessed are they, who have not seen and
yet have believed. Ioh. 20. 29
Where 1. it is observable, that blessedness (which is by the Apostle Paul
interpreted by remission of sins (Romans 4. 6, 7.) is annexed by promise unto, or
suspended upon believing, without the least intimation of any necessity of a
baptismall concurrence herewith for the obtaining of it. 2. That though Christ
in the late cited Scripture, Ioh. 6. 40 mentioned, the seeing of him, together
with a believing on him, in order to the obtaining everlasting life [and
consequently, remission of sins] yet may everlasting life (and so remission of
sins) be obtained by believing on him only without seeing him. Yea to show,
that Baptism contributes, neither toward remission of sins, nor receiving the
spirit, I add

3. (And lastly) that the promise, which Peter here declares unto these Jews,
was made to them, and their children, etc. the matter of which Mr. A. himself
interprets to be, remission of sins, and the receiving of the Spirit, was an
old Testament promise, either express, or resultive; and consequently could
not be made unto, or suspended (in the performance of it) upon Baptism (either
in whole, or in part) See Sect. 95. p. 244.
because there was no such Ordinance in being, when the promise was made, nor
mentioned as future, in this promise. Therefore it is a clear case that the
promise we speak of, was made unto Repentance, or Faith (each including other)
without any consideration had of Baptism. But I remember somewhat of this
before. Sect. 95.

Sect. 149.
The irrelativenesse of his two subjoyned Scriptures to his purpose ( viz. Ioh.
3. 5. and Tit. 3. 5.) has been evicted formerly, Sect. 78. Nor is there any
whit more, but less rather, in his additionall Scripture, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Nor
does the descending of the holy Ghost in a visible manner upon Christ so soon
after his baptizing, countenance his notion, that Baptism contributes toward
the receiving of the Spirit, in respect of a greater presence or operation
hereof, etc. Nor does Mr. A. himself seem to place much in this: in which
respect we shall wave the further consideration of it at the present.

But whereas in the process of this argument ( viz. p. 35.) he says, The
Promise of the Spirit is not made, either to repentance or Baptism singly, but
to both in con^unction; those very Scriptures pointed at (a few lines before)
by himself (being for the most part the same that we lately argued against him)
are abundantly sufficiently to refute him. The Scriptures are, Ioh. 7. 39. Act.
15. 7, 8. and 19. 2. Gal. 3. 14. Ephesians. 1. 13. See upon this account, Sect. 147.
where it is made evident that the promise of the Spirit is made unto
Repentance, either explicitly, or implicitly, (I mean as included in Faith)
apart from, or, otherwise then in conjunction with, Baptism. The rule which he
subjoynes, if rightly understood, is right and straight: and thus understood,
and applied accordingly, may do good service. Where things (says he) are
promised upon several conditions, or upon condition of several things in
conjunction, it is not the performance of one of these conditions, that can put
a man into a due and well grounded expectation of the promise. But M. A. has
lately learned, or (I am certain) might have learned, that every thing which is
inserted in a promise, or in reference to the obtaining of a promise,
condition-wise, [i. in the form of a condition] has not therefore the matter
or force of such a condition, without which the performance of this promise
cannot be obtained. And this explication, or limitation of Mr. A's rule,
always takes place in such cases (and possibly in some others) where the
blessing promised under the specification of two conditions, or more, in one
place, is expressly insured upon the performance of one of these conditions
only, in another. See more of this Sect. 95. p. 244, 245 etc. and Sect. 96, 97.
p. 24^. etc.
An instance hereof we lately gave from Ioh. 6. 40. in the preceding Section.
Unto which may be added, Ioh. 3. 5 (as being of somewhat alike consideration)
Except a man be born of water, and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom
of God. Water seems here to be joined (conditio^-wise) with the spirit, as
necessary, together with the spirit, to put a man into a capacity of seeing
[i. injoying] the kingdom of God. Yet it appears from the 3. verses immediately
following, where this capacity, under the notion and name of a new*birth, is
attributed unto the Spirit only, as likewise from the general ^urrent of the
Scriptures, that the Spirit, by the word, is the sole worker of this capacity
in men. See 1 Cor. 6. 11. and 2 Cor. 3. 6. 2 The. 2. 13. 1 Pe. 1. 2, 22.

Sect. 150.
Whereas he further adds (p. 135.) that Infants are in no present or actual
capacity of believing, whilst such, and makes a solemn business of the proof
of it, does he not make himself a companion of those, who are wont to disquiet
themselves in vain? For though there be some, as full of their own sense to the
contrary, as he can be of his, to whom neither this his assertion, nor yet his
proofs of it, are any ways satisfactorie; yet were he gratified with a
peaceable assent unto both, his cause would be little gratified hereby. For,

Though the ministration of the Law, or rather of the Gospel under the Law,
was (as the Apostle notioneth it) a ministration of the letter, (as we formerly
heard) yet his sense herein was comparative only, not simple or absolute (as we
largely proved, Sect. 133.) For The Spirit of God was in some measure and
degree given under, and by this dispensation; though the proportion of this
gift in respect of the generality of men, was very little considerable,
compared with the rich effusions of this spirit, under, and by means of, the
ministration of the Gospel; especially about the first entrance of this
ministration into the world (as not long since, viz. Sect. 145. we
distinguished.) And there is nothing more familiar or frequent in the
Scriptures, then to express a comparative sense in words of a positive or
absolute 1 Cor. 1.
form. Christ sent me not to baptize, etc. i. not so much to baptize. So,
Labor not for the meat which perishes, Ioh. 6. 27.
but, etc. i. labor not so much for this meat. Receive my instruction, and not
silver. i. Be more ready Prove. 8. 10:
and willing to receive my instruction, then silver, (besides many the like).
Now if the ministration of the Law was simply and absolutely a ministration of
the Spirit, though not comparatively, and God himself notwithstanding judged
Infants in a sufficient, yea in the best, capacity, to partake of a principal
part of this ministration (I mean, of the administration of Circumcision)
evident it is that the present incapacitie in children under the Gospel to
receive the spirit, is no bar in their way against their admission to
participate in Baptism, only because this is a part of the Gospel
ministration, and this ministration is the ministration of the spirit. For he
that thus argues, what does he less then put God himself to rebuke, who
judged Infants, such an incapacitie notwithstanding, capable enough of the
initiatorie part of such a ministration, which was a ministration of the Spirit
also?

Sect. 151.
Mr. A. was not (it seems) aware of this answer to his argument in hand; but he
was jealous of another; which he seeks to way-lay by proposing it
(Objection-wise) and so to shape an answer to it.

Nor can it (says he) reasonably be supposed here, that M. A. p. 36.
such a notion as this will salve this sore, viz. that Baptism may be received
by Infants in order to their receiving the Spirit, when they come to believe,
and so their Baptism come to be agreeable to the Gospel-ministration as it is a
ministration of the Spirit, notwithstanding it be received in Infancy; Because
Baptism has no influence this way as it is a work done; in which respect only
Infants are capable of it, but as it is done, submitted unto, and taken up out
of Faith, and in obedience unto God, as has been already proved in part, etc.
I answer.

1. That the sinews of this Answer were lately cut insunder, where we proved,
that God himself judged Infants, notwithstanding their actual incapacitie of
receiving the Spirit, capable of communion and fellowship in a principal part
of such a ministration, which was a ministration of the Spirit, as well as the
Gospel-ministration it self, though much inferior in this consideration unto
it, see Sect. 133. Yet

2. Whereas he says, that Baptism has no influence this way [he means, to, or
about, the receiving of the Spirit] as it is a work done, in which respect only
Infants are capable of it, but, etc. I answer; neither had Circumcision any
such influence as he speaks of, as it was a work done, in which respect only
Infants were capable of it, yet did God judge them meet to partake of the
administration of it.

3. Whereas he says, that Baptism has no such influence as he speaks of, but
only as it is submitted unto, and taken up out of Faith, etc. I answer, that as
there often is a subsequent consent to things done, as well as an Antecedent, and
that as valid to all ends and purposes, as this; in like manner a consequent
submission in Faith unto that Baptism, which was administered unto a person
without his antecedent consent in this kind, may be as available unto him for
all spiritual ends, as an Antecedent submission could have been. Let me put a
case to Mr. A. Suppose any one, or more of his Baptismall Proselytes should at
the time of their taking up Baptism, deceive both him, and themselves,
conceiting that they submit unto it, and take it up out of Faith, when as they
know not what true Faith means (which I have cause in abundance to fear, is
a case of very frequent occurrence among the Proselytes of his newfound
Baptism, and it was the case of Simon Magus, who it seems deceived both Philip,
and himself, in his taking up Baptism) but should afterward come to be
convinced of their error and hypocrisy, in this kind, and through the Grace of
God be brought to believe indeed, is it Mr. A's sense, that their Baptism,
because not submitted unto, and taken up out of Faith, at the time of their
literal reception of it, can now contribute nothing toward their receiving of
the Spirit, or have no influence upon them this way? Or is it his opinion, that
in this case they ought to take another voyage by water to invite the Spirit
unto them? If it be, certain I am that there is neither precept, nor example,
in the Scriptures, nor any competent ground in reason, to support it. But

Sect. 152.
4. We have Examples in the Scripture of edification and spiritual benefit
received by men afterward, by such, both words and actions, which at the time
of the hearing of the one, and transacting of the other, were not understood by
those, who were in time thus edified by them. When Peter thought it strange
that his Lord and Master should come to wash his feet, Jesus answered and said
unto him, What I do, thou know not NOW: but thou shall know HERE AFTER. Ioh.
13. 7
Might not God have spoken in like manner to every child, which he (by his
precept and order in that behalf) circumcised under the Law (the continuance of
their lives until years of discretion only supposed.) What I do, thou know
not now: but thou shall know afterward? Or is there not the same consideration
of children in their Baptism? When Christ said to Joseph and his mother, how is
it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business^? it
is immediately subjoyned; And they understood not (viz. at the present) the
saying which he spoke unto them; Luke 2. 49 50:
but were they therefore in no capacity of understanding it, yea and of
receiving spiritual benefit by it afterward? So again, when Christ said thus
to his Disciples, The Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men, the
Evangelist presently adds, But they understood not this saying, and it was hid
from them, that they perceived it not. Lu. 44. 45
[ viz. at the time when it was spoken unto them] Was it therefore spoken unto
them in vain? or did it not do worthy execution upon their judgments and
consciences in due time? Several other instances there are of like
consideration. See Joh. 10. 6. Ioh. 12. 16. Mat. 16. 6, 7, etc. we formerly
showed, that the end of planting is not made void, by the non-fructification of
the tree at the time of the planting of it. See Sect, 69. So that Mr. A's first
Answer in this place leaves his Objection in full force, strength, and virtue.

Nor does his second answer any whit more disable it. Infant Baptism (says he)
is disagreeable to the Gospel-ministration M. A. p. 36.
as it is the ministration of the Spirit, in this respect also; viz. as it
requires all worshippers, in all acts of worship, in all the Ordinances of this
ministration, to worship God in Spirit, with the mind, in faith and fear of the
Lord.

I answer, that to this reasoning, answer has been given over and over. For 1.
it has been opened, that the Gospel-ministration, is by the Apostle called,
the ministratio^ of the spirit, co^paratively only, and not with any import or
intimatio^, that the ministratio^ of the Law was in no respect or degree, a
ministration of the spirit also. This, Sect. 133, 150. 2. It has been proved
likewise, that the adnistration of Baptism is no part of the
Gospel-ministration, but an Appendix only unto it. This Sect. 146. 3. It has
been made good, That Infant Baptism may be agreeable enough to the Gospel
ministration, though it should not agree with it in some one property, or
particularly in this, as it is the ministration of the Spirit. This, Sect. 145.
Therefore whereas he here pretends to give a reason, why Infant Baptism should
be d^sagreeable to the Gospel-ministration, as it is the ministration of the
Spirit, does he not pretend to give a reason of that which is not? and withal
take that for granted without proof, which is denied by his adversaries?

Sect. 153.
And whereas he appropriates it unto the Gospel-ministration, that it requires
all worshippers in all acts of worship -- to worship God in Spirit with the
mind, etc. as if the Legall-ministration required not the same, this Conceit of
his also has been made to lick the dust at the feet of the Truth, Sect. 1^0,
145. So that we have here nothing but braided ware, soiled and foiled notions.

But whereas in the further traverse of this Argument, he professes his
ignorance, or want of understanding, how children should be incapable of the
Ordinance of the Supper, and yet capable of Baptism, especially considering Mr.
A. 37
that they both represent the death of Christ, both relate to the great benefit
of rem^ssion of sins, etc. I suppose that this Salve (in his own Rhetorique is
proper for this sore, and will heal it without a scarr. If Mr. A. can but
understand, how a child may be carried ten or twenty See Mr. Rich. Baxter plain
Scripture proof for Infants Church Membership, etc. Part. 2. cap. 4. 114.
miles, and yet not be able to go this journey, or the like, upon his own
legs, (did not that bane of understandings, prejudice, and preoccupation, here
intoxicate him) he may as well understand how a child may be capable of the
Ordinance of Baptism, and yet not of the supper. For Baptism is an Ordinance of
such a calculation, nature, and condition, that, as to the Elementarie and
literal reception of it, it requires no principle of action a^ all in its
subject, but passivenesse only, as Circumcision also did under the Law; which
among many others (to mention this briefly by the way) is an Argument to me of
a very considerable intimation, that it was and is as an Ordinance principally
intended by God for such subjects of mankind, which are merely passive, and
know not how to act any thing, in, or about, their reception of it. The like
counsel of God is observable, in his enditing of that Ordinance, which he
intended should be initiatorie, and primarily and ministrable unto Infants
under the Law. Circumcision was an Ordinance of such a nature, so conditioned,
that it required nothing but a regular passiveness in its subject (I mea^, its
ordinary and most appropriate subject) to the participation of it. But now the
Ordinance of the Supper, is of quite another consideration: to take, and to
eat, and to drink, and to do all this in remembrance of Christ, require
principles and abilities for action in him that performs them. And me thinks
Mr. A's understanding might as reasonably be opposed with this question, how an
Infant of the eight day, should be capable of Circumcision, and yet incapable
of eating the Passover, as how an Infant, being incapable of the supper of the
Lord, should notwithstanding be judged a capable subject of Baptism: yea
imposition of hands being an Ordinance of this nature (I mean, not requiring
any thing active in its subject about the reception of it) was adjudged by the
Lord Christ himself an Ordinance meet for little children, Mat. 19. 15. I
confess that some very judicious and worthy men, as Austin amongst the
Ancient, and Musculus amongst the Modern, have judged it regular and meet that
children should be admitted to the Lords Table also. And Luther in one of his
Epistles affirms, that the Pighards (a) Bohemos, qui parvulos communicant,
non probo, quanquam non in hoc haret^co^ cenceo. Tom. 2 Epist Lutheri ad ad
Nicolaum Haus mannum, p. 333.
or Protestants in Bohemia, did in his time admit their children to the Lords
Table with them, as (though he disliketh such their custom.)

Sect. 154.
What Mr. A. subjoyneth toward the close of his third argument, he rather
repeats, then adds, as himself acknowledges. Only when he says, The whole
ministration [he means, of the Gospell] is denominated by Faith (Gal. 3. 23,
25.) because Faith from first to last, from one end of it to the other, is to
steer all affairs under it on man's part, etc. here (I confess) is a new
Notion, or two. For, 1. by Faith, Gal. 3. 23, 25. I believe never Mr. A. p. 37
any Expositor understood, a ministration, or the ministration of the Gospel,
but rather the subject matter of this ministration, or the fuller manifestation
of those heavenly truths, which had been more darkly overtur'd under the Law.
Yea himself (page 20. of his discourse, as we formerly heard) conceives that
by Faith, is meant the confessing or acknowledging Christ Jesus to become in
the flesh, and to be the Son of God and Savior of the World. Which
interpretation of the word, Faith, is as wide from his present sense of it, as
both the one and the other are from the truth it self.

2. Whereas he gives this for the reason of his present sense, that Faith from
first to last is to steer all affairs under it on man's part, etc. 1. The great
Apostle assigns the great steerage of affairs under the Gospel dispensation,
unto love: Knowledge (says he) puffs up: but love edifyeth. 1 Cor. 8. 1
If love edifieth, love must steer and order all things under the
Gospell-dispensation: For all things here ought to be done to edification, 1
Cor. 14. 12, 26. Romans 14 19: and 15. 2. etc. But 2. Grant we that Faith ought
to steer all affairs here on man's part, to act all services, etc. ought it not
to have done the like under the Law? or did it not the like when children were
Circumcised, at least when they were circumcised by those who believed? And may
it not do the like now though Children be baptized? Of a truth these are very
light and loose reasonings to overrule the conscience of a sober man to the
disturbance of the affairs of the Gospel, and disquietment of the Christian
world.

The premises in the examination of this third argument from first to last,
duly considered, can we think that Mr. A. had so much as any tolerable ground
to wind up this his Argument in such a vapor as this: Where this qualification
[Faith] therefore is known to be wanting, as it is in Infants, certainly their
Baptism cannot Mr. A. p. 37
be applied without an apparent breach of the Laws and Rules of this spiritual
ministration. And thus also I have made good the Premises of this third
Argument. The Conclusion will follow of it self without help, etc.

Sect. 155.
The Conclusion he speaks of will indeed follow the premises without help.
They have been detected of vanity, and are vanished into the air: and thither
will the conclusion also flee: let no man stay it. The breach of which he
speaks, is very probably apparent, [i. such in appearance] unto men who have
prejudiced their sight, and look through such a medium, which is ap to cause a
mistake. Water, as both reason and experience informs us, will make a straight
thing seem crooked; if it be looked upon through it. But though Infant Baptism
be an APPARENT breach of the Laws and Rules of Gospellministration, whilst
looked upon by men, who have maimed their judicatorie by an unadvised and
overhasty Engagement in a by-way, yet being beheld and considered by men of
chaste judgments, and free understa^dings, it is an APPARENT co^formity
thereunto. Whereas he he says that he has made good the premises of his
argument, Solomon says, that which is crooked cannot be made straight.
Possibly he has made them good in his own eyes: but the answer given, will, I
trust, through the blessing of God, dissolve the enchantment, and make that,
which he calls making good, appear to him to be nothing else but a washie
color.

Sect. 156.
His fourth and last Argument against Infant Baptism, Mr. A's fourth and last
argument. p. 38.
he brings upon the stage of his discourse, p. 38. where it acts its part
on this wise. If none ought to be baptized but such who appear voluntarily
willing to be baptized in obedience utno God, then Infants ought not to be
baptized:

But none ought to be baptized but such, who appear voluntarily willing to be
Baptized in obedience unto God.

In this Argument we have only a new suite of apparel, because many of those
with whom we have chiefly to do in this writing, are not so well able to
distinguish between words, and substance of matter, let us examine the argument
in the former words, wherein it stands now last recommended to us.

The whole weight and strength of the Argument, depends upon the sense, and
truth of this Position, That none ought to be Baptized but such who appear
voluntarily willing to be baptized in obedience to God.

First, for the sense of this Position; 1. it is doubtful, whether by,
voluntarily willing, he means that which the terms precisely import, viz. such,
who are freely of their own accord, and without much contesting by others, as
by arguments, persuasions, and the like, willing; or whether such, who are very
intensly, or more then ordinarily willing, whether this intense degree of
willingness in them be from themselves, or from others. For that by
voluntarily willing, he should mean nothing but simply and merely willing,
especially in a press and close Syllogism, or Argument, is not easy to be
believed. Now taking the Phrase, voluntarily willing, in either of the two
former significations, the said Proposition is apparently untrue. For not only
they, who appear willing of themselves, and of their own accord, or who appear
extraordinarily, and without any the least regret, or degree of unwillingnesse,
willing, but even they who appear willing in any such degree, as to require
Baptism, may be Baptized, at least, if other things required in those who are,
or desire to be baptized, be not wanting. This (I suppose) will not be gainsaid
by Mr. A. himself.

2. When the said Proposition says, That none ought to be baptized, but such
who appear voluntarily willing, etc. If it desires to be understood of persons
capable of the appearance it speaks of, it may pass. But thus understood, it
prevaricates with the Conclusion, which it undertakes, to protect and prove,
and does it no service. Therefore I make no question but the Authors meaning in
it is rightout this: That none, i. no person whatsoever, of what capacity, or
incapacitie soever, ought to be baptized, but such [only] who appear willing to
be baptized. The Proposition then in this sense understood, we absolutely deny.

Sect. 157.
The Reasons of this our denial, are, 1. and principally because the Scripture
no where exacteth, or requires, any such appearing, as the Proposition speaks
of, in order to receiving of Baptism, but only of such persons, who are capable
of making or exhibiting it. Therefore for men to make it a requisite in all
persons whatsoever, and without the exception of any, to capacitate or qualify
them for Baptism, is to make themselves wise above that which is written.

2. Circumcision being a Sign and Seal of the righteousness of Faith (as the
Apostle affirms, Romans 4. 11. and this in such a sense as we Argued, and
proved formerly, Sect. 61. 62* etc.) it must needs be an Ordinance of a very
near affinity, and comportment with Baptism (as we have formerly likewise
declared and made good. Sect. ^1.
If so, God himself having judged such persons meet subjects of it, who did
not, indeed could not, appear voluntarily willing to receive it in obedience
unto God, who are we that we should exclude persons from Baptism, upon the
mere account of such a weakness, or infirmity? Similium similis est ratio.

3. Imposition of hands, at least during the times of Christ, and his Apostles,
when it was practiced c^m effectu, with some visible effect, and particularly
(as we lately showed) with the gift of the holy Ghost, was in this respect a
greater Ordinance, then Baptism; which we never find accompanied with the like
testimony from heaven in the practice thereof (which we also showed and
proved, Sect. 147.) yet were children judged capable and meet subjects of this
Ordinance by the Lord Christ himself, Mat. 19. 15. Mar. 10. 16. Now then, as
the Apostle (1 Cor. 6. 2, 3.) concludes the Corinthian Saints capable of
inferior judicatures, from their capacity of greater; in like manner from
that capacity in children, testified by Christ himself, of a greater
Ordinance, ( viz. inposition of hands) we cannot but judge them much more
capable of a lesser; I mean, Baptism: and consequently, that the Proposition
contested cannot stand.

Sect. 158.
4. The Lord Christ being much displeased (as the Text says) with his
Disciples for discouraging and rebuking those, who brought little children unto
him ( Mar. 10. 14.) upon the occasion makes this general Order, gives this in
charge unto all men, that they suffer little children to come unto him, [viz.
in such a sense, as those came unto him, who were now before him, who properly
came not, but were brought unto him by others] and not to forbid them. Now 1.
it cannot be conceived that Christ made this Order for men's suffering child^en
to come unto him, in reference to his o^n time only, and to his corporal
presence on the earth; for we do not find that any more children were at any
time brought unto him during his abode in the flesh; nor could he be ignorant
that there would no more come, or be brought unto him in this kind. Therefore
the said Order must of necessity be supposed to respect (principally at least)
the times after his death and ascension, and to enjoin and charge, that such
children who should come unto him [in the sense formerly declared, i. should be
brought unto him] should not be opposed in their coming at any time unto the
worlds end. 2. My understanding is not as yet able to comprehend, or conceive,
how, or in what way, or respect, child^en should come, or be brought to Christ,
either in these our days, or in any other, since his Ascension, but by baptism
only: or consequently, how such a coming, or bringing of them unto him as this
can be denied, or opposed, but with a manifest breach of the said Order of
Christ made in their behalf. The Reader is desired, to reperuse, upon this
account, what has been formerly argued, Sect. 25. and especially, Sect. 40.
The import of these things duly considered by us, render us very bold and
strong in our denial of Mr. A's Proposition under debate.

Sect. 159.
5. The Apostles Order is, that all things in the Church should be done to
edification; 1 Cor. 14. 26.
Doubtless his meaning is, that all things ought to be done to the best
advantage, for the best and highest promoting of this end. Now that the
constant administration of Baptism unto children, makes much more for the
edification of the Church, then the administration of it unto persons of years
only, has been demonstratively asserted formerly, Sect. 56. 73. Yet for the
further confirmation and clearing of the business, other considerations may be
added to what is delivered in those Sections.

.1 There is little question to be made but that God intended the edification of
his Church under the Law, and this upon the best terms, not only, or simply, or
by Circumcision, or by the administration thereof, but in, and by, his Election
of, and precise order about, the more appropriate and standing subject hereof.
This, for for the matter and substance of it, has likewise been already
proved, Sect. 138. If the truth of it yet stick in the throat of any man's
judgment, and will not down pleasantly, he may be relieved by this
consideration. If God did intend the edification of the Church of the Jews by
Circumcision, and the administration thereof, and did not likewise intend the
edification of this Church in his choice and appointment of the ordinary and
standing subject of this administration, then was he divided in, and against,
himself; yea and gave such a Law unto his people, one clause whereof observed
should tend to bless them, another, prejudice them, or at best do them no
service at all. Now if the administration of Circumcision unto children was
judged by God himself the most edifying administration of this Ordinance unto
the Church of the Jews, upon what substantial account can men deny the
administration of Baptism unto children to be the most edifying administration
unto the Gentile Churches? The differences pretended by Mr. A. toward the
close of his second argument, between the one administration and the other,
upon examination of them, we found to be mere impertinences and shifts, from
Sect. 120. to the end of Sect. 134. where the Reader may please to peruse their
respective examinations.

Sect. 160
2. The regular baptizing of children inricheth the Church, totie^ quoties with
the solemn testimony and profession of the Faith of those, who have been (like
Mnason) Act. 21. 16
old Disciples, and have had long experience of the ways of Christ in the
Gospel. For such Christi^n Parents, or Friends, who offer their children unto
Baptism, do hereby avouch the goodness and truth of the Gospel, and of the
Faith hereof, it being every man's sense, that no Parent is desirous to have his
child baptized into such a Faith, or Profession, which he judges unsound,
erroneous, or false. Whereas the Baptizing of men and women (at least if they
were baptized, as Mr. A. himself acknowledges they ought to be, I mean, upon
their first believing) accommodateth the Church with the testimony and
profession of young converts only, and such who are as yet unexperienced in the
word of righteousness, and little other then strangers unto the Gospel. In
which respect their testimony and profession cannot be of like authority,
weight, or edification to the Church, with theirs, who have been in Christ many
years before them, and still continue steadfast in him.

3. Infant Baptism makes more for the edification of the Church, then
after-Baptism, upon this account also. When Infants are baptized, the whole
Church may, and this with conuenience, and without breach upon their other
occasions, be present, and so partake of all the fruits, benefits, and
accommodations of the administration. Whereas when men and women are baptized,
very few of the Church, especially in many places, can have the opportunity of
being present, the place of the administration in this case being remote, (at
least where Rivers or Pools of water, convenient for the service, are not near
at hand) and the time likewise of the said administration, can hardly be
notified unto the generality of the Church. In which respect this Baptismall
administration cannot be much edifying to the Church, nor comparable with that,
which may be, and ought to be, (and in part) is, (ofttimes) made unto children.

4. Infant Baptism affords many more occasions and opportunities for the
administration of the Ordinance, and consequently, for the edification of the
Church, then Believer baptism does. For the children of Believers are many more
in number, then Believers themselves: and many thousands live to a week, or
month, who are prevented by death before they come to years of discretion, and
so much as to a capacity of believing. In which respect many baptismall
opportunities are lost, and cut off from the Church, which might have been
gained and enjoyed, by the baptizing of these persons in their infancy.

Sect. 161.
5. Whereas the holy Ghost admonishes the generality of mankid, to Remember
their Creator in the days of their youth, Eccle. 12. 1
they must needs be accessarie to the sin of their children in case they do not
thus remember him, who deprive them of so great an engagement to this See M
Rogers Treatise of Sacraments. part. 1. p. 80.
timely remembrance of him, as their having been early baptzied must needs be.
And they on the contrary wisely and graciously consult the obedience of their
children to that heavenly exhortation, who prevent them with, and lay upon
them, a baptismal engagement hereunto, in their Infancy. 1. It cannot be denied
but that baptism is an engagement to that duty, which Solomon expresses by a
man's remembering his Creator. 2. Neither can it be denied, but that men and
women in their youth, and as soon as they are capable of the duty it self of
remembering their Creator, are capable of the said engagement also; I mean, of
understanding and conceiving, that their being baptized, is, and ought to be
unto them a motive unto this duty. 3. Neither can it reasonably be denied, but
that they who are actually capable of a motive or engagement unto a duty, or
work, may, through want of this motive or engagement lying on them, neglect the
performance of the duty, which under an engagement, they would perform, and not
neglect. 4. Every man's sense may teach him, that when the two scales of a
balance are equally poised, a very small weight cast into either, will cast
it. 5. (And lastly) from these premises it roundly follows, that any man's
children, who know themselves unbaptized, and so free from the engagement of
Baptism, may from hence take occasion to neglect the duty of remembering their
Creator in the days of their youth, a duty which would lie with more weight
and authority upon their consciences (and so weas more likely to be performed)
did they look upon themselves as by Baptism engaged unto it. I am not positive
in affirming, that ever the Son or Daughter of any Parent did actually
miscarrie upon the account we speak of: but this I say, with fullness of
conviction in my judgment and conscience, 1. that it may very possibly come to
pass, that a Child, Son, or Daughter, unbaptized, may be less thoughtfull,
and careful, to remember their Creator in the days of their youth, by
understanding themselves free and loose from a baptismall tie and engagement
thereunto. 2. That in case the child of any Parent shall stumble at that stone
we now speak of, and fall, and be broken to pieces by it, the parents of this
child, being accessory hereunto, will be able to give but a sad account of the
loss of their child unto God. 3. (And lastly) that whatsoever the consequent
or event of a non-baptizing a child in his infancy, shall, or may be, evident
it is, that in this case, the Parents, or Vice-parents, upon whose hand the
Christian nurture of this child shall lie, will want a very material and
weighty argument, whereby to work his judgment and conscience to the
remembrance of his Creator. And (doubtless) the reason why God threatened the
uncircumcised manchild amongst Abraha^s posterity, with a cutting off from his
people* Genesis 17. 14
was not to signify, that this judgment should universally befall every
man-child amongst them, which possibly through the neglect of his Parents should
be uncircumcised, but to awaken the care and conscience of every Parent of such
children amongst them, to circumcise them, lest the want of this Ordinance
should occasion them to perpetrate such things, which should and ought to be
punished with such a judgment. However, by the consideration now last
traversed, in conjunction with the four preceding, it is evident enough that
Infant Baptism is a better Benefactresse unto Christian Churches in the
spiritual good of edification, then the practice lately risen up in
competition with it. And, supposing only the practice of baptizing to be still
in force, and binding upon Christian Churches (which, may, I doubt not, be
sufficiently proved from the Scriptures, and however, is one of the firstborn
Articles of Mr. A's faith) there needs no other precept be inquired after in
the Scriptures to warrant, yea and more then to warrant (I mean, to commend)
the Administration of it unto Infants, but only this (lately mentioned) Let all
things be done to edification, (so understood as was briefly suggested)

Sect. 162.
By this time I suppose an account in full has been given why we deny this
Proposition (asserted by Mr. A. in his last Argument) None ought to be
baptized, but those who appear voluntarily willing to be baptized in obedience
to God; although for the confirmation of the contrary Opinion, much more has
been said by others, and much more then both, may, or might, be said yet
further, if matters of much more weight did not claim pre-eminence.

However, let us hear and see what artificial color Mr. A. can put upon that
which is not, to make it seem to be.

The reason hereof (says he, speaking of his said Proposition) Mr. A. p. 38
is this, because without this Obedientiall willingness, Baptism will be
unprofitable, and fruitless to them: and where we know the good of Baptism is
not to be attained, there it is not to be administered. For in case we should,
it would be a profanation of the Ordinance, a taking of Gods Name in vain.
Though the sowing of seed be never so necessary, yet it would be no man's
wisdom, but folly, to sow in such a ground, or at such a season, which he knows
will render his seed frui^lesse.

I confess if Mr. A. could prove, that the good of Baptism, is not to be
attained by Infant Baptism, or that the seed hereof sown in such a ground as he
likes not, must needs become fruitless, his Proposition might well laugh all
opposition to scorn. But such things may be a thousand times over said, before
once proved. I doubt not but that the contrary is every man's belief, who has
duly weighed the premises. Notwithstanding Mr. A. (it seems) hopes to find
rocks in the air to build these castles upon.

That there is no reason (he proceeds) to expect otherwise, but that Baptism
should be unprofitable to all such, who do not take it up voluntarily,
willingly, and in obedience Mr. A. p. 38
unto God, appears upon this account,

1. Because now under the Gospel, this is the standing Rule or Law between
duties and rewards, between the using of holy Ordinances, and the benefit that
comes by them, viz. that duties be done, and Ordinances performed willingly,
and in obedience to God. And to make this stand, he cites this of the Apostle,
(1 Cor. 9. 17.) If I do this thing willingly, I have a reward. To this we
Answer (as we have in effect answered formerly.)

Sect. 163.
1. That standing Rule and Law between duties and rewards, of which he speaks,
was a Rule and Law in as much force under the Law, as now it is under the
Gospel. See Sect. 127, 130, 145. And without Faith it was altogether as
impossible to please God then, as now. This notwithstanding, the counsel of
the will of God was, that the Administration of the great initiatorie
Ordinance, Circumcision, should be made unto children. But of these things,
formerly, and (I trust) to satisfaction.

2. The saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 17. is very impertinently cited for
his purpose (and so are the other two, 2 Cor 8. 12. 1 Cor. 13. 3.) For there is
nothing more evident, then that this scripture (with those other) speaks of
persons actually capable, by reason of years, and understanding, of performing
duties and services upon the terms he speaks of, viz. willingly, and in
obedience unto God. And accordingly, they who do baptize children, ought to do
it willingly, and in obedience unto God: and are like to receive no reward from
God for this action, unless it be thus performed. But Baptism, in respect of
the baptized, is no action, or service performed: nor does the reception of it
as such, require any principle of action in the receiver. See this sufficiently
proved, Sect. 76. and again, Sect. 153. Notwithstanding, as Circumcision,
though not received voluntarily, willingly, or in obedience unto God, yet did
afterward profit the receivers, when they did voluntarily, willingly, and in
obedience unto God, accept of his counsel therein ( Rom 2. 25. Romans 3. 1, 2.)
in like manner though Baptism be not voluntarily or willingly received, the
receivers not being capable of commending their reception of it upon these
terms, yet if it be voluntarily and willingly subscribed and owned by them, and
wisely improved, afterward, the benefit of it will in full measure accrue unto
them. Yea I am of Mr. Calvin's judgment in this; that Baptism received in
Infancy, and so before a man has done any good, or performed any service at
all unto God, is, in a way of reason, more highly improveable to spiritual
ends and purposes, then when received after believing.

Sect. 164.
But Mr. A. advances a second reason to prove Baptism unprofitable to all
such, who do not take it up voluntarily, etc.

2. Promises (says he) made unto duty, or upon condition of duty, are rewards
of that obedience, which is yielded M. A. p. 39.
to God in discharge of duty, when they are fulfilled thereupon. Now it is no
wise proper to say, or rational to suppose, that God rewards his creature man,
for that wherein he is only passive, they being such actions, which we call
moral, and which proceed from the motion of the will governed by a divine Law,
that are rewardable by God. And therefore unless Baptism be submitted unto
willingly, and in obedience unto God, which cannot be supposed in Infants, the
good things annexed thereunto by way of promissorie recompense of such
obedience, connot upon any goood ground be expected. I answer,

1. Neither is it proper to say, or rational to suppose, that promises made to
duty, or upon condition of duty, are rewards of obedience, etc. For such
promises are made or given before obedience: and rewards for service do not use
to be given before work, or service. But by promises, I suppose he means,
things promised: and yet is it very improper to say that things promised, are
made unto duty, or upon condition of duty. But acyrologies in speaking are of
easy pardon, when they have truth and worth of notion accompanying them, to
mediate for them.

2. Whereas he says, that it is not rational to suppose that God rewards his
creature, man, for that wherein he is merely passive, he says nothing either
to help his own cause, or to harm the cause of his adversaries. For who ever
said, on the one hand, or proved on the other, that Baptism was, or is,
reward^d by God, unless the word be taken actively, or for the act of
baptizing, which (I know) is not Mr. A's ^nce here? Notwithstanding it may be
some question amongst wiser men then either he or I, whether God in some cases,
may not reward his creature, man, for that wherein he is only passive, and
particularly, whether he will not reward Rachels children (as they are called,
Mat. 2. 18.) for the loss of their lives by Herod's murtherous cruelty,
although they were only passive herein. But concerning Baptism, there being
nothing in it, simply as such, afflicting or grievous to the flesh, but, as it
may be administered and received, rather pleasing to it, I know no ground why
any man should look upon it as rewardable by God. Only when (as Mr. A.
speaks) it is submitted unto in obedience to God, I judge it to be rewardable
by God, according to the line and measure of other acts of obedience
commensurable in difficulty of performance unto it. But as I judge the
obedientiall perseverance and continuance in the profession of baptism, in
those who were baptized, when believers, as much (or more) rewardable by God,
as their momentanie act in their first submission unto it, and receiving it: so
I judge a conscientious owning and profession of their Baptism, in those who
were baptized Infants, when they come to years of understanding, and their
perseverance in this profession unto the end, altogether as rewardable by God,
as the voluntary taking up of the Ordinance in conjunction with the like
perseverance, in the other. When Mr. A. shall offer unto me a considerable
reason for the contrary, I shall demurre, until this his reason, and my
understanding, have conferd together about the case. In the mean time I cannot
but judge a conscientious owning of a man's Baptism, whenever received, as well,
and as much, yea and as worthy, a moral action, as the receiving or taking it
up at any time: and consequently, that the good things ann^xed* unto Baptism (I
mean, unto a willing and obedientiall submission unto Baptism) by way of a
promissorie recompense, may upon a very good ground be expected, though not by
Infants, whilst such, yet by persons, who were baptized Infants, when they come
to be men and women, and shall profess such an acceptance of, or submission
unto, their Baptism.

Sect. 165.
The third and last reason, which Mr. A. offers upon the account lately
specified, utters it self in these words.

3. I have proved before in another Argument, that now under the
Gospel-ministration, there is no benefit comes, either Mr. A. p. 39 40.
by Baptism or any other Ordinance, but by means of his Faith, who partakes
thereof Without Faith it is impossible to please God, (Heb. 11. 6.) i. e. in
any service to approve ones self acceptable unto him. For whatsoever is not of
Faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23. I answer,

1. That I also have proved; that neither did there any benefit come, either by
Circumcision, or any other Ordinance under the Legal-ministration, but by means
of his Faith, who did partake of them: and yet God judged it meet that Infants
should be circumcised. Peruse Sect. 127, 130, 145, 163.

2. It has been lately showed likewise, that though children did not approve
themselves unto God in their being circumcised, yet God did approve of their
Circumcision, yea and they who Circumcised them, did, or might, approve
themselves unto him in the service. What then hinders but that God may approve
of childrens being baptized, though children at the time of their baptism
cannot approve themselves unto him? And if Circumcision profited those, who
were circumcised ^nfants, by means of that Faith, which was found in them, when
they came to be men (as we lately heard) why may not the Baptism received in
Infancy, benefit the receivers of it by means of that faith, which by the
Grace of God comes to be wrought in them afterward? So that here is nothing in
in this reason, but what has been out-reasoned over and over. Yea Mr. A.
himself (it seems) was aware that this Reason of his was Obnoxious to the
Answers, which have been given unto it: but excuses himself thus:

I shall not here again answer the case of Infant-Circumcision, Mr. A. p. 40
which possibly may again rise up in the minds of some, against what has been
now laid down in this Argument also; but shall refer the Reader, for
satisfaction herein to what has been already done about that subject in answer
to another Objection, as judging it sufficient at this turn also.

I answer, that the Sanctuary, unto which he sends his Reader, to secure him
from the force of the Objection which he fears, has been polluted since the
building of it, and is razed to the ground. See Sect. 120. to the end of Sect.
134.

Sect. 166.
Before he comes to grapple with that Objection or Argument of his Adversaries,
with the conquest and overthrow of which be thinks it honorable to sound a
retreat, and to ungird his armor, he interlaceth this discourse.

I shall not proceed further to leavie more Arguments to Mr. A. p. 40.
serve in this Controversy (unless occasionally) though many more of like
import with the former, might perhaps readily be formed and drawn up, as
judging these already insisted on abundantly sufficient to detect the vanity of
Infant Baptism.

For answer, remembering the Latin Proverb, Suum cuique pulchrum, every man's
own is lovely in his own eyes. I look upon Mr. A's conceit of an abundant
sufficiency in his Arguments for the purpose he speaks of, but as a strain of
that weakness which is much incident to men. It is the wise man's observation;
Every way of a man is right in his own eyes: Pro. 21. 2.
Upon the account hereof, it is no great matter of offense to me, that Mr. A.
pleases himself with a supposall that he has detected the vanity of
Infant Baptism. By way of recompense, I trust it shall be no great offense unto
him, that I am confident, that instead of detecting the vanity of
Infant Baptism, he has detected the vanity of his undertakeing against it, and
has confirmed the doctrine and practice which he opposes, by letting the
world see, how little weight, either of reason, or truth, there is in such
Arguments which are leviable against them, and how there is nothing to be found
in the Scriptures, rightly managed and understood, that condemns or
discountenanceth them. But hear we the process of this his by-discourse.

Nor shall I apply my self to answer those many contrary Arguments, which are
wont to be mustered up in defense M. A. p. 40.
of Infant Baptism; not because I count them, or any of them impregnable, or of
hard or difficult attempt; but partly because in those Arguments I have
produced, there is a ground or foundation laid of answering all contrary
reasonings, and which is of easy application this way: and partly because some
of the chiefest arguments on that side, have been produced already
objection-wise, and received their answer: and partly likewise, because this
has been sufficiently done by other hands: and lastly, for brevities sake, as
perceiving copious discourses hereabouts to be burdensome. I answer.

Sect. 167.
1. That copious discourses about any Subject whatsoever, when they want light
and strength to make good their undertakings, are for the most part
burdensome. No marvel then if such discourses written against the Doctrine
and practice of Infant Baptism be burdensome. Never yet did I meet with any
Argument of one kind or other much considerable in that warfare, or of any
pregnant import, to disable, I do not say the lawfulness, but the expediencie,
and consequently the necessity, of Infant Baptism.

2. Neither do I know any one ground or foundation laid by M. A. in his
discourse, in any degree compete^t for the answering all contrary reasonings;
All his foundatians (so called) have been cast down, or else evicted of the
crime of irrelativenesse to his buildings. If he be able to nominate any one of
them, in which one stone has been left upon another, or which is not guilty of
the sin of impertinencie, I will acknowledge his cunning to be beyond my
expectation.

3. Neither have any the chiefest Arguments on the Paedobaptists side been
produced by him Objection-wise: Neither has he given the due weight to those
produced by him: neither has he given sufficient and due answers unto them, as
produced by him.

4. And lastly; Neither has the task or thing he speaks of been sufficiently
done by other hands; unless he confines his meaning in the word, sufficiently,
to the inconsiderate party of men and women, who have gone wondering after his
own judgment, whose fancies and consciences being a little disturbd, the
shadows of mountains may very possibly seem men unto them, or else unto such,
who through injudiciousnesse and weakness of apprehension, some other
occasions (happily) concurring, are prepared to take the impressions of any light
pretenses for a new way. To persons of this character, what (almost) is not
sufficient?

Mr. A. having super-sufficiently commended his preceding discourse against
Infant Baptism, in those supernumerarie passages lately rehearsed, prepares to
encounter his last enemy, which he purporteth as such an objection, over which
if his pen be but able to magnify it self, he seems to suppose the doctrine of
Infant Baptism will suddenly give up the ghost.

But because (says he) there is one Argument, which Mr. A. p. 40.
seems to be much taking with some, which as it is of a later invention, the^
others, so perhaps has not received such answer and refutation, as others
have: therefore as to this I shall give in somewhat by way of Answer.

Sect. 168.
By the way, the Reader may please to take knowledge, and consider, that all
that Mr. A. has pleaded for his opinion and practice against Infant Baptism,
being clearly disabled and refuted, the credit of his cause is no^ recoverable
by the Answer of an Objection, though he should do it never so commendably and
effectually. For the goodness of a cause, practice, or opinion, is not proved
by the insufficiency or weakness of an argument, one, or more, that may be
brought against them, no nor yet by the weakness of all the Arguments and
Reasons for the contrary which (possibly) have seen the light of the Sun
hitherto, but by Reasons and Grounds positively and pregnantly demonstrative of
this goodness, and such which with reason and truth cannot be gainsaid. So
that though Mr. A. should slay the Argument which opposes him, in his
encounter with it, yet can he not hereby raise his dead, nor cause his
Arguments again to live, which are now as so many dead Corpses.
Notwithstanding, let us go forward with him, and first hear what the said
Argument, or Objection is, as he has pleased to propound it, and then weigh
and consider the substance and pertinencie of what he gives in by the way of
answer unto it.

The Argument (says he) is this. If the love of God to persons be the first
and original ground of their being capable of Baptism, then Infants are
capable of Baptism.

But the love of God to persons is the original or first ground of their being
capable of Baptism. Mr. Ap. 41.


What he is pleased to subjoyn in the name of those, whom he makes thus to
argue, by way of confirmation and proof of either Proposition, respectively, we
shall understand, when we come to hear and consider what he answers unto it.

But before we are admitted to hear this, we are desired to observe two things
by the way.

1. That this Argument contradicts another that is wont to be employed in this
service, to wit, that the promise of God belongs to children of believing
Parents, and therefore Mr. A. p. 41, 42.
Baptism: by which Baptism is restrained to such Infants only, as are the
children of believing Parents. But by this Argument, Baptism is made to
appertain to all Infants whatsoever, whether they be children of believing, or
unbelieving Parents: because it supposes all Infants to be in the love of God
in the forementioned respect. And therefore if this be true, the other must be
false in its restrained sense, and contrarily, if the other true, this false.
So that you see the witnesses do no better agree in their evidence in this
behalf, then the false witnesses did, that came against Christ in their
testimony.

2. This Argument, if it were good, would render not only all Infants capable
of Baptism, but all men likewise, whether Christian or Pagan, because they are
beloved of God in such a sense, as its said Infants are, viz. in having that
sin, of which they were guilty in Adam remitted unto them, etc.

Sect. 169.
Before I come to speak to these two, by the ways, I must desire also that one
thing be observed by the way (on the other side.) This is, that I have ground
in abundance to believe, that he never heard any Paedo-baptist plead the cause
of Infant Baptism by that Argument, which here he undertakes to answer, in
those terms, or tenor of words, wherein he exhibiteth it, and that he
cunningly changed their terms, that he might gain an advantage for his two by
the ways, especially the latter, and withal be supposed to answer their
Argument, whilst (indeed) he only answers a mock argument of his own. The
Argument, which I suppose he pretends to answer, or would be thought to answer,
I acknowledge to have been sometimes urged by my self; nor do I remember that I
have met with it from either the pen, or lips, of any other. In which respect I
am able to speak with the more confidence what I have said. The true tenor
then of the Argument which Mr. A. should have answered, had he quitted himself
ingenuously, is this:

If the relation of Sonship unto God, and not Faith, or repentance* be the
original or first ground, or qualification in persons, which render them
capable of Baptism, then may Infants lawfully be Baptized.

But this relation, and not Faith or Repentance, is the original or first
ground in persons, qualifying them for Baptism. Ergo.

Had M. A. propounded the Argument in these terms, he had had no color at all
(or a very faint color only) for his latter by the way. For though it be
supposed, that all men, whether Christian or Pagan, have, or rather have had,
that sin, of which they were guilty in Adam, remitted unto them (for it may be
some doubt, whether this guilt, after remission, returns not again with the
guilt of actual sinning, though this be a point that I shall never much
controvert) and in that respect sometimes were, or let it be, at present are,
alike partakers in the love of God, with Infants; yet does it not follow from
hence that therefore they are equal with them in the relation or privilege of
Sonship, or in that love of God which accompanies this relation. He that
commits sin (says John) is of the Devil. Ioh. 3. ^. See also ver. 9, 10.
And the reason why Infants are the Children or Sons of God, is not only or
simply because they have the sin, whereof they were guilty in Ada^, remitted
unto them, but because, in conjunction with this, they are free from sinning
against the Covenant of Grace, and so from cutting themselves off from that
salvation which is by Christ. Whereas men and women, who have actually sinned,
and not repented and belelieved, remain in the gall of bitterness, and bands
of iniquity, and are children of Satan, not of God. This for answer to Mr. A's
latter by the way, being a purchase made by him, with the one half of the wages
of that disingenuitie, which he practiced, in concealing the true Argument of
his Adversaries, and substituting in the place thereof a Changeling of his own.
Concerning his former by-the-way. I answer,

Sect. 170.
1. If his meaning be, that the one Argument of his Adversaries (that against
which he is now buckling on his armor) contradicts that other argument of
theirs, which he mentions, as one part of a contradiction contradicts the
other, he has made a very bad bargain for his cause by the way. For it is a
general rule without any exception, that altera pars contradictionis semper
est vera; one part of every contradiction is always true. Now if either of
those Arguments, which he says contradict the one the other, be true, his
Doctrine of Anti-paedobaptism must needs be false; because they are both
contradictions to it. For 1. if it be true, that the children of Believers, and
these only, ought to be baptized, then must it needs be false, that no children
at all ought to be baptized. Or 2. if it be true, that all children are capable
of Baptism, or ought to be baptized, then it is much more apparently false,
that no children ought to be baptized. Therefore I do not believe, that when
Mr. A. challenges the one Argument of his Adversaries to contradict the other,
he would be understood to speak of a contradiction strictly and properly so
called, but only of a co^tradictio^ by way of contrariety (as Logicians speak)
in which kind both parts of the contradiction may (possibly) be false, but
never true. Therefore

2. I answer further, that if he judges it any matter of prejudice to the
cause of Infant Baptism, that some of those, who maintain it, are in some
things relating to it, differently-minded amongst themselves, herein also he
consulteth disrepute to his own cause. For it is well known, that the Peter and
the Paul, the two great Apostles of Mr. A's Re-baptismall Faith (I mean, Mr. J.
Tombs, and Mr. S. Fisher) resist one the other in their respective Doctrines
about the the state and condition of children Godward. Yea the former
professes (in effect) that if he were of the judgment of the latter, about the
said point, he would give hostages to his Paedobaptismall Adversaries, and
baptize children with them. His words (in his exercitation about
Infant-baptims, p. 24.) are these: Nor do I doubt, but that the Elect Infants
dying in their infancy, are sanctified: yea if it should be made known to us
that they are sanctified, I should not doubt that they are to be baptized,
remembering the saying of Peter, Can any man forbid water that these should
baptized, who have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Not long before ( viz.
page 19. of the same Exercitation) he had delivered his sense to the same
purpose in these words. I answer, the major Proposition is true, if it be
understood of th^se whose is the kingdom of Heaven, when it appears that the
kingdom of Heaven belongs to them. Now the m^jor Proposition* which here he
grants to be true upon the terms specified, was this: They may be baptized,
whose is the kingdom of heaven. Now Mr. Fishers judgment, declared over and
over, is, that unto children, yea unto all children, does belong the kingdom of
Heaven. I believe (says he) all Infants, as well as some, dying Infants, and
before they have deserved exemption, and damnation by actual rebellion, to
have, according to the general declaration of the Script^re, right of entrance
into the kingdom of Heaven. Baby-baptism p. 301. (with much more of the same
notion, in that which follows, and elsewhere.) Nor do these two Grandees only
digladiate between themselves about a business of such a main import, and so
nearly relating unto the Question about Infant Baptism (as Mr. Tombs in the
passages now cited, plainly enough supposes) but the Churches themselves of
the Ana-baptismall persuasion, are accordingly divided one from another,
thorowout the Land, one crying out, I am of Paul, another, I am of Cephas, some
of them, siding with Mr. Tombs in his judgment, others, imbarqueing with Mr.
Fisher in his. Nor are these Shepherds, and flocks, scattered from one another
in their judgments about the point mentioned only: they are at variance
amongst themselves about many others. Yea notice has been taken somewhere in
the premises, that Mr. A. himself contradicts Mr. Fisher himself in his sense
about the sealing nature and property of Baptism. So that if he looks upon
contradicting assertions amongst those, who are joined in the defense of the
same cause, as an argument of the badnesse of their cause (as he seems in his
first by the way to do) certainly his own cause must needs be very bad, whose
Assertours have no communion in judgment about many things. But

Sect. 171.
3. And lastly) what if Mr. A. be quite mistaken, in his supposall, that the
one Argument he speaks of, contradicts the other? then (sure) this by-the-way
will be found out of the way, as well as the other. He that affirms on the one
hand, that all children are capable of Baptism, and he who on the other hand
affirms, that the children only of believers are capable hereof, do not
necessarily contradict the one the other in these sayings, there being a sense
wherein they may be, yea, and are, both true. For all children, as such, may be
capable of Baptism: and yet many of them, yea all, the children of believers
only excepted, in other respects, incapable. There is a double capacity of
Baptism (at least, as the word, capacity, may signify) the one, in respect of
the subject, (simply considered) the other in respect of circumstance. All
children, in case they should be regularly offered unto Baptism, that is, 1.
freely, and by those that have the right of their education, as Parents, if
living, or Guardians, or Foster-parents, in case the natural be dead, and 2.
unto persons, or baptists regularly authorized to Baptize them, they might all
be baptized. But because Infidel Parents cannot be free in offering their
children unto Baptism, nor can they, being under no Pastor, or christian
Church Officer, offer, or bring them to a person regularly authorized to
baptize them (it being irregular for any Churh to authorize their Pastor, or
other Officer, to baptize the children of unbelievers) in this repect these
children of theirs are not capable of being baptized. That poor Cripple, who
waited 38 years together for healing at the pool of Bethesda, was all this
while, in respect of his person, or, as he was an impotent man, as capable of
healing, as any of those, who were healed; yea had he at any time found such a
friend, as would, upon the Angels stirring of the water, have cast him in,
before some other had prevented him, he had been actually healed. But being
helpless in himself, and friendlesse, he was under these circumstances, in no
capacity of being healed by those waters. A Virgin in respect of her years and
person every ways, may be capable of marying such or such a man; yet in
respect of the charge and command of her Parents, under whose power she yet
remains, to the contrary, she may be incapable of so marrying. Yea the man
himself, with whom, in the respect mentioned, and in many others, she is
capable of marrying, may notwithstanding be a person so, or so, conditioned, as
(for example) may be an Idolater, or son of a strange God, or the like, that
she is not in a regular actual capacity of marrying with him. Many cases of a
like exemplification might be proposed. It were easy to produce many sayings
out of the Scriptures themselves, which do every whit as much contradict the
one the other, as those catched at, and compared, by Mr. A. whose consistencie
notwithstanding is readily enough salveable by distinguishing, partly between
positives, and respectives, partly, between respectives, and respectives.

The three particulars now propounded, duly considered, it appears that Mr. A.
has made no bargain at all, either for his credit, or for his cause, by the
way: but it may be matters will succeed better with him at his journeys end.
And I confess that if he can come off with credit from his encounter with the
argument now before him, he will do more for the cause of Ana-baptism, then
has been done for it (as far as I can understand) these many years; although
neither is the goodness of that cause sufficiently evinced by never so
sufficient Mr. A. p. 41, 42.
an answer given to one argument bent against it. But let us now hear how he
quitteth himself in his answer hereunto.

But to come closer to the Argument: I do deny the consequence of the Major
Proposition; I do deny that it therefore Mr. Ap. 42. 43.
follows, that Infants are capable of Baptism, though it should be granted,
that the love of God is the original ground of rendering persons capable
thereof: And the reason of this denial is taken from that difference which is
between the original ground of persons capabilitie of Baptism, and the next
immediate ground hereof. For howsoever the love of God be the ground of all
dispensations of good to the creature, yet it is not so from the self same
respect: but as it exhibits it self in one dispensation of it in one respect,
so in another Dispensation thereof it exhibits it self upon other terms and
respects. And thereforce we must distinguish between the love of God, as it is
the ground of Baptism. The love of God then is to be considered, either 1. in
the whole entire sum or body of it, generally and indefinitely considered, as
comprehending and enclosing in it all particular dispensations of Grace toward
the creature; or else, 2. as it excites or puts forth it self in those
particular dispensations themselves. The love of God in the former sense,
though it be the the ground of all particular acts of Grace, and so that also
which appertains to Baptism, yet is it no sound way of reasoning, to conclude
persons to be in an immediate capacity of Baptism, because they are in the
love of God under this general consideration. For upon the same ground men
might as well argue infants to be strong Christians, or fit to be chosen
Pastors, Teachers, or Deacons, as to argue them capable of Baptism, because
persons are in these capacities by virtue of the love of God to them. And yet
who sees not how absurd it would be to reason thus: If the love of God to
persons be the original ground which renders them capable of being chosen into
the office of Pastor, Teacher, or Deacon, then Infants are capable of being
chosen into these Offices, because they are in the love of God, etc. If the
love of God to persons be the original ground of rendering them capable of the
denomination of strong Christians, then Infants are capable of the denomination
of strong Christians, Because they are in that love and favor of God. But,
etc. --

By the light then of these Instances, the invaliditie, indeed absurdity, of
concluding Infants to be capable of Baptism, because they are in that love and
favor of God, may (you see) be sufficiently discerned.

Sect. 172.
Never did there a more impertinent piece of discourse show it self on paper,
then this: and yet what joy does A. make in the winding of it up. For

1. It runs all along upon a palpable and wide mistake of the Argument, unto
which it pretends the relation of an Answer (as was lately observed.) Infant
baptizers argue Infants capable of Baptism from their relation of Sonship unto
God: Mr. A. answers, and labors to prove (though very unhandsomely too) that
the love of God to them does not render them capable thereof; as if the
relation in men of Sonship unto God, and the love which is in God toward men,
were one and the same thing. May not a man as well suppose, that the silver
which is in my purse, and the gold which in his, is one and the same thing?

2. The Argument which Mr. A. should answer, builds a baptismal capacity in
Infants, upon that which it calls the original or first gound, or
qualification for Baptism in the creature, which it affirms to be, the
relation specified (Sonship unto God) and this in opposition to Faith and
Repentance: Mr. A's answer discourses of the original ground of the
dispensation, in God: which, being interpreted, is nothing at all to the
purpose. By the way, when the Argument, with the Answer, whereof Mr. A has at
present both his hands full, asserteth the relation of Sonship unto God, to be
the original or first ground, or qualification for Baptism; it does not take
original, or first, in opposition to immediate or next, but in opposition to
that, which is after, and subordinate. So that it avoucheth Sonship in
children to be every whit as near, as immediate a ground of Baptism, as Faith,
or Repentance, or a declaration of either, or a desire it self of Baptism, are
in persons capable of such things. Yea and supposes, that neither Faith, nor
Repentance, nor a Declaration of either, are any grounds or qvalifications for
Baptism at all, but only as they make, and declare their subjects, men and
women, the children of God. But

3. Were the Argument, as he propounds it, owned by his adversaries, yet his
answer would not reach it. For whereas he says, upon the same ground one might
as well argue Infants to be strong Christians, or fit to be chosen Pastors,
Teachers, or Deacons, as to argue them capable of Baptism, because persons are
in these capacities by virtue of the love of God to them; he builds upon the
sand, For persons are not in the capacities he speaks of by virtue of the love
of God to them; For then all persons, toward whom there is love in God, should
be in the same capacities, which is manifestly untrue. Yea some may be in these
capacities, toward whom there is no love in God at all (I suppose Mr. A.
speaks of Gods special love, or that wherewith he loves his Saints.) Judas was
in the capacity of being an Apostle (which is more then of being a Pastor,
Teacher, etc.) when his Lord and Master bare no such love to him. It is rather
by virtue of the bounty of God considered as exerting it self in such or such a
determinate manner, then of the love of God that persons are invested with such
capacities. So ^^at Mr. A's Instances, besides that they hold no parallel, or
Proportion, with the reasoning or arguing, which he pretends to oppose,
proceed upon a groundless surmise, instead of truth. But let us see what work
he makes in the further process of his answer.

If then (says he) we would come to argue steadily, so as to conclude persons
capability of Baptism from the love of Mr. A. p. 43 44.
God to them, we must consider the love of God under that particular and
precise notion, by which persons are put into an immediate, not remote,
capacity of Baptism. For though it is true, that the love of God, which is
vouchsafed Infants in the pardon of that sin that devolved it self on them from
Adam, does put them into a remote capacity, both of Baptism, and all other
consequentiall acts of Grace, which are vouchsafed men upon their believing,
and diligent, and faithful improvement of all means and opportunities of
Grace, etc. yet it does not put them into an immediate capacity of these,
until they do believe, and have improved those means and opportunities; upon
condition of which such additionall and progressionarie acts of Grace, are
promised and suspended; no more then a childs ability to read his horn-book,
or Primer, puts him into a capacity of understanding his Grammar. I answer,

Sect. 173.
1. That neither have we here the Argument of his Adversaries so much as
touched, but an Onion talked of instead of an Apple, (as we have more then once
lately observed)

2. It is somewhat an uncouth expression, to say, that by any notion of the
love of God, how particular or precise soever, persons are put into any
capacity of Baptism, whether immediate, or remote: whatsoever the love of God
it self may do in this kind, certain it is that the notion of this love has no
operation either way.

3. Neither is it so true, that the love of God, which is vouchsafed Infa^ts in
the pardon of the sin devolved on the^ from Adam, does put them into a remote
capacity of b(...)ism, etc. For they are in this capacity as they are Infants
simply, or as members of the race of mankind. However, we have not yet so much
as the softest air, or gentlest breathing of an answer to that argument for
Infant Baptism, which bears so hard and heavy upon Mr. A's conceit of
Anti-pedo-baptism. It may be somewhat will come out at the last in the shape or
likeness of an Answer. Therefore let us wait upon his pen a little further.

That the Dispensation of Gods Grace and love (says he) is made to Infants in
one respect, and to persons of an immediate Mr. A. p. 44.
capacity of Baptism, in another; and that act of Grace which is vouchsafed
Infants in the pardon of that first sin, etc. does not put them into
animmediate capacity of Baptism, appears upon these grounds.

1. Because the act of Grace or dispensation of Gods love, unto which Baptism
does appropriately belong, is that which is exerted and put forth in the pardon
of men's actual transgressions, and this too notwithout their repenting, or
believing, whereas that act of Grace, of which Infants partake, is such as is
vouchsafed unto them in the pardon of original sin only, and this too without
their repenting and believing, merely upon the account of the death of Christ.
I answer;

Sect. 174.
1. Mr. A here undertakes to prove that, which none of his Adversaries do
deny; viz. that that the Dispensation of Gods grace and love is made to
Infants in one respect, and to persons in an immediate capacity of Baptism, in
another; if by the persons he speaks of, he means, persons who have actually
sinned, which (I question not) is his meaning.

2. By one and the same undertaking, he undertakes likewise to refute, that
which none of his adversaries affirm, or hold, viz. that that that act of
Grace, which is vouchsafed infants in the pardon of that first sin, puts them
into an immediate capacity of Baptism. So that though he should prosper on
both hands in this undertaking, his prosperity would be but a successful
beating of the air. That which his Antagonists hold about this latter point is,
that the relation of Sonship, which by the Grace of God working in that
redemption which is by Christ, accrues unto Infants naturally descending from
Ada^, partly by, or from, the pardon of the sin he speaks of, partly also from
that immunitie from actual transgression, which is found in Infants, renders
them actually, or immediately, capable of Baptism. Even as it is the same
Sonship in persons of discretion, though otherwise, in part, accruing (as viz.
from the remission of their sins, both original, and actual, through
believing) which being made known, or apprehended by the Ministers of Baptism,
invests them with an immediate capacity of the Ordinance. But

3. Whereas he makes an opposition between Infants, and persons in an immediate
capacity of Baptism, he broadly commits that error in disputing, which
Logicians call, Petitio Principi^, a begging of the thing in Question. For is
not the Question between him, and his Opponents, whether Infants be in an
immediate capacity of Baptism, or no? And Mr. A. here takes it for granted
that they are not.

4. Neither is it so broad a truth, as his measure seems to make it, that that
act of Grace, of which infants partake is such as is vouchsafed them in the
pardon of original sin ONLY. For the relation, or prerogative, of Sonship,
and, the pardon of Original sin, are not one and the same act of Grace, nor
yet one and the same benefit, or privilege. And certain it is, that God does
confer as well the former, as the latter, upon Infants. But Mr. A's discourse
advances thus.

That that act, or those acts of Grace, unto which Baptism does appropriately
belong, is the pardon of sin upon repentance, and such other acts of grace as
are concomitant Mr. A. p. 44
and consequentiall hereunto, appears plainly by this, viz. in that Baptism is
called (according to the nature of it, and the intent of God in its
institution) the Baptism of repentance for the Remission of sins. That is, that
Baptism which is to be received upon men's repentance for the remission of sins;
or that Baptism, in and by which men profess that they expect remission of
sins in the way of Repentance: or because the reception of which Baptism
proceeds from a principle of Repentance [this clause is no good sence] or else
because God therein does authentically assure men of the remission of their
sins upon their Repentance. Take it which way you will, it proves this, that
Baptism is conversant about, and subservient unto, that act of Gods grace and
love, which is vouchsafed unto men in the pardon of their sins upon their
repentance. And if so, then is it irrelative to the grace of God in the pardon
of Infants sin, which is vouchsafed them without, and before Repentance take
place. I answer.

Sect. 175.
1. The conclusion, which Mr. A. works after in the forepart of this parcel
of discourse, and which he draws up in the lasts words hereof (now recited)
viz. that Baptism is irrelative to the grace of God in the pardon of Infants
sin, may be granted him, with this explication; that that which Baptism, when
administered unto Infants, properly and immediately relates unto, is not the
grace of God in the pardon of their sin, but the grace of God in investing
them with the privilege of Sons. Which, whether in order of nature, it be
antecedaneous, or subsequentiall, to the other (the pardon of their sin) may be
argued to and fro: I incline to the latter. But if his meaning be, that Baptism
is simply, universally, and in every respect, irrelative to the grace of God in
the pardon of Infants sin, this is a crow which remains to be pulled. But

2. How his second, and fourth, explication of these words, The Baptism of
Repentance for the remission of sins, in both which he suspends remission of
sins upon repentance only, making Baptism, in the former, a profession only of
an expectation of this remission, in the latter, an assurance of it only, will
be able to reconcile themselves with his Confidentiall Doctrine formerly
avouched (as we heard) in which he makes Baptism a sharer or partner with
repentance it self in the procuring or obtaining this remission, I am to seek,
and (I fear) he will hardly be able to find.

3. Whereas he makes Baptism appropriately to belong, not only to the pardon of
sin upon repentance, but unto other acts of grace also concomitant and
consequentiall thereunto, does he not seem to lean either toward the Clinicall
Baptists, who were wont not to administer Baptism, but unto persons on their
sick beds, and (as the Papists their extreme unction) in the approach of death;
or else toward the Hemerobaptists, who judged it necessary to be every day
baptized, and practiced accordingly? For if Baptism appropriatly belongs unto
other acts of grace concomitant and consequentiall to Repentance, as well as
unto Repentance it self, ought it not to be administered upon the vouchsafement
or performance of these acts, if not with as much frequencie, as once a day
amounts unto, yet at least in the end of a man's life, when all such acts
shall have been vouchsafed?

4. If Baptism appropriatly belongs unto the pardon of sin upon repentance, can
it, upon the same terms, or after the same manner (I mean, appropriately)
belong unto Repentance? Or is Repentance, and pardon of sin upon Repentance,
one and the same thing? But

Sect. 176.
5. (And lastly) To give Mr. A. an account, why Baptism is thus held forth, or
described in the Scripture, the Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins
(words, I confess which face his Anti-paedo-baptismall conceit more plausibly,
then any thing besides in all the Scriptures, although they have nothing in
heart for it) it is to be considered, that the Gospel, being to be preached
only unto persons of years, who only are capable of understanding it, and from
whom only obedience is expected unto it, is drawn up by the holy Ghost (in the
general frame and carriage of it) with special reference unto these,
notwithstanding many things in it relate unto Infants and children, and their
benefit by the grace of it. Hence it is that many things are here required, as
simply, absolutely, and universally necessary unto salvation; viz. because they
are thus necessary in respect of those to whom the gospel is to be preached,
and that are capable of performing them, as persons of years and understanding:
but Infants, as such, and whilst such, and children, are never the more
subjected to this necessity: As when the Gospel threatens, He that believes
not [i. whosoever believes not shall be damned, the threatening is calculated
for men and women only: nor is it any part of the intent or meaning of it, that
Infants not believing, shall be damned. So when the Apostle says, without
holiness [or rather, without the purchase of holinesse] (...), none, or no
person shall see the Lord (Heb. 12. 14.) children are not hereby subjected to
the condition specified, to invest them with a capacity of seeing the Lord,
but men and women only. So again, when John says, whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God, Ioh. 3. 10.
neither he that loves not his Brother, it cannot be from hence concluded,
that children are not of God, or are not the children of God, and upon this
account, his he^rs, although they do not righteousness, nor yet love their
brother. This method and strain of the Gospel might be exemplified in very many
passages and instances more. In like manner, because the Doctrine of Baptism
was and is, to be taught and preached unto men and women only, these only being
of capacity to understand it, therefore is Baptism described and set forth in
the scripture, as it relates unto them, and their conditions; viz. as a sacred
pledge from God to assure them of the high privilege and blessing of remission
of sins upon their repentance. But this no more proves that the administration
of it belongs not unto Infants, because they do not repent, then this saying,
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, proves that salvation
belongs not unto Infants, because they do not believe. Upon alike account,
because the Doctrine of Circumcision, and of the counsel of God in it, was to
be declared and preached only unto persons of understanding, therefore the
scripture describes it, and frequently speaks of it, under that relation and
concernment, wherein it related unto men, as where it is described, to have
been a seal of the righteousness of Faith. [See Sect. 61, 64.] even as Baptism
is termed or described, the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins,
[which two descriptions we formerly scanned, and compared, Sect. 61.] so again,
where God says to the Jews, Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away
the foreskin of your hearts, Jer. 4. 4. and again, it shall be a token of the
Covenant between me and you, Genesis 17. 11. (to omit other places) These and
several other like passages and sayings notwithstanding, which represent
Circumcision upon no other terms, nor in any other consideration then as
appropriable and appliable unto men, yet children (we know) were the more
appropriate subject of the administration thereof. In like manner, though it
should be granted, that Baptism be described under such a consideration,
wherein it is only serviceable and appropriable unto men and women, who are
capable of Repentance, and of Remission of sins hereupon, yet this no way
proves, nor so much as lightly intimates, that therefore Infants are not the
regular, yea, or not the more proper and convenient subject hereof, ordinarily.

Sect. 177.
And let me here add this one thing further, that men altogether as judicious
and learned in the Scriptures, and (I believe) as narrowly and thoroughly
versed, in the controversy, as Mr. A. conceive the sense and mind of the holy
Ghost, in calling Baptism, The Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins,
is as well to signify and hold forth, that remission of sins, shall be
obtained upon Repentance future, as that it is obtained or enjoyed by means of
Repentance past* or at present in being. Calvin, in answer to an Objection,
made of the very same notion, of which Mr. A's answer (now in examination) is
made, viz. that Baptism is a Sacrament of Repentance and Faith; and therefore
is not competible to Infancy; having first said, that such darts as these are
rather thrown against God, then against him, or other Infant-Baptists, in
process of his answer, says; For although Infants, in that moment of time
wherein they were circumcised, did not comprehend the mea^ing or intent of the
sign: yet were they truly circumcised, for, [or unto] the mortificatio^ of
their polluted and corrupt nat^re, which being come to years of discretion,
they were to meditate, and bethink themselves of. And to conclude; the
Objection may receive a ready answer, viz. that [children] are baptized in
order to their FUTVRE REPENTANCE AND FAITH: which, although they be not as yet
formed in them, yet by the secret work of the holy Ghost, there is a seed of
both lying hid in them. Subnectunt, Baptismum poenitentiae ac fidei sacramentum
esse. Quare cum neutra in ^tenellam infantiam cadat, cavendum ne si in Baptismi
communionem admittatur, inanis and evanida reddatur significatio. At enim haec
tela in Deum magis quam in nos diriguntur. Siquidem and circumcisionem fuisse
poenitentiae signum, multis Scripturae testimonii^ compertissimum est. Et paulo
post: Nam etsi Infantes quo circumcidebantur momento, quid sibi vellet signum
illud intelligentia non comprehendebant, vere tamen circumcidebantur in naturae
suae corruptae ac contaminatae mortificationem, quam adulti postea
meditarentur. Denique nullo negotio solvi potest objectio haec: baptizari in
futuram poenitentiam and fidem, etc. Calvin. Institut. l. 4. c. 16. Sect. 20.
Baptism (says Musculus) is the laver of regeneration: but not so [or, in such
a sence] that only they who are already regenerate, should be sealed with it,
but those also who are yet to be Regenerated. Baptismus est lavacrum
regenerationis: at non ita, ut regenerati tantum illo debeant obfignari, sed
etiam regenerandi. Mus. in Mat. 22. 41, 42. etc.
The Scripture it self very much favors the judgment of these learned men now
touched. I indeed (says John to the people, who came to be baptized, and were
accordingly baptized, by him) baptize you with water, (...), toward, or unto,
Repentance, Mat. 3. 11. And accordingly, Luke 3. 7. he sharply reproves them,
as persons at present not engaged in any way of repentance, but exhorts them
hereunto for the future. Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be
baptized of him, O generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the
wrath that is to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy Repentance, and
think not to say, etc. Luke 3. 7, 8. Had he judged them truly penitent at the
present, it is not like he would have styled them, a generation of vipers, or
admonished them as he does. See more to this point, Sect. 35. Nor is it
probable that the Apostle Peter did look upon those as having already truly
repented, whom he exhorted to Repent and be baptized (Act. 2. 38.) nor yet,
that because in the first place he exhorts them to repent, and in the second,
to be baptized, he therefore diswaded them, or took them off from being
baptized, until they should have first repented. For to repent being a far
greater duty, then to be baptized, it may well have the precedencie of mention
in the same exhortation; and yet this not necessarily imply that to be baptized
was no duty to be performed by them, until they had first repented. When two
duties are required in the same exhortation, the obligation unto the latter is
not necessarily suspended upon a man's obedience unto the former, so that he
shall be in conscience bound to forbear, or not to practice the latter, until
he has first performed the other. And though it should be granted, that so
many of the persons exhorted by Peter to repent and be baptized, as were soon
after baptized, did indeed truly repent before they were baptized (though
neither is this sufficiently proved by their recceiving of his word gladly,
ver. 41. See Mat. 13. 20. Mar. 6. 20. Joh. 5. 35. Eze. 33. 32.) yet this
proves not that theref^re they should have sinned, in case they had been
baptized without this qualification. However, whether this Doctrine stands, or
falls, Mr. A's Doctrine, that Baptism appropriately belongs to the pardon of
sin upon Repentance, etc. is a notion quite besides the Scripture-foundation to
which it pretends. That Baptism is styled, the Baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins, does no ways prove, that it appropriately belongs, either
to pardon of sin, or to Repentance, or to pardon of sin upon Repentance. Yet
this he attempts to make good by a second argument: give we him a patient
hearing of this also.

Sect. 178.
2. (Says he) The love of God is the mediate ground of Baptism, so far only
as it relates to, or is effective of the Mr. A. p. 45
good of men, in Baptism. For the reception of Baptism is not otherwise to be
esteemed an effect of Gods love, then as the good and benefit of men is
concerned therein. That which Christ speaks of the Sabbath, how that it was for
man, Mar. 2. 27.* i. for the good of man, is true of Baptism, and every Mr. A.
p. 44.
other Ordinance and institution of God. In as much then as Baptism is not
beneficial unto any, but by means of their Faith, and answer of a good
conscience; and in as much also that Infants are not under this capacity of
means, both which I have formerly evidently proved; therefore it follows
undeniably, that God does not love Infants upon any such terms, as he does
those unto whom he commends and communicates his love in, and by, Baptism: and
consequently, that the love which God bears to Infants, puts them into no
immediate capacity of Baptism.

Neither is there any thing in this bundle of discourse, relating to Mr. A's
cause, but what has been already cast into the fire, and burnt. That every
Ordinance and institution of God (and so Baptism) is for man (in the sense
declared by him) is the sense of his Adversaries, as well as his, and makes
more for their cause, then his. For Circumcision was in (this sense) for man,
and yet Infants in the best capacity to receive it. Neither should Baptism be
as much for man [i. for the good of man] as now it is, in case infants were not
in a regular capacity to receive it. Not to repeat what has been formerly
insisted on, and proved, upon this account, as viz. that Baptism received in
Infancy, is a seasonable and preventive engagement upon them to remember their
Creator in the days of their youth (for Infants, are the same, the same
persons, in their Infancy, and in their youth) See Sect. 161.
as likewise, that Infant Baptism makes more for the edification of the church,
then the contrary practice, See Sect. 56, 57, 73, 156 160.
and again, that it is more improvable to spiritual ends, then after-Baptism,
(c) with some other particulars of like import) I shall here only subjoyn that
meditation of Calvin. How sweet a thing (says he) is it to the minds of godly
men, to be assured, not only by the word, but also by a visible spectacle [or
sign] that they have found so much favor in the eyes of their Heavenly Father,
as that their posterity also is regarded by him. Quam enim suave piis animis,
non verbo tantum, sed oculari etiam spectaculo certiores fieri, tantum se
gratiae apud pat^em co^lestem obtinere, ut posteritas sua illi cura sit? Calv.
Institut. l. 4. c. 16. Sect. 32.


Sect. 179.
Whereas he says, that Baptism is not beneficial unto any but by means of
their Faith, etc. if his meaning be that it is not, or proves not, actually or
eventually saving unto any adulterous person, but by mea^s of their faith, the
saying has had a pass granted unto it before. But neither was Circumcision
thus beneficial unto any, without Faith likewise (as has been proved over and
over) and yet Infants judged by God himself in a sufficient capacity to
receive it. If his meaning be, that Baptism is no ways, in no respect, or
degree beneficial unto any person without Faith, I must borrow his Faith, or
some like unto it, to believe it. Baptism without Faith, will open the door
into any of the Churches, which call themselves baptized. And is it not very
beneficial for a man to have a standing here? Or is it not possible for him to
be truly converted to the Faith, by means of his coming into one of these
Churches, and walking there? If so, then may a man's Baptism prove very
beneficial unto him without Faith, i. without Faith in the Receiver at the
time of the receiving it, which (I pre^ume) is a sense of perfect accord with
Mr. A's meaning. However, Mr. A's Answer to the Argument before him, as yet
comes on very heavily and slowly: it may be we shall find it in the reere. Let
this then be drawn up.

3. (Says he) The extent of Gods love to Infants, so far as is pretended in
the reason of the consequence in the Major Proposition, consists only in the
pardon of Original, Mr. A. p. 45
sin, and the putting them into a condition of Salvation by Christ: all which
love of God they are invested with, before ever Baptism can be applied unto
them. Because the love of God in this respect is not conditional, nor does
depend upon the action of any creature, or application of any means, but solely
upon the atonement which Christ has made on that behalf. And therefore
Baptism lies out of the verge, compass, circumference of the love of God as
enjoyed by Infants, and contributes neither less nor more in that dispensation
of Gods love unto them. In which respect also Baptism is irrelative to the love
of God in that precise consideration of it in which it is communicated unto
Infants. Thus far Mr. A. in an Aenigma in this place: and as far as I
understand the Riddle, I shall assoil it.

1. I am not able to comprehend what he drives at, nor where the thread of
reason reason runs, in this discourse. Only I perceive that he works upon his
former mistake, supposing that his Adversaries argue and conclude a Baptismall
capacity in Children from the love which God shows unto them in the pardon
of their guilt in Adams sin. But

2. Whereas he says, that Infants are invested with all that love of God which
consists only in the pardon of original sin, and the putting them into a
condition of Salvation by CHRIST, before ever Baptism can be applied to them, I
am so dull of hearing, that, I cannot conceive which way this would operate, or
what it desires to produce. The best of my conjectures at this turn, is, that
because the extent of the love of God to Infants, of which the Major
Proposition speaks, consists in the pardon of Original sin, and is
vouchsafed unto them before Baptism can be applied unto them, therefore the
application of it unto them, is superfluous and vain. I shall not spend much
time in detecting the vanity of this arguing, because I am not satisfied in my
self, whether I hit Mr. A's Notion right, or no. But if I do, then he may
please to consider,

Sect. 180.
1. That that which immediately qualifies any Subject whatsoever for Baptism, is
somewhat already in being in this subject, before Baptism be applied unto it,
not any capacity in in to receive somewhat, by, or after, Baptism. It is true,
there is no subject duly qualified for Baptism, but what is in a capacity of
receiving benefit, after, and by means of, his baptizing; and it has been
proved over and over, that Infants are in such a capacity as this, as well as
men. But however, it is not such a capacity as this, which qualifieth either
the one, or the other, for Baptism: for then all persons whatsoever of mankind,
young and old, should be qualified for it, inasmuch as they are all in some
capacity this way.

2. That although it should be granted, or could be supposed, that Infants are
in no capacity of any additionall love of God by means of Baptism, beyond what
they are possessed of before; yet supposing withal, that their Parents may
receive any additionall comfort concerning the Grace and Love of God toward
them, by means of their Baptizing, or that they judge themseves bound in
Conscience to procure, or endeavor their baptizing (neither of which is any
unreasonable supposition) it will not follow that the application of Baptism
unto them should be superfluous or vain. But I am here in the dark: only here
is a sufficiency of light whereby to discern that in this paragraph here is
neither little nor much to comfort the heart of Mr. A's fainting cause, under
the burden of that Argument, that lies still so hard and heavy upon it. But
as if hitherto he had only combated with the Major Proposition of the Argument,
(whereas indeed, he has had his sayings in Folio to them both) his next
engagement is against the proof of the Minor.

Whereas (says he) it is alleged by way of proof of the Mr. A. p. 45 46.
minor Proposition, 1. That the reason why Faith is necessary in persons, who
have not been baptized in their infancy, to render them capapble of Baptism, is
because it is that mean, by which those that are to admit unto baptism, come to
know that they are in the love of God; and that if such a thing could be known
without such a profession of Faith, as it may in the case of Infants, then such
a profession would not be necessary in order to such an admission;

To this I answer likewise; i. That a profession of Faith in such persons, to
render them admittable to Baptism, is not necessary to inform them that admit
them touching Gods love to them in any respect whatsoever, for this may be
known without such a profession; but in relation to their knowing them to be in
the love and favor of God in that particular respect, and determinate
consideration, which renders men immediately capable of Baptism. In this respect
such a profession of Faith is necessary, because without it the love of God to
them upon such terms is not knowable, and consequently they not admittable to
Baptism, as was before proved: by which, Infants, as touching their capability
of Baptism, are clearly excluded. This is the first advance of Mr. A's Answer
to the proof (as he calls it) of the Minor Proposition. For Answer unto this
Answer.

Sect. 181.
1. The proof he speaks of does not hold a necessity of Faith in the persons
mentioned, to render them known to those, who are to baptize them, for persons
being in the love God. To be in the love of God, imports a love in God born
toward them, not any thing in them toward God. Now it has been often said,
that that which immediately and formally qualifieth for Baptism, must be
somewhat in the creature or subject it self, not any thing in God. Therefore
Mr. A. does not here argue to the sense of his adversaries, nor answer any
thing to their Argument. But

2. The very Tenor and substance of his Answer, as it is quite besides the
Argument against which it pretends, so is it otherwise most irrational and
importune. For

1. This Answer says, that a profession of Faith in persons admittable unto
Baptism, is not necessary to inform Mr. A. p. 46
those that admit them touching Gods love to them in any respect whatsoever,
for this may be known without such a profession; If he speaks of any such love
of God to the persons admittable unto Baptism, which is commonly called,
common, and is born by him unto all his creatures, and all men (without
exception) he does not only argue quite besides the sense of his Adversaries,
but (that which is very disingenious) quite besides what himself knows to be
their sense. For how should it ever enter into Mr. A's heart to imagine, that
his Adversaries should affirm, or hold, that it is necessary for Baptizers to
be informed, by one means or other, concerning the common love of God toward
persons to be baptized? If he speaks of that love of God which is peculiar to
his children, and those who believe, I desire to know of him, how this in the
persons to be baptized, may be known to the persons baptizing, without such a
Profession as he speaks of. He should have done well at least to have named the
means or way, by which this knowledge may otherwise be attained: for I confess
I am wholly ignorant of it. Again

2. Whereas this Answer further says, that a Profession of Faith is necessary
in relation to the Baptizers knowing them to be in the love and favor of God
in that particular respect, and determinate consideration which renders men
immediately capable of Baptism, I would be a debtor unto him for his good
information, if he would inform me what this particular respect and determinate
consideration is, wherein the love of God renders men thus ^mmediatly capable
of Baptism. For unless it be the relation of Sonship, I confess I am to
seek. However, in this part of Mr. A's Answer, we have nothing distinct,
nothing but what savours of a fear, or loathnesse, to speak plainly. But to
this first member of his Answer, he subjoyues a second, in these words*

2. The profession of Faith is necessary in the case in hand Mr. Ap. 46.
for other causes then merely to inform those that admit persons unto Baptism,
of their being in the favor of God in general, whom they do admit: and that
is to let them know, that they are capable of the several ends and benefits of
Baptism, and so meet for Baptism it self; because unless they have reason to
conceive that they have Faith, they have no reason to conceive them in a
present capacity of the ends and benefits of Baptism, and so not of Baptism it
self, inasmuch as these are suspended on Faith, as has already been evinced. I
answer,

Sect. 182.
1. Mr. A's Adversaries never affirmed, that a profession of Faith is
necessary to inform any person whasoever of the favor of God in general
toward persons to be baptized. Nor did they ever deny but that such a
profession might be necessary for some other causes, besides an information of
men's being in the favor of God, whether general, or special. So that the
former part of this latter Answer is a mere impertinencie.

2. Whereas he supposes, and (in effect) says, that Baptizers have no reason
to conceive persons to be in a present capacity of Baptism it self unless
they have reason likewise to conceive them in a present capacity of the ends
and benefits of Baptism; I answer; 1. if by a present capacity, he means a
capacity which is at present vested, and found, in the subject, in this sense
Children are in a present capacity of the ends and benefits of Baptism, as
well as men. For there is at present, and whilst they are yet children, a
capacity of the ends and benefits of Baptism, vested and residing in them. This
has been showed and proved formerly, Sect. 64, 65, 68, 69. 2. If by a present
capacity he means (as I suppose his meaning is) such a capacity which renders
its subject actually, and at present, capable of the said ends and benefits of
Baptism, it has been formerly showed, and proved once and again, that such a
capacity is not necessary to render a person capable of Baptism, more then a
like capacity of the ends and benefits of Circumcision was necessary to render
Children capable of this Ordinance under the Law. Peruse Sect. 69, 152. with
others. So that we have nothing but overthrown Notions and Conceits to make up
this Answer. But it seems Mr. A. has been troubled with a second proof of the
said minor Proposition, which he lifts up his pen to disable in the next place.
We shall give him somewhat more then the hearing of what he has to say to this
proof also; although (by the way) this is more then the confirmation and proof
of our Argument in hand, and consequently of the entire cause of
Infant Baptism, requires at our hand. For when an Argument is regularly
formed, one sufficient proof, given for the truth of either Proposition (I
mean, both of the Major, and the Minor) renders the Argument as authentic and
concluding, as many proofs of either could do.

Now against the form of the argument in hand, no exception has been, nor
with, either reason, or truth, can be taken. However, let us see Mr A. and the
second proof he speaks of, play together before us.

Whereas in the second place (says he) it is said, that it was upon this
ground, viz. of Gods loving him, that Christ himself was capable of Baptism,
and not his Faith, in as much as he had no such Faith as is required of men to
render them capable of Baptism, to wit, a Faith in God touching the remission
of sins through Christ: and that yet Christ did not receive Baptism upon any
terms extraordinary, but upon the same terms as others do, in as much as it was
in conformity to a standing Law of righteousness, common to others, as well as
him. This proof is not drawn up, either in terms, or in substance of notion, to
the sense of Mr A's Adversaries, as we shall shortly declare in particular:
however, let us see whether the penny of it be not better silver, then the
Answers

To this I answer, That this Reason is built upon a mistaken ground, as
supposing Christ to have no such faith as MIGHT render him capable of Baptism,
at least such as is required of other men in order thereunto, for Christ had
the same faith which Mr. A. p. 47.
is required all other persons in that case. For what Faith was required of
other men, to render the^ capable of Baptism, save this; viz. To believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God. For so when the Eunuch demanded of Philip, See
here is water: what hinders me to be Baptized? Then Philip answered and said,
If thou beleevest with all thine heart, thou may. And he answered Philip
again, and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. I Answer,

Sect. 183.
Whereas Mr A. says, that the Reason which he is to Answer, is built upon a
mistaken ground, the truth is, that this is not the building of the reason, but
of the answer here made to it. For

1. The reason he speaks of, does not speak as he makes it to speak, viz. That
it was upon the ground of Gods Love to Christ, that Christ himself was capable
of Baptism. But what speaks it? it speaks this, That it was the relation of
Son ship in Christ unto God that rendered him thus capable. How material the
difference is between these two, has formerly been opened.

2. Whereas this answer says, that Christ had the sam^ faith which is required
of all other persons in that case, it builds upon another mistaken ground. For
that the faith which was in Christ, was essentially and specifically differing
from that which is req^irea of ^ther persons in the case he speaks of, is
evident from hence, viz. because such properties which are essential unto and
do universally accompany that faith which is required of other persons in the
case specified were wanting in the faith of Christ That faith which is required
of other persons in the said case, must be accompanied in its subject, with
repentance for si^ perpetrated and committed. This is so essential unto this
Faith that without it, no Faith whatsoever gives unto the persons we speak of,
a regular capacity of Baptism. At least according to Mr. As. principles.
Yea Baptism (as we have often heard) is described by its relation unto
Repentance, not unto Faith, as the more proper and signal qualifier of the two,
for its reception. Therefore that Faith which is not accompanied in the same
subject with repentance, is not of that kind or species of Faith, which is
required in persons in order to their baptizing: and consequently, that Faith
which was in the Lord Christ, not being thus accompanied (for he that never
sinned, could not repent of his sins) was not, could not be of the same kind
of Faith, with that required in other persons.

Again, that kind of Faith which is required of ordinary men and women (upon
the account before us) in all and every the particular and individual actings
and residings of it, obtains remission of sins. But the faith which was in
Christ, obtained no remission of sins. Therefore it was a Faith of a
differing kind from the Faith required of other persons.

Sect. 184.
Yet again: upon that Faith which is required in other persons, etc. this Law
is imposed by God in all and every the residings of it, viz. that upon the
first coming of it unto, and working of it in, the soul, a profession or
declaration of it ^b ^eopenly made by Baptism. This is Mr. A's own a vouched
Doctrine in the premises, and is also asserted by him in the sequel of his
present Answer. So that they, who truly believe, in case they delay their
Baptism (not having been already baptized) until afterward, commit an error at
least, or an oversight herein. But there was no such Law imposed by God upon
that Faith which was in Christ; otherwise he must be supposed to have committed
an oversight, in that he offered not himself unto Baptism until many years
after this Faith had been first resident in him. Therefore his Faith, and the
Faith required of other persons, are not essentially or specifically the same.

Whereas Mr. A. pleads the sameness of expressions or denominations, to prove
both Faiths to be specifically the same, and that to believe Jesus Christ to be
the Son of God, is the Faith required of all other persons to render them
capable of Baptism and that this Faith was in Christ, I answer;

That the sameness of name, expression, or denomination, does not always prove
the identity or sameness (I mean not the specifical sameness) of the things
expressed or denominated, but sometimes an agreement only between them in some
generical property or consideration. Their Faith, who have power given them
hereupon to become the Sons of God, is called, a believing on his name, Joh. 1.
12. and their Faith also, to whom Christ refused to commit himself, is in like
manner termed, a believing on his name, Joh. 2. 23, 24. Yet these two Faiths
were of very different natures and considerations (as sufficiently appears by
the two passages compared) notwithstanding their consent in name. So again,
their Faith, who because the Pharisees did not confess him, lest they should be
cast out of the synagogue, and who loved the praise of men more than the praise
of God, is termed, a believing (...) on him [i. e. on Christ] Joh. 12. 42, 43.
and their Faith also, who believe to justification and salvation, is expressed
after the same manner, a believing on him, (...), Joh. 3. 16. and elsewhere. So
again, that act, or series of actings, by which the Saints testify their
approbation of the wisdom of God, whether in the Gospel, or in his providential
actings, is termed, a justification (Mat. 11. 19.) as well as that act of God
by which he absolveth or discharges sinners from the guilt of their sins upon
their believing in Jesus Christ (Romans 5. 1 and in twenty places besides) yet
are these two acts of very different natures, and specifically (at least)
distinct the one from the other. It were easy to levy many other instances
upon the same account; but these are abundantly sufficient to prove, that the
Faith of Christ, believing himself to be the Son of God, and the Faith of other
men believing him to be the Son of God also, are not by their agreement in
name, or expression, evinced to be Faiths of the same consideration or kind.

Sect. 185.
Suppose it were granted, that the belief which was in Christ of his being the
Son of God, and the belief of the same truth in other persons, were of the same
nature and kind, yet neither will it follow from hence, that Christ was
baptized upon the account of this Faith, because all other persons are: For,

1. Other persons are not baptized simply, directly, or immediately upon the
account of this Faith, but by the interceding of their profession hereof before
those, who are to baptize them. Whereas Christ made no profession unto Jon of
that Faith, by which he believed himself to be the Son of God; neither was it
proper or comely for him so to do. From whence (by the way) this saying of Mr.
A. a little after, therefore may it well be said indeed, that Christ received
Baptism upon the same terms as others did, is manifestly evicted of untruth,
unless he think to salve the dishonor by those words, at least in several
respects; of which salvage notwithstanding he bereaves himself by these words
following, and that in conformity to the same standing Law of righteousness
(to wit, the Institution of God) common to others, as well as to him: For
(doubtless) there neither was nor is any such standing Law of righteousness,
nor Institution of God, according to which any other person of mankind, should
be baptized upon the account of his Faith without any profession or declaration
made of it unto the Baptizer. Therefore Christ being baptized upon these terms,
was not baptized in conformity to the same standing Law of Righteousness, or
Institution of God common to others, but by a Law (in this respect) appropriate
to himself.

Sect. 186.
2. If John baptized Christ upon the account of his Faith, whereby he believed
himself to be the Son of God, then when at first he refused or declined the
baptizing of him ( Mat. 3. 14.) either he was ignorant that such a Faith was in
Christ, or that this Faith was a legitimate ground of baptizing him, or else it
must be supposed, that when ^e refused to baptize him, he did against his
conscience, and contrary to what he knew his duty to be. But all these are
unworthy of John, and not to be conceived of him: Therefore he did not baptize
him upon the account of his Faith.

3. If he did baptize him upon the account of his Faith, then before his
baptizing him, he must be conceived to have reasoned thus within himself. This
man, or this person, surely believes himself to be the Son of God; and since I
have a compent or sufficient ground to conceive this of him, viz. that he thus
believes, therefore I will baptize him. But it is loudly dissonant from all
that reason says, to imagine, that John reasoned after any such manner as this
to strengthen his hand to the Baptizing of Christ. Therefore he did not baptize
him upon the account of his believing himself to be the Son of God. The major
in this argument shines sufficiently with its own light. The minor is evident
from hence; viz. because John knew as well before his prohibiting him his
baptism, or refusing to baptize him, that he believed himself to be the Son of
God, as afterward, when he yielded to baptize him; and yet (as we see) refused
to baptize him, notwithstanding the knowledge he had of such a belief in him.
Therefore certainly he did not baptize him upon the account of his Faith. Nor
did Christ in the interim (I mean, between John's refusing to baptize him, and
his admitting him unto his Baptism) any ways inform John, that since he
believed himself to be the Son of God, he lawfully might, or of duty ought, to
baptize him. So that on which side soever of the business we look, there is
not so much as the least lineament of a face of probability, that Christ was
baptized upon the account of his believing himself to be the Son of God.

Sect. 187.
If it be objected, that John, when he refused to admit Christ to hi^ Baptism,
did as well know that he was the Son of God, as that he believed himself to be
Son of God; and yet did not upon this account baptize him. Therefore according
to the tenor of your late reasoning, neither did he baptize him upon the
account of his being in favor with God, or of his relation of Sonship unto
God. To this I answer, that although John knew Christ to be the Son of God when
he declined the baptizing him as well as afterward when he baptized him, yet
(it seems) he did not at present so well consider, that he being the only
begotten Son of God, and so a person in dignity infinitely transcending other
men, it was meet for him being a weak and sinful man to baptize him, until the
Lord Christ himself admonished or informed him of the meetness of the thing,
the transcendent dignity of his person notwithstanding. Suffer it to be so now;
for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness (Mat. 3. 15.) as if he
should have said: How true soever it be, which thou alledgest against thy
baptizing me, as viz. that thou have need to be baptized of me, and not I of
thee, yet be content to do what at this time, and upon the present occasion, I
desire of thee, because it becomes me, notwithstanding the peculiar dignity of
my person, yet in respect of my mediatory undertaking, to condescend to every
thing which is righteous, or meet for other men to submit unto. So then if it
be righteous and meet for other persons, who are the sons of God, and because,
or as, they stand in this relation unto him, and not merely as they are
believers, to be admitted unto Baptism, then did Christ desire Baptism, and was
accordingly baptized, as, or because he was the Son of God; although it be
true, that he was indeed the first born amongst many brethren (as the Apostle
speaks) and so his relation of Sonship of an higher nature then other men's.

Sect. 188.
Now that other persons are not regularly admittable unto Baptism, nor ever
were in the Apostles times admitted hereunto, simply and merely, as, or because
Believers, but as, or because their faith, thorough the profession of it, did
declare them to be the Sons of God, and so i^ special favor with him, is
beyond all controversy evident upon these grounds.

1. If believing Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, gives a regular capacity of
Baptism, as it is simply believing, and not as it declares the Believer to be
the Son of God, and in special favor with him, then is the Devil himself, or
at least may be in a regular capacity of being baptized. The reason of this
consequence is evident; because he believes Jesus Christ to be the Son of God,
or at least is a sufficient capacity to believe it. The Apostle says that he
was mightily [or with power] declared to be the Son of God, according to the
spirit of holiness; by the resurrection from the dead. Now the devil is very
capable of any rational demonstration. how much more of such, which are
pregnant, and full of power to convince? And though he be a liar, and the
Father thereof, yet being subtle and wise in his generation, he is not like to
lie to his own disadvantage: which yet he must be supposed to have done, when
he said unto Christ, I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God, (Mark 1.
24.) ^f he had lied in so saying. So that there is little question of the
validity and truth of the consequence in the said major proposition.

Now that the Devil is, or may be, in a regular capacity of being baptized is
(I presume) none of Mr. A's thoughts. Therefore believing, simply as believing,
does not qualify for baptism but as it self being professed or declared,
declares the Professor of it to be a child of God.

2. If believing, simply, as believing, inrights unto baptism, then did Philip
put the Eunuch upon harder and stricter terms to satisfy himself about his
meetnesse to be baptized, when upon this account he required of him, or imposed
on him, a believing with the whole heart) Act 8. 37.) then his commission in
that behalf allowed him to do. And (indeed) his admonishi^g or presting the
Eunuch to believe with all his heart, plainly intimated, that it was such a
Faith, or believing, which would render him capable of Baptism to his own
comfort, by which he could approve himself to be a child of God If so, then is
it not the simple or absolute nature, or act of believing, but that relative or
declarative nature o^ property of it we speak of, by virtue or means whereof
it gives a capacity of baptism unto men. If so, then it readily follows, that
it is the relation of Sonship unto God, which originally, primarily, and
directly investeth with this capacity, and that wheresoever, and in whomsoever
this may reasonably be presumed to be there is as rich, as regular a capacity
of baptism, as believing by means of the profession of it, can give unto any
man. And that it is the property of Faith to give unto men the relation we
speak of (I mean, of Sonship unto God) is the loud vote of the Scripture from
place to place, Joh. 1. 12. Gal. 3, 26. and elsewhere. And if Faith gives the
relation of Sonship, the profession or declaration of Faith, must needs give
knowledge of this relation unto men.

Sect. 189.
If it be here replied; true it is, Faith professed declares a person to be
the Son of God; but it follows not from hence, that therefore it qualifieth
for baptism in this consideration: I answer; if this be the noblest and
highest consideration in Faith, viz. that it gives the relation of Sonship
unto God, makes a man or a woman to become a child of God (which I suppose is
no man's question) then must it needs be the highest consideration also in the
profession of it, that it declares a man or woman to be the child of God. And
if these things be so, it undeniably follows, that either it is somewhat that
it is meaner and lower in Faith (and so in the profession of Faith) which
instates men in a capacity of Baptism, or else that it is that relative and
declarative nature in it of which we speak, which thus enstateth them. Now then
if Baptism be to be looked upon as a matter of favor, or privilege vouchsafed
by God unto men, or unto his children, it is unreasonable to conceive or think
that he should confer it upon the account of that which is meaner, and less
considerable in them, passing by that which is more excellent, more
considerable and worthy.

3. If faith gives not right unto Baptism in that declarative consideration
mentioned, then gives it in some consideration relating to it; as (for
example) either as it is simply an act, or as it is such, or such a kind of
act, or as it relates to such or such an object, or the like. But there is no
other consideration in Faith, by virtue whereof it can so much as tolerably be
conceived that it should give a capacity of Baptism: Therefore it must needs be
conceived to give this capacity in the consideration specified.

Nor can it here reasonably be pretended, in opposition to what has been said,
that it gives the capacity now contended about, in consideration of the
ordinance or appointment of God, that so it should do, or that by virtue of
such a divine ordinance as this, it gives the said capacity. For,

1. When we affirm that it gives the capacity so often specified by virtue of the
declarative property of it (frequently likewise mentioned) we do not exclude
the ordinance, or appointment of God in this behalf but suppose or include it
altogether. We believe that faith does not justify, or make a child of God,
but by virtue of the will, appointment, or ordination of God in this kind: nor
do we believe that it gives the capacity of Baptism, upon any other ^erms (I
mean without the ordinance or appointment of God.) But,

Sect. 190.
2. Whenever God by the counsel of his will, or by his appointment, settleth
any privilege or benefactory power, upon any grace, act, or service of his
creature. he does it still in consideration of, or with an eye unto, something
that is considerable in, or about this Grace, act or service, which commends
it unto him as meet and proper for an investiture with such a privilege. He
does not invest every Grace, or every service, with every privilege: but
confers privileges with an exact proportion to each Grace, or service
privileged by him, in respect of some thing or other considerable in them in
reference to such a collation. Now then when we affirm and say, that faith
gives a right unto Baptism as it is declarative of Sonship unto God, our
meaning is, that this declarative property is that consideration in it, in
regard whereof God judged it meet to be invested with such a privilege, as to
give a capacity of, or a right unto baptism unto all those in whom it should be
found, and has invested it accordingly.

Thus then, all things duly weighed and considered, it fully appears, that
the device which Mr. A imagined against the argument or objection, lately
propounded by himself, is too great for him to perform. By the light of all
these late discussion it is sufficiently evident, that faith in no other
considerations intrinsically appertaining to it, gives a capacity of Baptism,
but only as it is declarative of Sonship and that this is the original and
proper qualification for Baptism; and that being by any probable (much more by
any demonstrative) argument made known unto those, who have a right to baptize,
baptism ought not to be denied unto it.

Whereas Mr. A. very operously, and with the quotation of many Scriptures,
labors to prove the Eunuch's Faith, I believe Jesus Christ to be the son of
God, was none other then the Faith of the Gospel, and the common form of
Believers confession: and again, that Christ had this Faith, i. e. that he
believed himself to be the Son of God; he might to as much purpose, and (well
nigh) with as much pertinence to his cause, have spent his pains in proving
the Sun to be up at noon day. If he could have proved, First that Christ's
faith was of the same nature and consideration with the Faith of believers; And
secondly, that he was baptized by John upon the account of this his Faith,
simply and absolutely considered, he had made the face of his cause to shine
(at least to a degree) but being defective in these, his labor and cost
otherwise signify nothing.

Sect. 191.
What he speaks afterward, concerning Christ making a dedication of himself
unto the service of professing and publishing the Gospel, by the solemnity of
baptism, as others did and ought to do; he speaks upon no steady, no nor
probable, account in reason. For Christ (doubtless) had made a dedication of
himself to the service he speaks of long before his receiving the solemnity of
Baptism: yea and had professed the Gospel, and declared himself the Son of God.
For being yet but twelve years old, he was found in the Temple discoursing the
things of God amongst the Doctors (so called) of those times. And to his
Parents his Mother saying thus unto him, Son, why have thou dealt thus with us?
behold thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing, he returned this answer,
How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers
business? (Luke 2. 46. 49.) So that now he both professed himself to be the
Son of God, and declared also that he had dedicated and devoted himself to
that work of his, about which he was sent, whereas he was not baptized till
about the thirtieth year of his life, Luke 3. 21. 23. Or if Mr. A's. meaning
be, that Christ was now coming forth into the world to profess and publish
the Gospel openly when he was baptized, the express letter of the Evangelical
History rises up against him. For Christ did not thus profess or publish the
Gospel, until John's casting into prison ( Matthew. 4. 12. 7. Mark 1. 14.) which
was some considerable time after his baptizing: for presently after his
baptizing he was led by the spirit into the wilderness, and there continued
forty days and forty nights amongst the wild beasts ( Mark 1. 13. Matthew. 4. 1,
2.) which imports (as Theophylact well observes) that all this time he
continued in such a part of the wilderness, where men were not wont to come.
So that all this while he did not profess or publish the Gospel openly, unless
it were to the wild beasts, or the Devil. Nor can it be proved that John's
casting into prison immediately followed the abode of Christ in the wilderness:
indeed the contrary appears from the Scriptures; yet shall we not argue this
at present: So that M. A. is out of the way of truth at this turn also. Why
Christ deferred his baptism to that time, when he received it, may be showed in
the progress of this answer very speedily.

But however Paedo-baptists claim countenance to their practice from the
baptism of Christ, Mr. A. has a conceit that from it he can frame an argument
against their practice, and this (as he says) without wresting it; as if it
were somewhat a singular thing with him to argue against his adversaries
without wresting the Scriptures, which he manageth against them. His argument
is a little prolix, and encumbred with words; yet let us give it a patient
hearing, as himself lays it down.

If Je^us Christ his being baptized at that season, and upon that occasion when
he began to profess and publish the Gospel, and not before, was in conformity
to a Law o^ righteousness in this behalf; then those that are baptized, who yet
make no such profession, as Infants are, are not baptized inconformity to that
Law of righteousness.

But Christ his being baptized at that season, and upon that occasion, when he
began to profess and publish the Gospel, and not before, was in conformity to a
Law of righteousness in this behalf: Therefore those that are baptized, as
Infants are, who yet make no such profession, are not baptized in conformity to
that Law of righteousness.

To this argument we answer, 1. That Mr. A. may be gratified with a concession
of the whole Argument, conclusion and all, and yet his cause not gratified at
all hereby, nor the cause of his adversaries at all impaired.

Sect. 192
For what though Infants are not baptized in conformity to that Law of
righteousness, according unto which Christ was baptized, it does not presently
follow from hence, that therefore they are baptized in conformity to no Law of
righteousness at all. There must go two words (as the common saying is) to this
bargain. Isaac, in conformity to a Law of righteousness, was Circumciszd on the
eighth day, Genesis 21. 4. Abraham also was Circumcised in conformity to a Law of
righteousness, yet was he not circumcised in conformity to that Law of
righteousness, according unto which Isaac was circumcised; for he was not
circumcised until the 99. year of his life, Genesis 17. 24. Mathias was chosen
into the place and office of an Apostle, in conformity to a Law of
righteousness; yet he was not thus chosen in conformity to the same Law of
righteousness, according to which Peter, Andrew, and the rest were chosen; for
he was chosen by the decision of the lot between Barsabas and him, Act. 1. 26.
whereas the other were chosen* either by a call from the mouth of the Lord
Christ himself, or else by his entertaining them upon their voluntary
applications of themselves unto him; which seems to have been the case of
Andrew and Peter, and another, Joh. 1. 3^, 38, 40, 41, 42. And as the Apostles,
were all true Apostles, and all lawfully called, although the terms or forms of
their callings were various; and as those who were circumcised men, and those
who were circumcised infants, under the Law, were all lawfully and truly
circumcised, though the times of their respective circumcisions were differing:
in like manner they who are, with Christ, baptized about the thirtieth year of
their lives (not having formely been baptized) and they who are baptized before
the thirtieth day of their lives, may lawfully, or by a like, though not the
same, law of righteousness, be baptized. So that Mr. A. does but beat the air,
not his adversaries, with this syllogism.

Sect. 193.
2. That which this argument takes for granted, and upon which the whole
stress of it rests, viz. that Christ should be baptized at that season, and
upon that occasion, when he began to profess, and publish the Gospel, and not
before, has been lately cashiered upon the delinquencie of error found in it.

The true reason (to give knowledge of this by the way) why Christ was baptized
at that season, of which he now made choice for that purpose, was (as the
Evangelist Luke seems to insinuate, Luke 3. 21.) that in the midst of that
great confluence of people which came unto John to be baptized, he might
receive a testimony from heaven, that he was the Son of God. This account of
the time or season of his baptism, was given by Hierom long ago. The context in
Luke very much favors it. Now when all the people were baptized, it came to
pass that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the Heaven was opened, and
the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a Dove upon him, and a voice
came from heaven which said, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well
pleased, Luke 3: 21, 22. The multitude of those, who came unto John to be
baptized (and were now baptized accordingly) is here mentioned,

1. As the occasion of Christ's coming to be baptized (and of his baptism
accordingly) and,

2. Together with this baptism of Christ, as an occasion, both of the opening
of the heaven, and of the descent of the holy Ghost in a visible shape upon
him, and (as the end of these two) of that voice that came from heaven and
said, Thou art my beloved Son, etc. The Evangelist Matthew also (c. 3. 13.
compared with the foregoing part of the Chapter) glanceth a like intimation:
For having first reported, the great numbers that had been baptized by John, as
viz. Jerurusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, ver. 5,
6. subjoyning the tenor of John's Doctrine and Exhortation to those that had
been baptized by him, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. He takes notice, v. 13. that
Christ took this opportunity for his coming unto John to be baptized of him:
THEN comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be baptized of him: THEN,
viz. when, and whilst those who repaired unto John's baptism, were in greatest
numbers about him, and attending on his Doctrine.

Sect. 194.
The reason or occasion now assigned of Christ's delaying his Baptism until the
time when he accepted it, has (as we have showed) a ground in the Scriptures;
whereas that pretended by Mr. A. viz. His coming now forth to profess and
publish the Gospel in the world, has neither word, syllable, nor iota here for
it.

3. (And lastly) whereas he says in the argument before us, That Christ was
baptized in conformity to a Law of righteousness (inculcating the expression of
such a Law, before and after, over and over) he should have done well, and
dealt clearly in his cause, had he produced the Law of which he speaks so much,
and so often, or had directed us to those Scripture quarters where such a Law is
to be found. Certainly Christ was not baptized in conformity to that Law of
Baptism, which either is, or was, imposed upon others: For this Law, according
to Mr. A's own notion and description of it (as we have formerly seen)
requires of all men to repent, before they are baptized; and further,
requires of them to be baptized, in order to the obtaining, or receiving
remission of sins: whereas nothing can be more evident than that the Lord
Christ was not baptized upon either of these accounts; and therefore not in
conformity to the common Law of Baptism, which respects every other man. Lex
Mosis de hoc Baptism^ nihil praescripserat: and coeleste mandatum, quod
Baptista acc^perat, ad peccat^res resipiscentes proprie pertinebat. Hugo Grot.
in Mat. 3. 15.
If he was baptized in conformity to any Law of righteousness it was some or
other of these general Law^, which respect not Baptism more, then many things
besides, nor yet other men more, then the Lord Christ himself, as man. ^et all
things be done to edification. 1 Cor. 14. 26.
Let all things be done decently. ver. 40.
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; and if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,
think on these things. Philip. 4. 8.
And it is the sense of our best Expositors, that when Christ says: For thus
it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, he speaks not of obeying any
Institution or positive Law, but only of doing whatsoever was in any respect
meet for him to do, even in matters of the least moment otherwise. Vox (...)
hoc quidem loco latissime summitur, ita ut signifcet non modo (...), sed and
quicquid ul^am aequi atque ^onesti habet rationem. Grot. in Mat. 3. 15.
This place (says Musculus) is diligently to be noted against those, who
having no regard of what is Christianly comely, think nothing is to be observed
by them, which is not commanded by the express Word of God: nor any thing to be
taken heed of, or avoided, which is not forbidden in the manifest words of the
Scripture. And Hugo Grotius (in the words lately cited from him) says, That
the Law Inducitur, (...), cujus apud honesta ingenia and Deum timentia, multa
perpetu^ vis est, ac ratio -- Locus hic probe notandus est contra eos, qui
nullam habentes decoris Christiani ration^m, nihil sibi servandum putant, quod
non sit expresso Dei mandato praeceptum, and tale, quod omissum damn^t: nec
cavenda and vitanda, quae non sunt manifestis Scripturae locis vetitae Musculus
in Mat. 3. 15.
of Moses had prescribed nothing about this Baptism; and the heavenly command
which the Baptist had received, properly belonged to repentant sinners. These
things duly considered, it clearly appears that Mr. A's pen mistook error
for truth, when it wrote: And therefore well may it be said indeed, that Christ
received Baptism upon the same terms as others did, AT LEAST IN SEVERAL
RESPECTS, and that in conformity to the same standing Law of righteousness (to
wit, the Institution of God) common to others as well as to him; unless by this
cautionary proviso, at Mr. A. p. 47.
least in several respects, he intends to restrain the Baptism of Christ in its
conformity to other men's, unto these two respects:

1. That as other men being the children of God, and not having been baptized
in their infancy, are regularly baptized when they come to be men, so was
Christ.

2. That as other men are baptized upon the account of their relation of
Sonship unto God, being made known, so was Christ. However, those respects
wherein he makes the Baptism of Christ corresponding with the Baptism of other
men, viz.

1. His being baptized upon the account of the same Faith, upon which they are
baptized.

2. His being baptized at his coming forth to profess and publish the Gospel in
the world, have been weighed in the balance, and sound light.

Sect. 195.
Whereas he says, that Christ had an OPPORTVNITY of being baptized long
before, and much soever, then he was, etc. The saying is somewhat reflexive,
either upon the Lord Christ, or upon the ordinance of Baptism, or both: For if
to be baptized be a worthy piece of obedience and subjection unto God, and the
Lord Christ, had an opportunity to exhibit this obedience unto him by being
baptized, and yet for a time (for a long time, Mr. A. seems to affirm)
neglected, or delayed, to exhibit it, does not this represent him upon terms
much unworthy of him? But it may be Mr. A. at this turn did not so well weigh
the import of the word, opportunity.

What reason is very imaginable, yea and is suggested by the Evangelists
themselves (I mean by two of them) why Christ was baptized not with the first,
but with the last, of the people, besides that which Mr. A. conceiteth has
been lately declared. See. 193. Yea the reason here pretended by him has been
detected for a nullity,. 191.

Concerning his critique inference, or observation from this Particle Now, in
these words of Christ to J^hn, Suffer it to be so NOW, as if it pointed at that
juncture of time in which he was to be manifested unto the world to be the Son
of God; and to manifest to the world the Gospel of God.

1. In this description, or expression of it, he identifies, at least in time,
two things, which are, even in this respect, as well as otherwise, much
diversified, as has been (in part) already proved: For though the juncture of
time wherein Christ was baptized, was (as has been granted) the same, or very
near to it, with that wherein he was to be manifested unto the world to be the
Son of God, yet was it not the same (nor near to it) with that wherein he was
to manifest unto the world the Gospel of God. See this demonstratively proved,.
191.

2. Whereas Mr. A. following our English translation, reads the clause in
hand, thus, Suffer it to be so n^w, Beza out of the Greek, and Tremellius out
of the Syriaque, render it, omit nunc, i. e. omit, or pass by now; meaning,
that consideration which thou pleadest why thou should not baptize me, viz.
that thou have need to be baptized of me, and not I to come unto thee for
Baptism. This reading of the words, (...), makes the sense of them as if
Christ should more at large have spoken unto John thus: John, that which thou
pleadest against thy baptizing me, viz. that thou have need to be baptzied of
me* and not I to come to thee for baptism, is true, and considerable; yet wave
the insisting upon it at present: For, thus [i. e. sometimes by waving our
prerogative, as I do mine, in coming to thee to be baptized, and other while by
doing of that which in ordinary case seems to be above our line, as thou must
do by baptizing me being the Son of God.] it becomes us [i. e. both thou and
me also] to fulfill all righteousness [i. e. to do whatsoever the present
exigencie, either of the glory of God, or of the edification and salvation of
men, does require.] If this be the true sense, and import of the passage (as I
know none more agreeable either to the scope of the place, or to the words
themselves, or that exhibiteth a better, or more spiritual notion) Mr. A's
criticism about the particle NOW, vanishes. Musculus well expresses the sum
and substance of the said exposition. It is to be no^ed (says he) that he does
not only say, omit [or, let pass] but adds, now; intimating, that that which
was true in i^ self, just, and worthy, was notwithstanding then to be omitted,
and that rather to be done, which was at present agreeable to the dispensation
undertaken by him. He does not imperiously command, saying, Thus I will, thus I
command; but gives a reason why it should at present be done, as he desires
Deinde notandum est, quod non tantum dicit, omit, sed addit, nunc: innuens,
etiam id quod verum in se, justum ac dignum erat, tum tamen esse omittendum,
and id potius agendum, quod in praesens susceptae dispensasationi compet^bat:
non imperat, dicens, sic vole, sic jubeo; sed rationem reddit, ^ur iam ita sit
faciendum. Muscul. in Mat. 3. 15.
. The emphasis, or force of the said pa^ticle, (...), NOW, implies the
speciality or extraordinariness of the present occasion, and this (probably)
with more reference unto John than unto Christ, intimating, that John was never
like to be put upon such a kind of action, as the Baptizing of Christ, more,
this being an action transcendently above his line or condition (as was lately
signified) in which respect he ought, or might the more willingly suffer
himself to be for once overruled to it, although it be burdensome to a truly
modest and humble man, as John was, to act above, or out of his proper sphere.
Whereas Christ had many acts of a like, or rather far greater condescension,
then his being baptized of John, yet remaining to be performed by him.

Now the reason why it was a matter of righteousness [i. e. a thing equitable,
meet, and comely] for Christ to be baptitized and in this respect, for John
also to baptize him) may be conceived to be, either, 1. because he was to be
the head or principal member of a body of baptized ones, or of persons that
were to be baptized, and a conformity between Head and Members in this kind, is
comely; or, 2. That by submiting unto John's Baptism, he might countenance the
same together with his Ministry, and commend the like submission unto others;
or else, 3. (and lastly) that he might leave a gracious pattern and example in
general unto others, to condescend both to the doing and suffering of such
things, being for the benefit and profit of many, which they have no necessity
or occasion otherwise, or in respect simply of themselves, to submit unto,
according to that of the Apostle Paul: For though I be free from all men, yet
have I made my self a servant unto all, that I might gain the more, 1 Cor. 9.
19.

Sect. 196.
But notwithstanding Mr. A. has quitted himself so weakly, not only in his
accenting the particle, NOW, but indeed in his whole reasoning about the
Baptism of Christ, yet, as a man that had in a short time perfectly learned the
common Genius and deportment of his new Generation, he concludes masculinely:
And thus we see (says he) that the example of Christ's personal baptism, which
was entreated to bless the opinion for Infant Baptism, has contradicted it
altogether. They who desire to see the sight here spoken of had need borrow Mr.
A's eyes; and yet I am not without all hope, but that if his eyes were
thoroughly anointed with the salve prepared in the preceding discourse, he would
acknowledge, a deceptio visus in reference to the said Vision, and confess it,
darkness. The truth is, that the example of Christ's personal Baptism is so far
from contradicting the opi^ion for Infant Baptism, that were I to plead the
cause of this opinion against the greatest Anti-paedo-baptist under heaven, I
would desire no ground of more advantage to stand on, then it. And concerning
the argument for Infant Baptism, which Mr. A. propounds (but amiss) and
undertaketh to answer, p. 41. of his discourse, let the tenor and term of it
be rectified according to my proposal of it,. 169. of my discourse; if either
Mr. A. or if there be any other pillar of the Anti-paedo-baptismal Faith
greater than he, shall give a fair, full, and clear answer to it, I shall
become their Proselyte; although I have much more strength than this to support
me in my present judgment and practice, as the Reader may (in part) find in
this present discourse.

Having, thus to the satisfaction (I trust) of all reasonable, and considering
men, who shall please to read the preceding Treatise, not only detected of
insufficiency whatsoever Mr. A. has pleaded against Infant Baptism, but above
all reasonable contradiction evinced the lawfulness, yea expediency, of the
practice thereof in Churches constituted, there is no need of pursuing the
second part of his Discourse with an Answer: For if men may be lawfully
baptized, whilst they are yet children, and shall be baptized accordingly: 1.
There can be no necessity (at least in ordinary cases) of their being baptized
thesecond time. Nor, 2. Can there be any irregularity in holding
Church Communion with persons thus baptized. And for this latter point, I have
elsewhere at large, and by many arguments, pregnant, and full of demonstrations,
evinced the regularity and lawfulness of communion with the Saints in
Church Fellowship, though unbaptized (especially as Mr. A. calls un-baptized)
But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches
of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16.

Postcript, for the finishing of Sect. 25. p. 133.
TO say that Christ blessed these children as symbolical or typical
resemblances of the humility and docility of Christian converts, or in such a
sense as he is said to have blessed the elements in the Sacrament, Mat. 26. 26.
Mar. 14. 22. not as persons really capable of any true spiritual blessing, is
(it seems) a late Apocryphal, and empty shift found out by some of the Masters
of the Ana-baptismal persuasion, to help their lame cause over this style. For,

1. The Scripture no where so much as whispers this notion; I mean, that Christ
blessed the children brought unto him no otherwise, then as types only, and as
he blessed the Bread in the Sacrament. There is neither precept, nor example in
the Scriptures, nor any good consequence from any part of Scripture, so much as
to color such a conceit.

2. Did Jacob bless Ephraim and Manasseh (the sons of Joseph) typically, or as
Christ afterward blessed the Sacramental Bread? or if he blessed them as
persons really capable of such good things, as mankind, or reasonable creatures
are capable of, and this his blessing them was not fruitless or in vain, but
they really prospered upon the account of it; can we imagine that the blessing
of Christ conferred upon the children brought to him, should turn to so
inconsiderable an account unto them, as to benefit them no otherwise, then as
inanimate and senseless things may receive benefit? The like demand might be
made concerning Moses his blessing the children of Israel before his death,
Deuteronomy. 33. 1.

3. Christ pleading the cause of those who brought the children unto him,
against his Disciples, who rebuked them, plainly justifies the reasons and
grounds of their act in bringing them, which are said to have been, that he
might lay hands on them and pray, Mat. 19. 13. Therefore (doubtless) he did
answer the desires and intentions of these persons in that behalf, in what he
did unto, and for these children. Now it must needs be a very weak man's
thought, to imagine that they, who brought these children unto Christ, desired
nothing from him on their behalf, better or greater then what senceless and
liveless creatures might enjoy, as well as they: And if he had conferred upon
them only some such thing, as this, he had (certainly) frustrated both the
desires and expectations of those that brought them.

4 If Christ had blessed these children only as emblems or types of Gospel
converts, in case Lambs or Doves, or Sheep had been brought unto him likewise,
he might, upon such an account, as well have laid his hands upon these, and
blessed them, and have said, Suffer Lambs and Doves, and Sheep to come unto me,
for of such is the Kingdom of God. But is it meet to make any part of a sober
man's faith, to believe or think, that the Lord Christ in the case specified,
would either have done or spoken, according to the tenor of these things?

5. (And lastly) because the conceit we oppose, is in it self so uncouth and
improbable, that it is not like to ride any man's judgment, unless he finds it
bowed down with prejudice) the reason which Christ gives for this his order,
that Children should be suffered to come unto him, and consequently of his
gracious intentions toward them upon their coming, is this, viz. That of such
is the Kingdom of heaven. This clearly proves, that the blessing wherewith
he now blessed those children that were brought unto him, and intended to
bless those that should be brought unto him afterward, was a blessing
appropriate unto Saints, or such, who are subjects in the Kingdom of God: But
the Bread in the Sacrament, is no Saint (though the Papists dream it to be the
King of Saints) and therefore no capable subject of such a blessing, which the
children obtained by their coming to Christ.

A Table of some Texts of Scripture occasionally handled, or touched, in the
preceding Discourse, and to which some light is given (besides many others
cited only probation-wise.)
Genesis 17. 1. The uncircumcised Man-child shall be cut off from his people, page
349 Exodus 3. 6. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, p. 3, 12 Eccles. 7. 11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance, 230 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, 347, 348, etc. Isa. 1. 11, 12.
To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, etc. 103 Mat. 3.
11. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, 246, 248, 328, 375 3. 15.
Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness,
263, 390, 401 12. 3. Have ye not read what David did when he was an hungry?
etc. 12 12. 8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbathday, 323 18. 6.
But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones who believe in me, etc. 166,
167 19. 13. Then there were brought unto him little children, that he should put
his hands upon them, and pray, etc. 132, 161, 162, 344 22. 31. But as touching
the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read? etc. page 3 28. 19. Go and
teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. 167, 168, etc. Mar. 1. 4. The Baptism
of Repentance for the Remission of sins, p. 246, 372, etc. 1. 8. I indeed
baptize you with water, 328 1. 38. For therefore came I forth, 247 10. 13, 14,
etc. And they brought young children unto him, that he should touch them, etc.
and he laid his hands on them, and blessed them, 132, 159, 160, 161, 162, 344
16. 16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, 229, 230, etc. 373
Luke 3. 15. And all men mused in their hearts of John whether he were Christ,
or no, 284 7. 29, 30. And all the people that heard him, and the Publicans,
justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and
Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, not being baptized of
John, 182, 183, 260, 261 Joh. 1. 31. But that he should be made manifest unto
Israel, am I come baptizing with water, 175, 176 3. 5. Except a man be born of
Water, and the Spirit, etc. 216, 333 3. 23. And John also was baptizing in
Enon, near Salim, because much water was there, 62, 63 3. 32. No man receives
his testimony, 152 5. 31. If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not
true, 206 6. 40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that he that sees
the Son, and believes on him, etc. 331 7. 39. This he spoke of the Spirit,
which they that believe on him should receive, page 329 13. 7. What I do, thou
know not now; but thou shall know hereafter, 202 20. 29. Blessed are they
who have not seen, and yet have bleee, 8ed 331 Acts 2. 3. Then Peter said unto
them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, 234, 235, 236, etc.
330, 376 2. 39. For the promise is unto you and your children, etc. 145 2. 41.
And the same day there was added about three thousand souls, 294. 3. 19. Repent
therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, etc. 235 5. 14.
And believers were the more added unto the Lord, multitudes both of men and
women, 157 7. 25. For he supposed that his brethren would have understood, how
God by his hand would deliver them, but they understood it not, 4 8. 10. To
whom they all gave heed, etc. 157, 158 10. 47. They were baptized both men and
women, 152, 158 10. 47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized? 25 15. 10. Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the
disciples? etc. 85 17. 31. Whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in
that he has raised him from the dead, 4 21. 5. And they all brought us on our
way, with Wives and children, 155 22. 16. And now why tarriest thou? Arise and
be baptized, and wash away thy sins, etc. 252, 253, etc. Romans 2. 26. Therefore
if the uncircumcision shall keep the righteousness of the Law, shall not his
uncircision be counted for circumcision? 294, 295 4. 11. And he received the
sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the Faith which he had,
being yet uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all men that believe,
187, 188, etc. 4. 18. Who against hope believed in hope, that he might be the
Father of many nations, 188, 189 etc. 6. 5. For if ye have been planted
together in the likeness of his death, ye shall also, etc. 280 8. 14. As many
as are ^^d by the Spirit of God, these are the Sons of God, 286 8. 23. Even we
do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, 249 8. 24. For we are saved by
hope, 303 10. 1. My hearts desire and prayer for Israel is, that they may be
saved, 246 10. 10. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness etc. 249
14. 22. Have thou Faith: Have it to thy self before God. 107 1 Cor. 1. 17. For
Christ sent me not to baptize, but etc. 128, 327 3. 8. The ministration of the
spirit, 326 7. 9. It is better to marry then burn, 108 9. 9. Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, 4 10. 1, 2. And were all
baptized unto Moses in the cloud, etc. 37, 38 11. 28. But let a man examine
himself, etc. 25, 26 14. 12. Seek to excel to the edifying of the Church, 173
14. 26. Let all things be done to edifying, 345 1 Cor. 14. 31. They may all
prophecy one by one, that all may learn, etc. 246 2 Cor. 2. 16. And who is
sufficient for these things? 23 13. 1. In the mouth of two or three witnesses
shall every word be established, 133, 138 Gal. 3. 12. For the Law is not of
Faith; but the man that does them shall live in them, 299 3. 24. Wherefore the
Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by
Faith, 266, 267. 3. 25, 26, 27. But after Faith is come, we are no longer under
a Schoolmaster: For ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.
For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, 265,
266, etc. 286. 3. 29. If ye be Christ' s, then are ye Abraham' s seed, 271. 272
5. 5. We thorough the spirit, wait for the hope of the righteousness by Faith,
249 7. Ye are all partakers of my grace, 276 Philip. 1. 16. The one preach
Christ of contention, not sincerely, suppossing to add affliction to my bands,
24 Col. 2. 8. After the rudiments of the world, 318, 319 2. 11, 12. In whom
also ye are circumcised. Buried with him in Baptism, 145, 256 1. 5. The
unfeigned Faith which is in thee, which first dwelt in thy Grand mother, etc.
190 2 Timothy 4. 3. For the time will come, when men will not endure sound
Doctrine, but after their own lusts shall heap to themselves Teachers, having,
etc. 2 Heb. 12. 14. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, page 373 Iam.
3. 2. For in many things we offend all, 212 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like figure
whereto, even Baptism, does also now save us; not the putting away of the filth
of the flesh, etc. 256, 302 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have also a more sure word of
Prophecy, etc. 322 1 John 3. 10. Whosoever does not righteiusness, is not of
God, etc. 373
A Table of the particulars contained in the preceding Discourse.
A
ADmin^stration. No administration comprehends or expresses the whole mind
of God, in, or about, the Ordinance administered 110, 111, 118 Agreeableness may
stand in the community of one property only 325 Mr. Allen his Petition p. 101.
His discourse how censured by some p. 102. His abuse of Baptism, the greatest
104. His question not properly about Baptism, nor the administration of Baptism
104, 111. Not stated in opposition to his adversaries 108. His prescription how
to come to satisfaction in it 111. Makes the night overseer of the day 111.
Takes no notice of a want of a Baptismal Institution, ibid. His late opinion
about anointing with Oil 113. He turns aside from his business 123. Alters the
state of the question 261. Differs from his Master Fisher 34, 199. Cites
Scriptures against himself 154. Rends Christian society upon had-Iwist 216.
Allows not the holy Ghost the liberty of his own understanding to draw up his
own records 152. Makes himself wise above what is written 151. Offers
sacrifice to an unknown God 185. Contradicts himself 228, 198, 214, 265, 305,
340, 371. Most heavily censureth the whole Christian world 218, 221, 222.
Blames in Paedobaptists what himself practices 314. Cites Scriptures
impertinen^ly 306. Triumphs without a Conquest 278. Mispropoundeth the
argument of his adversaries 359. In his citations of Scripture, he sometimes
puts in w^rds that make for him, and sometimes leaves out words that make
against him 181, 182, 260, 302 Ana-baptism can sail with any wind 162. Not so
termed by way of disparagement, or disgrace, 165. Not justifiable by the
Scriptures 72, 73. The wrath of God has been from time to time revealed from
heaven against it, and this in several kinds 80, 81, 82, etc. An harbinger to
erroneous, wild, and fond opinions 81, 82, 83, etc. Anabaptists. Some
Samaritan^ze better Jews then themselves 9. No good conseque^tialists 13.
Multiply bands of conscience without Scripture 14. Improvident in exchanging
their Infant Baptism 18. Superstitious, and Will-worshippers 30, 41. Make the
entrance into Christian Churches, more dangerous and grievous, then the
entrance into the Jewish Church was 39. Act beside, and without Scripture
warrant or example 42. Former and latter compared 86. Two sorts of them 88.
Their Churches divided 362. They have always been injurious to the Gospel 85,
86, etc. (...), what it sign fieth 25 Augustine for Infant Baptism from the
Apostles 133, 134, etc. 140. Accounts for the original of Godfathers, etc. 41
B
Baptism. A seal of the righteousness of Faith, page 34, 190, 191. Not to be
administered with danger 20, 21. May be performed without dipping 29. Questions
about in like to be endless 104. and little advantageous to the Gospel 107.
Contendings about Baptism now, and Circumcision of old, compared 102, 103.
Idolized by Mr. A. ibid. Never expressed by the Verb, (...), which properly
signifies to dip 47. Typifies Christ's applying him ^lf unto men 55. not given
for bodily cures 57. Manifestation of Christ to the world no end of it 175,
176, etc. 283. Justifying God in the sight of the world, no end of it 259, 260.
compared with Circumcision 187. When it is common, it is no argument of Faith
178, 179, etc. It is not unlawful, when some one end of it only is not attained
258. It is not a part of the Gospel 263. Is no Scripture test o^ visible
Saintship 274. 275, 276, etc. 281. No declaration or profession of Christ made
by it unto the world 283, 284. etc. Administered in Rivers and in cold seasons,
prejudicial unto health, yea and life it self 39. Three kind^ of Baptism (
besides Water Baptism) 236. Whether Christ be put on by Baptism 285, 286. How
it saves 302, 303. Whether it be a part of the Gospel ministration 327.
Whether it contributes toward the receiving of the Spirit 327, 328, etc.
Requires no active principle in the subject, in reference to the reception of
it 241, 338. It is still in force 349. although the arguments to the contrary
have not been well answered by any Anti-pado-baptist 231, 232. Why called the
Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins 380, 381. Whether and how
rewardable 353. Why described as relating only unto persons of discretion 372,
373. How rewardable without Faith 153. What it must be that qualifieth for it
380 Adult baptism a seminary of confusion in Churches constituted 32. Amongst
persons born of Christian Parents, not consistent with the Gospel rule of
Baptizing 70, 71, 72, etc. Baptism administered to non-beleevers 112. 113, 173.
Administered by un-baptized a nullity 143. To be taken up for future repentance
186. Asign to children 191 (...) signifies to wash, as well by any other kind
of washing, as by dipping 47. Never used in the New Testament to signify to
dip 48. However, it does not signify to un-dip 50 Baptizing. Never expressed
by the word (...), which properly signifies to dip 48. To baptize, a business
of Inferior consequence, compared with the preaching of the Gospel 123, 124.
The baptizing of many no argument of the success of the Gospel 152, 153 Basil
75 Mr. Baxter 16, 32, 39, 42, 78, 84, 86, 88, 89 Beza 77 L. Brook 138 Bulinger
78, 82, 83, 85, 256
C
Calvin p. 67, 76, 77, 186, 216, 217, 241, 257, 265, 268, 352 374, 377
Children. Their righ^ to Baptism 26. As capable of Baptism, as they were of
Circumcision 34, 35. Baptized into Moses, 37, 38. Children of Gentile believers
not inferior to the children of the Jews 37. In the same capacity of holy
things under the Gospel, in which they were under the Law 196, 197, etc. 304.
How in a capacity of engaging to the practice of repentance 195, 196, etc. 384.
How stand in need of Baptism 204. As capable of the benefit or the ends of
Baptism, as the ends of imposition of hands 307. 308. Why not capable of the
Lords Table 338. How, and why, the children of God 360. Whether, and how all
children are capable of Baptism 363. Jews children involved in the rejection of
their parents 36, 37 Christ. His Faith not of the same kind with the Faith of
other believers 386, 387. Whether baptized upon the account of his faith, and
what Faith 388 389 etc. Whether consecrated himself to the service of the
Gospel by Baptism Not baptized in conformity to the common Law, or rule, of
baptizing 388, 389. etc. May be put on several ways 270 Church Membership, a
great privilege to children under the Law 35. So under the Gospel also 36. No
Levitical ceremony, nor abolished by Christ 42, 43 Circumc^sion, with all the
burden of the Mosaical Law atding it, no yoke, in comparison of Baptism, as it
is now obtruded 166. The end and use of it better served, by the the
circumcising of children, then of men 174, 196, 199, 208, 308. A sign or seal
of no man's Faith 194, 195. The use and end of it the same in substance with
those of Baptism 187. Why the fierce Advocates of it so severely censured by
the Apostle 102, 103. The end of it 174. Engaged to the practice of Repentance,
as well as Faith 194, 195. The remaining of it in the flesh 289, 290, etc. The
visibility of it not insisted upon by the Scriptures 290, etc. Not profitable
without keeping the Law 297. Not a seal of righteousness of Abraham's Faith
only 33, 188, 189, etc. Intended primarily for children, yet first administered
unto men 112. Profited not upon the mere deed done 297, 298, etc. How it
abolished from Christ 226. The Circumcision of men more spoken of in the old
Testament, then of c^ildren and why 1^9 etc. The administration of i^ unto
in^^n^s a pa^^ of the wisdom and strength of the Law 309. The^r sons of Infant
Circumcision Ev^n^e^ical 315 ^^quired on^y a reg^la^ p^ssiveness in ^t^ pr^p^r
su^j^ct 339. More ed^^ying in being administ^ed unto children 345. The want of
it why thr^atned with cutting ^ff 349. Though ^ot r^ceived voluntarily, ye
profited afterward 3^1 Circumstance. Diff^rent circumstances may justified
d^fferent actions 113. may suspend lawful, yea, in some ca^es, necessary
actions 123 Conscience. Reverence is due to the consciences of the Saints 172
Consent. Subsequent and Antecedent 335 Con^equences from Scripture are
Scripture 15 16. T^^ m^re unabl^, or in ^xpert, m^n are, to raise con^equences
regularly, they must needs be so much the more ignorant of the mind of God in
the Scriptures 112, etc. Contra-Remonstrants magnify t^eir opinions 10
Contraries. One contrary ^emoved places not the other 184 Cyprian often cited by
Austin for In^ant-bap^i^m 134. ci^ed 148
D
Deodate 217 D^^pi^g with garments, or without, very inconvenien^ 56, 57, 64.
Was the Devils ceremony 58, 59 D^natists 9.
E
(...) S^metimes used for, ad, unto 60. Sometimes for (...), in 65, 66.
Sometimes for (...), because, or, for the sake of 247 Ex sometimes signifies,
from 60 Error is apt to propagate 89 90 Est us 265 Eugenius Pope 241 Eunomius
9 Eunuch ( Act. 8.) not dipped 51, 52, 61, 62 Examples of Christ and the
Apostles do not bind universally 116, 117. In what cases they bind 127
F
Fact. Mere matter of fact no meet pillar to build any man's Faith upon 116, 117
Faith and Repentance dead works (according to Mr. A.) until Baptism quickens
them 221. Faith under the Law how differs from Faith under the Gospel 266. How
it qualifieth for Baptism 391, etc. It investeth men with the prerogative of
Sonship 391, 392, etc. Mr. Fisher 34. ackn^wledgeth the Jews doting on the
Circumcising of their child^en 144. His hard hap 150. His misunderstanding
Christ's imposition of hands on the children 160. His daring assertions 162,
163, 166. His mistaken construction of Abraham's receiving Circumcision 188,
189. His true interpretation of the verb substan^ive 193. His error, that
Baptism is no sign unto children 199, 200. Knows better how to triumph, then
to conquer, 166. Resists Mr. Tombs 361
G
Godfathers and Godmothers their origi^al recorded in Church History, not the
original of Infant bap^ism 140 Grotius 217, 265* 268 Gua^ter 241
H
Hands. Laying on of hands, a mean of receiving the Spirit, not Baptism 329,
330. Chil^ren why capable of laying on hands 339 Dr Holms 136, 149 Mr Th.
Hooker 53 Household, and house, commonly signify children in an house, a^ well
as others 131
I
Jailer and his house, whether dipped when baptized 69, 70, 147 Idolatrous usage
prohibited by God 59 Jews their zeal for their c^ildren 45. yet never
complained of their not being baptized 45 Imitating Christ and the Apostles, in
their arguing, how necessary 320, 321, 322 Infant Baptism yeeldth all the real
fruits of true Baptism 97, 99. May be proved from the Scriptures to have been
practiced in the Apostles days, though not from the History of the Scriptures
115. Proved by many arguments that it was then practiced 122. to p. 150.
Asserted from the Apostles by more then two or three witnesses 138, 139. If
forborne by the Apostles, it was neither out of their own private spirits, n^r
by any Scripture restraint 122, etc. There may be other reasons now for it 124,
125. The original of it not recorde^ in any Church History 149, 141. No reason
or likelihood that it should be in^r^duced into the Church contrary to the
practis^ of it in the Apostles days 147. The first opposers of it, both in
former and latter times, were wicked men and unsound in the Faith 142, 143. How
it is a means to enlarge the Kingdom of Christ 149. Christ manifested by it,
as well as by men-baptism 177. More edifying quickening, etc. then men-baptism
180, 181. 346, 347. More justifying God in the sight of the world 262, 263.
More improveable and engaging 30* 31, 348. As proper and sufficient to compass
all Baptismal ends, as Infant-circumcision, the ends of Circumcision 310. Yet
is it not built upon Infant* circumcision 314. How of a moral consideration,
223, 224. How it may be ascertained to the Baptized afterward 291, 292, etc.
Upon what grounds it was first diswad^d 74, 75. Practiced by those, who
c^nversed with the Apostles 46. Was not brought into the Church by Pope
Innocent, 46, 47, 74. Is no will worship 41. May be a duty, though not so easy
to come at 5 (.) Why the arguments against it are so taking with many 3. It is
not disagreeable t^ the Gospel ministration 325, 326, etc.
Infant-church-membership not abolished by Corist, 43, 44, 45, 154 Infants See
children. Pope Innocent not the first that commanded children to be baptiz^d
74, 149 Institutions not instances, the best means to regulate the
administration of Ordinance* 109 110. No administration fully commensurable to
an Institution 110 118. They are subject to the Law of Nat^re and humane
accommodation 110, 111 See Ordinance. John Baptist why termed Elias, 246.
Whether he baptized by dippi^g 66, 67 Jovinian 9
L
Laying on of hands. See hands Law. Weakness and unprofitableness attributed
unto the Law comparatively only 308 Lorinus 241 Love, steereth all things in
the Gospel 340. Love of God, what, and how, qualifieth jor Baptism 383
M
Marlorat 217 Mr. Marshal 136 P. Martyr 241 Melchior Adamus 82 Means may be
lawfully used, though, and where, they are less serviceable 171, 173, 177
Musculus 77, 167, 186, 265, 268, 375.
N
Nature. The Law of nature allowed to umpire in the administrations of
Ordinances or Institutions 110 Nazianzen 75 (...), and (...), how distinguished
by Paul 267
O
Objections answered* no relief to weak arguments 170 Ordinance. The subject no
part of it, 19, 20, 163. In what cases God himself pours contempt upon
Ordinances 103. He best understands their conducement to their ends 174
P
Mr. Perkins 265 Mr. Joh. Philpot 137, 141; 150, 159 Precedencie in mention is
not argumentative 167, 168, 176 Primitive practices how, and in what cases not
obliging, 113* 114, 115
R
To Relieve is to honor 6 Remission of sins is the righteousness of Faith 34.
188. Not suspended upon Baptism, 187. 214, 315. 220* It is twofold 111. 235.
Promised both unto Faith and Repentance 317, 218, etc. 246. Sometimes signifies
the assurance or fruition of this remission 249. not the same with Sonship 370
Repentance, how, and in what respect, qualifieth for Baptism 367 Rudiments of
the world 318
S
Sacramental, or typical expressi^ns 256 Sanctification, sanctify. Men are often
said to sanctify themselves, but not to justify themselves 255 Salvation, not
suspended upon Apocryphals, or man-supposed truths 231. Some thing necessary to
it, which are not necessary to justification 239. etc. Scripture, The result of
Scripture, is Scripture 16 Scultetus 76 A Seal is not to proc^re, but to
confirm 34 Signs, and seals, not n^cessarily corresponding in similitude 27, 28
Silence. Total silence of Scriptures, no proof of a negative 128, 129 Sin.
Every sin is waylaid by God 1^1 S^^da^ ^6. Sonship unto God, ^ow (...)ueth
360. 36^. ^c. Superstition, wha^ 29* 10 Synecdoche. A figure of Speech frequent
in the Scripture 33*
T
Teaching differs much from making Disciples 169 Tertullian seems to be the
first that persuaded to delay Infant Baptism 74. yet approves it in case of
necessity 75 Mr Tombs 85. 146 opposes Mr Fisher 361 Trapezuntius 294 Trent
Catechism 242 Truth why embraced with much difficulty 1, 2
V
Visibility of Saintship 272, 273, etc. Saints visible before Baptized 278,
279, etc. Ursine 77, 82
W
Washing performed by the application of water to the thing to be washed, not
on the contrary 55 Will worship, what, 29. 41. Every usage of holy things not
particularly prescribed by God, is not Will Worship 41 Women, upon what ground
to be admitted to the Lords Table 26. and children comprehended under men. 156
Z
Zuinglius 76
Reader the mistakes of the Prefs, are rather many, then material. Yet if in
reading thou meetest with any thing that disturbeth thee in thy way, thou
may presently be relieved by repairing to this Index corectivus: Possibly
thou may meet with some other oversights, besides those rectified here
(especially in the Epistles.) For as the saying is, that finitum additum finito
non facit infinitum, so neither does a Corrector added to a Printer, nor a
Supervisor added unto both, amount to a man that cannot err or mistak^.
p. 2. l. 23. read, rejected, p. 4 l. 4. r. truth, p. 11. l. 24. r. there p.
12. l. ult for 23. r. 3. p. 19. l. 24. r. kind, p. 25. l. Title, r.
c^mmensurable, p. 28. l. 9. r. typical. p. 31. l. 9. r. apparent, p. 34. l. 26.
r. contradictions, p. 34. l. 33. r. descriptior, p. 37. l. 25. r. as, p. 40. l.
33. r. there p. 41. l 7. r. not, p. 45. l. 32* r. yet p. 53. l. 1. r.
appropriate, p. 44. l. 7. after not, r. as much, p. 56. l. 27. dele unto them,
p. 57 l. 3. r. apoplexies, p. 60. l. 15. r. (...), Ibidem, r. (...), p. 64. l.
35. r. a provision, p. 77. l. 10. r. Anabaptists, p. 79 l. 22. r. propagate, p.
82 l. 10. r. Christians, p. 82. l. 15. r. sent, p. 83. l. 33. r. Doctrines, p.
92. l. 19. r. YE, p. 94. l. 8 for discourse, r. consideration, p. 132. l. 23.
r. Administer p. 102. l. 30. r. obtruded, p. 100. l. 29. r. externalities, p.
109. l. 1. dele a, p. 117. l. 15. r. spes, p. 118. l. 1. r. denying, p. 129. l.
35. r. did forbear, p. 123. l. 23. dele here, p. 134. l. 14. r. Ecclesiae, p.
140. l. 8. r. putid, p. 153. l. 8. r. And, p. 157. l. 3^. r. persons, p. 170.
l. 22. r. for, p. 184. l. ^it. r. places, p. 186. l. 8. r. (happily) himself, p.
187. l. 47. r. (...), p. 198. l. Tit. r. capacity, p. 206. l. 11. r.
declaration, p. 216. l. 15. r. Christian, p. 226. l. 4. r. care, p. 240. l. 30.
dele the, p. 243. l. 24. aft^r saved, r. only adds, p. 243. l. 32. r. gift,
p. 245. l. Tit. r. repentance, p. 247. l. 12. r. upon you? p. 248. l. 12. r.
from, p. 252. l. 24. r. eightieth, p. 254. l. 2. r. forgiven, p. 256. l. 24. r.
hereafter. p. 264. l. 19. r. assumes, p. 266. l. ult. r. after, p. 269. l. Tit.
r. putting on, p. 273. l. 4. r. An^i-pedo baptism, p. 274. l. 4. r.
consideration, p. 284. l. 7. dele Christ, p. 288. l. 17. after would r. not, l.
34. r. substantial, p. 318. l. 7. r. he, before demands, p. 339. l. 10. r.
opposed, ^. 26. dele as, p. 341. l. 8. r. apt, p. 342. l. 4. r. form of, p.
345. l. 1. r. in their, p. 3* 6. l. 34. r. baptized, p. 348. l. 23. dele we as,
p. 357. l. 2. r. foundations, p. 360. l. 32. r. believed, p. 365. l. 24. r.
exert's, p. 376. l. 6. r. dissuaded, l. 23. r. therefore, p. 378. l. 11. for
adulterous, r. adult. p 379. l. 18. dele reason, p. 380. l. 6. for in, r. it.
p. 387. l. Tit r. where, l. 1. r. to be, p. 391. l. 14. after is, r. in, p.
393. l. Tit. dele to, l. 6. r. it in some other, p. 394. l. 14. r. discussions,
l. 15. r. consideration, p. 404. l. 1. r. terms.

