CALUMNY ARRAIGNED AND CAST. OR A Brief Answer to some extravagant and rank
passages, lately fallen from the pen of WILLIAM PRYNNE, Esquire, in a late
Discourse, entitled, Truth Triumphing over Falsehood, etc. against Mr John
Goodwin, Minister of the Gospel.

Wherein the loyal, unfeigned and unstained affection of the said John Goodwin
to the Parliament, and Civil Magistracy, is irrefragably and fully vindicated
and asserted against those broad and unchristian imputations, most untruly
suggested in the said Discourse against him.

By the said JOHN GOODWIN.

Psalm. 56. 5. Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me
for evil. Psalm. 120. 2. Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a
deceitful tongue. Gal. 3. 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if yet
it be in vain. Praeceptum trahit praeceptum, and transgressio trahit
transgressionem. Dictum Hebraeorum. ex Mercero in Prove. 22. 4. Apologiae nullas
aures inveniunt: calumniae omnes praeoccupant. Oecolam. Epist. Licensed Entered
and Printed according to Order.

LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Popes-head-Alley. 1645.

TO THE READER.
READER;
MY business with thee (at present) is not much. Only upon occasion of those
passages of my Antagonist, replied unto in the following Discourse, I could not
without breach of duty, but administer this Preservative unto thee against the
danger of very many writings on that side; that if thou beleevest them,
especially in what they present concerning either the persons or opinions of
their Adversaries, without strict examination, thou art like to embrace nubem
pro Junone, and to match thy understanding with untruth. Which kind of marriage
oft-times and in many cases, proves of as sad and unhappie consequence unto
men, as Ahabs joining himself in this relation with Jezabel did unto him;
concerning whom the sacred Record avoucheth this; That there was none like
Ahab, who did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, whom
Jezabel his wise provoked 1 King. 21. 25.
. Errors and misprisions concerning the persons, practices, and opinions of
men, having taken the fancies and imaginations of some men, many times work
them into very uncouth, violent, unseemly, and unchristian distempers, which
makes them out of measure forgetful of themselves, and of all rules of reason,
equity, and good conscience, in their representations of, and contestations
against both the one and the other. Especially when the special and particular
points of difference between them and others, are of a difficult eviction and
clearing on their parts, the resentment hereof is a sore temptation upon them
to make many a voyage beyond the line of Truth, to fetch Apes and Peacocks, and
I know not what monsters both of practices and opinions to bestow upon them;
that so the uncontroverted disparagement which they hope to derive upon their
opposites by such imputations as these, may help to mediate the like
disparagement of their judgments in those other matters of difference, in the
thoughts and minds of men. Nor does an Accuser (ordinarily) open his mouth to
that wideness, or lift up his voice to that strength and strain of clamor,
when he can come by any thing that is real and matter of truth, to make his
accusation, as when he is constrained to serve his disposition in that kind,
with that which is fictitious, and pretended only. The Jews that sought the
suppression and ruin of our Savior, not being able to prove any thing of
real demerit against him (for Pilate himself knew well that they had delivered
him out of envy Mat. 27. 18.
) thought to fill up the emptiness of their cause or accusation, with the
abundant loudness and importunity of their clamor and cry: But they CRIED,
AWAY WITH HIM, AWAY WITH HIM: crucify him. And in another place, because they
could not with truth reprove him of any sin Joh. 8. 46.
; being put upon it to feign, they did it to purpose, and charged him with
being a Samaritan and having a Devil Verse. 48.
.

Who would have thought that the Gentleman (my Antagonist in the ensuing pages)
or A. S. the Duplicator against M. S. and some others of the same engagement,
that I could name, would ever have sought protection for the cause they desire
to maintain, at those polluted Sanctuaries of untruth! If our opinions know
not how to maintain themselves and live, without the undue disparagement, or
collateral impeachment of those who are of opposite judgment to us therein,
it is a sore testimony against them, that they are but counterfeits, and not of
the royal line and race of Truth; who is able to maintain all her legitimate
offspring, with her own demeans, and native inheritance, without the unjust
taxations of the reputation, practices, or opinions of her Adversaries.

Till the Sons of Difference in matters controversiall, give over all wresting
(at least, all wilful wresting) and perverting of the sayings, doings, and
opinions of their opposites, and catching at impertinencies and lighter
oversights, and lie close in their reasonings to the points in difference; they
will never do any great matter, either for the truth, or for their own
Repute, amongst sober and advised men.

This brief advertisement I thought needful to impart unto thee; and if thou
have the taste and relish of it in thy spirit, I have nothing by way of
transaction further with thee (for the present) but only to express my
desires unto God on thy behalf, that the perusal of the little piece ensuing,
may either make or keep thy thoughts straight concerning the man, (a friend of
thine, who ever thou be) whom thou shall find fiercely accused, and yet (I
hope) sufficiently (though calmely) acquitted therein. It is a special grace
of GOD vouchsafed unto thee, to be preserved, from making that crooked, which
he has made straight.

From my Study in Colemanstreet. London. Jan. 30. 1644. Thine in Him who is our
all in all, JOHN GOODWIN.

Faults escaped in some Copies.
Page 5. l. 24. for, confidence, r. confidence.

Page 18. l. 24. for, rerum, r. reum.

Ibidem. l. 30. for, contemned, r. continued.

Page 28. l. 6. for, rf, r. of.

Page 32. l. 30. for, right, r. Law.

Page 35. l. 18. for, declare, r. decline.

Page 39. l. 15. for, not only, r. not only not.

Page 42. l. 13. for, shacking, r, sharking.

Page 44. l. 31. for, commodious, r. commodiously.

Page 46. l. 20. for, yet (and, r. ( and yet.

CALUMNY ARRAIGNED AND CAST.
SInce the finishing of my lately published Innocence and Truth triumphing
together.
Discourse, my Antagonist having (as it seems by his own expression My
nocturnall lucubrations, borrowed from the hours allotted to my necessary
natural rest, etc. Epist. Dedic.
) sacrificed the necessary natural rest of his body, upon the service of the
un-necessary and violent restlesnesse of his spirit, has thereby gotten the
opportunity of doing very good service to the way of Independencie (so called)
by sending forth a Discourse into the world, entitled Truth triumphing over
Falsehood; i. (by the figure Hypallage) Falsehood triumphing over Truth: For
whereas the weight of his credit and reputation before lay somewhat heavy upon
the shoulder of Independencie, and oppressed it; by the unchristian
extravagancie and impertinencie of this Discourse, he has so far eased and
reduced the burthensomnesse of it, that it may now be endured and borne without
much detriment or disadvantage. And doubtless, Divine providence was above him
in drawing this acknowledgement and confession from him, that these Collections
or Lucubrations of his are distracted Epist. Ded. Prope finem.
and impotent Epist. to the Reader. Prope finem.
: Distracted they are in point of argument or reason; Impotent, in point of
heat, height, and passion. Or did we wave his own confession of the
distractednesse of them, his expectation of such preferment for them as the
satisfaction of the learned Epist. to the Reader. Versus finem.
, yea, and conviction of all the world Page 110. Versus finem.
, were a demonstration, and that a priori, of such a (...), or affection
cleaving to them. For can any man, with any consistency of Reason, expect or
think, that learned men, who have risen early, and gone to bed late, bestowed
much time and pains to inquire out the truth and certainty of what they hold
and profess, should yet be so desultorie and light in their judgments, as by
a few indigested, nocturnall Epist. Delic. non long a fine.
, subitane Ibid. and p. 1.
, impotent Epist. to the Reader.
collections and lucubrations to be turned out of their way; especially when
the Collector makes no more conscience of speaking truth in matters of fact and
of the most obvious and easy cognizance, then Mr. Prynne in many passages does
in these his lucubrations? Does he think that the elaborate and long-studied
notions and apprehensions of learned men, are of no better use or worth, then
only to adorn the trophies and triumphs of his extemporanie pen? If he
expected such obsequiousness of Faith from the judgments of learned men to
his subitane and indigested collections, in matters of more difficulty and
weight, his method had been to have laid the foundation of such credence, by
speaking Truth in those things, which are every man's inquiry and cognizance,
and wherein the miscarriage of his pen is obvious unto all. For he that has
not so much policy as in parvis sibi fidem praestruere, will never get an
opportunity magna mercede fallendi. And he that will not deal honestly in the
light, who will trust in the dark?

I shall not (for the present) insist upon the refutation of those twelve
imputations in his Epistle to the Reader, Sect. 2.
wherewith he labors to render the Independents odious; all and every of
which, (except the fifth) are every whit as appliable (as I am able to
demonstrate in the sight of the Sun) to his party, as to the Independents,
and some of them with far more truth to the former, then to the latter. And
for that inference which he deduceth from the fifth particular there charged
upon the Independents (which is the sting of the charge) as viz. that denying
there is any National Church under the New Testament, they must of necessity
deny one Article of their Creed, That there is a Catholic Church; This
Collection (I say) is so impotent and undigested, that he that runs may read
Non sequitur written in the face of it.

Nor secondly, do I intend to unbinde or meddle with that farrago, that bundle
of blind learning; I mean, those transcriptions and quotations, fetched many
(if not most) of them, out of the darkest times of Popery, (as himself
somewhere does little less then confess) Page 106.
which are the bulkie and unweildie part of his discourse: For, What communion
has light with darkness? old obsolete, exolete Records, fetched out of the
darkest times of Popery, are no Vrim and Thummim, no Oracles to be consulted
about the mind of Jesus Christ; no competent Judges or Interpreters of the
Laws and Statutes of Heaven. The saying of Cyprian is seasonable upon this
occasion: This is not to be esteemed true Antiquity to understand, quid hic out
ille ante nos fecerit, aut docuerit, sed quid is qui ante omnes est Christus,
etc. i. what this or that man did or taught before us, but what he did and
taught who was before all, even Christ himself, who only is the way, the
Truth, and the life, from whose precepts we ought not to digress Cyprian ad
Caecil. lib. 2. Ep. 3.
. And besides, if Mr Prynnes hand was no steadier, in transcribing these old
matters, then it has been in some things of later date concerning me, his
Antiquity it self may have cause enough to complain of being perverted into
noveltie.

Nor thirdly, shall I thrust my sickle into my brother Burtons harvest; but
leave the latter part of the Discourse unto him, either to neglect, or answer,
as God shall direct him.

But fourthly, (and lastly) I shall briefly acquaint the Reader, how unworthily
my Antagonist has dealt by me, (that I say not by himself, and his own
Reputation) first, by assertion of untruths; secondly, by cruel and
unreasonable wrestings and torturing of my words, to make them speak what they
never meant; thirdly, (and lastly) by slight and empty replies to things
asserted and laid down by me.

For the first, Sect. 3.
he cites my two Sermons (entitled Theomachia) and my Innocencies Triumph, as
denying ( he means dissuading) all opposition in word, deed, or thought
against the Way of Independency, as a direct fighting against God Epist. Ded. p
3. paulo ab initio.
; which is a most notorious untruth; all that I drive at in these Discourses,
is to dissuade men from opposing this Way with an high hand, lest in so doing,
men should fight against God: there is no such assertion as this which Mr Pryn
charge upon me, nor any near it, or like unto it, in either of those Tracts.
I no where affirm, all opposition to this Way, whether in word, deed, or
thought, to be a direct fighting against God. Nay, p. 12. of my Theomachia, I
affirm the quite contrary, viz. that it is not every degree or kind of
opposing a Way or Doctrine which is from God, which either the Text or the
Doctrine calls a fighting against God; but only such an opposing which is
peremptory, and carried on with an high hand, etc.

2. He cites my Sermon, Sect. 4.
preached Febr. 25. 1643. My Theomachia and Innocencies Triumph, as holding
forth this Position, That every particular Congregation of visible Saints, and
Independent Church, is under the Government of Christ alone, as the ONLY Head,
King, Governor, Lawgiver of it; and subject to NO OTHER JURISDICTION, then
that of Christ, his Word and Spirit, etc. Ibidem.
Which conclusion, though generally held and maintained by Protestants against
Papists; and in that respect I need neither be afraid, nor ashamed to own it;
yet if he can find, or make out with any tolerable construction of words and
saying, of any, or all of those pieces of mine which he charge with it, let
Mr Pryn be true, and me the lier. But if otherwise, currat lex, etc.

3. He charge me with affirming (in the forementioned Sermon) that it would
be more easy for me, Sect. 5.
and I should rather yield to be torn in pieces by wild horses, then submit to
such a Government which proceeded from a Parliament chosen by the Riffe-raffe
of the world, Ibidem.
etc. Never was there an innocent and harmless expression more cruelly and
despitefully handled, since the world was first haunted with a spirit of
unrighteousness and untruth. The passage of mine, represented by Mr Prynne, as
you have heard, was only this (I shall go as near the very words as my best
memory will lead me; but the effect and substance of the saying I perfectly
remember) It were as easy for me to be torn in pieces by wild horses, as to
submit to any Church Government whatsoever, which is not agreeable to the
Scriptures, and mind of Christ. But to deny subjection unto a Government which
should proceed from a Parliament, because chosen by the Riffe-raffe of the
world (which terms I mean the Riffe-raffe of the world, are suppositious too,
and none of mine) was so far from my thoughts in that Sermon, that I expressly
declared, and said (as several of those that were examined about the Sermon
before the Committee, there testified, and I nothing doubt, but to this day, do
perfectly remember the saying) that as a Church Government was not therefore to
be received or submitted unto, because it is enjoined by men; so neither is it
therefore to be rejected, because it is commanded by men.

4. He cites the forementioned Sermons (called Theomachia) as holding forth
this assertion, Sect. 6.
p. 48, 49, 50. that perchance all, or the greatest part of the Parliament and
Assembly are not endued with the sanctifying Spirit of God, Page 156.
etc. If there be so much as the least hint or insinuation of any such matter
in any, in all of those pages, I shall mistrust either my eyes, or my sensus
communis for ever. But if it be otherwise, Mr. Prynnes tongue and pen (as well
they deserve) are like to bear the burden of this my diffidence.

5. He cites the prementioned, Theomachia, with my two books since, for crying
up the Independent Way, as the very Government, Discipline, Kingdom and
Ordinance and Christ himself, Page 134.
etc. whereas,

First, since the coming out of my Theomachia, I had put forth only one book
(and that a very small one too, and which the violent and merciless
proceedings of himself against me, extorted from me,) when this was affirmed
and printed by him.

And secondly, there is no such cry, as that which his fancy is troubled with,
to be heard throughout either the one of those books, or the other. So that
here is a double notorious untruth in this quotation: 1. that I had set forth
two books, since my Theomachia: 2. that in these two, as also in my Theomachia,
I cried up the Independent Way, as the very Government, Discipline, Kingdom
and Ordinance of Christ.

6. Whereas he avers, Sect. 7.
that pending the complaint against me before the Committee for plundered
Ministers, for some Antiparliamentary passages (so called by him) with other
particulars, I justified the said passages again very unseasonably in the
Pulpit on a solemn first day, and likewise in two printed books, to the one
whereof I prefixed my name Page 106.
; the truth is, first, that (if my memory serves me not as ill as Mr. Prynnes
confidence serves him) I never justified, nor meddled with those passages he
speaks of in the Pulpit, either on any solemn fast day, or any other, within
that compass he speaks of: nor secondly, had I justified them in two books,
when Mr. Pryns pen avouched it, though by this time it may be interpreted that
I have; nor thirdly, have I put forth any book since, to which I have not
prefixed my name; or at least suffixed it to an Epistle, if not at large, yet
by the initiall letters of it. Therefore if Mr. Pryn implies, that I have
published any book within the time he speaks of, which I do not publicly own,
he is implicated with a further untruth in such his implication.

7. Whereas he affirms (with no want of confidence) that he has elsewhere
answered, and fully refuted Page 106.
the passagers aforesaid; what truth there is in this affirmation, let my last
Discourse Innocence and Truth triumphing together.
testify. He has answered those passages of mine he speaks of, much in such a
sense, and after such a manner, as Mr. Walker and Mr. Roburrough, have answered
my Socinian errors: which Answers he advises his Reader to see ( p. 109. in
the margent) but tells him not where they are to be seen.

8. Whereas he charge me in my Innocencies Triumph (quarrelling with the very
title, Sect. 8.
as if it were unfit, and he unwilling that Innocence should triumph) with
denying those very matters of fact which I voluntarily confessed in his hearing
before the Committee Page 107. paulo ante medium.
, for which I was sequestered; the truth is, that there is no truth at all in
this his allegation or charge. For, first, I am certain, that Jesus Christ was
present at the Committee, as well as Mr. Prynne; and certain I am that in his
hearing (which is every whit as good as Mr. Pryns) I confessed nothing there,
which is denied by me in my Innocencies Triumph. I neither confessed that I
neglected my parishioners, nor that I seldom preached unto them, nor that I
prescribe a Covenant to my Independent Congregation, with in stead of my
parishioners I have gathered to my self, before they be admitted; nor that I
receive tithes of my parishioners in any other way, or after any other manner,
then as I declare and express in my said book. If I had confessed any of these
things, either before the Committee, or any others, I had been of Mr. Prynnes
confederacy against mine own innocence, and the truth. But what I did
confess before the Committee, I confess as plainly in my Innocencies Triumph;
as viz. first, that I had refused to baptize some children of my parishioners
Innocencies Triumph. p. 18. 19.
. Secondly, that I had not administered the Sacrament to my Parish for some
months Ibidem.
. Again, secondly, whereas he says that I was sequestered Ibidem.
by the Committee, for the matters before mentioned, and denied by me in my
Innocencies Triumph, in this he asperseth the honorable Committee every whit
as much (if not more) then me. For (doubtless) it no way stands with their
honor to sequester a man for that which was never done by him. Nor thirdly, do
I know whether I may take Mr. Prynnes word (it is now grown so unstable) that I
am suspended, censured, or sequestered by the Committee, either for the one
thing, or the other; and besides, a friend of mine, inquiring of some that are
Members of the said Committee concerning that suspension or sequestration which
Mr. Prynne speaks of, received this answer from them, that they knew no such
thing. I suppose it is not ordinary, that a sentence or censure should pass in
a Court of Justice against any man, and he not to have any knowledge of it for
several months together: but if it be so, Gods will, and Mr. Prynnes wish, (
Fiat Justitia) in Mr. Prynnes sense, are fulfilled together.

9. He is not ashamed to avouch, Sect. 9.
that I publish my brainsick jealousies and suspicions of the Parliament
behind their backs in open Pulpit, and then to the whole world in print (a
strange misdemeanor indeed, and more monstrous and incredible, then ever
committed by the VERY Pope or Turk himself, or the great Antichrist, or the
Arch-Prelate, or Oxford Aulicus, or the most venomous Malignant, that a man
should do that behind men's back, which he does in print to the whole world) of
purpose to make my Auditors, Readers, jealous of them, as men who invaded the
very incommunicable royalties and privileges of Heaven Page 108. Circa medium.
: Whereas the God of Heaven, who knows my purpose and intent in those passages
(as in all my actions besides) much better then Mr. Prynne knows the contrary;
and that my purpose therein was singly and simply, and with all faithfulness,
as becomes a Minister of Jesus Christ, to caution those worthy persons of honor
and trust, against that snare of sinning against God, into which great places
of power and interest in the world are apt to lead men before they are aware.

10. He charge my late Sermons and Pamphlets to have kindled such unhappie
flames of contention in our Church and State, Sect. 10.
as all the tears of Repentance which I may shed, will not be sufficient to
quench. For my part I know of no such, I hear of no such, I know no cause why
I should imagine that any such unhappie flames as he speaks of, should be
kindled by any of my Sermons or writings. I have much more reason to conceive
and think, that Mr. Prynnes writings charge mine with kindling flames of
contention, much after the same manner, and upon the same terms, that one
charged Eliah with being the troubler of Israel 1 King. 18. 17.
: and that mine may recharge his, as the Prophet did that King 1 King. 18. 18.
.

11. Whereas he further charge me, Sect. 11.
that in my Innocencies Triumph, I slander the Parliament more then before, and
show my self a man despising Government (at least any Church Government the
Parliament shall establish not suitable to my fancy) self-willed, and even
speaking evil of Dignities, etc. Page 110. Circa medium.
; The truth is, that there is far more slander in the charge, then in the
crime: the best is, that that book is open before the world, to see and judge
whether therebe, I do not say any aspersion of slander, but so much as the
least touch or tincture of any thing dishonorable to the Parliament, or to any
Government or Dignity whatsoever, because not suitable to my fancy.

12. Whereas he insinuates a guilt upon me of Socinian errors Page 109. Paulo
post ini^^^^.
, Sect. 12.
and in his margent invites his Reader to see Mr. Walkers and Mr. Roburroughs
answers to them; the truth is, that in the Answers he speaks of, his Reader may
see and find mistakes of my opinion, and confutations of those mistakes, as
substantially managed as want of apprehension of my thoughts, and somewhat
else, was able to manage such an enterprise: but for any Socinian errors of
mine, they are only to be seen in such books as were never written: and then
where the Answers to them are to be seen, remains yet as matter of further
inquiry for Mr. Prynne.

For the second head propounded, Sect. 13.
the unreasonable wresting, torturing, and tormenting of my words, I shall
chiefly insist upon his paraphrase upon that passage, recited (in part) by him,
p. 107. ( but mis-cited in the margent, as touching the page, where it stands
in my book). The tenor of the Passage in this; If I have denied the least dram
or scruple of that power which is truly Parliamentary, and consistent with the
word of the great and glorious God (of which misdemeanor I am not in the least
measure conscious unto my self as yet) I most seriously and solemnly profess
in the presence of this God (my conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost
that I lie not) that I did it out of a loving, tender and affectionate
jealousy over the Parliament, lest possibly they might dash their foot
against that stone, by which all Rule and all Authority and power will one day
be broken in pieces. So that if either my tongue or pen have in the least
miscarried, it was, Error amoris, not amor erroris, etc. You have heard the
text: and if you have any mind to see darkness brought out of light, hearken
to the Interpretation.

But good Sir (says this Intepreter, one, I may say of twenty thousand) can
any rational man think (though you should protest it ten thousand times over)
that such Anti-Parliamentary passages as yours are, should proceed from your
love to the Parliament? Suppose the passages he speaks of were
Anti-Parliaentary (an aspersion I conceive fully attoned in the foregoing
discourse) yet is it so highly irrational to conceive they should proceed from
love to the Parliament, (especially upon ten thousand Affidavits made for it)
that it must be made matter of a doubtful disputation, whether it be possible
for a rational man so to think or conceive? Did Mr. Prynne never hear of a
vein of people, who did bona animo male precaris, wish that which was hurtful
to their friends, out of good affection toward them? Seneca (I am certain)
speaks of such. And God himself is said to have testified things against his
people (as the former English translation, and Junius out of the Original
reads the place, Genesis 32. 46.) Cannot a rational man conceive that these
things might proceed from love and good affection in God toward this people,
because they were against them? I cannot but think that Mr. Prynne himself has
been Anti-Parliamentary, I mean, has done some things, (if not many) in their
natures at least, if not in their fruits and effects, prejudicial to the
honor and safety of the Parliament, as (by name) in representing their
cordial Friends (as sometimes his conscience, or something else prevails with
him to call them Though for the most part really cordial in their affections,
actions to the Parliament and Church of England (speaking of Independents)
Epist. Dedic. Circa initium.
) unto them as disaffected unto them, and as acting, and that successively
against their jurisdiction more desperately then the worst Malignant, Royalist,
Cavalier, on the Arch-Prelate himself Page 107. Circa finem.
). Doubtless, such a practice as this, is in the nature and tendency of it
very disserviceable to the Parliament; as making sad (and so indisposing) the
hearts of those, whose inclinations otherwise stand ready bent with all
cheerfulness, to serve the Parliament with all their strength and all their
power, as (blessed be God) they are resolved to do; after the example of
Christ, who continued still to cast out Devils, though represented by the
Pharisees unto the people, as dealing by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils, in
casting them out. Compare Mat. 9. 34. with Mat. 12. 22. etc. So again by
representing unto them as peaceable, innocent and harmless a generation of
men, as the land bears any, yea, persons as deeply and dearly devoted unto, of
as high and honorable endeavors to promote the public peace both of Church
and State, as those that are extremely derogatory and destructive unto both,
yea, and great disturbers of our Peace and unity Epist. Dedic. Paulo post
initium
. Yet again when he infuseth such notions and principles into Kings,
Magistrates, highest civil powers, as this, that Christ has delegated his
Kingly power unto them, etc. Full Reply. p. 7. Circa initium.
. he spreads snares of death in their way, and tempts them to think higher
thoughts of themselves then He that is higher then the highest of them will
bear. Now however in these and several other things of like consideration
(which are ready too for instance) I absolutely conceive him to be very whit
(yea, and much more) Anti-Parliamentarie, then ever I have been in any passages
whatsoever, whether from my tongue or pen; yet do I not think but that I may
very lawfully, and without trespassing upon the reputation of my reason,
conceive and think, that he did both the one and the other of the things
mentioned, out of love to the Parliament.

Secondly, Sect. 14.
The honey of the foresaid passage, by reason of an ill digestion in his
stomach, breeds this choleric argumentation: If this proceeded from such
affectionate jealousy over the Parliament, I pray what made you so strangely,
if not malignantly, jealous over them, as to fear and presume they might dash
their foot against that stone, which, etc. Good Sir, let me seriously entreat
you to be more jealous over your pen for the time to come, and see to it, that
in repeating and arguing men's words and sayings, it deal more honestly, then
to adulterate and imbase them, as you do both here and elsewhere in this
discourse. Do I any where say that either I fear, or presume the Parliament
might dash their foot against the stone spoken of? Why then do you represent
me so strangely, if not malignantly, jealous over them, as to do both, both
fear and presume? I confess, I should be very strangely jealous, or (however)
very strangely affected in one kind or other, both to fear and presume in
respect of one and the same thing, as you fear not, but presume to say here
that I do. You find out I know not how many significations (I believe more
then ever any man did before you) of the word Presume, p. 109. to salve the
reputation of your pen in charging me to have done that presumtuously, which I
never did at all, or at most very ignorantly; but is there any one amongst them
all, that is able to reconcile PRESVMPTION and FEAR, and make them draw
together in the same yoke? But this by the way. Only this I desire you would
heartily account unto me, why you translate my expression, Lest possibly they
might dash, by fearing and presuming they might dash. I beseech you deal
ingenously with your self and me: is there not far more malignancie in the
interpretation, then in the text? or did you not strain the root overhard, to
make such an extraction as this out of it? Nay, out of the vehemency of your
intention to make an unchristian advantage of your Brothers words, did you not
almost forget the propriety of your own? I conceive I should speak much
beneath the line of Mr. Prynnes reputation for a Scholar, if I should express
my self thus; I fear and presume that Mr. Prynne might do that which is very
possible for any man to do. An English care any thing well palated, would find
no pleasant taste in such words.

But let us give Mr. Prynne the liberty of an Interpreter or Translator, who
is not bound Verbum verbo reddere Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus
Interpres. Hor. de Art.
, Sect. 15.
and accept of his substitues, presumption and fear; is either a fear, or a
presumption (or both) that a Parliament might, or may, dash their foot against
that stone I speak of, any demonstration or argument at all of so strange a
jealousy as he speaks of, and which he is at a stand with himself, whether he
should not call malignant? If any of the other Apostles had feared or presumed,
that Peter possibly might fall (as he did) by denying his Master, (as they had
reason enough to have done, in respect of that humane frailty whereof the best
men are partakers, and Peter himself was with the rest) and had dealt lovingly
and faithfully with him to have kept him upright, by caution, counsel, or
advice; had this been any argument at all, or so much as a color of any such
jealousy in them, which should have carried in it any touch of malignancie
toward him? When Paul feared in the behalf of the Corinthians, Lest by any
means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so their minds should
be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ 2 Cor. 11. 3.
; was this so strange a jealousy over them? Indeed himself calls it a godly
jealousy Ver. 2.
: and in such a sense, as godliness is strange Isa. 8.
in the world, let Mr. Prynne vote my jealousy over the Parliament, STRANGE;
and then he shall be eased of his scruple, whether he should call it malignant,
or no. But jacta alea est; and he intends not to make a stand here, but
advances thus.

Did the Parliament ever give you the least color or occasion of such
uncharitable, Sect. 16.
unchristian, that I say not detestable, jealousy? Could you have harder or
more jealous thoughts then these of the very Pope or Turk himself, or of that
Great Antichrist, who exalts himself above all that is called God? Can such
jealousies as these issue from any, but from a rancorous or disaffected heart
toward the Parliament? or did ever such execrable jealousies as these proceed
from the heart, tongue, much less the pen of any Oxford Aulicus, or most
venomous Malignant to our Parliament? The strain of eloquence in these
passages, may be thought above the line of Mr. Prynnes Rhetorique; nor can I
believe but that he had some supernatural assistance in the raising and
composure of them. And therefore whereas others (it is like) will be apt to
censure him more for a few such lines as these, then for many others of a
softer temper, and more plausible allay; I on the contrary, can better bear
with him in these, and be content to pass by and spare him, as our Savior
spared Peter, when he rebuked Satan in his stead Mat. 16. 23.
. But did I know that Mr. Prynne would not accept of this purgation, but when
recovered out of that Tartarean Ecstasie, wherein he spoke this dialect of
Dragons, would still stand by and own those ebullitions of blood, as the
natural and genuine productions and fruit of his pen; I should hardly refrain
from taking a solemn vow and protestation upon me in the sight of God, Angels,
and men, never more to have to do with him in word or deed, at least until he
repented, and turned Christian. Well might the Apostle Paul pray to be
delivered from unreasonable men 2 These. 3. 2.
: They that neither make use of their reason nor goodness, (or charity) dwell
in such a darkness which is inaccessible to all principles both of Nature and
Grace. For the present, though I think it not meet for me so far to
dis-interesse my self of my liberty to comply with such opportunities from
Heaven, which may possibly and unexpectedly come in my way, as absolutely to
abjure all commerce with him by pen; yet this I profess, that I am as near
the brow of such a resolution, as ever I can go without falling into it. From
henceforth I shall give Mr. Prynne leave to write storms and tempests,
whirlwinds and earthquakes, thundering and lightning, millstones and
mountains, (or if his pen knows how to utter it self in any thing more
formidable then these) better cheap, then hitherto I have done: I see there is
no mercy with him; and therefore I shall not fear him; no, nor in the mind I
am in for the present, ever look after him in his writings more, this answer
finished. But to his lines (or, whose-ever they be).

First, Sect. 17.
Does Mr. Prynne think that he is heir to that Laurel which was long since
wreathed for the head of Socrates, reputed in his days the Grand-Matter of
wisdom in the world; Tanquam umbrae velitant alii; solus sapit iste? Other men
generally as well learned and Scholars by profession, as others, yea, even
those in whose affections neither my person nor cause were any ways
interessed, gave testimony to my Innocencies Triumph (and consequently to that
passage also so cruelly handled by Mr. Prynne) as moderately and inoffensively
written: only Mr. Prynne, as if his eyes were given him to condemn all the
world besides of blindness, espies Bears and Tigers, Lions and Dragons, where
other men saw nothing but doves and sheep; discovers fanatique jealousies,
rancourousnesse and dis-affection of heart, execrablenesse of jealousies,
Oxfordian Aulicisme, venomousnesse of malignancie, and I know not how many
other strains of most portentuous and hideous outrage against the Parliament,
where no man besides himself either saw or could see, any jot, tittle, letter,
syllable, word, or sentence, but what both was and is of the fairest
consistencie with the honor, dignity, peace and safety of the Parliament.

But secondly, how irrational and weak is that demand of his; Did the
Parliament ever give you the least color or occasion of any such uncharitable,
unchristian, that I say not detestable jealousy? as if to fear, or think it
possible that men might be men, that is, do weakly or unworthily, were an
uncharitable, unchristian, detestable, execrable jealousy over them; Or, as if
there were not ground and reason enough, yea, and more then enough, in the very
natures of the best and holiest of men, to judge that they may very possibly
miscarry, and that dangerously, unless they should add ex superabundanti,
such personal irregularities, as might further presage their future falls, I
wonder what Epithet or Name Mr. Prynne will find for that jealousy of an
ancient Father over Kings, out of which he uttered this saying: Miror si
aliquis Rex salvahitur; I wonder that any King should ever be saved. If so be
such a jealousy over them, which only conceives a possibility of their
perishing, be uncharitable, unchristian, detestable exeorable; of what censure
is that jealousy worthy of, which makes it matter of admiration that any of
them should be saved? Considering that there has scarce (if at all) been any
Council or Synod since the Apostles days, but which has miscarried and
heterodogmatiz'd, more or less; would it be my uncharitable, unchristian,
detestable, execrable jealousy over any Synod or Council now fitting, to think
that they also might possibly miscarrie, unless they gave some particular and
special occasion so to think and conceive of them?

But my Adversary has not yet finished his severe Commentaries Sect. 19. Mr.
Pryn, p. 108
upon his gentle and harmless Text; his pen moves forward thus: Had you had
any just cause of such a jealousy, yet it had been your duty privately to have
informed your friends in Parliament with it in a Brotherly Christian way: but
to publish these your brainsick jealousies of them behind their backs in open
Pulpit, and then to the whole world in print, of purpose to make your Auditors,
Readers, jealous of them, as those who invaded the incommunicable Royalties and
Privileges of Heaven, etc. -- or to defame or draw an odium or contempt upon
them, and prepare the people beforehand to oppose or reject whatsoever
Church Government they shall establish, etc. -- is such a transcendent crime
and high affront against the Parliament, as you are never able to expiate: and
is so far from extenieating, that it aggravates your former offenses beyond
expression.

I answer, first, that howsoever by reason of my years, profession, and tenor
of studies, it is (I confess) a shame to me, that I should not be as able to
teach Mr. Prynne his duty, as (it seems) he is to teach me mine; yet glad and
willing shall I be to receive instruction, were it from a far meaner hand then
Mr. Prynnes, in any thing that becomes me in a way of duty to do. But,

Secondly, Sect. 20.
whereas the tenor of his Instruction to me is this, that it had been my duty
privately to have informed my friends in Parliament with it in a Christian
Brotherly way; I perceive he has heard of dealing with his friends in a Way
which well becomes him, as well as it does me; I mean, that which is Christian
and Brotherly. But it seems, he that teaches another, does not always teach
himself. For since the mountains were brought forth Psalm. 90 2.
and settled Prove. 8. 25.
, it may very probably be thought, that there was never any son of Adam, whose
pen made a broader digression from that Christian Brotherly way he speaks of,
then his own. For look as low as the Earth is beneath the heavens; so far is
Mr. Prynnes Way of dealing with his friends, beneath that which is Christian
and Brotherly.

Thirdly, Sect. 21.
whereas he conceives it had been my duty to have informed my friends privately
of what I preached and printed publicly in the premises; I conceive it had
been his duty to have understood himself better in the point, before he had
taken the Chair. For first, the greatest part of the things which I either
preached or printed in the premises, concerned only or chiefly those to whom I
preached, and the generality of men to whom I printed, not the Parliament.
That it is a terrible and most dreadful thing for men to be found fighters
against God, that it is better and more righteous to obey God then men; that
men in great places, men of great parts, learning, and Grace, may possibly
err, and de facto have erred from time to time, with some few particulars more
of like consideration (which are the substance of what was either preached or
printed by me in the premises) are Doctrines of equal (if not of superior)
concernment to the generality of the people, with the Parliament. As for that
passage in my Innocencies Triumph, wherein I mention my tender and affectionate
jealousy over the Parliament, etc. (the passage so tenter'd, tortured and
tormented by the evil spirit which so much haunts Mr. Prynnes pen) it was
occasioned (indeed necessitated) by his own most unreasonable, bloody, and
importune suggestions, clamours and instigations of authority against me: in
regard of which I had no other course but to give a fair and real account out
of what principle and motive (in reference to the Parliament) I spoke such and
such things, which were most unchristianly handled and misused by his pen. Now
then to whisper those things in the ears only of a few, the knowledge whereof
concerns so many thousands, is not the duty, but an high prevarication of the
duty of a Minister of Jesus Christ. Secondly, neither does he know whether the
Doctrines so much questioned and quarrelled by him, did, or do so particularly
concern my friends in Parliament (by my friends, I suppose he means my
acquaintance: for otherwise I trust the whole number of that honorable
Assembly are my friends; at least I know no cause but why they should) as many
other members of this Assembly. If so, his ignorance in such a circumstance as
this, plainly proves that he has here prophesied above the analogy or
proportion of his Faith Romans 12.
; and consequently, (even in his own notion of the word Page 109. paulo ante
medium.
) has done it PRESVMPTVOVSLY. Yea, thirdly, how does he know but that I did
prevent the admonition or reproof of his pen, by doing the very duty, for the
neglect whereof I am so deeply censured by him. I presume that my acquaintance
in the Parliament have not communicated unto him all things that have passed
between me and them; therefore his ignorance in this particular also, proves
him (according to the responsall of his own Oracle, even now intimated) to have
been somewhat PRESVMPTVOVS in his charge of neglect of Duty in me. Fourthly,
and lastly, there being nothing in the particulars excepted against, either
preached or printed by me, which in the judgment of any indifferent or
Christian-spirited man, is of any hard or disparaging reflection either upon any
particular person in the honorable Assembly of Parliament, or upon this
Assembly it self, there could be nothing in the publishing of them, whether by
preaching or printing, any ways repugnant to any duty lying upon me.

That which follows in the late transcribed passage, Sect. 22.
as that I publish my brainsick jealousies and suspicions against them behind
their backs, of purpose to make my Auditors, Readers jealous of them, as men
who invaded, etc. or to defame or draw an odium or contempt upon them, to
prepare the people beforehand to oppose or reject, whatsoever, etc. these
things (I say) with many others of like calculation, both in this and many
other of his writings, are but the reasonlesse presumptions of his exasperated,
transported, unchristianized spirit, over-heat (it may be) with his nocturnall
lucubrations, and in part occasioned by the fuliginous vapors breathing still
upon him from his lamp; and in this regard, I judge them unworthy to have
daylight bestowed upon them for their refutation. He talks of my brainsick
jealousies and suspicions; but these are more then brainsick, even brain-dead
calumniations and slanders; ten degrees (to speak in his own language) more
unchristian, uncharitable, detestable, execrable, then any (even the worst of)
jealousies or suspicions whatsoever. If he would but authorize me to reason
after the rate of his Logique in raising conclusions from his premises, I
could prove (according to the tenor of such authority) that Mr. Prynne has
written against the Congregationall Way, has represented those that walk in it
as extremely derogatory and destructive both unto the Parliament and Church of
Englend Epist. Dedic. non long ab mitio.
, as great disturbers of our public peace and unity Ibidem.
; has slandered them in their spirits, principles, practices, over and over
Epist. to the Reader, all most throughout, and elsewhere in several other of
his writings, as his full Reply, etc.
; has presumptuously attempted to infuse such dangerous principles as these
into Kings, Magistrates, and highest civil powers, that they are Christ's
Substitutes, Vicars, in point of Government (Church Government he speaks of
Full Reply page 7.
) that Christ has delegated his Kingly power unto them Ibidem.
, that it may pass as tolerable, that Christ is King alone over his Churches
in matters of Faith, Full Reply p. 6. prope finem.
etc. with many others of like undue insinuation; I could prove (I say) by the
Commission aforesaid, that Mr. Prynne has done all these things on purpose to
despite the Spirit of God, to defame the Gospel, to make the Ways of
godliness and Religion hateful unto the world, to increase divisions, to
multiply distractions, to bring a snare and evil day upon the Parliament, to
expose the whole Kingdom to utter ruin and destruction. Yea, the truth is,
that there is a far more rational connection between the premises last
mentioned from Mr. P ryn's pen, and such collections and conclusions as these;
then there is between those premises of mine transcribed by him, and the
inferences which he extracts and deduceth from them.

A man might think that the Gentleman had by this time laid out himself to a
sufficient proportion, in depraving both the expressions and intentions of him,
that never (to his best knowledge) did him the least wrong, nor ever
administered the least occasion of provocation; -- Sed audi facinus majoris
abollae.

Your last clause ( says he, yet further, p. 108.) And if continued, etc.
intimates and speaks, aloud without any straining that the Parliament for the
present are guilty of dashing their foot against Christ the Rock: of claiming
the most sacred incommunicable royalties and privileges of heaven, and making
themselves equal with God: and that if they persevere in the course they have
begun (to Reform our Church, etc.) it is such an high provocation against the
most High, as will kindle a fire in the breast of him whose name is Jehovah; he
should have said jealous, ( but that his pen has contracted an ill habit of
stumbling) which will consume and devour, etc. Could all the malignant and
Prelaticall party in England lay a greater, wickeder, or more unjust scandal
in our Parliament then this, or more defame them then by such a false report?
enough to fire the whole Kingdom against them, as well as Gods wrath, etc. as
it follows in his most unjust and ignoble strain of Calumny. But for answer,

1. Does a wicked or unjust scandal use to fire Gods wrath against those upon
whom it is cast, and who are the sufferers. Though the sin committed be enough
to kindle a fire in the breast of him whose name is jealous, against those,
whosoever they be, that lie under the guilt of such a Commission; yet is there
not the least color to imagine, that the false or scandalous imputation of it
unto any, should have the like operation, in respect of those that are so
scandalized.

He tells me of my being a mere Divine, p. 109. and a man altogether ignorant
in the ancient Rights and Privileges of our Parliament, (with how little
pertinencie or advantage to his cause, shall be taken into consideration in due
place.) And by such passages as this, it seems he is every whit as mere a
Lawyer as I a Divine (and consequently of no such super-transcendent abilities
neither, to discern and judge of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, as
will be manifested in due time.) For he that knows not, that God is no ways
offended with men for having wicked and unjust scandals cast upon them, surely
had need to be taught what are the first principles of the Oracles of God Heb.
5. 12.
. And

2. Whereas in the beginning of the last transcribed passage, he speaks thus,
Your last clause, And if continued, etc. intimates and speaks loud without any
strayning, that, etc. does he not seem to rejoice, as if now he had met with a
full feast, and had only scrambled for all he had gotten and satisfied his
hunger with till now? And does he not without any strayning, seem to imply,
that all my former clauses without straining, would have spoke none of those
things, which now by his rackes, screws, and engines, he has made them to
speak? So that here we have confitentem rerum: oh that we had but the
Participle as well matched as the Adjective, that is (by interpretation)
emendantem confitentem, and then let both our books to the fire together, to
purge out the dross of them What ever censure you deserve, I fear your book
demerits the fire to purge out this dross. p. 109.
. But

3. The grand unhappiness of the man is, that what I speak only in thesi, or
in the general throughout the whole period or passage, wherein this clause,
And if contemned, etc. stands, he here represents upon the Stage of his
passion, as if it had been spoken in hypothesi, with particular and precise
application to the Parliament. The whole period, though it be somewhat long,
yet that the Reader may not be denied any part of his due in point of
satisfaction, I shall transcribe, ab ovo usque ad mala, as it begins at the
bottom of page 2. of my Innocencies Triumph. I confess I am in the habitual
and standing frame of my heart and spirit, tender and jealous over all the
world, and much more over those who are dear unto me, but most of all over
those who being dear unto me, are likewise more exposed then others unto the
tentation and danger of the sin; extremely jealous and tender (I say) I am
over such, lest they should touch with any title, or claim the most sacred and
incommunicable royalties and privileges of heaven, and so count it no robbery
to make themselves equal to God; knowing most assuredly, that this is a high
provocation in the eyes of the most High, and if continued in, will kindle a
fire in the breast of him whose name is Jealous, and will consume and devour.

I confess I spoke in some passages before this, of the Parliament by name;
nor do I deny all relation between this and the former: but all the relation
that can reasonably be imagined between the one and the other, will not amount
so much as to a colorable justification of this high-handed and full-mouthed
charge, that the latter speaks aloud without any strayning, that the Parliament
is guilty of dashing, etc. of claiming, etc. And that if, etc. These are every
whit as pure and clean strains of that disposition which acted in the former
part of this exposition, as any of those other which have played before us
already. And

4. Suppose the period had been perfectly Hypotheticall, and the contents of it
applied to the Parliament by name, yet it is far from speaking the dialect
that Mr. Prynne would fain force into the mouth of it. He that shall represent
the great evil or danger of a sin, as suppose of oppression, drunkenness,
adultery, or the like, unto a man, in these or the like terms, Know most
assuredly, that such a sin is a most high provocation in the eyes of the most
High: and then should add, And if continued in, will kindle a fire in the
breast of him whose name is Jealous, etc. does no ways suppose, that the
person to whom such an address or representation is made, is under the present
actual guilt of the perpetration of such a sin; but only demonstrates the
dangerous and deadly consequence of it unto him, in case he shall be entangled
with the guilt, and continue in the perpetration of it without repentance.
Therefore Mr. Prynnes lucubration and collection, that this clause, And if
continued, etc. speaks aloud without any strayning, any such Parliamentary
guilt as he deciphers with his pen, is nocturnall, neither is there so much as
a beam of the light of truth in it.

5. Whereas he charge that innocently-offending clause of mine, And if
continued, etc. both to intimate and speak aloud, and that without any
straining, that high misdemeanour lately mentioned, (little less then capital
to him that shall avouch it) I cannot conceive any regular consistence in the
charge. For though one and the same man, who has a liberty and power both to
alter his tone and voice, and tenor of expression, may one while only
intimate, i. whisper, or express a thing sparingly: and otherwhile, speak it
out aloud, with a full and strong voice, (though hardly thus without any
straining at all) yet how one and the same clause in writing, which has
neither principle nor shadow of any variation or change of expression in it,
but is still uniforme and standing both in the matter which, and in the manner
wherein, it speaks, should both intimate (or whisper) and yet speak aloud
too, one and the same thing, is a saying divided in it self, and which my
understanding knows not how to make to stand. But thus, God many times makes
both tongues and pens which imagine evil against others, to f^ll upon
themselves Psalm. 64. 8.
.

6. And lastly, whereas he pretends the forementioned clause, And if continued,
etc. guilty of speaking aloud and without any straining, the prenamed
enormitie, the truth is, that this charge speaks aloud and without any
straining, that Mr. Prynne loves all devouring words Psalm. 52. 4.
, whether they be words of soberness and truth Act.
, or of another inspiration. Is it not very strange, and a miracles fellow (at
least) if not a miracle, that Mr. Prynnes hearing should be so predominant in
the world, that he alone should hear a loud s^eaking, where all the world
besides could not hear the least muttering or whisper? But when men have Brick
to make, and want straw, they must be content to gather stubble in stead of it
Exodus 5. 12.
. The builders of Babel were fain to make use of slime in stead of mortar Genesis
11. 4.
. (...), were a generation of men in Plato's days, and the line (it seems) is
not yet extinct.

Many other passages there are in this Triumphing discourse, wherein the author
does miserable carnifice other words and passages of mine; but Caesar's image
and superscription may be seen in a penny Mat. 22. 19, 20.
, as well as in a pound.

But because the great Guerdon and Crown for which Mr. Prynne runs in this
and other his lucubrations against me, is to transform me into a man of a
ranc^^ous and disaffected heart against Parliaments Page 108.
, and to couple me with the worst Malignants, Royalists, Cavaliers, yea with
the Arch-Prelate himself Page 107.
; before I leave the point in hand, I shall briefly specify, both what, in
what degree I have done, and continue yet doing from opportunity to
opportunity, to the utmost of my power, for the Parliament: and withal
solemnly profess in the sight of God and men, that if either Mr. Prynne, or
any other man, can direct or say unto me, how, or what, when, or wherein I may
yet do more for them, or show and express more love or affectionatenesse unto
them, then I have already done, and still do (upon occasion) daily; provided
only that I may see and understand, that what shall be required of me in this
kind, does really and indeed, not in show and pretense only, tend to the
benefit, honor and safety of the Parliament; I am ready and willing, and do
by these presents obliege and bind my self, Testibus Coelo and Terra, to
perform. I have once See my Anti-Cavalierisme.
and again See my Bonc for a Bishop.
in Print, with the utmost engagement of my weak abilities in that kind,
asserted the Parliamentary cause against the Oxfordian; yea (as far as I yet
understand) I was the first amongst all my Brethren who serve at the Altar,
that rose up in this kind, for the Parliament: with what exposall of my self to
danger, on the one hand, and with what success and advantage to the cause
undertaken by me on the other, many there are that know, and (I make no
question) are ready upon occasion to declare and testify. How frequently, yea
for many months together, when the Parliamentarie occasions were most urging
and pressing, (almost) uninterruptedly, and with what fervency and contestation
of spirit, I labored by preaching to advance the service; yea with what
alacrity and importunity, I continually solicited and promoted all
Parliamentarie occasions, suits, and motions recommended by Ordinance or
otherwise; was openly testified by a Member of that Honorable Committee before
which I was called, pending the complaint against me there. How many young men
and others, as faithful as useful in the Army as any others of their rank
and employment whatsoever, what by preaching, what by conference and
persuasion, were through the blessing of God, armed with courage and resolution
by me for the wars, there are both in the City, and in the Army, more then
a few that can inform. Nor is it unknown to thousands, with what contention
and striving of spirit, with what earnestness of prayer and supplication I
have without ceasing in my public prayers, commended the Parliament with all
their proceedings and affairs unto God; nor have my later intercessions for
them, either in strength of affection, or in any other desirable respect
whatsoever, given place unto my former. Without any disparagement to Mr.
Prynnes Orisons Epist. Dedic. in sine.
be it spoken, I may conjecture I have been both as frequent, and desired to be
as fervent in commending that Honorable Assembly with all their pious
endeavors to the Divine Benediction, as himself. As touching pecuniary
expressions of my self to and for the Parliament, my affections may (perhaps)
suffer loss and disadvantage in the thoughts of some, who measure by the
Arithmeticall, in stead of the Geometrical proportion (by which our Savior
measured the poor widows gift, cast into the treasury Mar. 12. 43.
, and every man's expressions of himself in this kind should be measured) yet I
make no question but I can produce speaking papers, (yea and men too, if need
be) that will abundantly testify, that I have not been behind many of those
who are before me for matter of estate, and who are looked upon too as men
sound-hearted to the Parliament. There has no proposition for advance of
moneys, been at any time recommended by the Parliament unto the City, that I
know of, but has been entertained by me with a full proportion of my estate.
And look what I have been, and have appeared to be in public, and in view of
many; the same have I bin also in all my more private intercourses and
colloques with men; strengthening the hands of some which began to be feeble and
to hang down, loosing the bands, resolving the doubts of others, so setting
them at liberty to serve the Parliament, who before were bound up, and could
do nothing. Nor have I quitted my self at this rate in the Parliamentary
service, in or about the City only: but have been as diligent and faithful
an Agent for them in the Country also where I have become, and that not
without some considerable success. I am a fool (I confess) to speak all this
of my self: but Mr. Prynne has compelled 2 Cor. 12. 11.
me. If I be yet defective and wanting in any thing that is my duty to do for
the Parliament, if there be any other service or labor of love wherein I may
yet further express my self to, and for them; all the powers of my soul stand
ready bent and pressed within me to embrace the opportunity, and to fall on upon
the work. If for all this I must be numbered amongst men of rancorous and
disaffected hearts against the Parliament, I shall congratulate the felicity
of those that are better thought of; and yet shall think mine own the more
Princely portion Reglum est male audire, cum been feceris.
. Mala opinio been parta delectat. A good conscience is never at the full of
her sweetness, light, and glory, but when uprightness suffers and is
eclipsed: the antiperistasis of outward sufferings, intends the inward vigor
and strength of that principle, out of which a good conscience acts, when
she comfort. If the affections of men to the Parliament, must be compelled
to hold up their hand and be tried at Mr. Prynnes bar, and the Law ruling
there be this, that whosoever will not adore Mr. Prynnes notion of an
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the civil Magistrate, and submit the clear
and lightsome decisions (at least in the eye of their judgment and conscience)
of the Oracles of God to the Spirit that spoke in old Stories, Statutes and
Records in the darkest times of Popery, though they have given never so
satisfactory and abundant an account of the goodness of their affection in
this kind otherwise, must be condemned and cast as venomous Malignants and
underminers of the undoubted privileges of Parliaments, etc. I confess, that
my affection will not abide the trial of this fire. Nevertheless, this I
solemnly promise and profess, that if Mr. Prynne or any other, shall
reasonably demonstrate unto me truth in either of these Positions; either 1. in
this, that any thing is to be esteemed a Privilege, which is not for the
benefit, good, or safety of those that shall enjoy it; or 2. in this, that such
an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or power, as Mr. Prynne in all or most of his
discourses upon this subject portraictures and sets out, tends in the nature
and constitution of it, to the benefit, safety or good of the Parliament; I
shall soon be his convert, and cause my present apprehensions in the point to
bow down at the feet of his. This for the second head propounded.

For the third and last, the insufficiency, or (to speak the dialect of his
own pen) the impotencie, of those few exceptions which he makes against some
few particulars in my Innocencies Triumph, such as he conceives (it seems) to
be more soft and tractable under his exceptious pen. First, to salve a sore
that will never be perfectly healed, to justify (I mean) his Indictment
against me, that I did not only or simply undermine the undoubted privileges
of Parliament by the very roots, (this being not a charge, as it seems, worthy
the indignation or discontent of Mr. Prynnes pen) but that I perpetrated this
high misdemeanour PRESVMPTVOVSLY; he informs us as matter of high concernment
to his cause and honor, that Grammarians, Lawyers, and Divines inform us,
that the word, Presumptuous, comes from the verb, Praesumo: which verb he
presumes will accommodate him with one or other of those various
significations, which with great care and circumspection that none be wanting,
he there musters and enumerates. And because the honor and validity of this
his purgation rests altogether upon such significations or acceptions of his
verb, as are most men's mysteries; therefore in his margent he calls in Thomas
Aquinas, Calepine, with some others, for his compurgators. But

Good Sir; did you either expect or intend, that either the Parliament or your
other readers, should be so above measure tender either of your reputation or
of mine, as that meeting with the word PRESVMPTVOVSLY in your indictment
against me, they would go and search Calepine, Thomas Aquinas, Holy-oake,
Media-villa, and I know not how many more, to inform themselves in how many
senses or significations the word might be taken, lest otherwise they should
take you tardy with an unjust crimination, or me with a foul crime? What you
may conceive them likely to do in this kind out of tenderness of respect to
your reputation, I will not prejudge: but to deal plainly with you, I expect
no such quarter from any of your Readers, for the preservation of mine. They
that have a mind to believe you in that point of your charge, (yea and indeed
any other, considering other expressions of yours of the like importance) are
like to take the word Presumptuously, according to the vulgar and most familiar
signification of it in common parlance, and that which is next at hand: in
which signification, it does nothing less then import all that variety you
speak of, but a plain wilful (as your word elsewhere is) perpetration of an
evil; and as for the three last significations which you fasten upon it, as
that it signifies, against Authority, or Laws, or upon hopes of impunitie;
though I have not the Authors by me upon whom you father the propriety of
these significations, to examine the truth of what in this you affirm; yet am
I very strong of Faith, that men of learning and judgment (as most of the
Authors you cite were) never assigned any of these three senses or importances,
as the proper and legitimate acceptions or significations of the word. When
John the Baptist told Herod (a man in great Authority) to his face, that it
was not lawful for him to have Herodias his Brother Philips wife Mat. 14. 4.
, was this done PRESVMPTVOVSLY, especially in the proper signification of the
word? Again, when Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego refused to submit to that
Decree or Law which Nebuchadnezzar and his Nobles had made, which commanded all
to fall down and worship the golden image which the King had set up Dan. 3. 18.
; and so when Daniel trangress'd that Law or Statute which Darius and his
Nobles had decreed and established according to the Law of the Medes and
Persians, which alters not Dan. 6. 8. 10.
, by kneeling upon his knees three times a day, praying unto, and praising God,
with his chamber-window open toward Jerusalem; did either of these sin, or do
any thing (under the Interpretation aforesaid) PRESVMPTVOVSLY? Mr. Prynne
himself (I presume) dedicated these his Lucubrations to the Parliament, upon
hopes, yea upon more then hopes of impunitie, upon hopes of Grace and
Acceptance: has he therefore done PRESVMPTVOVSLY? I am content in this sense
to own the word PRESVMPTVOVSLY, in my prementioned charge; and confess that I
did that, which he (calling it quite out of its name) calls an undermining of
the undoubted Privileges of Parliament, etc. PRESVMPTVOVSLY. i. I did upon
hopes, yea and somewhat more then upon hopes of impunitie, upon hopes of
acceptance both with God and men. And if Mr. Prynne would have pleased but to
have declared in his margent or otherwise, that in the aforesaid indictment he
meant the word, PRESVMPTVOVSLY, in this sense, and no other; he had saved me a
double, and himself a single labor, (if not a double also) for I should not
have lift up so much as a word of exception against it.

But let us see a little, how like a man he quits himself in vindicating the
truth and equity of his so-dearly-beloved term, PRESVMPTVOVSLY, as it stands,
or lies, (which you will) in the controverted indictment. His first
signification of the verb PRAESVMO, is to forestall; and to prove that in this
sense of the word, I committed the capital crime objected PRESVMPTVOVSLY, he
reasons, or rather talks, thus. First you preached and printed those passages
of purpose to forestall the Parliaments and Assemblies pious resolutions, etc.
But Mr. Prynne, there is a rule in the civil Law (and because there is so much
reason in it, I conceive your Common Law complyes with it) which sounds thus;
Non esse, and non appaerere, aequiparantur in Jure. How will you do for
witness, or evidences competent in Law, to make it appear that I printed and
preached the passages you speak of, for such a purpose as you pretend? can you
find the present thoughts or purposes of all particular men in this age, in the
ancient Records which bear date, from the darkest times of Popery? Or has the
Omniscient anointed your eyes with any such eye salve, which makes you able to
see into the hearts and reins and spirits of men? or have I acknowledged either
in writing or otherwise, any such intent or purpose as you speak of, in those
passages? or is it beyond the upper region of possibilities, that I should have
any other purpose in them, then what you affirm? When you print, that I
printed the passages you mention of purpose to forestall the pious resolutions
of the Parliament; do you print this OF PVRPOSE to forestall the pious
inclinations or resolutions of the Parliament, not to make more offenders by
punishment, then were made such before by delinquencie? Or when you printed,
that Christ has delegated his Kingly Office unto Kings, Magistrates, and
highest civil powers Full Reply page 7. Circa initium.
, did you print it of purpose to make them think that they had as much power
and Authority to make Laws for his Churches, as Christ himself has? Such
affirmations and right-downe conclusions as these, are worse then the most
uncharitable, unchristian, detestable, execrable, groundless, fanatique
jealousies Page 108.
.

The second signification of the auxiliarie verb, PRAESVMO, is (as Mr. Prynne
from his Authors, or otherwise, informs us) to conceive beforehand: and to
prove that in this sense I trespassed the trespass of his complaint,
PRESVMPTVOVSLY, he advances with this demonstration. 2. To establish and
support that Independent way which you had beforehand without any lawful
warrant conceived, ere the Parliament had made choice of, or settled any
Church Government for them, etc. But good Sir, has no man a lawful warrant to
consider, inquire after, (and consequently, to conceive) what Christ has
established in point of Church Government, until the Parliament has made
choice of, or settled such a Government? Every man has warrant enough, yea and
that which is more then a warrant, an engagement by way of duty lying upon
him; especially Divines (as you call them) whose particular calling and
profession it is to search the Scriptures, and to discover the mind of Christ
there, to conceive beforehand, if they be able, what tenor or form of
Church Government is most agreeable to the mind of Christ; and not to suspend
their studies, inquiries, conceptions in that kind, until men have framed
their conceptions or apprehensions for them. The Parliament had not made choice
of, nor settled any Church Government for Mr. Edwards, when he composed and
printed his Antapologie? Did he therefore PRESVMPTVOVSLY, to conceive it
beforehand, and so peremptorily conclude for it as he has done? Whether yet
they have made choice of any, or no, I cannot say; I have no demonstrative
grounds to think they have: but certain I am that they as yet have settled none,
and so are still at liberty to choose another, in case they have chosen any.
Has not Mr. Prynne then done PRESVMPTVOVSLY, to conceive a Government
beforehand, and to print for it, the Parliament as yet having chosen none, or
however, settled none? If Mr. Prynne being a Lawyer, had a lawful warrant to,
conceive a Church Government beforehand, as he has done, Church Matters being
eccentricall to his profession; much more has he that is a Divine, and
nevertheless because he is a mere one. Neither can the five Apolog. be said
to have done this first, because they rather show their own practice and desire
liberty therein, then peremptorily, (as some others) prescribe to others under
the notion of schismatiques and troublers of the public peace, if they be not
of their minds in all things, about what they practice and profess, as (in
their judgments) most agreeable to the truth.

A third signification of the verb we wot of, is according to Mr. Prynnes
Lexicographie, to usurp or take that upon a man which belongs not to him. And
to prove that in this sense also I am a Son of PRESVMPTION in the transgression
voted by Mr. Prynnes pen, upon me, he rises up higher then yet in this
insulting strain. It was no less then high PRESVMPTION in you, being a mere
Divine, and a man altogether ignorant of, or unskilful in the ancient Rights
and Privileges of our Parliament (as your writings demonstrate, and your self
intimate, p. 5.) to undertake and judge of them so peremptorily -- When as if
you had known any thing concerning them, you might have learned this among
other things, that Divines are no competent Judges of Parliaments privileges:
that the Privileges, Rights and Cujiomes of our Parliaments, are only to be
judged and determined by the Parliament it self, not in or by any other
inferior Court, etc. In this passage there are some things true, and some
things false; and both the the one and the other make aloud and without
straining, against the Author, and neither of them against me at all. For,

1. If I be a man altogether ignorant if the ancient rights and privileges of
Parliament, how come I to be charged, as a wilful underminer or violator of
them Full Reply in the very last clause.
? Ignorance though it be good for little, but to cause men to stumble and do
amiss; yet it is (for the most part) a preserver of men from offending
wilfully, how ever it self may be a wilful offense. Those things (says
Aristotle) appear to be involuntary, (...). Arist. Ethic. ad Nichom. l. 3. c.
1.
or unwillingly done, which are done either by external compulsion, or out of
ignorance. If I judge Mr. Prynne ignorant of that government which the
Scriptures hold forth, I cannot reasonably judge him a wilful opposer of it.

2. If the Privileges, Rights and Customs of our Parliaments, be only to be
judged and determined by the Parliament it self, and not in or by any other
inferior Court, how comes Mr. Prynne by his authority or commission to judge
and determine, that I have wilfully violated, presumptuously undermined the
undoubted privileges of Parliament, by the very roots? Surely he has not the
power which an inferior Court of Judicature has, much less is he the
Parliament it self: and yet he undertakes to judge and determine, and that
positively and negatively, (which I do not) not only the privileges
themselves of Parliament, but the very roots also of these privileges. If
according to his own assertion, he has no power or authority to judge or
determine of the privileges we speak of, why does he judge and censure me as a
PRESUMPTUOUS underminer and violator of these privileges? Can any man
reasonably pass a sentence against another as a delinquent in such and such
cases, when as the cases themselves are not of his cognizance, nor lawful for
him to judge of?

3. If the Privileges and Rights of our Parliament be only to be judged by
the Parliament it self, upon what Christian or indeed reasonable foundation,
shall we a vouch the taking of the late National Vow and Covenant, wherein
with our hands lifted up to the most high God (among other things) we swear,
that we would sincerely, really, and constantly, in our several vocations,
endeavor with our estates, and lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, etc. Did we swear in this most tremend and solemn
manner, to preserve those things, not only that we know not what they are,
but which it is not lawful for us to enquire after, at least, not to judge and
say what they are after our most diligent and faithful enquiry after them? If
before the taking of this covenant, I had conceived, that whatsoever Mr. Prynne
should please to avouch for Privilege of Parliament, I should have stood bound
by the covenant taken, to maintain with my estate and life, for such; I should
rather have exposed both to the mercy and equity of the Parliament by refusing
it, then both these and my self besides, to the displeasure of God, by such an
unchristian, yea unreasonable and unmanlike action. Besides, Parliament
privileges are either fundamental, general, and common Rights of all
national Bodies, or else peculiar to this State; and so also they are either
such as are by their constant practice commonly declared, or else more reserved
for occasional emergencies. The two former are obvious to judge of; and the
latter also apprehensible upon their discovery of them, especially with their
grounds, else how could they have been assisted in the defense of them all this
time?

4. Whereas he vilifies, or insults over me as being a mere Divine, I confess
I have not much to except against the disparagement; yet I desire leave to
speak these three things. 1. That if Mr. Prynne himself had been a mere
Divine, he had chosen the better part: and if he yet knew how to tranforme the
skill which he has in the Law, into a like proportion of sound Divinity, he
and the Church should gain by it; so great plenty is there of good Lawyers, and
so few faithful laborers in Gods harvest.

2. Though I pretend to no great knowledge in any other Science, but to that
which is the glory of all the rest ( Divinity I mean) no nor yet to one half
of that knowledge in this, which my years and opportunities, had not I been a
son of folly and infirmities above many, might well have furnished me with;
yet can I not with truth yield my self so merely a Divine, as not to
understand many Principles and Maxims of reason, besides those which I have
learned from the Scriptures; As that every whole is more then any part of it:
That no effect can possibly exceed the virtue or efficacy of the total cause
thereof: That one part of any contradiction is verifiable of every thing: That
the good of many other circumstances being alike, is to be preferred before the
like good of one, or of a few: with many others of affinity with these. By the
authority and aid of which alone, without the concurrence or assistance of any
Principle at all, proper to the Science of Divinity, I know (God assisting) I
am able to make good the ground which I have chosen to stand upon in the
controversies depending between Mr. Prynne and me. Yea, I should injure mine
own ignorance and weakness, and censure them too deep, if I should deny but
that I know somewhat in other Arts and Sciences also.

3. And lastly, if I be a mere Divine, I remember I have read some such
observation as this for my comfort, that when the stream of endeavors is
divided, the waters of knowledge run but shallow in a plurality of channels,
(...). But

5. Whereas he lifts up this Iron mace on high, and thinks to break all in
pieces like a potters vessel, that I have either said, or ever shall be able
to say, to escape the push of his pike, PRESUMPTUOUSLY, wherewith he makes at
me in the pre-recited charge, that Divines are no competent Judges of
Parliaments privileges; and that therefore it was no less then PRESUMPTION,
nay then PRESUMPTION upon PRESUMPTION, then high PRESUMPTION for me being a
mere Divine, and a man altogether ignorant in the ancient Rights and Privileges
of our Parliaments, to undertake to determine and judge of them so
peremptorily, etc. I answer.

1. If I had been altogether ignorant of the Rights and Privileges of
Parliament, I was not so capable of engaging my self by that solemn vow,
which is now upon me, for the maintaining of them sincerely, really,
constantly, etc. For though a man may indefinitely swear to maintain the just
rights of such or such a Body, though he know them not all distinctly, yet that
he may swear in judgment, it is requisite he be not altogether ignorant of
them. So that if Mr. Prynnes doctrine in this point be true, it is more then
time for me to fly from my Covenant, as from a Serpent, and to abhor my
self in dust and ashes before the presence of God, that ever I took it. But
blessed be God, my ignorance of the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, is
not such, but that I know many of them: These by name (questionless) are some
of them; To be the Sovereign Tribunal, and supreme Judicatory in the
Kingdom: To have a Legislative power in civil affairs in respect of the
whole Kingdom: To have a power of discharging or repealing all former Laws
and Statutes that are found inconvenient for the State and Kingdom: To dispose
of the Militia of the Kingdom, for the safety and best advantage thereof: To
impose Rates and Taxes of money for the necessary occasions of the Kingdom; to
call even the greatest Delinquents in the Kingdom to account, and to inflict
punishments upon them according to the nature of their crimes: To defend,
protect, and encourage, and that with an higher hand then others can do, those
that do well, and live peaceably, and are serviceable in their callings and
employments to the State. Besides many others like unto the Stars in the
Firmament of heaven, which cannot be numbered.

2. Whereas Mr. Prynne to make light of darkness, and to cover the shame of
his darling (PRESUMPTUOUSLY) with honor, thrusts Divines out of doors, as no
competent judges of Parliaments privileges, he must know from a mere Divine (if
there be any place left in him for an addition in that kind, and intus apparens
does not prohibere alienum, with too strong an hand) that Divines in one
respect, and that of sovereign consideration, are Judges of a better and more
regular competencie of such things, then Lawyers are, (without prejudice to
that profession be it spoken) yea and the meerer Divine (in M. Pryns sense) the
more competent Judge in this kind, as the mere Physician a more competent
Judge of medicines then others. There is a double judgment or dijudication of
Parliament Privileges: the one positive or affirmative, the other privative or
negative. The positive or affirmative judgment we speak of, consists in a
faculty or ability of discerning what really and indeed are the Privileges of
Parliament: the judgment which I call negative, consists in the like faculty
or ability of discerning, what are not. For this is a most certain and
undoubted Maxim, That nothing that is sinful, or contrary to the will and
word of God, can possibly be a privilege of Parliament. The reason whereof is
plain: Nothing that in the nature and direct tendencie of it, is dishonorable
or destructive to a creature, can possibly be any privilege thereof. Now
whatsoever is sinful, and displeasing unto God, is in the nature and direct
tendencie of it, dishonorable and destructive to the creature, as the whole
tenor of the Scriptures (almost) yea and the impressions of natural light and
conscience in all men, do abundantly confirm. Ergo. So then the Scriptures or
word of God being the Standard or supreme Rule whereby to judge what is
sinful, and consequently destructive to the creature, and what not; evident it
is, that they who reasonably may be presumed to have the best knowledge and
soundest understanding in these, are the most competent Judges (from amongst
men) in all cases and questions, about what is sinful, and what not. And
whether mere Lawyers, or mere Divines, may with more reason be presumed to be
men of this interest, let either Lawyers themselves, or Divines, or who ever
will, judge. I had not known sin (says the Apostle Romans 7. 7.
) but by the Law: He speaks of the Law of God, not of any law of men. And
another Apostle to like purpose: Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also
the Law: for sin is the transgression of the Law 1 Ioh. 3. 4.
; speaking as the other did, only of the Law of God. Now howsoever Mr. Prynnes
mere Divines cannot reasonably be supposed to have spent so much of their time
in traversing and reading over the ancient Records of Parliamentary
transactions, as Lawyers have, nor consequently to be so able or ready as they,
to tell Stories in this kind, of what Parliaments formerly have done; yet when
any case of conscience, or question arises, about such and such customs or
passages in Parliaments, (call them Rights, Privileges, or what you will)
whether they were lawful in point of conscience, and justifiable in the sight
of God, or no, the mere Lawyer with his books and records, must stand by, as
having neither part nor fellowship in this Judicature; the mere Divine is the
only competent Judge in the case; yea, and this is confirmed by Parliaments
themselves, who have decreed that in some Courts and Cases, Clergymen, as some
call them, should fit, and was the custom till very lately in London it self,
the Bishop usually and by right sitting at the Sessions of life and death; yea,
and in case of life, if the Clergyman says, Legit ut Clericus, the Law saves
the man. And if Mr. Prynne conceives, that all customs or Presidents of
Parliaments will make Privileges of Parliament, I conceive the present
Parliament will abhor his conception; many of them being only matter of
sorrow, shame and caution, not of Privilege or example. So then to deal
clearly and unpartially between Lawyers and Divines, touching their respective
abilities and interests for discerning and judging of the Customs, Rights and
Privileges (so called) of Parliaments; The Lawyers interest and faculty (if he
be a Master in his profession) as such (I mean as a mere Lawyer) is to
collect, draw together, and present to view, all, and all manner of
Parliamentary transactions, passages, statutes, customs, presidents, etc. good
and bad, one with another, without distinction, out of their respective
Records: but the interest and faculty of the Divine (if he be a man worthy his
profession) is to survey this collection presented unto him, to consider
whether there be nothing in them contrary to the will and mind of God declared
in his Word: (which contrariety dissolves the authority and interest of any
Statute, Custom, President, whatsoever) and so to separate the vile from the
precious Ierem. 15. 19
, that which has a consistence with the word of God, from that which opposes
and contradicts it. The entry series or story of Parliamentary passages, is
like the Polypus head, wherein there are observed to be (...), many good
things, and many bad; the Statutes of Moses, and the Statutes of Omri, the
manner of the house of David, and the manner of the house of Ahab, are
intermixed and wrapped up together there. Now alas, with the mere Lawyer (I
speak of him, as such, and not as Christian or godly) all is fish that comes to
net, all this Congregation is holy, even every one of them Numb. 16. 3.
; every Statute without exception, if unrepeal'd on earth, though nullified in
heaven before it was made, is still valid, and good in Law; every custom,
without difference, an undoubted privilege of Parliament: every passage a
sufficient president for after-imitation, the Statutes of Omri as good for his
turn, and in his eye, as the Statutes of Moses: the manner of the house of
Ahab, as laudable as the manner of the house of David, or of the house of God
himself: as is the good, so is the bad, (to him) the Statute that curses, as
that which blesses a Land. All this is evident from that voluminous
coacervation of old matters, passages, presidents, etc. by Mr. Prynne himself
in the former part of this discourse, many of them (as himself intimates Page
106. l. 9. 10.
) fetched out of the darkest times of Popery, and highest ruff of Pope, of
Prelates: and yet thinks that these are enough to evict and convince me and
all the world besides, that I have not only violated, but denied, oppugned the
privileges of Parliament in Ecclesiastical affairs Page 110. in fine.
. In the case last presented, except the Divine shall come with his fire from
heaven, to separate and purge the Tin from the Silver, and the Dross from
the Gold, and be as the mouth of the Lord to take away the vile from the
precious Jer. 15. 9.
, that enmity unto God, and that unrighteousness which cleaves, and is like
to cleave (notwithstanding all that the mere Lawyer is able to do by way of
relief) unto many the Laws and Statutes of a State or Kingdom, is like to be
first an heavy scourge, and rods of Scorpions, for the punishment of the
State; and in fine, the utter ruin and destruction of it. (...) (says the
Apostle Romans 8. 6.
) i. the wisdom of the flesh is death: The reason whereof he gives in the next
verse, which is this, because the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God.
So that wheresoever there is any enmity against God, especially if it utters it
self in any the consultations, acts, or results of the wisdom of the flesh, it
disposes the subject wherein it is sound, whether it be Person, Family, State,
or Kingdom, unto death. And whether this enmity against God which we speak
of, sound in some of our laws and statutes yet unrepeal'd (if not in more then
is generally observed and known) has not made God an enemy unto us, and
strengthened the arm of his displeasure and indignation against us, I leave to
Divines of sound judgment and conscience, to consider: yea and to such Lawyers
who have sanctified their profession with the sound knowledge of the word of
God and prayer.

By what has been argued in this last passage, evident it is, that the skill,
faculty, and interest of the Divine, (yea of the mere Divine) to discern and
judge of the customs, rights, privileges of Parliament, is far more useful
and necessary, then that of the mere Lawyer. The reason is plain; because
there is no manner of doubt or question to be made, but that whatsoever is not
sinful and prohibited by the word of God for them to do, is an undoubted
privilege of Parliament, without the authority or contribution of former
passages or records: and on the contrary, whatsoever is sinful and displeasing
unto God, can never make Privilege, as has been already argued and proved. Now
then the faculty or skill of the Lawyer, as such, excending it self only to the
conquisition and mustering together former transactions, passages and records
of Parliament, or at most to assist in the literal explanation or
interpretation of them; but matter of sin, and what is lawful by the law of
God, belonging properly to the cogniance of the Divine, it is as evident as
evidence it self in her highest exaltation can make is, that Divines are more
useful, necessary, yea and competent Judges (in the saense declared) of
Parliamentary Privileges, then Lawyers are: Notwithstanding

To the last recited passage I answer 3. and lastly; that whereas my Adversary
charge me, to have determined and judged of the ancient Rights and Privileges
of our Parliaments so peremptorily, etc. that this charge is like all or most
of the rest, undue untrue; I do not meddle with any ancient Right or
Privilege of Parliament; I only argue and work upon the Principles of mine
own Profession, the Scriptures and Word of God: if these in their natural and
proper inclination, ducture, and tendencie, lead me to any such position or
conclusion, which enterfeers with something which Mr. Prynne will needs call an
ancient Right or Privilege of Parliament, it is merely accidental, and which
I cannot with my Allegiance to Heaven, nor otherwise then at the utmost peril
of my soul, no nor without a sinful prevarication with that duty which I owe
to the State I live in, decline. And therefore whereas

The 4th signification which the Gentleman finds of the verb Praesumo (to salve
the miscarriage of his pen, in the word, PRESVMPTVOVSLY) is to do a thing
before a man be lawfully called to it, and hereupon tells me that I had no
lawful calling or warrant from Gods Word or our Laws to handle the
Jurisdictions and rights of Parliament in my Pulpit, etc. and concludes against
me without bail or mainprize, that in this I was PRESVMPTVOVS by the
Scriptures own definition, 2 Pet. 2. 10. I answer,

1. That the Apostle Peter in the place cited, gives no definition at all, of
the word, Presumptuous, but only speaks of a wicked generation of men, who
walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise Government,
presumptuous, self-willed, and they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities.
Can a man gather any definition of Presumption, or of a Presumptuous man, from
hence? When the Apostle Paul confesses himself to have been a Blasphemer,
Persecutor 1 Timothy 1. 13.
, etc. does he give any definition of either? I had rather Mr. Prynne should
call me a Presumptuous man a thousand times over, then that he should be able
once to prove it out of any definition of St Peter. The Scriptures which Mr.
Prynne still cites, are acknowledged to be very good; but he imployeth them
against their wills; and so their goodness and his purpose, do not greet or
kiss each other. But

2. Whereas he tells me I had no warrant from Gods Word, or our Laws to handle
the Jurisdictions or rights of Parliament in my Pulpit, etc. I first demand
what warrant from Gods Word or our Laws has he, thus to calumniate a Minister
of the Gospel, only for his faithfulness to God and men; to wring, wrest, and
wier-draw his words and sayings, as he has done these ten times (at least) in
this and his other writings? I shall have my warrant, and that Authentic
enough, to show for what I have done, when his will be to seek for what he has
done, and (that which is worse) will no where be found. As for his charge, that
I handle the Jurisdictions and rights of Parliament in my Pulpit, etc. it is
but a dead corpse of an accusation, without any life or soul of Truth in it at
all; and may well be reputed free of the company of his other not more foul
then false criminations. I never handled any such theme or subject in my
Pulpit as he talks of, except it were in pleading the justness of their cause
in the present wars, against the determinations of the Oxford Schools. I
trust Mr. Prynne will forgive me this offense. But

3. If by handling the rights and Jurisdictions of Parliaments, he means those
passages wherein I argued against the lawfulness of submitting unto any
Government from men, except it be agreeable also to the Word of God, and mind
of Christ; or against any lawfulness of power in any civil Magistrate or
Magistracy whatsoever, to make any such Laws or Statutes in matters of
Religion, and which concern the worship of God, whereunto the servants of God
shall stand bound under mulcts and penalties to submit, whether they can with a
good conscience submit unto them, or no; if this be the tenor of my charge, I
answer, that I have warrant both from the Law of God, and from the Laws of the
Land also, as far as I understand them, (and I hope I understand them
sufficiently in this) to do whatsoever I have herein done. The warrant of a
Law, (whether we speak of the Law of God, or of the Law of men) for an action,
does not stand only in a positive or express injunction, or declaration in
the Law, that such or such an action, either must, or may be done: but also in
the total silence of the Law, (directly and by evident consequence) as
touching any restraint or prohibition of the action. It is true, the total
silence of humane Laws concerning many actions, does not simply and absolutely
warrant them for lawful or good, (though this be true concerning the Divine
Law) but it warrants them sufficiently against any crime imputable, against any
censure or punishment infligible by the Authority of such Laws. Where no Law
is (says the Apostle Romans 4. 15
) there is no transgression. So then, if amongst all the Laws and Statutes of
the Land, there be no one Law or Statute to be found, which prohibiteth or
restrains a Minister of the Gospel from declaring and making known the whole
counsel of God Act. 20. 27.
unto men, (of which wretched import I know none, yea I am securely confident
that there is none) then have I warrant sufficient, in respect of our Laws,
both to preach and print whatsoever I have done either in the one or in the
other, in the passages aforesaid: because in them I have neither preached nor
printed any thing, but what is part of the counsel of God, as I have
abundantly manifested and made good, in several tracts, especially in that
which was last published Innocence and Truth triumphing together.
, against all opposition and counter-reasonings whatsoever.

As for the word of God, I have not only a warrant from thence, to do all
that I did in the premises, but (that which is more then a warrant, in the
sense specified) precept upon precept, injunction upon injunction, command upon
command: yea I stand here most deeply and dreadfully charged, as I will answer
it at the great and terrible day, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed
from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ 2
These. 1. 7, 8.
, to do that which I did in the passages excepted against. I charge thee
therefore (says the Apostle to Timothy, a Minister of the Gospel) before God
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing
and his Kingdom: Preach the Word: be instant, in season, out of season;
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and Doctrine. For 2 Timothy 4. 1,
2.
, etc. Peruse the other Scriptures presented unto you in the margent Ezekiel. 3.
10, 11. 18, 19, 20. Jer. 1. 17. Esa. 58. 1. Mat. 10. 27, 28 Act. 4. 19, 20. and
20. 24, 25, 26, 27. Romans 12. 6. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 9. 16. Tit. 1. 9. and
3. 15, etc.
; behold, they lift up their voices together, calling, crying out amain for
all diligence, faithfulness, zeal, undauntednesse of courage and resolution
in those who are entrusted with that great dispensation of the mind and
counsel of God in the behalf of the world, in the discharge of this most high
and honorable trust committed unto them. And therefore for Mr. Prynne to
charge me with boldness, daringnesse, audaciousnesse, etc. for sticking to,
standing by, and maintaining what I have said and done out of faithfulness
both unto God and men, and according to the true tenor and intent of my
Commission from Heaven; is as childish and weak, as if I should charge him with
boldness, daringnesse, audaciousnesse, for eating his bread, or pleading the
righteous cause of his honest client. He mistakes his mark day and way, if he
thinks either to (rail I might truly say, or) threaten me out of the way and
course of my duty, by his great words. Through Christ strengthening me, it is
as easy for me to bear all his unjust and hard sayings, as it is for him to
speak them: to stand under, and carry the greatest burden of infamy and
reproach, as it is for him to lay it on; yea to suffer the worst and hardest of
sufferings, as it is for him to procure them. He that cannot (...), and that at
any rate whatsoever, will never make good Soldier indeed for Jesus Christ. His
pen (I hope) you see, has not prospered hitherto, in pleading the cause of his
client, PRESUMPTUOUSLY: he cannot find any one signification of the word, that
will stick or fasten.

The fifth and last signification, which he insists upon, is this. The verb ye
wot of, PRAESVMO, yet further signifies, to do a thing boldly, confidently, or
rashly, without good grounds, etc. To help himself at the dead lift he is now
at, by this signification of his verb, he sets on thus; After you were
questioned before a Committee of Parliament for those very passages in your
first Sermon, as exceeding scandalous and derogatory to the Members and
Privileges of Parliament, yet you in a daring manner, whilst you were under
examination, audaciously preached over the same again for substance in your
Pulpit on a solemn Fast day, and published them with additions in no less
then two printed books: yea since your very censure by the Committee for them,
you have in a higher strain then ever gone on to justify them in print once
more, in your Innocencies Triumph (like an incorrigible Delinquent) wherein you
slander the Parliament more then before, etc. Where before I answer, observe 1.
That the signification here insisted upon is, lower then the charge; it
signifies to do boldly, etc. but his charge is, that I did it presumptuously.
2. In this great Muster-roll of the several significations of his verb
Praesumo, he passes over, and forgets to list the common or general
acceptance of the word, as it is usually taken amongst us, and as any Author
that writes English uses to be understood; viz. for a wilful and high-handed
commission of some wicked thing. But for answer;

1. What Logic is there in all this Rhetoric to prove, that what I did in the
passages under contest, I did rashly or without good grounds? Here is nothing
so much as in pretense (in reality no where else) to disable those grounds upon
which those passages stand.

2. How unkindly he deals with the truth, in affirming, 1. That I preached
over the same again for substance or a solemn Fast day. 2. That I published
them with additions in no less then two printed books, whilst I was under
examination; has been already presented to view toward the beginning of this
Discourse. And here we have yet more (besides these) ejusdem farinae, (seu
potius, furfaris) as 1. That the passages in my first Sermon were exceeding
scandalous, and derogatory to the members and privileges of Parliament: There
has been nothing yet proved, nor (I believe) ever will or can be proved, that
there was any thing in this Sermon, not only not exceeding scandalous and
derogatory, etc. but not scandalous or derogatory in the least or lightest
manner or degree either to any member, or any privilege of Parliament
whatsoever. 2. That since my very censure by the Committee for them, I have
gone on to justify them in an HIGHER STRAIN then ever, in my Innocencies
Triumph. Mr. Prynne I see is no Astronomer, to take the altitude or elevation
of a strain in Rhetoric; if he were, he would be ashamed of this calculation,
that in my Innocencies Triumph I justify my passages in a HIGHER STRAIN then
ever. Whosoever reads this little piece, cannot lightly but see and confess,
that all along I creep as near the ground as any man (lightly) can go. 3.
That in my said Innocencies Triumph I slander the Parliament more then before.
Here we have untruth upon untruth, position upon supposition, and both vanity.
For this assertion 1. supposes, that I had slandered the Parliament before,
(wherein I am certain Mr. Prynne slanders me:) And 2. i affirms, that I
slander it a second time more then I did before. If he had contented himself
only to have said, that in my Innocencies Triumph I slander the Parliament as
much as I did before, he had spoke a kind of truth, though of very slender
importance. 4. That I was censured by the Committee for the passages in my
Sermon. If by censured he means sequestered (as by the tenor of all he writes
concerning me in this discourse, it should seem he does) granting the truth of
the act or censure it self (which yet to me is very questionable, upon the
reasons formerly mentioned) yet I cannot believe but that Mr. Prynnes pen
faulters in assigning the grounds or reasons of the censure. It will not enter
into me, to conceive a thought so dishonorable to that honorable Committee, as
that they should suspend or sequester a Minister of Jesus Christ, who has in
all things from the first to the last, approved himself faithful unto them,
and to that honorable cause wherein they are engaged, for preaching his
judgment and conscience in a point of doctrine, having such substantial and
weighty grounds both from the Scriptures themselves, and otherwise, (which I
then in part accounted unto them, and am still ready to perfect the account, if
called to it) to conceive and judge is none other but the very truth of God.

3. And lastly, whereas he brands me for an incorrigible Delinquent, and
elsewhere for one impenitent after censure Page 107. circa medium.
. I answer and confess, 1. That I am incorrigible indeed, by a crooked rule,
as the Apostles themselves were, when being charged and commanded by a whole
Council, not to speak at all, or teach in the Name of Jesus, they
notwithstanding professed, that they could not but speak the things which they
had seen and heard Act. 4. 18. 20.
. Rectitude is always unrectifiable, i. incorrigible: And 2. I answer and
confess yet further, that I am impenitent also in respect of that wherein I
know no unrighteousnes, or sin. The truth is, I am conscious to my self of too
many sins and failings in my self, to cast away my Repentance upon such
things as need it not If I can find repentance for all my finnes, I shall leave
all my other actions to be lamented and mourned over by the world. If Mr.
Prynne will indict me for such incorrigiblenesse and impenitency as these, so
be it: I know the great Judge of heaven and earth will acquit me. And thus you
see that Mr. Pryn still stands as a man convicted of an unrighteous charge in
the word PRESUMPTUOUSLY; haeret lateri lathalis arundo: the arrow sticks still
in his sides, and all his wringling and wresting, and pulling, cannot get it
out.

His last charge and contest against me in this piece, is, that the Authors
which I cite to justify my self, are miserably wrested and mistaken for the
most part. The common saying is, That it is ill halting before a creeple; The
Proverb seems to import some dexterousness of faculty in him that halts
continually, to take those tardy who only counterfeit, and do that by way of
design, which himself does out of necessity. The truth is, though Mr. Prynne
may reasonably be conceived to have a more sagacious faculty then other men,
of taking those with the very manner, who wrest Authors and mistake their
meaning, as being a man so familiarly exercised in the practice himself (I
speak of his writings against my self) yet either his skill fails him, or his
will stands too fast by him, in the sentence pronounced against me in this
kind; as will appear presently. In the mean while, I cannot but take notice of
that expression, mistaken for the most part, as an expression of the greatest
caution and care, that (to my best remembrance) I have met with in all that he
has written against me. It is very rare to find any of his uncharitable
assertions concerning me, at all bridled or corrected with any allay of any
diminutive, lenitive, limitation or restraint: but the saying (I remember) is,
that he goes far, that never returns. But let us hearken unto his complaint
of the behalf of those Authors, whom he so bewaileth, as being miserably
wrested by me.

The first is his Friend Mr. Edwards, from whose unaunswerable a piece of
Presbytery, I cite this passage, The Parliament interposeth no Authority to
determine, what Government shall be; and gather upon it thus; therefore his
opinion APPEARS to be ( not, as Mr. Prynne, whose pen I see loves to play at
small game in mis-reports, rather then sit out, recites it soon after;
Therefore his opinion is) either that the Parliament has no Authority, or at
least intends not to make use of it, it determining a Government. How miserably
this good well-meaning Author is by me wrested, he declares thus: It was
written only with reference to the present time, the Parliament having at that
time when he writ (during the Assemblies debate and consultation) interposed no
Authority is determine what Government shall be.

But good Sir, though you (it may be) hit the meaning of the Author better then
I, having and the opportunity to consult with him about it, which I have not;
yet I am sure I hit the meaning of his words better then you. If men and their
words will be of two different minds and meanings, I confess their meanings
may very easily be mistaken, not by me only, but by those that are wiser, and
far more able then I to understand stand the force and proper import of
words. And yet now I come upon this occasion to review my expression, I find it
more cautions and wary, then I can remember my self to have been in the
calculation or inditing of it; and altogether free even from that cavilling and
shifting exception, which is here made against it. For I do not absolutely say
or conclude, that his opinion was or is either so or so, (as Mr. Prynne, pro
more suo, charge me to do) but only that it appears to be either the one or
the other: and I think there is scarce any that understands English, from the
child that has new learned his Primer, to the greatest Master in the language,
but will acknowledge an appearance at least of one or other of those opinions
in the words. And how anomalous and sharking that interpretation of the words,
which Mr. Prynne would force upon them, is, will best appear by comparing the
words and interpretation with other expressions of the same Grammatical
character and construction both in the same Author, and in others. When ( p.
170. of his Antapologie) he cites this saying out of Zanchie; that which does
not disturb the public peace -- the Magistrate PROCEEDS not against; does
he imagine that the meaning of this Author was to confine that non-proceeding
of the Magistrate he speaks of, to the particular and precise time of his
writing; as if then indeed he did not so proceed, but at all other times he
did. So again when himself (p. 169. of the same Tract) says thus, the power of
the Magistrate by which he punishes sin, does not subserve to the Kingdom of
Christ the Mediator; can any reasonable man think that his meaning only should
be, that this power of the Magistrate which he speaks of, does not thus
subserve whilst he is in speaking or writing it; but that afterward it may,
or does subserve in such a kind? Apage nugas! when the Evangelist John,
speaking of Christ, says thus: This was the true light that LIGHTS every man
that comes into the world Ioh. 1. 9.
; is his meaning that Christ performed that act of grace he speaks of,
enlightened men coming into the world, only whilst he was writing his Gospel,
and that afterward he suspended it? In such constructions of speech as this,
the common Rule of Divines (touching matter of Interpretation) is, that verbum
praesentis notat actum continuum seu consuetum: i. a verb of the present tense
notes a continued or still accustomed act. So that whilst Mr. Prynne goes
about to prove, that I miserably wrest his Author, how favorably soever he may
deal with his Author in comparison of my dealing with him, certain I am that he
miserably wrests his words, with which I deal as favorably, as their genuine
and native signification, according to all rules both of Grammatical and
Rhetorical construction will bear.

As for that reason which Mr. Prynne alleges, to countenance the sense which
he puts upon the words now contested about, to the disparagement of mine, viz.
that be maintains point blank against me throughout his Treatise a legislative
and coercive power in Parliaments; and that the inference which I draw from the
said words is quite contrary to the next ensuing words and pages; I answer,

1. (To the former part of the Reason) that it is most untrue: he does not
maintain point blank against me throughout his Treatise a legislative and
coercive power in Parliaments and civil Magistrates. I every where acknowledge
and assert a civil legislative power in both; therefore Mr. Edwards
maintaining such a power in them, maintains nothing point blank against me. And
whether he maintains a spiritual or Ecclesiastical legislative power in them,
especially throughout his Treatise, let this passage be witness between me and
my Adversary: There is nothing more common in the writings of the learned and
orthodox, then to show that the civil power and Government of the Magistrate,
and the Ecclesiastical Government of the Church, are to to genere disjoined:
and thereupon the power of the Magistrate by which he deals with the corrupt
manners and disorders of his people, it in the nature and specificall reason
distinct from Ecclesiastical discipline Mr. Edwards Antap. p. 169.
. I know not what artificial construction and meaning Mr. Prynne may possibly
find out for these words; but surely he that has not affirmed the contrary,
as Mr. Prynne very inconsiderately (that I say not PRESUMPTUOUSLY) has done,
will not affirm, that Mr. Edw. in this passage maintains an Ecclesiastical
legislative power in Parliaments or civil Magistrates, but the contrary; yea
and affirms this to be the common judgment of men learned and orthodox. So
again when he affirms, p. 282. that it is their duty (speaking of the
Parliament) by their power and Authority to bind men to the Decrees of the
Assembly, he does not (doubtless) maintain an Ecclesiastical legislative
power in the Parliament: for they that have such a power, cannot be bound in
duty to own the Laws or Decrees of others, much less to bind others to
subjection to them. I omit many other passages in this book of like importance.
The truth is, that Mr. Prynnes opinion concerning an Ecclesiastical spiritual
Jurisdiction in the Civil Magistrate, which yet is his grand notion in all
that he has written upon the subject of Presbytery, overthrows the main
grounds and principal foundations upon which the Doctrine of Presbytery is
built by all her ablest and most skillful workmen. Insomuch that I wonder not a
little, that the Masters of that way and Judgment, have not appeared at
another manner of rate then yet they have done, for the vindication of their
principles against him that has made so sore a breach upon them, and laid
their honor in the dust. Somewhat I know some of them have done in this kind:
but the Prophet Elisha reproved the King of Israel, for smiting thrice only
upon the ground, and then ceasing, telling him that he should have smitten five
or six times.

2. To the latter part of the Reason, I answer and confess, that the inference
I draw from the words mentioned, may very possibly be quite contrary to the
next ensuing words and pages, and yet the sense of them no ways wrested, nor
mistaken by me; because it is familiar in the Discourse, for the Author to
contradict himself, as well as other men; according to one of the ingredients
in that most true and happy character of the Discourse, given by a woman, who
describes it to be wrangling-insinuating-contradictory-revengefull story
Katharine Chidley New-yeers gift. Epist. to the Reader.
. And the truth is, that in the eye of an unpartiall and disengaged Reader,
there is scarce any passage or period throughout the whole Discourse but may be
commodiously enough reduced under one of these 4. heads. And therefore whereas
Mr. Prynne gives this elogium of it, that it is in truth unanswerable Epist.
Dedic. non long a fine
; I confess that unanswerable it is in several respects and sundry ways.
First, it is unanswerable to that esteem which my self with many others had of
the Author formerly. Secondly, unanswerable it is to that opinion, which he
would have the world conceive of his parts and learning, and in special manner
of his abilities to deal in the particular controversy. Thirdly, it is
unanswerable to his profession as he is a Christian. Fourthly, much more
unanswerable is it to his calling, as he is a Minister of Jesus Christ and of
the Gospel: And fifthly (and lastly) most unanswerable it is to those frequent,
solemn and large professions which he makes both in his Epistle and elsewhere,
of his love to the Apologists, and candor and fairness in writing. But for any
such unanswerablenesse as Mr. Prynne intends, the one part of it will not
endure that such a thing should be spoken of the other; there being enough in
the Discourse it self to answer whatsoever is to be found in it, of any
material consideration against the Congregationall way; as will in time
convenient be made manifest in the sight of the Sun, God not preventing, by
more then an ordinary (or at least expected) hand. And whereas Mr. Prynne
glories (and that twice over at least, for failing) that it has not been
hitherto answered by the Independents Epist. Dedic. non long a fine. And
again, p. 111. non long a fine.
; I answer three things: First, that neither has Mris Katharine Chidleys
Answer to Mr. Edwards his Reasons against Independencie and Toleration, been
yet replied unto or answered, either by Mr. Edwards himself, or any other of
his party; notwithstanding the said Answer be but a small piece in comparison
of the Antapologie: and besides has been some years longer abroad, then this.
Besides this, there are many other Tractates and Discourses extant (and so have
been a long time) in defense of the Congregationall way, which as yet have not
been so much as attempted by any Classique Author whatsoever. A particular of
some of these you may see, p. 65. of my Innocence and Truth triumphing
together, in the Margent. As for that which A. S. or (in words at large) Adam
Steuart has lift up his pen to do against M. S. if men will needs vote it for
an Answer, an Answer (so called) let it be: Whereas M. S. has these words:
Better a thousand times is it that such distempers as these, though found in
millions of men, should suffer, then that the least hair of the head of one of
those men should fall to the ground: This passage A. Steuart ((...)) interprets
this: Better that millions of us, who desire the suppression of all Sects,
should suffer, then but any of them should lose but one, yea the least hair of
their heads. The second part of the Duply, etc. by Adam Steuart, p. 180. What
M. S. calls, DISTEMPERS, A. S. interprets, Presbyterians; and is not able to
conceive how the one should suffer without the other. And this line of
interpretation he stretches over this whole Discourse: (...).
but (doubtless) he that wants either will or skill to distinguish between the
persons and the distempers of men, is in an ill capacity (or incapacitie
rather) of framing any sober answer to a sober Discourse. Secondly, Mr. Edwards
himself, the smallness of the content of the Apologeticall Narration
considered, took not a whit less time to give answer to it, then has yet been
taken by the Independents to answer the Antapologie. But thirdly (and lastly)
if Mr. Prynne knew and considered, who it was that has hindered the
Independents, and that once and again from answering it as yet, viz. he that
sometimes hindered Paul's coming to the Thessalonians 1 These. 2. 18
, though (in Mr. Edwards apprehension) he both hastened and furthered the
coming back of the Apologists into England Actapol. p. 191.
; he had little or no cause to glory in that privilege. But Quod defertur,
non anfectur:

Quicquid sub terra est in apricum proferet aetas.
Having (as you have heard) befriended Mr. Edwards (his fellow laborer in the
Presbyterian cause) with the best accommodation he could to make one piece of
him hang to another (but alas, who is able to comprimize between fire and
water?) he proceeds and tells me behind my back, (and yet with an intent I
presume that all the world should take notice of it) that my passages out of
Mr. Hayward, Bishop Jewel, Mr. Fox, Mr. Calvin, Jacobus Acontius, etc. make
nothing at all against the legislative Authority of Parliaments in matters of
Religion and Church Government, and have no affinity with my passages, words,
most of them propugning the very Ecclesiastical power of Parliaments, which I
oppugn: And yet in the very next words adds; that indeed some of their words
seem to diminish the coercive power of Magistrates, and enforcing of men's
consciences in matters of Religion; as if I ever oppugned or denied any other
Authority or power in Magistrates, then this. If he will please but to peruse
my Innocencies triumph, page 8. and my Innocence and Truth triumphing together,
page 72. 73. 78. with several other passages in these and other my writings,
he will (or at least very easily, may) see that I oppugn, deny no other
Authority, power in Parliaments, Civil Magistrates, but only that which is
enforcing of men's consciences in matters of Religion. Whereas he promises or
undertakes that he shall in due place answer these words of theirs, which (as
he says) seem to diminish the coercive power of Magistrates in matters of
Religion, and manifest how I abuse the Authors herein as well as Mr. Edwards;
My answer only is, that he may indeed soon answer them after that rate of
answering, at which he has answered any thing of mine hitherto, and he may
show how (i. say that) I abuse them; and without writing or speaking, as well
as by either, manifest that I abuse their Authors herein, as well as I do Mr.
Edwards. But for this last particular, I am willing to save him the labor and
pains of writing for the manifestation of it. For I here freely confess, that
I have abused these Authors in what he speaks of, just as I have abused Mr.
Edwards: and both of them just as much as amounts to no abuse at all. I wonder
by what art or way the Gentleman means to go to work, to prove that I have
miserably wrested, or abused the Authors he here speaks of, or their words,
when as I have put no construction at all or interpretation upon their words,
nor drawn any inference or deduction from them, but only transcribed them with
as much diligence and faithfulness as I could, and presented them clearly as
they stand in their respective Authors. If his meaning be, that I have
miserably wrested and abused them by my quotation of them, as subservient to my
cause or purpose, (a deed of folly which himself commits with the holy
Scriptures themselves many a time and often) my answer is, that were this
assertion true, that they are not subservient to my cause or purpose, yet my
recourse unto them, for aid to my purpose, were no miserable wresting or
abusing of them. Our Savior being an hungry, did not abuse the fig tree by
repairing to it, though there proved nothing upon it for his purpose. Nor
should Mr. Prynne abuse a Tavern by going into it to drink a cup of wine that
pleases him, though he should be disappointed in his expectation when he comes
there. Nay in this case would he not rather think (and that much more
reasonably of the two) that the Tavern had abused him, then he it. In like
manner, if those Authors and sayings which I have produced, and which Mr.
Prynne speaks of, have no affinity with my passages and purpose, I may much
more truly and reasonably say that they have abused me, then Mr. Prynne can
either say or ever prove, that I have abused them. For the truth is, if they do
fall me, or refuse to stand by me in the defense of those passages spoken of
when Mr. Prynne has done his worst to them, they are the greatest dissemblers
that ever wore the livery of paper and ink. Never were there sentences or
sayings that more fully and freely complied with any man's notions whatsoever in
terms and words, then far the greatest part of these do with my passages and
purpose. If Mr. Prynne can dissolve or abrogate the Authority of Grammar
rules, and destroy the natural and proper signification of words, then may I
have some cause to fear, that he may possibly evict me to be a miserable
wrester and abuser of Authors and their sayings. But if words be able to defend
themselves, and make good the possession of their known significations and
rules of construction, their both ancient and modern interest in the
understandings of men, against the Authority or violence of Mr. Prynnes pen; I
defy all his interminations and threatenings of manifesting me either a
miserable wrester or abuser of my Authors.

The last parcel of his high contest against me in this Discourse, is, that I
pervert the meaning of the Divines of Scotland, in one, or more, or I know not,
he knows not, how many or how few, of those passages which I cite from them;
whereas I meddle not little or much with any sense or meaning of any of them;
but only barely tender them unto the Reader, leaving it free unto him to judge
of the sense and meaning of them, and whether they consort with my
apprehensions, or no. And though he be doubtful of that interpretation or
meaning which himself (however) adventures to put upon them (as there is reason
more then enough, why he should) delivering himself with this sub-modest
caution, If I mistake not; yet am I rated and chidden at no lower rate, then
this: you may THEREFORE blush at this (I wonder, which) your perverting of
their meaning, as if they held, that the Parliaments of England or Scotland had
no power to make Ecclestasticall Laws for Religion and Church Government.
THEREFORE may I blush: wherefore? what? because Mr. Prynne has put such a
sense and interpretation upon the passages in hand, of which he knows not (it
seems) what to make, but suspects a mistake in it? Blush in this respect I
confess I may: but what cause have I to blush, at my perverting of their
meaning, when as 1. I do not interpose to put any meaning (I mean any
particular or special meaning) upon any of them. 2. Why should I blush upon
Mr. Prynnes injunction, at any meaning which I put upon them, when as that very
meaning which himself puts upon them, by way of confutation and disparagement
of that which he pretends to be mine, is by himself little less then suspected
for a mistake? The tax of blushing which Mr. Prynne imposes upon me, should in
reason be rather levied upon the estate of his own modesty, who by his own
confession runs the hazard of perverting the meaning of those passages under
debate, whereas I never came so near the crime of such a perversion, as to
engage my self in any Interpretation of them at all. But if you will please to
hear his Interpretation, and compare it diligently with his Text (the passages
cited by me from the Divines of Scotland) you may very fairly translate Mr.
Prynnes, If I mistake not, into, certainly, Mr. Prynne mistakes. I Answer,
(says he) 1. That their only meaning (if I mistake not) in these passages,
is, that the Prince or chief Civil Magistrate of himself, without a
Parliament, or without the assistance and consent of his Nobles, Commons,
Clergy, cannot legally make any Ecclesiastical Laws to oblige his people.
Mark this saying well; and see how like it looks to the genuine Interpretation,
sense or import of these (and the like) ensuing sentences. All men, as well
Magistrates, as inferiors, ought to be subject to the judgment of the
National Assembly in Ecclesiastical causes without any reclamation or
appellation to any Judge, Civil or Ecclesiastical, within the Realm. Again;
It belongs to the Synod (the Clergy having the chief place therein to give
Direction and advice) not to receive and approve the definition of the Prince
in things which concern the worship of God, but it self to define and
determine what Orders and Customs are fittest to be observed, etc. We see here
in the Text, that the chief place, yea the sole power (for what other sense
can be put upon those words, It belongs to the Synod it self to define and
determine) of defining and determining Orders and Customs in things which
concern the worship of God, is ascribed unto the Synod, (wherein also the
Direction of the Clergy ought to be predominant) not only without the
definition of the Prince, or chief Civil Magistrate, but with rejection of
his definition: NOT TO RECEIVE OR APPROVE THE DEFINITION OF THE PRINCE (says
this text.) Whereas in Mr. Prynnes Interpretation, the Prince or chief Civil
Magistrate (as we heard) has the pre-eminence and precedencie in all such
definitions and determinations assigned unto him; and next to him, the Nobles,
and next to them the Commons, (of neither of which ne (...) quidem in the Text)
are interessed in the same; and the Clergy, or Synod, which are made the head,
and have the chief place, if not the sole power, about such definitions and
determinations in the text, are in the Interpretation made the tail, and
compelled to come behind all the rest, as a party borne out of due time, or at
least in the lowest influence of power, for any such Interest. If Mr. Prynne be
not (at the softest) mistaken in this Interpretation, the sense and meaning of
those words, Abraham begat Isaac Mat. 1. 2.
, may very possibly be this, that Judas went and hung himself Mat. 27. 5.
. Judge, Reader, between me and my Adversary, who has more cause to blush, and
who is the more miserable wrester of words, and perverter of meanings. And
whether there be not an air or gentle breathing of a contradiction in this
period which he subjoynes, within it self, and in one part of it to the
premised Interpretation, I desire the Reader attentively to consider. But that
the King (says he) or supreme temporal Magistrates, assisted by a Parliament
and Orthodox Divines, may not make binding Ecclesiastical Laws, or, that
their or our Parliaments have not a real Legislative power in any matter
Ecclestiastique (the only point controversed) is directly contrary both to the
constant Doctrine and Practice of our Brethren and their Church, etc. I believe
that neither our Brethren, nor their Church, will conne Mr. Prynne thanks for
this his vindication and plea for them: but however, I shall not speak in his
cast, nor forestall his market. Only I desire to know of him, if their, and
our Parliaments have a real Legislative Power in matters Ecclesiastique (as he
affirms in the latter part of the sentence) why he requires an assistance of
Orthodox Divines in the former part of it, to make binding Ecclesiastical
Laws. They that have a real Legislative power in, or within themselves; need
no forinsecall assistance of others, to make their Laws binding, though they
may need forinsecal advice for the better constitution of them, as in Laws
about any particular trade; yea he had given this judgment in the case a
little before (as we heard) that the Prince or chief civil Magistrate cannot
legally make any Ecclesiastical Laws to oblige his people, not only not
without a Parliament, but not without his Clergy also. Does he not here
interesse the Clergy every whit as far, and as deep in the very essence or
substance of the Legislative power to make binding Ecclesiastical Laws for
the people, as he does the Parliament it self? And whereas in the passage last
recited, he affirms the only point in controversy to be, whether our
Parliaments have not a real legislative power in any matters Ecclesiastique; I
wonder why he storms me and my writings with so much indignation, page 106,
107. etc. for printing passages only charged by him as being against the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Parliaments Page 106. ante medium.
; which likewise is his usual expression elsewhere. Does he apprehend no
difference at all, between an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, power, Authority;
and a legislative power in or about Ecclestiasticall matters, or things? Mr.
Edwards, if he will vouchsafe to learn of him, will teach him a wide
difference; who in many places gives and grants unto the Magistrate a power and
Authority about Ecclesiastical causes, and businesses Antapol page 159, 160,
163, etc.
of many kinds, (though not of any page 166. 169. 170, etc.
, as Mr. Prynne bounty extends) but no where (to my remembrance) grants any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or power to him: yea p. 163. of his Antapologie,
he interrogates his Apologists, Whether there does not reside in the Church all
Ecclesiastical power absolutely necessary to the building up of the Kingdom
of Christ, and salvation of men, even when the Magistrate is not of the Church?
The import of which interrogation agrees well with that assertion of the same
Author; and tract p. 169. that the civil power and Government of the
Magistrate, and the Ecclesiastical Government of the Church, are toto genere
disjoined; and thereupon the power of the Civil Magistrate, by which he deals
with the corrupt manners and disorders of his people, is in the nature and
specificall reason distinct from Ecclesiastical Discipline. If there be an
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or Legislative power in civil Magistrates,
Parliaments, to make Ecclesiastical binding Laws; why may not the exercise of
this power in the administration or execution of these Laws, be called
Ecclesiastical Discipline or Government? yea, why not rather Ecclesiastical,
then civil? So that Mr. Prynne confounding an Ecclesiastical power, with a
power about Ecclesiastical things, plainly shows that he is not perfectly
initiated in the mystery of Presbytery: and did not his writings more
accommodate that cause and party by the weight of their Authority, and height
of language, and confidence, together with unparalleld bitterness against his
opposites, then by their worth in strength of reason, I believe they would
hardly think them worthy to be numbered amongst their Benefactors.

But notwithstanding all that Mr. Prynne has done or said to, or against me,
or my Innocencies Triumph, in particular; in the 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111,
112 pages of this his Discourse, yet his spes gregis, the strength of his hope
that he has done sufficient execution upon me, rests only upon his former
sections; however the Question of many concerning them, is, Cui bono? He tells
me, that my own conscience and judgment cannot but inform me, that he has
written enough in the former Sections to convince me and all the world besides,
that I have not only violated, but denied, oppugned those Privileges of
Parliament in Ecclesiastical affairs, which our own Parliaments in all ages,
and Parliamentary Assemblies in all other Kingdoms have unquestionably
exercised, etc. I answer,

1. I confess that in the former sections he has written enough,
quantitative, to convince any reasonable man (if not all the world) of any
error or mistake whatsoever: but much too little qualitative, to convince
either me, or any reasonable man, that I have violated, or oppugned any
Privilege of Parliament; I have far more reason to conceive and hope, that
in this and my last-published Discourse, I have written enough both ways to
convince both him and all the world, that I have NOT violated or oppugned any
Privilege of Parliament, truly, or with the consent of Heaven, so called. If
he intends to conclude, that therefore I have violated, oppugned the Privileges
of Parliament, because I have argued against some positions or opinions, which
Mr. Prynne, with some others, are pleased to call Privileges of Parliament;
the Logician, who is a man of reason, will answer for me, that a terminis
diminuentibus non sequitur argumentatio. It does not follow, that a piece of
metal or coin is therefore gold, because it is counterfeit gold; nor that Mr.
Prynnes Great Grandfather is a man, because he is a dead man. If he can, or
shall fairly demonstrate unto me (though in a far less content of words, then
his three former sections amount unto) that any act, practice, or exercise,
either by continuance or succession of time, or by frequencie of repetition, or
customarinesse of reiteration, by connivencie or want of opposition from men,
must needs change the nature and kind of it, and of sinful become lawful, he
shall by such a demonstration as this, put life into his former sections, and
render them potent for that conviction which he expects from them; but till
this be done, that great bulk and body of things done in the dark, and time out
of mind, will partake of that infirmity which the Author himself
acknowledges as cleaving to the Discourse, I mean, impotencie These my
impotent endeavors. Epist. to the Reader, versus finem.
; and can with no tolerable pretense of reason or equity, demand that interest
in the judgments, consciences, understandings of men, which he challenges (it
seems) on their behalf. It is as poor and low a design, only by alleging
the examples, opinions, or judgments of men, to attempt the conviction of him
that builds his opinion upon the Scriptures and word of God, yea though he
builds besides his foundation; as it would be in a man to carry a sack of
chafe to the market, hoping to bring home a like quantity of wheat for it,
without giving any other price. Yea to allege and cite the Scriptures
themselves, though in never such an abundance, without close arguing and
binding them to our cause; is a means of very small hope, whereby to prevail
or do good upon such a man who holds his opinion, not barely or simply upon a
supposall of Scripture-Authoritie for it, but upon Scripture thoroughly
debated, and by principles of sound reason and natural deductions, brought
home unto his judgment and cause.

Again, 2. in all that great body of premises contained in all the former
Sections he speaks of, there is not one word, syllable, letter, or tittle to
prove that maine ingredient in his Conclusion, unquestionably exercised.
Logicians justly reject and exauthorize all such Conclusions, which swell above
the line of their premises. By all the tables and donaries presented unto
Neptune by those that in Shipwracks escaped with their lives, it could not be
known, who, or how many they were, that were drowned.

3. Nor is there any whit more in any, in all the said Sections or premises,
that reaches home, or indeed comes near, to that specialtie in the
Conclusion, in all ages. Evanders mother lived many ages agone; yet the mother
of Abel had the precedencie of her by many generations. Therefore surely all
the world will never accept of the Conclusion so insufficiently and lamely
proved.

4. And lastly, Whereas Mr. Prynne tells me, that if I now make not good my
promise, few or none will ever credit me hereafter; I should be very glad to
meet with my condition, that so I might perform my obligation. But in the
mean time, whether any or none will credit me hereafter; I know not well how
I, or any other should credit him for the present, as touching the
authentiqueness and truth of those citations and transcriptions, upon which the
principal weight of that Conclusion depends, whereof he expects conviction
both from me, and all the world to boot. Is it lightly possible for any man to
refrain jealousy in this kind, that does but consider how often his pen has
dashed against the rock of truth, in representing me, my opinions and sayings,
(yea, I can say further, affections, intentions) upon the open theater of the
world, where any man that will, may see his nakedness in this kind? Is
boldness in the Sun, like to prove modestie^ in the shade? As for satisfaction
by examination of all particulars, it is not every man's, indeed very few men's,
opportunity. The respective Authors and records, wherein particularities must
be inquired after, and found, for satisfaction in that kind, are in few men's
hands; and not of all men's understandings. So that Mr. Prynne by dealing so
unfaithfully and unchristianly by me and my sayings, as he has done, has not
only obstructed the course and passages of his own reputation and credit; but
has further also injured the world round about him, by rendering those good
parts and abilities wherewith God has entrusted him for public accommodation,
if not wholly unserviceable, yet of very mean usefulness and concernment, in
comparison of what their line and tenor would well have borne. It is a saying
in the Civil Law, that he that has injured one, has threatened many.

I end, with a word of Christian admonition and advice, both to the Gentleman
my Antagonist, and my self. Sir, the Great and Glorious God that made us, in
mercy remembers both our frames, and considers that we are dust Psalm. 103. 14.
. This gracious remembrance of his we enjoy both by night and by day, in
whatsoever we enjoy in the Comforts of this world, yea or in the opportunities
we have of laying hold on that which is to come. Our dust which abaseth us, in
this respect, yet relieveth us, and becomes a Mediator for us with the
bountifulness of God: were we creatures of a more excellent line, those sins
and infirmities would (in all likelihood) were they found upon us, be our
ruin, which now do not so much as shake the least hair of our heads. If we
would but remember and consider one the other, as God does us both, that common
principle of frailty, out of which we act to a reciprocal coffeehouse and
offense, would be of sovereign use to mollify and supple, if not perfectly to
heal, both our wounds. Not to think any thing that befalls us strange, is
almost (being interpreted) not to think it evil. We shall not quit our selves
like men, if we make any great matter of it, to be evil entreated by men.
Mutual discontentments now and then are a known tribute which men must look to
pay for the commodity of living and conversing together in the world. If we
have offended one the other, happy shall we be in forgiving one the other, and
circumvent him whose design was to have circumvented us, and made hatred (a
kind of upper hell) of our contestation. If I have offended you otherwise then
by speaking the truth, and so as the defense of it, all circumstances duly
poysed, required, you shall not need long to complain of want of Christian
satisfaction, as far as I am able either to do or to speak any thing that may
accommodate you, if you please, but to signify your aggrievance, and make your
demands in a Christian and loving way. And if your heart will but answer mine
in these inclinations, the storms and tempests of our contestations, shall yet
end in a sweet calm; and men shall look upon us, as if we had never been
they: If you reject the motion of a Christian compliance by the way, I can very
patiently, and with comfort enough, awaite the Decisions of that Great
Tribunal, whose awards will shortly seal all the righteousnesses and
unrighteousnesses of men, against all further disputes or inquiries to the
days of Eternity.

FINIS.

