BISHOP GOOD MAN His Proposition: In discharge of his own Duty and Conscience
both to God and Man.
PRivate interests, as they work the deepest impressions, so are they usually
the first motives and occasions of great Public designs; though I am not
altogether ignorant of some secrecies, and close carriage of business in these
times; yet here, I will only take notice of such things as did manifestly
appear to the Public view.

The beginning of our late troubles and wars, was upon this occasion: K.
Charles sent down the Common Prayer Book to K. Charles.
be used in the Scottish Church; and as the L. Archbishop of S. Andrews, then
Chancellor of Scotland, did very well observe, If it had been recommended to
an Assembly of Divines there to have been discussed; or if it had been sent to
the Parliament there to have been confirmed, it is thought it might have taken
good effect. I do therefore much commend the practice of former times. That K.
James began his Reign K. James.
with the Conference at Hampton Court, which did much settle and pacisie the
controversies then in the Church of England. Q. Elizabeth began her Reign with
a solemn Disputation between Q. Elizabeth.
the Bishops, and those other Divines, who had fled for Religion beyond Seas.
So in Q. Mary's time, there were several Q. Mary.
Disputations concerning Religion, as appears in Mr. Fox his Acts and
Monuments. In K. Edward the 6. time, came some Edward 6.
Divines out of Germany, as Bucer, Ma^rtir, Fabius, who were sent to both the
Universities, there to dispute and determine controversies in Religion. Henry
the 8. did his best endeavor Henry 8, Head of the Church
to procure Philip Melanchthon to come over; and though he failed therein, yet
Agents came from the several Princes of Germany, who together with the Kings
Commissioners might ^rea^ for the settling of Religion: I have seen the
Originalls as they were copied out by the Clerks; the English Commissioners did
acquaint the Forain Agents, that K. Henry had assumed the Title, to be Head of
his Church, and for support of that great honor, he had First fruits, Tenths,
Subsidies, and other payments from the Clergy; he had likewise the disposing of
Church preferments, whereby he was absolute in the Government both of Church
and State, and none of his Subjects had any forain dependence, or could appeal
to the Church of Rome.

These Relations did little please the forain Agents, for they did consider,
That if the King should be the supreme Head of his Church; then it would
follow, That the Emperor should be the Supreme Head of the Church of Germany,
whom they hated ten times more then the Pope; and therefore, their resolution
was, that as Scripture was the only judge of controversies in Religion, to
determine them; so Scripture should be the Scripture head of the Church.
head of their Church, they would be wholly govesned by Scriptures, they would
obey none but Scriptures, and acknowledge no other head: It should seem their
wisdom proceeded not so far, as to demand who should interpret Scriptures, or
who should judge of the Exposition of Scriptures? In default, and for want of
such conference to settle Religion, Henry the 8. made no other change in
Religion, but only took upon himself the Government, and in right thereof, he
disposed of the Revenewes; and to this Church Government did belong
Matrimonial causes, (...) divor^^
and thereby he had power to divorce himself from his Wives as often as he
thought fit, (for the Law was in himself:) and probable it is, that he had an
intent by his Spiritual power, to proceed against his own Wife, Anne of
Cleeves in point of Heresy, and so to have burnt her in stead of a divorce,
had she not very wisely (though falsely) accused her self to have been formerly
precontracted, whereby the Delegates (such as had their power from the King)
adjudged the Marriage to be void, and both parties to be at liberty to match
where they pleased; and that principal Chaplain, who was so much employed in
the Divorce, was now as much employed to find out Arguments for the lawfulness
of Polygamie, so to satisfy his Masters Polygamie,
appetite with variety, and to give him greater hopes of Issue: and had it not
been that the King was now grown in years, and his body exhausted and tired out
with his own lust, it is not unlike but he might have consented thereunto; and
then being an approved Doctrine by the head of the Church, it might have past
for very sound and Orthodox.

Not to dwell altogether at home, if we look abroad, we shall find that very
lately the Synod at Dort did settle the differences Synod of Dort,
of Religion in the Low Countries, which together with the sacrificing of old
Barnevelt, did procure their peace; and not only in Protestant Churches, but
in the Church of Rome, the Council of Trent did much settle the Controversies
in that C. Trent.
Church, insomuch, that I could never have believed such plotting and
practicing against that Council, had I not seen with mine own eyes, the
original of those secret practices subscribed by the Actors themselves, and
other great witnesses beyond all exception: and thus, if through all ages, we
shall come to that Council in the Acts of the Apostles, we shall ever find,
that Synods and Counsels have been used as the ordinary means for composing
differences in the Church.

Now I speak it to my great sorrow and grief, I know no Nation so much
distracted with Sects and Schisms as we are; Schisms
and fit it is some course should be taken to give satisfaction to weak
Consciences: the Church of England at this time is in so sad and mean a
condition, that we are scarce capable of a Synod; for I am confident, that the
greatest number (if not all) of the most learned, judicious, Orthodox Divines
are so dejected in mind, as that they are not fit for a Synod, nor will be
admitted to have a free election in the choice of their Clerks; and they are so
utterly plundered and undon, as that they are not able to bear the charge of a
Synod, and failing herein, let us find out some other course; suppose a
disputation, (...)
where every man might give an account of his Faith; but this were to expose
the truth to great inconveniences choler and passion do therein usually
prevail, there would be a needless multiplying of words; and sometimes in a hot
pursuit (the Hare would he lost) we might lose the state of the question: and
commonly, men contend not so much for Truth, as for Victory. If then, in
discharge of mine own duty both to God and man, I should propose a course, I
hope it could not be offensive.

For I see as mean men as my self in the City, who have their private
Congregations, their set times of meetings on the week days; they have their
conferences, private fasts, and thanksgivings; and even in Churches they have
Lectures set up without any license, or public authority; then why should The
resolving doubtt in Religion.
I be afraid to set up an Exercise to satisfy men's doubts and scruples in
Religion? no man is bound to believe, but wholly left to God and his own
Conscience, that when he finds better reasons to persuade him, he may alter and
change his opinion: Thus as there are temporal Courts to determine
controversies concerning the right of Inheritance, and other differences
between men; so there may be a little power left in the Spiritual Court, only
to satisfy the doubts and seruples made in Religion; and such a course (God
willing) I do propose to my self, to undertake toward the end of May; I give
long warning beforehand, that if I should be forbidden, I might desist.

The Order which I shall observe is this, That he who presents the doubts, must
present them in Writing, and the Modesty in presenting the doubts.
Writing not to exceed half a sheet of Paper Written on both sides; he must
present them in modesty, giving every man that due respect and honor which
belongs to his place and calling; he must subscribe his name, his age, the
condition and course of his life, the place of his dwelling; and it were to be
wished, that some others would testify their knowledge of him. His doubts
shall then be publicly read, and in due time they shall be answered. I do not
herein presume on mine own weakness, but upon Gods great mercy and goodness,
who never will be wanting in his own cause, and in defense of the truth;
neither will I neglect the means under God, but I will advise and hold
correspondency with the best learned men in England, and I doubt not but God
will assist. I am now past the age of man, and consequently past as the joys
and hopes of this world, so past the fears and terrors of this world; and so
let God be merciful unto my soul at the last day, as I shall deliver nothing,
but what I conceive to be Gods truth; the World has been now long deluded and
abused with controversies of Religion, in so much, that there is little
Religion left amongst us: I hope to discover some secrefies, and to make it
appear who are and were the great Impostere; And here I do make this
Achallenge.
profer and challenge, Let any man bring me the body or system of his Religion,
together with all the several members and branches thereof, and if I shall not
make it plainly appear, that his Religion is a self-homicide destroying it
self; (i.) admits contradictories in it self, I will be of that Religion. 2.
If any man shall bring me a Religion which shall subsist with humane learning,
(which in effect is only reason improved) I will be of that Religion. How
wonderfully are we bound unto God, for that great certainty of our Religion,
which is not only grounded upon the divine testimony revealed, confirmed by
miracles, and wonders, far above all natural power, written in our hearts by
Gods sanctifying Spirit; together with the infusion of grace, whereby we
believe Mysteries above our natural capacity; but likewise that our Faith and
Religion should have those special properties of truth, that it should
cohaerere sibi, agree with it self, like a well governed City, or a well
compacted body, paeem habens ad invicem: and as it agrees with it self, so it
should subsist with all humane learning, which serves only to adorn Religion.

Now for the method which I shall observe in giving satisfaction The method
(...) be observed.
to all doubts and scruples proposed, though I do much commend the School
method, which is first to make the strongest objections; then laying open the
naked truth, and fortifying it with sound demonstrations and reasons; those
former objections which at first did seem invincible, alas they fall of
themselves, and come to nothing and so are soon routed and easily dissolved;
and this course, I conceive, does best represent Nature; as in digging for
Mines, the Earth, Stones, and scurfe we dig up and lay aside, and so at length
we come to the pure Oar, this we refine, and use the earth and scurfe to scour
it. Though I commend this method, yet I will forbear to use it, as being not so
fitted to every man's capacity: I will therefore use mine now method, which is a
little more easy: First, I will use two or three quotations out of Scripture,
and no more. 2. I will show the analogy, or correspondency which it with other
Texts of Scriptute, and other Articles of our Faith. 3. I will show how it was
employed in the state of Nature before the giving of the Law. 4. How it was
shadowed forth in the types, figures, and ceremonies of the Mosaicall Law. 5,
How it received ripeness and perfection in the state of the Gospel. 6. How it
has been continued in the Church in the Primitive age, and in all succeeding
times; and this to appear especially by the ancient Liturgies, not by straggling
words taken out of Fathers, which being spoken upon several occasions, might
be variously interpreted. 7. The great inconveniences and absurdities which
would undoubtedly follow, if any other Doctrine should be admitted. I do the
rather acquaint you with this my method, that such as shall have any doubts or
arguments to propose, they may do it according to this method, if they please.

When I have answered Objections, then I will reduce all Religion settled by
Laws.
to the Church of England, as it is settled by the Fundamental Laws, by the
Statute Laws, by many Acts of State, and generally, by Public Authority; to
this end, I have read all the Statutes, all the Parliament Rolls, many Acts of
State, Articles, Injuctions; yea, I made a hard shift (I cannot now do the
like) to understand some of their Reports in Law, only such as did concern
Religion. I never did regard any particular Opinions; for all my time the
Professors in Cambridge did differ in their Opinions; the first difference
began between Dr. Whitaker and Dr. Barow; then in their Successors, Dr. Overall
and Dr. Playford; and then in Dr. Richardson and Dr. Davenant.

Heretofore I took some pains to know how far the Imperial The Civil Laws.
and Civil Laws, together with the Roman Histories, did give testimony to
Christian Religion, even before such time as the Emperors became Christians;
and how far they did touch upon some controversies now agitated in the Church:
since, I took the like pains in our Common Laws, but my Notes are burnt Our
Common Laws.
and plundered, and with sorrow and grief, my wits and memory are likewise
plundered, and my age gives me assurance that I shall recover neither the one
nor the other; yet still I have a will to do good, though I do foresee that
this my project will fayl and come to nothing; yet my honest intents will
appear, and that I have done my uttermost endeavor: and if any one shall blame
me for indiscretion, truly it has ever bin my course and practice to desire
God in all my actions so to direct me, that I might rather seem to the world to
want wit and discretion, then to neglect my duty to God, and my charity and
conscience to man: and my fault easily deserves pardon, because I am now come
to those great years which may claim a privilege to dote.

Tying my self to Religion as it is settled by Laws, under favor The (...)
Judges.
be it spoken, I do not think the temporal Judges of our Common-Laws so fit
to interpret them; but rather the Spiritual Judges, the Church men themselves,
especially such who were the Lawmakers, and knew their own intents best, and
as it may be supposed, had a special influence in those Laws, while the
Temporal Judges were only assistants, and not permitted to speak but when
they were demanded; besides the honor of Priesthood, which is not to be
incroached upon within the compass of his own sphere; thus I shall reduce all
Opions to the Church of England, as it is settled by Laws.

For the name of Protestant Religion, that I may confess my own weakness, I
never yet understood what was meant by it; Protestant Religion.
yet I have read Sleydon and Florimond both very wise and excellent Authors,
though different in their Opinions, Factions, and in all their ways and
courses; yet they agree in the name of Protestant; for 1529. there was a Diet
held in Germany, where many Princes, Free States, and others, did enter a
solemn Protestation: 1. Against the Pope and his Power. 2. Against the
Emperor, and the Power which he claimed. 3. For an absolute liberty and
freedom of Conscience, that every man might profess what Religion he pleased,
and none to be molested therein. There were then at least 14. several
Religions which did enter this one Protestation: and if the Jews, the Turks,
and the Heathen had bin present, no doubt but they would have joined in the
Protestation, and so become Protestants, and yet not converted from their own
Religion, much less made Christians; how this word Protestant should signify
and point out any one proper Religion, it is beyond my understanding; the Roman
Catholics protest against all Religions but their own, and therein they become
Protestants. The Laws of England, and the Acts of State finding this
inconvenience, ^ces of Parliament.
do usually add this one word, and call it the true Protestant Religion, which
does very much qualify the business. Now when I say that I will reduce all to
the Church of England as it is settled by Laws; I must here crave leave to take
some further advice concerning the Ordinances of Parliament, which were made
without the Kings consent, while the Kings Power was acknowledged, how far they
do oblige out of Parliament, and how far they differ from Acts of Parliament,
for herein I am not yet so fully satisfied.

Now that the Church has lost all her Temporalties, the Revenues are gone, the
Jurisdiction is gone, the Honor and Esteem is gone, and nothing left for
further or future Sacrilege; it may please God to use this as a means that our
Eyes The controversiemoungers.
may be opened, and without any temporal obstacles, we may discern the naked
truth, and so agree in one Faith, while the controversie-moungers who were the
Incendiaries in the nature of Buffoones, most contemptible in themselves, they
must find out some other trade to thrive by; for their Patrones and Supporters
have now their own ends, and swallowed up their morsel, and have no further
use of them; and now they must fall to sedition and matters of State between
the Presbyterian and Independent; (men whose wit, learning, honesty, and
Religion, carry an even and equal proportion) while all of them running
themselves out of breath, and finding how one error has begotten an other,
they will at length return home and seek shelter under the Apron of their
Mother Church; and by Gods assistance I will do my best endeavor to hasten
their return.

I cannot ferve God in any other kind, for my strength will not serve me to
Preach; and though no man does honor Preaching more then my self; yet I do
not think it always a like necessary; where Religion is once Planted, and that
men Preaching when necessary.
are sufficiently satisfied in the truth of Religion, that there they should be
still learning, and that the practice of Religion should only consist in the
precept; this I do not commend; multiloquium parit contemptum; there may be
Satietas in sacris; it is not frequent and long Preaching, but painful and
profitable Preaching which works upon the minds and affections of men. It
cannot be denied but many Sects and Sectaries have risen from rash and
unadvised Preaching; men must fill up the hour sometimes with impertinencies,
sometimes with seditious discourses; but always with needless repetitions as
the Directory commends extemporary Prayer: so following that example, The abuse
of Preaching.
(for the reason is alike in both;) some men will Preach ex tempore, and while
they sweat in the Pulpit, and fill up the hour with weak stuff, the judicious
hearer presently concludes, that this man breaks the fourth Commandment, Six
days shall thou labor and take pains, and the seventh day thou shall rest:
but here he has bin idle, and not followed his Studies the whole week, and now
he labors and sweats on the Sabbath, and truly to little purpose; for as it
is in Husbandry, according to the pains of the Husbandman, together with Gods
mercy, the Earth brings forth her increase: so according to the pains of the
Preacher, he must expect that the People shall edify: for if he be careless
and negligent, and regard not his own Preaching, he cannot in justice expect
that others should greatly regard it. Thur far the judicious hearer, but the
Sermon consisting of weak stuff, the weak hearer, suppose Tradesmen,
Artificers, if they have but a volubility of speech, they will adventure to
make such a Sermon. Thus you have preachers of all Trades and Professions: thus
some Ministers desiring to be reputed zealous and painful in their Calling,
with their tedious and frequent Preaching, they have prostituted the very
honor of Preaching, and made it contemptible.

Some Preachers there are whom of all others I do most commend: I confess I
received more benefit from them, then from others; and these are Silenced,
Sequestered, Plundered, and utterly suppressed; for it is an Error to think that
all Preaching should come from the Pulpit. Men Preach in their lives, in their
actions, in their examples; The Heavens declare the glory of God; and the
Firmament shows his handy work: one Day tells another, and one Night
certifieth another: here is excellent Preaching indeed, not an impertinent
word: Thus the Church in all her Orders and Ceremonies did Preach; the building
of great Cathedralls, set forth the Majesty and Magnificency of God, and that
he was to be served like a God. Thus we consider Solomon's Temple, where the
very snuffers were of beaten Go'd; they did likewise assure us, that God had
his dwelling and habitation amongst men, which was an argument that God was
once Incarnate, and visibly conversant with men: And whereas the Jews expect a
Temporal Messiah, I do acknowledge that in all the Old Testament there is not
one word to the contrary; and therefore I believe, that Christ Christ was a
temporal Messiah.
was not only a Spiritual, but likewise a Temporal Messiah; for what
Emperor or King of the World ever had or possibly could have so many Temples,
so many Religious Houses, so many Servants, Archbishops, and Prelates to be
served in such rich Vestments and Copes, such continual singing Praises and
Hymns, such excellent Music, while all the Christian Emperors and Kings did
bow and obey him, offering up their Crowns, and submitting themselves to his
Laws, to testify that the whole World was only created for his Service, that
as he was the beginning of all, so he might be the end of all. God cannot
bereave or divest himself of that Honor, but all must tend and end in his
Glory.

Such as have pulled down these Temples, and committed Sacrilege, The natura
and first beginning of Sacrilege.
they do but second the Devil in his courses; for the Devil intended to
possess himself of Gods Throne in Heaven, and failing in that attempt, being
justly cast down; yet still he continues in his malice and obstinacy toward
God, and has so far prevailed with his imps, the wicked of this world, that as
he could not possess Gods Throne in Heaven, so neither should God have any
Throne upon Earth; they would exile God from the Earth, as the Devil was cast
down from Heaven, to be revenged of God, while God for a time permits it.
Truly Sacrilege is the renouncing of God, and of his Service, and the
greatest of all sins; and while they destroy Temples, they make it known whose
sons they are, and against whom they fight; while they take Gods Inheritance
here into their own possession, they renounce their Inheritance in Heaven;
while they adhere to the world, ceasing upon Church means, spending them in all
luxury and riot, they do thereby shorten their own lives, and hasten to their
own homes.

But of all Preachers I do most commend the Orders and The Church did preach
in her Ceremonies.
Ceremonies of the Church, for they were all significant, and had some special
use: As to instance in the observation of times; The Ecclesiastical year
begins with Advent, wherein we are first awakened with the fears and terrors of
Gods last general judgment; per setam introducimus linum, the needle first
enters and brings the silk after: Then we consider the nenessity of a Savior;
and here the Prophecy of Esaias is read, which of all other Prophesies does most
punctually set forth the coming of Christ: Here we express our hopes and
expectations in the Antiphonies of the Church, Rorate Coeli desuper and nubes
pluant justum, aperiatur Terra and germinet Salvatorem, attollite portas
Principes vestras, and introibit Rex Gloriae, etc. Then we consider the Types
and Figures of Christ in the Law: So we end our Advent with John Baptist the
immediate forerunner of Christ.

Then we come to the Nativitie of Christ, where we consider all the Miracles
and Wonders which then passed the Song of the Angels, the Stars appearing to
conduct the Gentiles to the place of his Birth: Here we express out excessive
joy for his coming, with all kind of mirth, with Hospitality to entertain the
members of Christ: this time lasts to the Purification, which is the time of
the lying in of our Lady; and according to our own custom and fashion, while
Wives are in Child bearing, there are Banquets and Feastings for What we learn
by the observation of time,
joy that a Child is born, and that the Mother is safely delivered: How much
more should our joy be, that God is born in our flesh, to the salvation of
Mankind? After the Purification, we consider the Infancy of Christ, and what
then happened; his flight into Egypt; the murder of Innocents; his return from
Egypt; his manner of going to Jerusalem at the great Feasts of the year; how he
Disputed with the Doctors at twelve years of age, when he was lost in
Jerusalem; then we come to his Baptism; and his first Miracle of turning Water
into Wine.

But seeing our sins are the great hinderance to Gods mercy, in Septuagesima we
consider our sins, and how they have drawn Gods punishments upon us: Here
Genesis is read, Septuagesima.
where it appears, That man was Created in happiness, but fell for his sin; and
the punishment of his sin, was no less then Death; as an earnest thereof, we
see the murder of Abel, that God would not spare the most righteous; so that
if the Son of God took up man's nature, he cannot be dispensed withal, but he
must dye; Statutum est, there is a Statute past, and none can be exempted: This
generally appears in the Deluge, where in effect all mankind perished, and that
there are other punishments after Death, it is inmated unto us The Punishment
of God for sin.
in the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah with fire and brimstone. Then to show the
general afflictions which befall man; it is manifest how Esan did persecute
Jacob; how the Famine drove the Israelites into Egypt, where they lived in
bondage: all this appears in that one Book of Genesis.

For preventing Gods further anger, and appeasing Gods wrath for sin; there
must be a time for repentance, with all A time of repentance.
humility and mortification, to testify our inward sorrow; Thus we begin Lent
with Ashwednesday, and perform that Ceremony, Pulvis es, and in pulverem
reverteris: Then we keep our forty days Fast, according to the Imitation of
Christ; this continues, and ends with the Death and Passion of Christ, whereby
we express our grief, that we should be so wicked, that needs the Son of God
must dye for our sins. Thus, with repentance, we prepare our selves to
celebrate the Resurrection of Christ, that we might rise together with him, and
in assurance thereof be regenerated in him: Here we sing our Hallelujah, with
the greatest expression of joy Our joy with Halleluiah.
and comfort; for at this time Christ is supposed to be on the Earth as a
Conqueror, having finished his labors and passion. Thus we continue to the
Ascension of Christ, before which we have a Rogation-week, that so our prayers,
and we our selves in heart and affection, may together ascend with Christ: and
though we are left here behind, yet still we comfort our selves, that,
according to his promise, we do undoubtedly expect the coming down of his
Spirit, which we Celebrate at Pentacost. Now in regard the three Persons have
thus revealed themselves, we therefore keep the next Lords day, in memory of
that high Mystery, the Trinity in Unity, the Unity in Trinity; and from
hence all the rest of the Sundays have their denomination; according to their
distance. And because these Mysteries are all implied in the blessed and holy
Eucharist, therefore we keep Corpus Christi day, for the Honor of the
Institution of that great Sacrament; and for the rest of the days, they have
proper Collects, Epistles, and Gospels, fitted for the times. (E. G.) we have
twice that The Collects and Gospels fitted for the time.
Gospel of feeding so many thousands with so few loaves. First in Lent, to
comfort us in our fasting, that God is able to seed us with a little, as well
as with much: Then is it used in Harvest, to put us in mind that we should not
ascribe all to natural Causes, but still acknowledge that the same omnipotent
God who has now multiplied the Seed, and sent a All Saints and all Soule^.
plentiful Harvest, he is able, and did likewise multiply the Loaves, to the
feeding of many thousands without the labor of the Husbandman, or the help and
use of the Sun in the Firmament. Thus every Month has Holy Days, to put us
in mind of the Communion of Saints, and that following their example, we shall
have our part and portion with them: And therefore in the last place, we keep
all Saints Day, in memory of that Holy Communion with them: And because all
dyed not Saints, therefore we keep the next Day in memory of all Souls, to put
us in mind that we must follow them, and that God will accomplish the number of
his Elect, and that we shall be all gathered together, and all to appear at his
last and general judgment.

Thus the whole Year runs in a circle of Devotion, though The Nativity.
we cannot with the Angels be always praising God; yet, according to our
weakness, we do by degrees and accession our best endeavor to follow the
example of theit Holiness. From the year, we come to the quarters, and months,
Gods Providence has so disposed it, that the coming of his own Son should be
at the return of the Corporeal Sun in the Heavens; The resurrection.
when the days begin to lengthen, then Christ came into the World, as a
day star to enlighten our darkness. So the Resurrection of Christ by a special
providence of God, falls out in the Spring time, which is in effect, the
Resurrection of the Natural Year; for then every Plant begins to rise out of
the Earth with a new Body; And so in every Quarter, we have our Ember Weeks for
our Mortification and Devotion, as in every Month we have Holy Days for our
Imitation.

From the quarters, and the months, we come to the days of the Week, and in
them with our Hymns and Prayers we commemorate the work of every days
Creation, and how wonderfully Gods mercy and goodness appears in the variety of
his Creatures, together with that excellent order observed in the Creation, how
fitting and agreeable to the nature of every thing in particular.

From the Week, we come to the Hours of the Day; at The Canonical hours.
midnight we celebrate the Birth of Christ, his descent into Hell, together
with his last and unexpected coming in Judgment; At three of the clock we
commemorate the song of the Angels in the Birth of Christ; as on the contrary,
at the same time, we remember the apprehending of Christ in the Garden by the
Jews: At six we celebrate the coming of the Gentiles, and they received by
Christ; then we remember the carrying of Christ before Pilate, there to be
condemned: At nine we celebrate the coming down of The memorials of Christ for
our Devotion.
the Holy Ghost and then we remember the crying out of the Jews, Crucify,
Crucify: At twelve we remember the sending of the Apostles into all Nations to
Preach Christ Crucified, which was then done at the very same hour of the Day:
At three we remember Christ giving up the ghost upon the Cross, and at the same
instant we consider the declining of the Day, and our own hastening to Death to
follow Christ: At six Christ was taken down from the Cross by Joseph of
Arimathea, and Nicodemus, men scarce mentioned in Scripture before, who durst
not openly profess Christ, to give us an assurance that Christ died for
sinners, and is able in an instant to convert them: At nine we commemorate the
Burial of Christ, and then the nine a Clock Bell Rings, to put us in mind of
all those who have departed in Christ. Certainly no Man can dislike this course
of Devotion, if he has any spark of Religion in him.

A short Ejaculation, or a comfortable Meditation, when grief and sorrow does
oppress us, which I do recommend to all Churchmen, who are in my case.
QVare tristis es anima mea? and quare conturbas me? spera in Deo, quoniam
adhuc confitebor illi, salutare vultus mei and Deus meus. Creed videre bona
Domini in terra viventium, expecta Dominum, viriliter age, confortetur cor
tuum, and sustine Dominum: ego pauper and mendicus sum, Dominus sollicitus est
mihi; Nudus egressus, nudus revertar. Dominus dedit, dominus abstulit, sicut
Domino placuit sic factum est: sit nomen Domini benedictum; Si bona suscepimus
de manu Domini, mala quare non sustiniamus? Non sunt condignae passiones hujus
temporis ad futuram gloriam quae revelabitur in nobis, Nulla mihi nocebit
adversitas, si nulla dominetur iniquitas.

FINIS.

