GOOD NEWS FROM HVLL.

Being the most happy Discovery of a terrible Plot against the sai^ Town;
Intended by Sir Charles Grantham, but discovered by Mr. Henry Brunker, Son in
law unto the said Sir Charles.

The manner of the betraying to be by a false Alarm at the South Port. With
the sum of moneys proffered Mr. Brunker for his trust and consent. And also
the manner and means of the Discovery.

ALSO, The Danes Fleet discovered at Sea, having (as is supposed) a^ (...)
against this Kingdom; ^ith the manner how VAN TRV^^ the Dutch Admiral met
with them at Sea, upon the English Coast.

Wherein is related the manner of their Battle, and how they were put to
flight.

LONDON, Printed for J. Tompson. and Andrew Coe. June 15. 1642.

Good News from HULL. Being the discovery of a terrible Plot, to surprise and
take the said City, also the manner and means of the complotting, the sum
proffered and paid for the betraying; With the the Discovery, and the manner
thereof.
MIschief is always pregnant, and can never want willing instruments to bring
her unto perfection. These diseased Times, which languish in expectation of
remedy, are daily fostred and made worse by new devises, and plots. Ill
disposed persons will never satisfy themselves, but with the public ruin,
and all their aim is confusion and destruction. They hate peace, as sound men
do a disease, and their hearts are still on fire, until their bad conceptions
are brought into action and conception. This lingering mischief was long
breeding in the breast of Sir Charles Grantham living within three miles of
Hull, who had his mind been as good as his possessions, might have shined a
worthy member in this our Commonwealth. But the common disease of these times
had infected his blood, and now to promote his discontents, and give birth to
his ill intentions, he invented this plot against the Town of Hull. One Mr.
Henry Brunker a very worthy man and an ancient soldier, was wedded unto the
daughter of this Sir Charles, unto whom (upon what reason grounded I cannot for
the present give the Reader satisfaction) Sir Charles neither gave countenance
nor maintenance, so that the low ebb of his fortunes, constrained him to
apply himself unto Sir John Hotham, and under him to gain some small proportion
to relieve and defend himself from present want and extremity. He had
continued long an alien to his father in Law his affection, and a stranger to
his charity, but on a sudden, it happened beyond the expectation of Mr.
Brunker Sir Charles his son in Law, that Sir Charles with much respect and
specious affection sent for him, whom formerly he could not endure within his
sight. Mr. Brunker much admired at the change of his fathers disposition, yet
willing to give satisfaction, and not to incur the censure of a contumacious
and stubborn child, did attend his father in law, and according to his desire
came unto his House unto him. His welcome was as extraordinary as the cause,
both being beyond the thought of Mr. Brunker.

Now was the Cockatrice hatching his eggs, and waited a continual
opportunity to bring them to perfection. But after his entertainment, thus he
began to open his intentions. That it was true his hand had bin for a long
space close; and shut unto him, but now if he pleased to embrace it, a way was
offered unto him, whereby he might promote his decayed fortunes, and raise
himself to eminency and dignity. Seeing you are in trust under Sir John
Hotham, you may do what I shall propose unto you, which will be no way
disadvantageous unto you, but rather prefer you to future fortunes. The Town of
Hull you may betray and deliver up into our hands and for your salerie and
trust in that cause, I for my part will presently allow unto you 200 l. per
annum, and also supply you for the present with 500. l. to defray and pay your
present occasions. Mr. Brunker seemed to consent to those his propositions, and
told him that his true and faithful service in this case should not be
wanting, but that withal, he must of necessity obtain the consent of one Mr.
John Hayly a Scotchman, for without him nothing could be effected or performed
in this case. The plot was thus far spread, Mr. Brunker parted with his
father for the present, the Scotchman was sent for, and had the same conditions
proposed unto him. But no sooner was Mr. Brunker come unto Hull, but he
immediately acquainted Sir John Hotham with all their discourse and conditions,
who willed Mr. Brunker to take the salery, and still to countenance the plot.
Mr. Brunker went again to his father in law, and by Sir John Hothams advice,
told him he was resolved upon the Exploit, the means and way now was the aim
of Sir Charles his ambition, and thus he began to plot it; That at the dead of
night when Mr. Brunker was abroad with his Watch, about 12. of the clock, he
should draw down his Watch unto the South Port, and being there immediately
strike up a false alarm, as if they expected some assault, and then they while
the combustion was there raised, would with all their power have opportunity to
enter in at the West Port. Mr. Brunker seemed very well pleased with the
contrivance, and first made sure of his land and moneys, afterward he related
all to Sir John Hotham, who according to his own disposition of Goodness, did
secure the Town from the present invasion.

Sir Charles being thus discovered, as you may justly conceive, was very much
perplexed, but having no remedy for his anger, was enforced to satisfy himself
with bare content; the Plot was discovered, the Town secured, the Actors known
to be malignant Foes to the Commonwealth, and as yet Justice and Piety have
taken place.

The Danes Fleet discovered at Sea, having (as it is supposed) an intent
against this Kingdom^.
IF it may not seem any way offensive to you, I shall present unto you, which
wh^^he^ you have heard of formerly or no, I cannot tell, concerning the Danes,
who have presumed so far upon his Majesty's Coast as to come within ten
leagues of his Majesty's Port of Hull, affrighting the people there by their
daily report proceeding from their own mouths. That they were bound for
England to receive satisfaction for some wrongs done them; Whereupon the rumor
being spread abroad through these their (...), intelligence was given to some
of hi^ Majesty's Ships then at Sea, being the James and the Rainbow, there
being with them six Merchants Ships; who reso ved to go and meet them,
thereby to enquire the truth of this report, but ere they came near, they
perceived a small company of Dutch ships being men of War, ready provided for
an encounter with the Danes, which gave them occasion of beholding the
prospect: They begun the fight on Monday the 22 of May, continuing in fight the
space of two hours very hotly. Van Trump the Dutch Admiral being then present
behaved himself very valiantly, insomuch that they sunk many of the Danes ships
ere it was two of the clock, when having spent much powder and sho^ of either
party, they resolved upon parley, which continued for an hour, wherein Van Trump
desired the perusal of their Commission, and to know whether they were bound,
the ground of their intents, which being denied, they fell to it again, and
commned till it was dark; then taking opportunity of the night, being very
cloudy they fled, but the wind being contrary, some were driven upon the
Western Coast of England.

FINIS.

