THE VINDICATION OF SEVERAL PERSONS Committed Prisoners to the TOWER,
GATE HOUSE, and other Prisons of this Nation; Publicly reproached, as Actors
or Contrivers of some horrid Plot.
Published by PETER GOODMAN, who continues a Visitor of Prisoners, Encouraged
by this following Warrant; Prove. 31. 8. Open thy Mouth for the Dumb in the
Cause of all such as are appointed to Destruction.
I. Breda, and the Act for Indemnity, upon false Informations, without seeing
Accuser or Accusation, imprisoned in the Tower and elsewhere, their Houses, as
hostile Enemies, by Soldiers (without Warrants) searched and disarmed; but
after very long and chargeable Restraints, were thereof discharged: And whenas
they, according to Justice, might have expected Satisfaction for the Loss of
Goods and wrongful Imprisonment, from those who were the Authors and occasion
thereof, the Parliament was pleased (in one Clause, inserted in an Act,
Entitled, An Act declaring the Sole Right of the Militia to be in the King) to
Indempnifie and save harmless all such persons, as having acted for the Service
of his Majesty.

II. Indemnity, as not to be Disarmed, Reproached, or Imprisoned, upon any
pretense, hwo specious soever; which nevertheless is now their Portion, when
those of the Popish Religion, who have neither the Law, as to wearing Arms, nor
Public Promises to lay claim to, yet both in their Persons and Estates are
very much Indulged, whilst others remain in loathsome Prisons; wherein also are
many other Sufferers because of Oaths, which in their original institution were
to discover Papists from Protestants; but now, as to the Papists, are dis-used,
and are become a Snare to entrap all other Persuasions, who in Doctrine and
Discipline are most contrary to the Pope and his Adherents.

III. October and November last, many of those Persons were again taken from
their several Habitations, by Pursevants or Messengers, and carried to the
Tower, Gatehouse, etc. (the Keepers refusing to deliver Copies of the Cause of
their Detainor) and not a little wounded in their Reputations and Credits,
being publicly aspersed, as if they, amongst others, were the Contrivers or
Actors in some horrid Plot, thereby rendering them and their Friends most
odiously Infamous, both in City and Country; as if their Actions did occasion
the loading the Nation with more Taxes, and continuing of Mercinary Soldiers;
Whereas in truth their Demeanors have been very inoffensive; and for ought
they, or any of their Relations yet know, they are not so much as accused of
any Crime: and might they but be permitted to speak for themselves, or to enjoy
a Trial according to the known just Laws of this Nation, doubt not but they
would soon make known, and vindicate their Innocence to all People, however at
present by such Aspersions prejudiced against them in their suffering
Conditions.

IV.

V. England assembled in Parliament, the wonted Refuge of all oppressed
Commoners, Unless some grave Patriot, in faithfulness to his Country and
Posterity, meeting with this their Just Vindication, will vouchsafe, on the
behalf of the Prisoners, to implore their Relief, by setting them at Liberty,
without paying Fees or Chamber-Rent, repairing them for Losses and Damages
sustained, and make Provision to prevent such hard usage and Arbitrary
Proceedings for the future, That so Innocent People may not be thus hurried
from Prison to Prison, but may enjoy Protection to live peaceably in the Land
of their Nativity: Or, if after this long Imprisonment, Accusations shall be
pretended against all, or any of them, That then a speedy Trial may be ordered
to be had, agreeable to the known just Laws of this Nation; wherein, if any of
them shall be found guilty of any Plot, Conspiracy, or Oath of Secrecy,
against his Majesty's Person or Government, (as lately published in two learned
Speeches) Then let never more Credit be given to the Visitor of Prisoners, who
aims at no other advantage but the Peace and Welfare of these Nations.

January the 8th, 1661.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.


