ASANISTA'I. OR THE TRIERS, [Or Tormenters] TRIED and CAST, By the Laws both of
God and of Men. OR, Arguments and grounds as well in Reason as Religion,
clearly evincing the unlawfulness of those Ordinances or Commissions (at least
as they have been from time to time declared and interpreted, aloud by the
persons acting them, and tacitly by the Authority enacting them) with all
others of like import, by which the respective Courts, or Consistories of
TRIERS and EJECTORS (so called) amongst us, are established: together with the
unwarrantablenesse of the acceptance and exercise of the powers delegated and
granted in the said Commissions, by any man, or company of men whatsoever, now
in being.

By John Goodwin, an aged Minister of Jesus Christ, and Pastor to that remnant
of his Sheep, usually assembling in Coleman-street, London.

That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of
God, Luke 16. 15. And they please not God, and are contrary to all men. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. (...) Theog. Nulla potentia fida est, si sit nimia.

Sunt multi fidelium qui imperito zelo succenduntur, and saepe dum quosdam,
quasi haereticos hos persequuntur, haereses faciunt.

Greg. l. 9 Epist. 39. London, Printed for Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
BEing much stricken in years, and not far from that turning in the course of
mortality, where Moses the man of God, found in his days the ordinary period
of the life of man Psalm. 90. 10.
; I am by the high and dreadful concernment of my dissolution approaching,
importuned to the uttermost to bethink my self and consider, what service I may
do, whilst my earthly tabernacle yet stands, to my dear Lord and Master
Jesus Christ, and for his sake, to the world about me, which is like to be of
choicest acceptance with him, and which will turn to the best account unto my
self at my appearance before him. In my thoughts about this important affair, I
traversed much ground, and had a great variety of particulars, from time to
time presented unto me, which all commended themselves unto my conscience in
both those respects, which I made after with the greatest strength of my
desire. Amongst others, and with more rational importunity than the rest, some
brief Remonstrance or Testimony against the two Apocryphal Orders of
Commissioned officers amongst us (whether Ecclesiastic or Civil, can hardly
be determined, but by a Nemo scit) however known by the names of Triers, and
Ejectors, much solicited and pressed me in that behalf. From the first day that
I heard of these Commissions, and understood, though but in general, the
purport of them, my heart was troubled within me, and began secretly to presage
the many and great evils, which through the Administration and execution of
them, they were like to bring upon the Gospel in the Ministry of it, and upon
many godly, worthy, and well deserving men. Of the truth of which presagements,
my self in part, with several others, who have had better and more opportunity
than I, to understand the occasioned productions of the said Commissions, are
sad witnesses.

I call God for a record upon my soul, that as concerning the persons
entrusted with the Administration of the said Commissions (some few of them
being known unto me, but far the greater part unknown) I bear not the least
grudge of ill will against any of them, but from the heart wish them all
prosperity and peace, as well in their temporal as spiritual affairs; yea,
and with all Christian candor and clearness of spirit, shall upon all
occasions seek to promote them: Only, my soul has no pleasure in their
accepting the Office (such as it is) into which the mentioned Commissions
(respectively) have tempted them, much less in many strains and carriages in
their managing of it: yea, for those of them, who are known unto me, I believe
them to be men of conscience and worth, fearing God, and lovers of Truth, as
far as God has caused the light thereof to shine in their hearts and
understandings; and for the rest, I charitably hope the same also. But as one
observed, that etiam ex timidissimis animalibus acris multitudo cogi potest,
some creatures that being very timorous and fearful, whilst single and alone,
are yet daring and fierce in herds and greater companies; so frequent
experience shows, (and has showed in all ages) that many men, who divisim
and apart are of a sober and Christian temper, inclineable unto things that are
honest, just and good, yet conjunctim and in consort, prove boisterous and
peremptory, apt to be acted and led by oppressive counsels and principles of
much unworthiness. The reason whereof may be, because the guilt and shame of
unworthy doings being divided amongst many, weigh but light upon the
apprehensions and consciences of particulars; whereas in the mean time, the old
man, or the flesh, in these particulars, may be as much or more gratified by
what is done in consort, and company, as by the same things, in case they were
transacted and done personally only and in particular, by the same men. I
shall not here insist upon any explication of this reason, a considering man
will see enough to satisfy him in this brief proposal of it.

Concerning the Persons, by whose authority the said Commissions have issued,
and been established, I have (I presume) much less need to profess the
Christian loyalty and entireness of my respects toward them, than the
fairness and friendlinesse of my spirit toward the other. The prosperity and
peace both of the Parliamentary and present Government, together with theirs,
who are entrusted with it, have been the great contest and strife of my soul,
both with God and man, ever since the day wherein God laid the foundations of
it, and this against disobliegments not a few, nor inconsiderable. That I speak
the truth in this, and ly not, I have many witnesses. But it has been a kind
of fatal unhappiness incident to the Rulers of the Earth professing
Christianity: whether out of their zeal of God, without knowledge, or out of a
desire to make their power (I mean their authority, or lawful power) to be
thought greater than (indeed) it is; or else by the plausible suggestions and
insinuations, or by the importune or minatory puttings on, or thrustings
forward of others, who under a pretense, seek to serve themselves of their
power, to be drawn into this snare, Namely, to think it their duty, and a
service well pleasing unto God, to employ that Authority and power which is
vested in them, for other purposes, about making, and enforcing by the civil
sword additional Ordinances, Provisions and Decrees, as it were to supply that
which is, or seems to them to be, wanting in that system or body of Counsels,
Orders, and Directions, which the Lord Christ himself has drawn up, and
commended unto the Christian world, to be practiced by those who profess the
Gospel, and the true worship of God, for the best advancement of the interest
of both amongst men. Whereas the truth is, that multiplications in this kind,
and substractions, are of the same demerit and provocation in the sight of God,
and are accordingly censed and prohibited as it were with the same breath by
him, Ye shall not add unto the Word, which I command you, neither shall ye
diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God
which I command you (Deuteronomy. 4. 2.) This last clause, That ye may keep, etc.
clearly imports, that when any thing is added [in matters of Religion and
appertaining to the conscience) unto the Word of God, it is as impedimental or
destructive to the keeping of Gods Commandments, as the taking away of any
thing from it would be Hereof I give some brief account in these Papers. So
else where: What thing soever I command you, observe to do it; thou shall not
add thereto, nor diminish from it, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. And Agurs advice by the Holy
Ghost, is; Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee [viz. by
punishing thee in one kind or other] and thou be found a liar Prove. 30. 6.
[meaning unto thy self, who promisedest unto thy self special favor in the
sight of God for thy imaginary service in supplying that, which in thy conceit,
was wanting in his words, whereas thou reapest his displeasure by it.] This
adding unto the words of God, of which we now speak, is elsewhere (I conceive)
termed, A turning aside on the right hand [from what God had commanded] as a
taking away from these words, A turning aside to the left: And is voted by God
himself an enemy to the prosperity and peace of men, as well as this. Turn not
from it (says God to Joshua concerning his Law) to the right hand, or to the
left, that thou may prosper whethersoever thou go (Josh. 1. 7.) Plainly
implying, that as well turning aside on the right hand [from the commands of
God, by which I know not, as was even now hinted, what can be meant, but men's
adding words and ordinances of their own, to fill up that which they conceive
to be defective and empty in his] As turning aside on the left, is provoking in
the sight of God, and obstructive to the peace and comforts of men. So again:
Ye shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord your God has commanded you: you
shall not turn aside TO THE RIGHTHAND, or to the left, you shall walk in all
the ways, which the Lord your God has commanded you, that ye may live, and
that it may be well with you, etc. Psalm. 2, 10, 12.
Deuteronomy. 5. 32, 33. The wisdom of Kings, and of the Judges of the] earth, (as
the great King and Prophet David informs them) is, to kiss the Son, lest the
be angry, and they perish from the way, i. e. to subject themselves unto the
Laws and Ordinances made and established by Christ, not to set their thresholds
by his, or by their authority to super-induce new Laws or Ordinances upon his,
to serve upon the same account, with his, or to regulate the judgments or
consciences of men, in matters of Faith, or things appertaining unto God, which
is his appropriate Sovereigntie. The anger or displeasure of Christ against
Rulers, when they refuse to kiss him, especially when they challenge and claim
from men the same kiss with him, is commonly expressed by such an interposure
of his, whereby they perish from the way. i. as Mr. Ainsworth well interprets
the phrase, wander and lose the right way, and not know whether to go, nor what
to deliberate: and so they become entangled and ensnared in their own Counsels,
and run to confusion. This is the express doom that in all ages has befallen
Kings, and Princes, and States, and Persons in power, when they have lift up
their hearts in a conceit, as if that Jesus Christ had given unto them the
right hand of fellowship, as well in his Prophetical Office, as his Kingly,
and accordingly have fallen upon making Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, as the
furrows in the field, for binding under severe mulcts and penalties, the
judgments and consciences of men. And whether the anger of Christ has not
uttered it self in that very kind of judgment now described, against the
former Princes and Rulers of this Nation, and more especially against our late
Parliaments, as often as they presumed to meddle with his golden Scepter, whereby
he nurtures and rules the consciences of men, I refer to the testimony of
those amongst us, who has been diligent and constant observers from time to
time between the Lord Christ and them, at such turns. My hope is, and my
fervent prayer shall be, that God in mercy will keep the present Rulers of the
Nation from dashing their foot against this stone, and that they shall not
oppress or vex, by any Apocryphal Statutes or Decrees, those consciences in
the Nation, which are full of goodness, and zealous in their love and loyalty
toward them. But of these things; I have upon several occasions, written
heretofore more at large.

The Papers now in thy hand, were at the Press some weeks since, and in part
printed: only upon some overtures of report (which since vanished into
nothing) as if the two Commissions here impleaded were under some relentings,
and meant to annoy and damnifie the Gospel no more, as hitherto they have
done, the process of the Press was for a while suspended. To what account,
whether for the benefit and good, or of increase of guilt, they will turn unto
those who are most concerned in the contents of them, rests in the hand of
God in conjunction with the wills and reasonings of these men. My hearts desire
and prayer unto God for them is, that he will incline them to consider what is
here said, and give them understanding in a matter of so great concernment unto
them. For my self, what inconvenience or trouble otherwise I shall gain by the
hand, (...) I think it not worth the putting to account, being so near the
line, beyond which there are no sufferings to those that love God. Certain I
am, that by giving my testimony against two so great evils, and dammagers to
the Gospel of Christ, and sundry his faithful Ministers and Servants in the
Nation, as the two commissions against which I here contend, I shall gain a
departure in so much the more peace whenever my change shall come. In which
great blessing (good Reader) my soul wishes thee part and fellowship with my
self, and rests

Devoted to thy soul, and the dear interest thereof. John Goodwin.

ARGVMENTS AND GROUNDS As well in REASON, AS RELIGION,
Clearly evincing the unlawfulness of those Ordinances or Co^mmissions
(especially as they have bin from time to time declared and interpreted, aloud
by the persons acting them and tacitly by the Authority enacting them) with all
others of like import, by which the respective Courts, or Consistories of
Triers and Ejectors (so called) amongst us, are established; together with the
unwarrantableness of the acceptance and exercise of the powers delegated and
granted in the said Commissions, by any man, or company of men whatsoever, now
in being.
IT is a great indignity and affront put upon the Lord Jesus Christ, presumed
to do it, (I mean to make and establish such an erection in the Church) what
do they less then obliquely, yea and by a pregnant and near-hand consequence,
impute either oscitancy and forgetfulness, or else weakness and defect of
understanding unto the Lord Jesus Christ, in his own greatest and most
important affairs? If either the Civil Magistrate, or any other on his behalf,
will rise up to plead or show an Order or Commission from Christ for him to
grant such Commissions and authorities, as those now impleaded, unto men,
(besides that it had been more Christian and proper that this should have been
done before the said Commissions had been issued, and exercised, to the great
scandal and offense of the far greater part of the godly and understanding
people in the Nation) I fear that neither the credit, nor the conscience, of
the undertaker will rejoice over the enterprise, in as much as all attempts in
this kind that have been made (as many within the compass of a few years last
past have been) have miscarried, and turned to no account, but of loss and
disparagement to their undertakers. Do we provoke the Lord unto jealousy? are
we stronger then He, that we dare say, we are wiser then He?

The Lord Christ himself never assumed to himself, (respectively) exercise over
the Faith of that great number of worthy persons now mentioned, even to Eject
them out of the possession and enjoyment of such livelyhoods which the merciful
providence of God in conjunction with the Laws of their Nation, have entitled
them unto? to cast them out (I say) of the enjoyment of their lawful
subsistence to the extreme misery, if not utter affamishing, of themselves,
wives and children, only because they will not, or rather because in
conscience they cannot, believe or profess as they, being in this case made
their Lords and masters, require them upon the said penalty to believe; the
other, upon a like account, shutting against others by the iron bars of their
authority, the door of access unto such livelyhoods, whereunto both the
providence of God, and the faithfulness of men legally entrusted with such
opportunities, yea and their own signal worths and ministerial abilities, do
aloud call them? Doubtless the Lord Jesus Christ never took upon him the
exercise of any such Authority, as to appoint a few men for the devesting of
any sort of men whatsoever, much less the ministers of his Gospel, of their
temporal rights or enjoyments, only because their faith in matters
appertaining unto God, is not the same in all points with the faith of other
men.

If it be replied, that neither sort of Commissioners, Trier; or Ejectors, are
empowered by the tenor or words of their Commissions, to punish any minister,
either poena sensus, or poena damni, simply for not believing, or (which is the
same in effect) for not professing, or not teaching others to believe as
themselves believe; so that when they do any such thing as this, they act
besides their Commissions. I answer, first, The Commissioners themselves, at
least such of them as are generally knwon to understand their Commissions, as
well as, or rather better then, their fellows, do so construe and understand
them, as giving them power, both to reject, and eject for not finding their own
sense and belief in those, that come before them. Secondly, Their frequent, if
not constant, practice in this kind, being sufficiently known unto, and
connived at, if not approved of, by those under whose authority and protection
they thus practice, clearly shows that the sense intended, or at present
owned, in both the Commissions by those who are in authority, and who have
power to declare the sense of either Commission, is that which has been
supposed in the argument, though deposed, or denied, in the reply.

They who devise new stratagems, viz that he was faithful to him that appointed
him [meaning, God the Father] as also Moses was faithful in all his house, Heb.
3. 2. For if it be supposed that the two Commissions specified, be advantageous
and benedict to the interest of the Gospel, and that this is more like to run
and be glorified in the world, because seconded and assisted by the said
Commissions, then was not Jesus Christ faithful unto God in all his house,
neglecting or forgetting to give any order to his Apostles or others concerning
the levying or setting on foot any such means as these for the relief of the
Gospel; nor is it easy to imagine (But much more difficult is it to prove)
when, unto whom, or by whom, Christ directed the making of any such Evangelical
engines, as either of the said Commissions are.

The Lord Christ being (as was said) faithful, Moses also was, in all the house
of God, and his wisdom and providence every ways answerable to this his
faithfulness, it cannot be conceived but that with his precepts, counsels, and
directions, for the advancement and prosperity of the Gospel, he has taken up
and filled the whole roomth or space, which is capable of receiving Injunctions,
Orders, or Directions in that kind So that no man can add, insert or thrust in
any thing byway of advice, or under the notion of a prudentiall contrivance for
the promoting of the Gospel, but he must justle or thrust out, and (in our
Saviors phrase) make of none effect, some or other of those precepts, or
directions, which have been given by the Lord Christ himself, for the same end.
Even as the Pope cannot gratify any new Saint with a day in the Calendar but
only either by turning some of the more ancient out of their long-continued
possessions, or else by compelling them to take the other into part and
fellowship with them in their honor, because the Calendar is from the one end
of it to the other, already filled with the Names o^ the more ancient: In like
manner the whole latitude and compass of wisdom and prudence for the due and
successful managing of the affairs of the Gospel, being spread with the
orders and charges given by Jesus Christ in that behalf, it is not possible for
men to devise or se^on foot any method, means, or device of theirs for the
promoting of this end, but by disauthorizing, or with reflection of
disparagement upon, some or other, or all, of the said prescriptions of Christ
Nor is it possible for any man to invent or form any projection, or make any
provision, which upon a true account will be found in any degree material, or
pertinent, for the welfare or success of the Gospel, wherein he has not been
prevented by the Great Author and Father of the Gospel himself Otherwise it
must be supposed that men are, either (as has been said) wiser then God, and
able to supply that, which has been wanting in him; or else that they are more
sollicitous and careful over the interest of the Gospel, more intent upon the
salvation of the precious souls of men, then He. Therefore the two Commissions
we implead, the one of Triers, the other of Ejectors, being neither of them
given in charge by Jesus Christ for the promotion of the Gospel nor holding any
true or real communion with any of his Orders in that behalf, must needs be
of another Spirit and tendency from these, and rather counter-workers, then
co-workers with them: and this experience it self has sufficiently discovered.

To entrust an inconsiderable number of men, For by this means, in case the
Triers shall at any time be froward, or shall upon any pretense bear a private
grudge against a parish or congregation, or any considerable person, whether
for Religion, or otherwise, in it; or shall judge him unsound in the faith,
whom the congregation shall desire for their Minister, for some special
opinion, one, or more, for which (it is possible) the congregation may in
special manner desire him, and can desire or admit of none that is
contrary-minded; in all these cases (and possibly in many other the like) a
congregation may never be permitted to enjoy such a Minister whom they can
cordially reverence or affect, or by whom they can edify, but must either be
like sheep scattered, and in danger of being lost for want of a shepherd, or
else content themselves to be in subjection to such a person in this great
office, whom the Triers, pro libitu suo shall obtrude upon them, be he never so
froward, never so unsufficient, never so unsound in judgment, or
ill-conditioned otherwise.

The said commissions, Christ Jesus with a liberty or power to choose for
themselves (and accordingly to enjoy whilst they please, and God give the
opportunity) a spiritual shepherd, a man to be over them in the Lord, and to
take the charge and care of their souls, the Commissioners we speak of take
upon them by virtue of the said Commissions, when, and as often as they plese, to
keep asunder those whom God would have joined together, and disgracefully
reject and thrust by him, though never so worthy, whom the people have greatly
desired, and accordingly chosen, to serve them in that great work: and refuse
to grant the indulgence of their pass, but unto such who will swallow their
camels, and yea it, and nay it, with them from the one end of their faith unto
the other.

The Commission of Triers, the one kind and the other, who by law are invested
with a law-right of Presentation unto Parochial demesns, which are called
Benefices, or spiritual promotions. For though such Parishes and Persons, still
may (and I suppose do) present whom they judge meet, to such preferments, yet
the men of their recommendation though never so deserving, lie at the mercy of
the Triers whether they shall ever possess and enjoy such preferments collated
upon them, or no. By means whereof, as often as these Triers shall please to
act their power in quarrelling and opposing the Clerk presented unto them by
either of the said Patrons (a practice whereof they are not over-tender,
whether there be any Christian or reasonable cause for their so acting, or no)
the Patrons are not simply defeated of those accommodations, which the law
intended them in their right of presentation: but this with disparagement and
reflection; and this both upon themselves, as desirous to gratify and perfer
unworthy men; and upon their friends also, or persons presented by them, whom
in such cases, they cast out as unsavory salt upon the dunghill, good for
little but to be trodden under foot by men. So that by means of the Commission
we implead, and her sons, the right and privilege, of presenting is so far, in
the practick and exercise of it, from being a royal privilege, or matter of
convenience unto men (as the law intended) that it is turned into a snare and
occasion of dishonor and trouble only, both to themselves, and those whom
they in special manner desire to gratify. Yea by means of that power which is
invested in the triers by their Commissions, in conjunction with their
interest, and subtilty of working and bringing about their ends, they are found
( effective) the Patrons of all spiritual livings in the Nation; and
accordingly receive the tribute of thanks and acknowledgements due to Patrons
and Benefactors (if no baser metal withal) from those, who by the light of
their countenance come to find the way to those preferments.

And whereas in the days of Prelacy, quare impedit against them, and they
might be, and sometimes de facto were, compelled by Law, to do that which
became them in this case, and to give their pass of Institution to those,
against whom there was no material or legal exception, though otherwise never
so much disrellished by their Lordships; the Triers of the last edition are
mounted upon thrones of power and authority far above the line and level of
their Predecessors and forefathers (the Bishops) For these are (...),
plenipotentiary in the highest in their proceedings; they esteem all laws, but
as Leviathan esteems iron and brass, He esteems iron as straw, and brass as
rotten wood; they with the Pope, laugh all appeals to scorn, and with the wild
ass in Jeremy, being used to the wilderness, snuff up the wind at pleasure,
and fear not in their occasions to be turned away by any man. Never was there
such a rule-less, law-less, controuleless generation of men set up in this
Nation over the Lords people in it: never was there the like unsufferable yoke
of slavery fastened about the necks of the free born people here, as the power
given by Commission unto, or at least claimed and exercised by, these men, upon
pretense of such Commission.

Where there are great numbers of men in a State or Nation, an opportunity for
a rescue and deliverance? Or are not the Commissions we speak of, of this
calculation? Do they not set up a generation of men to be judges over those,
who dissent from them in some weighty matters of faith? Or do not the men thus
set up exercise a bloody dominion over their Adversaries only for dissenting
from them (although they nick-naming the same, call it, a dissenting from the
Truth) dooming them and theirs from time to time, with the Prophet Micaiahs
doom) to be fed with the bread of affliction, and water of affliction, or to
suffer cold, hunger, nakedness and all extremity, if God will not look after
them, and by his more than ordinary providence, provide better than so for them?

To spread snares and temptations in the way of men's consciences, But judge
this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way, Romans 14 27. Now whether the men armed with the power and
authority of the two Commissions protested, do not either by virtue, or color,
of the said Commissions frequently perpetrate and practice the said high
unchristian misdemeanor, I could be content to make themselves judges, if they
would but make their own proceedings the law, and rule of their sentence. For
1. is not the simple professing and owning of those great and important truths
of God that Christ dyed, or gave himself a ransom for all men (as the
Scripture says) that God reprobated no man under a personal consideration,
nor intended so to reprobate any man, from eternity, that he vouchsafes a
sufficiency of means unto all men whereby to repent and be saved, that he
neither constrains, nor necessitateth, any man to believe, or to be saved,
that those who at present truly believe, may put [or thrust] away a good
conscience from them, and hereby make shipwreck of their Faith, and perish; is
not (I say) the professing and owning of these most worthy truths (with others
confederate with them) a bar against all spiritual or ecclesiastic promotion
in the course and process of their consistory? And may not thieves and
murderers as soon (or sooner) purchase the seal of their approbation, and (
solutis solvendis) obtain their pass unto any benefice, or augmentation, as
men whose faces are but set toward any the said Tenants, though otherwise
never so signally qualified, both with moralls and intellectualls for the
Ministry? Again 2 is it not their guise and manner to scrue and dive as far and
as deep as they know how, into the judgments and conscience of those who come
before them (at least if they be not known vassalls to their sense in the
points mentioned, before hand) to discover, whether there be not some touch or
tincture (at least) of some propension or verging of judgment toward those
erroneous opinions (erroneously so called) to be found there? If they answer
any whit tenderly in the case, or but whisper the least (...) construable in
favor of any of those opinions, actum est ilicet, perierunt, they are lost and
undone men: they are presently condemned (they and theirs) by these
consistorian judges, to the spade, or flail, or else to cleaness of teeth, or
begging their bread where they can find it. So that when young men who are
fair for preferment, and want nothing but these men's, good will in wax and
paper to the possession and enjoyment of it, shall come before them, knowing
that they are not like to be supplied with that which they want in this case,
but by a professed disowning those great truths of God [lately specified] let
the regret of their judgments and consciences in the act be never so strong,
are they not now under a sore temptation, and hard to be resisted by flesh and
blood, to dissemble both with God and man, and to pollute their consciences, in
case they stand inwardly convinced of the clearness of those truths, which they
are thus sorely tempted openly to renounce and disclaim? And may not such
faultring and dissembling with God as this, prove, yea has it not often proved,
of that sad consequence, as to occasion such a breath between him, and his
creature, as was never repaired afterward? Woe to such a generation of men
that shall spread such snares of death, lay such stumbling blocks, as these in
their Brethrens way. If they stumble and fall by them, shall not their blood be
required at their hands? Or did Balaam escape the revenging hand of God, who
taught Balack to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel? See
Josh. 13. 22. Or is it regular, or worthy persons professing Christianity, to
reward men with their favor and approbation, in order to their preferment, who
shall do unworthily by sinning against their judgments and consciences; and on
the other hand to obstruct those in their way, and hereby set a black brand of
reproach upon them, who shall deal clearly, heartily, and Christianly with
them? Or is not this the way when occasion serves, of those men, who have not
lifted up themselves upon the wings of the two Commissions mentioned, to make
their nests among the Stars?

According to the best principles of Christian policy, and consistent in their
teachings) other endowments, as of meekness, humility, love, zeal, good will to
the work etc. concurring, are persons more competent for the work of the
ministry, than those, who confining the said Grace of God within the narrow
sphere of their own apprehensions, are hereby inevitably entangled in the
course of their ministry, so as ever and anon to pull down, what even now they
built up; and again, presently to build up, what a very little before they
pulled down. And yet such is the spirit, such the principles and Tenants of the
men now under censure (and the nature and property of all these accordingly
might easily have been known by those who put them into Commission, before this
grand and unhappy oversight was committed) that they take themselves bound in
conscience to admit the latter only, with the two grand incompetencies
mentioned, into the work of the ministry, and to say unto the former,
notwithstanding those signal characters upon them (lately mentioned) with
other qualifications comporting, notably marking them out for the said great
work, you are not fit to serve at the Altar, not meet to have part or
fellowship in this business of the ministry; you are not of our judgments in
all points, wherein we are infallible: therefore we must smite you with the rod
of our power, and break you in pieces like potters vessels, that you may learn
not to Remonstrate, nor take up the truth in contestation with us.

The Commission for Triers, Christ, of conditional Perseverance (with the rest
of the same band of association) wherein it is sure enough that the Triers are
heterodox (or at least profess to hold that, which is interpretatively as
much, for I know not well how they should escape an inward conviction) he
should not answer the law or dictate of a good conscience to offer or present
unto the Triers a man dissenting in such weighty points from himself,
especially, when he knows a person like minded with himself, regularly
capable in all other respects of such a presentation, and willing to be
presented. Yea very possibly the judgment and conscience of a Patron may
(through a mistake) resent it as a thing unlawful, for him to present any man,
whom he judges not sound in these great Doctrines of the Gospel, or that
doubts of, or denies the universal extent of Christ's death. In this case,
the people destitute (at present) of a Minister or spiritual shepherd, are
like to be destitute still: and for six months at east to be exposed to all the
evils and dangers that are incident to a people, like unto sheep scattered, and
not having a shepherd: and at the six months end the Patron, whoever he was (
primum in unoquoque genere est excipiendum) being nonsuited in the plea of his
privilege the people, if their sacerdotal demeansbe any thing considerable, are
like to have some favorite of the times, wearing black, instead of a Minister,
thrust upon them, or otherwise to remain spiritually waste and desolate For the
Patron, in the case we now speak of, cannot upon the account of his conscience,
present a man passeable in respect of his judgment, with the Triers: and the
Triers again, upon the account of theirs (at least as they pretend) cannot
pass any man of a passeable judgment with the other. And thus by means of
this un-christrian and irreconcilable (...) between the Patron and the Triers,
unhappily occasioned by the Commission, the poor people are miserably
distracted and oppressed in their spiritual estates, being fed with the air
instead of the bread of life; and the Patron suffers an illegal defeature of
his just desire on the behalf of the worthy Person presented by him: and the
person rejected, an uncivil (that I say not, an unchristian) affront, and
undeservered blot in his reputation.

It is a maxim the truth whereof is avouched by the experience of all ages,
(in most cases at least) Nulla potentia fida est, si sit nimia; no power is
trusty, if it be over great. The reason may be, because all power being matter
of trust and depositure, for the use and benefit of those, who depone it, and
those who are entrusted, accountable to the Trustees; when either it is at
first conferred in too large a proportion, and without such cautions, limits,
and provisos, which are necessary for the regulation and due ordering of it in
its exercise and administration; or else in the course and exercise of it, is
from time to time permitted to stretch it self beyond the line of its original
grant, and so by degrees to swell and grow out of all shape, to a prodigeous
kind of enormity, it is apt to become unweildy and unruly in his hand that
holds it, and to teach him things that are exorbitant and uncomely: Yea he that
understands himself armed with power incompetent for men, greater then
subjection to give an account of its actings unto any man, is not like to be
far from such an intoxication, which inclines men to think that they are some
Demigods, and that it is but reason that both the natural and civil rights
and privileges, and comforts, yea and consciences also of other men, should be
sacrificed upon the service of their interest, or pleasure only. It is
generally known what monstrous and blasphemous conceits with practices suitable,
the overgrown power claimed and exercised by the Pope, has dictated unto him,
and engaged him to justify and maintain. And is not the power, claimed and
acted by the Triers, whether by virtue of their foundation, or by the underhand
indulgence and connivence of their founders, very superlative, and of the house
and lineage of the Papal? The Popes (says Thuanus) held it for a principle
inviolable not to confess themselves to err in any thing: and Pope Nicholas
made a Decree, That none presume to reprehend his judgment, nor to judge of it:
It has been a long time obtruded upon the world, to believe the infallibility
of the Papal Chair. The absolute anomie and lawlesnesse of the Pope is such,
or claimed for such, that no man may judge of him, no man may dispute of his
judgment, or call it in question, though he draw millions of souls with him
into hell. When the Emperor Charles came to Rome to reform the abuses of the
Pope, and began to enquire of them, Answer was made by all here, that the
Apostolic See being the head of all Churches, ought to be judged of none;
especially, not by a lay man. The spiritual man judges all things, but he
himself is judged of no man, is pleaded for the Popes privilege of exemption
from all censure or question. The Popes in their Decretals and Canonists,
arrogate and assume to themselves plenitudinem potestatis and scientiae; and
teach that they have one and the same tribunal with God and Christ Jesus. They
suffer none to buy or sell (as the Scripture speaks) but only those that
wonder after them, or that have the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the
number of his name. Is there not an eye of these principles, practices, and
usurpations in the spirits and practices of our Tryers? If any Minister that
comes before them shall dispute, or call into question their judgments, though
never so erroneous and destructive to the precious souls of men (as in the
points of Election, Reprobation, the death of Christ, etc.) is he not made a
grand delinquent for so doing, and the door of preferment, ipso facto, shut up
with bars of Iron against him? If any man wonders not after them and their
leanring and tenants, do they not presently set the black brand of their
Reprobation upon him, and interdict him all communion in all Ecclesiastical
matters, where they have to do? And as the Popes parasites have a saying in
gratification of their great Master and his greatness, What the Pope does, is
done; meaning, is so done, as not to be reversed or undone by any authority
whatsoever; so are the proceedings of these men in their lawless Consistory;
so auto-cratoricall and sacred, that they magnify themselves against all
appeal and reversall by men If they shut, no man can open. Now their power,
whether by investiture, Usurpation, or connivance, being thus vast, and
disproportioned to the weakness and obnoxiousnesse of flesh and blood, it is
no otherwise like, but that it should miscarry in the exercise of it, and be
found treacherous and disloyal to the interest and comforts of those, who are
subject unto it, unto whom notwithstanding it owes the best of its service and
administration. And is not the generation of Tryers accordingly troublesome and
burdensome with their power, to the greatest part of the Nation; yea to far the
greater part of the truly godly and well affected here? Do they not use it to
the making and maintaining of parties and factions, to the gaining and
multiplying of disciples to themselves, to the avenging themselves upon their
enemies (so supposed by them for not subjecting their judgments and
consciences unto them) to the ingratiating of themselves with some men,
affronting and trampling others under their feet? Do they not use it to the
wringing and straining of many men's Consciences, by imposing the bloody law of
a necessity upon them, either to praise their sayings and commend them for
orthodox, by professing themselves of the same sense and judgment with them
(though they be really and inwardly of an other) or else to feell the weight of
their loins, and to be cast into their hell fire, where there is weeping and
wailing for want of bread, and other things needful for the life of man? Yea
do they not use it to the spiritual affamishing and starving of some parishes
by obstructing the entrance and access of such worthy persons, only because
they are not of their faction and party, who are designed for the feeding of
them with the bread of life, by those, who judge themselves bound in
conscience, according to their trust by law, to make provision for them in this
kind? The day would fail me to rehearse and insist upon all the particulars of
the irregular and erroneous deportments of persons lifted up to a height of
power, above what their heads and hearts are able to bear, upon the wings of an
unhappy commission.

The Gospel stands in no need of any commission or constitution of humane
devise or contrivance, Mat 9. 38. Luke 10. 2.
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he will send [or thrust, (...)]
forth laborers into his harvest. Laborers thrust forth into the Lords
harvest, will, through the ordinary blessing of God upon their labors, advance
the interest of the Gospel amongst men, as our Savior himself in this passage
of Scripture clearly supposes; because otherwise it were not worth the while
to pray for their thrusting forth, as viz. in case their thrusting forth were
like to turn to no account either of glory unto God, or benefit and blessing
unto men. And yet we see that Christ prescribes no other course or means for
the obtaining of this high favor from God, but prayer only: therefore
certainly this is sufficient for the obtaining of it at his hand. By the way;
our Triers are so far from being co-workers, or co-actors with God in his
gracious act of thrusting forth laborers into his harvest, that they are
counter-workers against him many times, and when he thrusts forth laborers
indeed, they thrust them back, thrusting loiterers and unworthy men upon him in
their stead. And doubtless the Lord Christ, who when time was, desired nothing
in this world (at least comparatively) before his departure from it, but only
to see that fire kindled which he came to send on the earth, (Luke 12. 49.). i.
To see the Gospel (as it were) to have gotten some footing, and taken some good
hold in the world, was sollicitous and provident enough by himself, or by his
Apostles (at least) to order and enjoin all things necessary or meet for the
propagation and spreading of it upon terms of the best advantage after him, and
not to leave so important an affair to the umpirage, care, or contrivance of
the secular powers; yea, the truth is, and the experience of many ages has
demonstrated it, that as for men to blend the grace and merits of Christ with
the righteousness of the law and their own works, for the procurement and
obtaining of justification, is a certain way or means never to be justified (
Gal. 5. 2, 3, 4.) in like manner for men, whoever they be, to compound the
wisdom, counsels and institutions of Christ for the advancement of the
Gospel in the world, with their own devises and inventions, and so to incumber
and entangle them, is the next way to obstruct the course of the Gospel, and
to keep it from running so as to be glorified in the world. And yet the
professing powers of this world, have in all times had itching desires to be
officious unto Jesus Christ in this kind, and to obtrude upon him their own
projections and inventions to accommodate and help him through the world with
his worship and Gospel: A course, which however it still may have gratified
the flesh of some ignorant professors, together with many such, who have been
inordina^e lovers of this present world, and the darlings of the times, yet
never did the heart of the Gospel, nor the serious and hearty profession
thereof, ever prosper or rejoice in it. Unto which of the Kings or Potentates
of the earth did the Lord Christ ever say, I have ordained you by your wisdom
power, and Authority, to supply that, which has been wanting in me and my
Apostles, for the propagation of my Gospel in your dominions?

The Kings and Princes of this world, any such power or Authority, which never
was conferred, nor intended to be conferred upon them, by their people. Now 1.
certain it is that no body (much less any politic or civil body) or community
of people, has any authority or power from God, either by the law of nature,
or otherwise, to establish any such Rule or law, one, or more, amongst them, no
not by or with the universal consent of every individual member of this body,
according unto which they shall all stand bound to believe every man the same
things with an other in all points of Christian Religion, or that any one man's
judgment, or the judgment of any number of men amongst them, shall be the
standard unto which all the rest shall conform their judgments in matters of
Faith or worship, or else incur some civil punishment. The reason is,
because God never gives a power unto any man, or any number of men, to enslave
or subject the consciences of men in matters appertaining unto himself, either
unto themselves and their judgment, or unto any others; or to inflict any
civil mulct or punishment upon any man, for thinking that they are mistaken in
some of their Tenants concerning God, and Christ, and consequently that he
ought to dissent from them. God reserves the legislative power over the
consciences of men unto himself alone: Therefore in case any people should
confer, or do what lies in them to confer, such a power as this upon their
Sovereign Magistrate or Ruler, this Magistrate or Ruler should have no right at
all, either to own, or exercise this power, notwithstanding the intended
collation of it upon them by his people. Yet a It is at no hand probable, nor
have I so much as ever heard, or read, it insisted upon, or pleaded, by the
Rulers in chief in this Nation, or on their behalf, that the people of this
land ever gave unto them, or invested in them, any such power as that now
declared, viz whereby they might invest any one, or more of their subjects
(muchlesse of foreigners or strangers) with power and authority to mold and
form the judgments and consciences of their fellow subjects in matters of
faith, or (which is the same) to inflict any civil mulct or punishment, or to
set any brand of public infamy and reproach upon them, as by excluding them as
unworthy, from places of public trust, yea from all means of livelihood and
subsistence, of which they are (in an ordinary way) capable, and ever likely to
obtain, only because they cannot set their judgments by theirs, or make one
lip with them in some controverted points of Christian Religion. Therefore the
Commission, by virtue or pretense whereof our Triers (and there is not a much
differing consideration of their Brethren in iniquity, our Ejectors, and their
Commission) sell their Brethren (many of them persons not inferior in any
point of Christian worth to the best of themselves) into the hand of poverty
and disgrace, only because they will not prostitute their judgments to the
lust and ambition of theirs, stands not upon any regular foundation of power or
authority: nor is there any person, or number of persons under heaven,
competent or duly qualified to enjoin such an execution of this Commission, as
that, which that occupied part of our Triers, who keep the stage, lift up their
hearts and hands unto from time to time, and are more (it is greatly feared)
than connived at, by those who have power to restrain them from their evil.

The Spanish Inquisition accuses aloud the Romish Religion of cruelty and
blood, to signify as much as they practice.) For what do the bloody Fathers of
the Inquisition more than feed men better, and more orthodox and sound in the
Faith, than themselves, with the bread of sore affliction, under the pretense
of heresy and dangerousnesse of opinion? And what do our Consistory, or
Inquisition of Triers yea of Ejectors also ^lesse? Do they not from time to
time (in effect) grind the faces, and break the bones of men of signal piety
and worth, who know more of God, and of his Gospel, and Grace here, than
themselves, under a pretense of error, unsoundnesse in Doctrine, holding
dangerous Opinions, and such calumniating and unchristian imputations? Do they
not expose such persons with their wives and children, and all depending on
their hand for outward supplies, to the suffering of all extremities of hunger,
cold, nakedness, famine, ignominy, disgrace, etc. by thrusting them back in a
contumelious and disgraceful manner, from such livelihood and means of
subsistence, which both God and man had agreed to provide for them, and bestow
upon them; and this only for not complying with the lusts of their ignorance
and ambition, and not imbasing their consciences by professing the same
profession of an erroneous and misgrounded Faith with them? For let this be but
done, the men are satisfied and overcome, the door of entrance is opened
immediately: and let the Clerk or Register be but a little over-considered, the
Dedimus potestatem will be given with the heaped measure of expedition.

When the trees of the forest (in Jothams parable) went forth to anoint a
King over them, fire would come out of the Bramble, and devour the Cedars of
Lebanon. The honor (such as it is) which is delegated by the two Commissions
of Triers and Ejectors, was not proper to be entertained by men, who were
conscious of any usefulness in themselves for the service, either of God or
man, unless they mean to part with it, and take this honor in exchange for
it. Nor was it like to be accepted but only by Brambles, who had a mind to
scratch, and rend, and tear the flesh, of those who should come near them, and
withal refuse to put their trust in their shadow, [I mean in their learning
and judgment touching matters of Faith] And there is a fire come out from
these brambles, [the Consistory of Triers, and Consistory of Ejectors.] which
has devoured the Cedars of Lebanon: they have consumed and undone persons of
eminent growth and stature in all Christian worth and excellency; and if their
Kingdom be continued unto them, are like to devour more. Men of Christian and
sweet principles would have bethought themselves of better opportunities for
the exercise and improvement of them, than a fitting upon a Consistorian throne
to the great grievance and offense (in a manner) of a whole Nation, and for the
selling of their Brethren into the hand of poverty, disgrace, and all manner of
misery, and this for no other crime or misdemeanor, than this conceit of their
own, that their Brethrens Faith in some points (and these by their own
confession, very obscure, mysterious, and abstruse) is not so good and
commendable, as theirs. Men of modest and Christianly ingenuous spirits would
never endure it, that their Brethren, some of them (it may be) every ways?
equal to the best of themselves, should take long, wearisome, and chargeable
journies, from the remotest part of the land to give attendance upon them,
sitting upon their seats of honor, and with patience, reverence and
submission, to wait their leisure and pleasure, (I know not how long) for the
dispatch of their occasions, yea the leisure and pleasure of their underlings,
whether Register, Clarks, or by what other name they call them.

No argument that yet has been, or (there is sufficient ground to believe) can
be alleged for the necessity of that establishment of Triers, is much
considerable. For what reason can there be for any necessity to exchange or put
by such a way or method, which is generally known, for another, which besides
that it threatens a disturbance and discontent through the novelty of it, is
not like to obviate or prevent those inconveniences, that are sometimes found
in the former, unless it be with introducing or occasioning greater in their
stead? For what if Patrons of benefices, whether parochial congregations, or
single persons, have sometimes recommended or preserted unworthy men to some of
these places, have not the Triers been as great or greater Delinquents in this
kind, as they? Have not they approved of, and given wings unto birds of as
unclean a feather, as any that were wont to fly from the others hand? I always
judged it beneath a spirit of ingenuity to hold intelligence with any man for
information of the sinister, and undue practices of men, or to give
encouragement unto those, who love to be the messengers of such tidings; nor
did I ever bestow the fourth part of an hour in following the scent of any
report I have occasionally met with concerning the Triers, and their unhandsome
and un hallowed doings in their way, although I have met with many in this
kind: Nor have I kept a Register either with my pen or memory, of such
stories. Only I cannot but be sensible of the smart, which ever and anon I
suffer, with having both my ears beaten with the loud complaints, clamours, and
outcries, which I hear from many of their transeats or passe-ports granted to
the firstborn of undeserving men, and of their being denied in the mean time
to persons excellently qualified, and commended unto them by God, as well as by
men, for that great work of the ministry. In this latter, they are much more
irregular and obnoxious, than the other Patrons we spoke of; yea, even when
they stumble at the stone of unworthy presentations. For though in these cases
they behave themselves amiss in helping Chaplains, taken out the Devils
school, to employment in Gods house; yet do they not (thus far) contumeliously
entreat more deserving men, nor obstruct their way to any preferment, unto
which God has called them. Therefore they are much less peccant of the two,
than our Commissioned Triers. The truth is, the generality of the Triers, being
men bent in their dispositions and desires to promote a faction under the name
and pretense of countenancing Orthodox Doctrine, and to suppress all of a
contrary judgment to themselves as erroneous men, corrupt and dangerous in
their principles etc. it was none otherwise like from the beginning, but that
they would steer that crooked course, which now they have steered; and that
they would shine the light of their countenance upon men of the greatest
demerit otherwise, if they were right for the design; especially if it should
so fall out (as I suppose it has done) that men of a more regular behavior
and better fame, should not come in unto them fast enough, to complete the
number of Disciples, and to augment the party to their mind.

If it be argued on the behalf of the Commission, that it is neither meet in
point of conscience or Religion, nor yet prudentiall or safe in point of
policy, that all Patrons, authorized for such by the law, should be suffered to
prefer to the work of the ministry, in all places where they have to do, whom,
or what manner of persons they please. For by this means a great part of the
Parochicall Congregations in the land should (in all likelihood) have either
Popish, or ignorant, or ungodly, or malignant persons set over them in the work
of the Lord: the sad consequence whereof is every man's apprehension. I answer,

1. That in the case in hand, our English Proverb is of too commodious an
application; The remedy is worse than the disease. For by means of the
Commission, and Commissioners, operating together, not only a great part of
the Parishes of the Nation are ministerially supplied with persons of all, or
the most of, those evil characters mentioned in the plea, but many of them are
defrauded also, or disappointed, of men of Christian worth and choicely
qualified for the office and work of the ministry, whom God had graciously
provided for them, and men worse than barely insufficient obtruded upon them in
their stead.

2. To prevent the dangers and inconveniences insisted on in the argument, it
is no ways necessary; either the same missioners should be entrusted with the
inspection of the business throughout the whole Nation, or that those that now
occupy the places of Commissioners, should put no difference between the vile,
and the precious, but join both together in their decrees of Reprobation; if
yet they do not put an unnatural and left handed difference between them,
respecting the vile many times more than the precious, and making reprobates of
these, when they approve of the other. And doubtless it had been a course much
more promising a prevention of those evils, which the argument suggests and
insinuates, to have framed the Commission of Triers, according to the model
and tenor of the Commission for Ejectors, and to have appointed men for that
service in each County, (respectively.) So should the grandeur of their
authority and power have been some what more competent and tolerable, and not
so hyper-archepiscopall, so supermetropolitan and Roming as now it is. And (as
has heen already offered to consideration) a competency of power, for the most
part acquits it self with more diligence and faithfulness, than an extravagancy
and excess. A cup that is filled to the brim, is hardly carried without
spilling. Besides the device of Triers, had it distributed it self into the
respective Counties, had been less burdensome by many degrees unto those, who
live in the remote parts of the Nation, when their occasions should necessitate
them to do their homage of attendance unto them.

3. In case a project of trying all that should: pass into the public
ministry of the Nation, be judged necessary to keep the people of the land free
from infection by their Teachers, as by drinking in doctrines dangerous, either
to the soul, or to the state and present Government, the work is more proper
for the congregated Churches through the Nation, than for a petty handful of
Clergy men (as they are called) unto whom alone it is now upon the matter
devolved (and was like to be from the beginning) sitting in one angle only of
the Nation: Yea, and was much more like to prosper in the hand of the former,
than of the latter. For besides that the holy Ghost made use of Churches, not
of Clergy men, to send forth men to preach the Gospel, Act. 11. 22. Act. 13.
4. hereby declaring it to be a work more proper for them; Churches are like,
First to be more considerate in what they should do in this kind, than the
sealed knot of Triers; these all being but a few, and making but one
Consistory, and so the whole business of trying throughout the Nation lying on
their hand, are in no capacity (especially meeting so seldom consistorywise,
as they do) to allow a meet proportion of time for the regular traversing of
matters committed unto them, at least not without constraining many of their
Suitors to dance a troublesome and burdensome attendance upon them for their
dispatch; whereas the Churches being many, the work and business of trying
being distributed amongst them (as it is like it would be, in case it were
committed unto them) would have leisure to make a due inquiry into matters that
should come before them, and this without any tedious or chargeable delay unto
the Persons. 2. It is like the Churches would be more faithful in the
transaaction of the affair, as being less under tentation or secular
inducements to miscarry, or act unworthily. They in their respective
communities or bodies, have no relations of dependances upon, or expectations
from, Great men, nor are like to be swayed by recommendations, or other
applications of Persons claiming interest in them. How of the Triers have
dashed their foot at these, and such like stones, is known unto, and lamented
by many. Thirdly, neither are the Church-bodies accomplished with any such
politic reaches, deep methods, or subtle, contrivancies for the bringing about
secular projects, or by-ends, as our Triers are Neither (indeed) are they in
respect of their numbers, and complicated variety of interests and conditions
in their respective members, very capable of conspiring or combinging so much
as in the proposal of any unworthy or undue ends to themselves; and in these
respects are like to be more sincere and plain hearted in their proceedings,
than they. Fourthly, the Churches being of different judgments touching
discipline and worship, and some other opinions much controverted and debated
amongst godly, sober, and worthy men in the Nation, may amongst them, and this
with a full concurrence and consent of their judgments, and without the least
regret or check of conscience, accommodate all pious and godly persons of what
judgment soever otherwise, in all their just desires or requests. Whereas
indignation and wrath against men dissenting in judgment from them, have laced
the consciences of our Triers so strait, that themselves profess, they are not
at liberty, they cannot without sin open the door of entrance into the ministry
unto any man, though otherwise never so well qualified thereunto, but only
unto those, whose thoughts are their thoughts, and who can make one spirit of
judgment with them all along in the matters of Christian Faith and Religion.
Fifthly (and lastly) the Churches are by the good providence of God,
commodiously dispersed (as has been lately hinted) through the Nation, for
persons from all quarters thereof to repain unto one or other of them, without
the trouble or charge of any tedious and long journey: Whereas our English
Inquisitors [sirnamed, Triers] having their chamber of Audience fixed some
hundreds of miles from the skirts and frontiers of the Nation (in several
parts of it) impose an hard necessity (differing little from a formal
oppression) upon all the candidate Minister of these parts) who must, by order
of the Commission, pass thorough their Purgatory, or else never come at the
Elysian fields of a fair benefice) to take journies so longsome, wearisome, and
expensive, to come at them, that it may be a matter of doubtful disputation,
whether the sweet of the enjoyment of a good Benefice, or the sour of getting
access to it, be preponderant.

4. If a trial of ministers before admission to a place of public service, be
admitted as necessary, and the Churches of God in the nation not deemed
competent to take, or make, a regular trial of them, yet why should not those,
who are authorized as competent for the ordination, or creation of ministers,
be judged competent for their trial? Or is it any good harmony in reason,
either that they who are judged meet to be invested with the office of a
minister, should not without a new and further trial, be entrussted with the
work of a minister? Or that they, who are judged sufficient and meet to try men
in reference to the former, should not be as sufficient for their trial in
reference to the latter? What need was there then of our new College of
Triers, the erection whereof, together with the irregular deportments of the
masters of it, has (I dare say) more disaffected the generality of the Nation,
and more especially of the better party of it, to the present Government, than
any other State transaction whatsoever. Nor do I know any one Act besides,
whereby the Government is more like to commend it self unto the people
(especially the people of God) in the land, than by plucking up by roots, that
which has been so unhappily planted. But,

5. If neither Churches, nor Presbyteries, be wood of which to make the Mercury
of Trying, yet why might not this image have been carved in smoother timber,
and of a better grain, than that, wherein it is now formed? Why should the
children of great assumings, and such who pretend their judgments be fairer
than the moon, without spot, or stain of error, or mistake; who cannot with a
good conscience give the Lord Christ in his servants any tolerable quarter,
unless he will declare for them, and their opinions, who spread snares of
death in men's way, and (Sathan-like) tempt men to offer violence to their own
judgments and consciences, and so to condemn themselves in that which they do
allow, who count the crushing of godly men, to be godliness, if they understand
more than themselves in the things of God; why (I say) should men of this mold,
rather than any other, be the proper material of which to form the Trier? Is
no vein of men meet to make Triers, but they that can persecute the innnocent
and harmless with a good, conscience, and think they do God service, when they
keep out of his vineyard, those which he sends to labor in it, and who are
like to make the best and faithfulest laborers here?

6. Why the respective Congregations in the Nation should not be allowed Triers
of those, that are to serve them in the work of the ministry, and to whom, upon
that account, they are to allow maintenance, I believe no reason, that will
hold water better than a Sieve, can be given; especially if it be but granted
withal, that they are in a capacity to have Ministers over them, or (which is
tantamont) that they are in duty bound to maintain them. For if it be against
reason that the State, or civil Magistrate, should be any law, or Edict,
restrain men from hiring or entertaining such servants for their civil or
domestic affairs, which they judge are like to prove most serviceable and
useful unto them in these, or to appoint others to assign them what servants
in this kind they please; much more unreasonable is it, that greater bodies or
societies of men should not be permitted to have such to serve them in their
spiritual affairs, whom (upon advise and consultation had with those, whom
they judge most faithful unto them, and best able to give advise in such
cases) they are really and conscienciously persuaded are most like to build
them up in the sound and saving knowledge of God, and to promote the interest
of their souls; especially it being pretended or alleged (and accordingly
submitted freely unto by them) that they are bound to maintain those, that
shall minister unto them in this kind. And as the Magistrate is no ways
accessory unto, or responsible for, the error or weakness of such a man, who
shall of himself entertain a negligent or unfaithful servant, by whom he is
much endammaged in his outward affairs; but in case he had a servant
authoritatively obtruded by the Magistrate upon him, by whom he should suffer
in this kind, the Magistrate were justly chargeable here: In like manner when
a Congregation shall be permitted either the choice, or allowance, of their
Minister, themselves only (with such their Minister) are culpable for what
spiritual danger or detriment soever they shall incur and sustain, either by
his inability for, or unfaithfulness in, his work; but in case the Magistrate
shall take this power from them, and will not suffer them to be the approvers
or allowers of their Ministers, but will by his power take this upon himself,
now in what kind or degree soever, the people shall spiritually suffer or
miscarry, either by the ignorance or insufficiency, or by the negligence or
unfaithfulness of him that teaches them, the Magistrate is justly chargeable
before God with it. Nor does his guilt, or crime, in this case, lie in this,
that he was deceived or mistaken in the man, whom he caused the people to
receive for their Minister, but in this rather, that voluntarily and without a
call, he would be meddling with such sacred edge-tools, as an authoritative and
forcible imposing of Ministers upon them. This is a direct way to bring all the
blood of all the souls that perish, either thorough the weakness, or
wickedness, of the Ministry, in all the Parochial Congregagations in the land,
upon the head of the Magistrate: Whereas if the people perish either by the
insufficiency, or unfaithfulness, of a ministry of their own choice and
approbation, in case they were vigilant, and circumspect in their act of
choosing, or approving in this kind, their blood shall be chiefly required at
the hand of their Ministers: neither shall they contract any guilt, or incur
any further degree of condemnation, by their choosing, or approving such
Ministers, who afterward prove negligent and unfaithful in the work and
charge committed unto them, because in these actions they put their sickles
into their own corn, and not into other men's.

7. (And lastly) For danger likely to befall, the State, or Government, by
allowing the Parochial Congregations in the Land the right of approving their
own Ministers (respectively) the truth is, that the danger is like to be the
greater by their being denied so just and equitable a privilege, than by a
permission to enjoy it. States never suffered by indulging their people in
things reasonable and just; but a forcible wresting out of their hand, or
withholding from them, their due interests and rights, has still been
exasperating and provoking. And in case a Minister allowed by the people,
should prove of a malignant humor;

First, So may a Minister though with the Triers pass: this is no amulet or
charm against malignancy.

Secondly, if a Ministers tongue prove at any time malignant in the pulpit,
there is another Minister of God at hand to restrain him (I mean the
Magistrate) who bears not the sword in vain. But though men who have
committed murder or theft, may be put in prison for their misdemeanors
perpetrated, yet may not others, who have not committed such facts, be
imprisoned to prevent their committing them.

Thirdly, the greatest danger threatening the State from malignant Ministers,
is not by the opportunity they have, or may have, of preaching publicly, but
by clandestine insinuations, consultations, irritations, etc, for the plotting
and practicing whereof they have both the more leisure, and may have the more
opportunties, by being taken off, or put by their employment in preaching.

4. (And lastly) When persons somewhat (it may be) malignantly inclined, shall
be contumeliously entreated by the State, or by their Officers, as suppose any
of them should be made to drink of the Triers cup of reprobation (as many a
worthy man has been) is not this a direct way or means to awaken and set on
work such an inclination? Therefore the politic consideration suggested in the
argument in countenance of the Triers, and their Constitution, is clearly
anti-politick, and srowns rather than smiles upon their consistory. And if
Policy having weighed them in her balance, find them wanting; and Religion
having weighed them in the balance of the Sanctuary, has found them yet
wanting more: let their Kindome be divided, and given to the Congregations of
the Land.

FINIS.
THese Books following sold by H. Eversden at the Greyhound in Paul's
Churchyard.

Truth Defended; Innocence Cleared, being the Declaration of the Judgment of
James Arminius, Dr. in Divinity at Leyden.

The Grand Inquiery who is the Righteous man, (in 80) by William Moore, at
Whalley in Lancashire.

The Seventh day Sabbath sought out and Celibrated, by Thomas Tillam in 80
Imputatio Fidei, or a Treatise of Justification, wherein the Imputation of
Faith for Righteousness (mentioned in Romans 4, 5, 6th.) is explained by Mr.
John Goodwin in 40.

Mercy in her Exaltation, a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas Tay
lor, by Mr. John Goodwin.

Anabaptists Meribab, or Waters of Strife, being an Answer to Mr Thomas Lamb
Merchant, by Mr. Price one of Mr. Goodwins Congregation.

Postscript to the Reader.
IF there be any thing found in the Papers now in thy hand, which some may
please to construe as favoring more of an undue liberty or plainness of
speech, then of that reverence and respects, which are due unto Authority, and
more especially to that authority, from whence the two Commissions impleaded
therein, were issued; the Author desires that it may be considered, 1. That
the great men of the earth are in nothing more exposed to danger and disaster,
then through want of seasonable smitings and reproofs of faithful men, upon
their misdoings. 2. That all evictions and reproofs of irregular actions, being
seasonably and duly administered, are more the reproofs of Jesus Christ, then of
the men, who ever they be, by whom they are administered. 3. That Kings and
Princes, and the greatest Rulers of the earth, are, in their miscarriages,
liable to the reproofs of Jesus Christ, as well as meaner men. 4. That those
that reprove in the Name of Christ, and in his stead, are not in this service
to respect persons, but only the nature and demerit of the cause or thing
reproved. 5. and lastly, That the Author stands particularly and publicly
engaged to the Nation, to take and use all Christian boldness and freedom, in
declaring unto the Rulers of his people their errors and mistakes, upon the
account of his zeal and faithfulness, so often publicly testified, in
asserting not only the justifiablenesse of their authority and power, but of
their actings also, when, and as far, as justifiable; and were impeached and
condemned by their greatest adversaries.


