Separation Examined: OR, A TREATISE Wherein the grounds for Separation from
the Ministry and Churches of England are weighed, and found too light. The
practice proved to be not only unwarrantable, but likewise so hurtful to the
Churches, that Church-Reformation cannot with any comfort go forward, so long
as such Separation is Tolerated. Also an humble request presented to the
Congregational Divines, that [since the differences between them and the
Classical-Divines are very small] they would please to strike in with the
Classical-Divines in carrying on the work of Reformation, before the
Inundation of these corrupt Opinions, have destroyed both Ordinances and
Religion.

By Gi. Firmin Minister to the Church in Shalford in Essex.

1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no Schisms among
you.

Judicabit autem and eosqui schismata operantur, qui sunt immanes, non habentes
Dei dilectionem, suamque utilitatem potius considerantes quam unitatem
Ecclesiae, propter modicas and quaslibet causas magnum and gloriosum corpus
Christi conscindunt and dividunt, etc. Irenae l. 4. c. 62.

Cavenda sunt autem, fratres dilectissimi, non solum quae sunt aperta and
manifesta, sed and astutae fraudis subtilitate fallentia, etc. haeteses invenit
and schismata, quibus subverteret fidem, veritatem corrumperet, scinderet
unitatem, Cypr. de unit. Eccles.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Stephen Bowtell, at the Bible in
Popes-head-Alley. 1652.

The Contents.
THere are true visible Churches in England. page 1 There is a true
Gospel Ministry in England. page 4. The grounds of Separation must be either in
the Ministry, Worship, Congregation, or Place of meeting. p. 12
The Ordination of the Ministers by Bishops can be no ground for Separation. p.
22 There can be no ground in the Worship, being singing of Psalms is here
touched. p. 32 There can be no ground in the Congregation, though many wicked
persons be there. Nor in the place of meeting. p. 39 The Proposals of the
Separatists, what they would have are set down, and answers returned; as, 1
They would have Ministers lay down their former Call, and join with them,
then they (it may be) will elect them, and ordain them; where this question is
handled. p. 46 Quest. Whether election only gives the essentials to a Minister,
and Ordination be but an Adjunct. p. 50 Whether the People have power to
Ordain? p. 70 Whether the Fraternity be the first subject of the power of the
Keys? briefly touched. p. 73 2 They will have an explicit Covenant, which they
call the form of a Church. p. 81 3 No Church Members, but visible Saints. p.
82 4 Power in Admissions, and Excommunications. p. 83 5 Liberty to Prophecy.
p. 84 6 Liberty of Conscience. p. 88 How it appears that Church-reformation
cannot with comfort proceed, so long as the Separation is Tolerated. p. 91 The
Separatists are no such-friends to the Civil Power, as is pretended. p. 94 The
Questions propounded to the Separatists, in reference to their Separation. p.
97 The agreements and differences with and between the Classical, and
Congregationall Divines are reviewed, their agreements found to be many, their
differences very few. p. 100 Whence an humble request is presented to the
Congregationall Divines, speedily to join with the Classical Divines, backed
with seven reasons. p. 108
To the Reverend the Ministers of London, the Authors of the Vindication of the
Presbyteriall Government and Ministry, etc. Printed, 1650.
Fathers and Brethren:
THe goodness of God, manifested of old to England (in causing the Sun of his
Gospel to rise early upon this Nation, and to find such entertainment in the
hearts of the Supreme Power, that it was the first Nation that ever received
the Gospel with the countenance of public Authority, having the first
Christian King that ever was) is known to the whole Christian world; his
goodness in these latter days, since he took from our necks the
Antichristian yoke, has been also wonderful, honoring the Ministers of his
Gospel with such Holiness, Learning. Ministerial abilities, and success in
their labor in converting many, and setting up the power of godliness in this
Nation, that he has not honored any Nation more; nay (without pride it may be
spoken) his Free Grace has not honored any Nation so much in these respects,
as this English Nation; but now in our days the Ministry, which God has thus
honored, is as much dishonored, and that by such, who cannot but acknowledge
(their own mouths have spoken it) that what Spiritual good they have
received, it was wrought by the Ministry; and now we find scorning, deriding,
separating from the Ministry, and many not so much as stepping over their
thresholds, to hear them, who were the first instruments of their good (if
they have any, as some we hope have) and yet the Ministers are the same they
were before; yea, some repenting, that ever they bestowed so much pains and
time to follow the Minister, as one that lives but four or five miles from
Dedham has said, He repented that he followed that eminent Servant of God, Mr.
Rogers so much, to hear his preaching. While I observed these things, and
considered into what a sad condition we are fallen, and read over your
Vindication, in which I saw a holy, meek, and true Christian spirit breathing,
calling upon the Congregationall men to join with you; certainly I thought
that Book deserved a courteous Christian answer from the ablest of our
Congregationall men: what they have done toward it I know not, (being little
acquainted with affairs abroad, being locked up in much sadness of spirit at
home) but I thought with my self, that being I was numbered among the
Independents (though I am the weakest, and most worthy the holy Lord should
turn me out of his holy Work) laying other things together (which I have
mentioned in the Epistle to the Reader) I resolved to improve the little Talent
the Lord had given me, in examining the grounds of these practices, and to
stand up in the defense of such Ministers, who I saw were dear to Christ, and
whom in holiness, learning, and abilities, the Lord had honored far before
my self. And now (my Fathers) the quarrel is not only with you, because you
are Presbyteriall Ministers, the quarrel is with the whole Ministry, for this
spirit has infected even some in New England, and I believe will cause more
troubles there in those Churches, then ever the Bishops did, though they
threatened them much. What are the practices of some, and what are the fears of
the worthy Ministers there, I understand by Letters. I do not, I dare not
censure the Congregationall Churches here, some of the Ministers I know to be
holy, and reverent (I wish I had such grace) many Members no doubt are really
godly; but had I not lived in New England, and seen the Churches there, by
what I hear of diverse, and what I know by some Churches here, I should have
been convinced that Independent (as it is here called) Government, was never of
Christ's institution. I have observed few people that come once to stand up for
Independency, but they grow very tender (as they call it) toward corrupt
Opinions, if not leavened with them themselves, not allowing a Minister to
speak against them; yea, and those, whom I took to be the soberest and best
grounded Christians, have not stuck to Censure New England sharply, for being
too strict against those which they call, Non-fundamentall Errors; and I wish
that some Ministers were not sick of that policy, to plead for Toleration of
such Opinions, esteeming it a piece of true Christian wisdom to be silent, and
not to meddle, but comply with all Opinionists, especially, if they conceive
them to be not in the fundamentals, which are but a few.

Hierome thought it was Augustines honor, Aug. Epist. 25.
that he so strongly opposed the Heresies of his time, that all the Heretics
hated him; to oppose by Argument is good, yea and to discountenance the
contumacious is not amiss; but it is now an honor for a man to be silent. For
your parts (my Fathers) you and the godly Presbyterians of England, are
esteemed the causes of all these troubles; yea, I observe by Letters, which my
self and others have received from the Divines of New England, that some have
informed them, as if you were the causes of the second War, when Duke
Hamilton, and Lord Goring, etc. arose. Also that you are so adverse to the
Congregationall Churches here, that you had rather join with the Common Enemy,
and hazard your own Liberties, then enjoy your Liberties with your Brethren,
the Congregationall men; but you have I think sufficiently cleared your selves
from these aspersions in your Vindication, yea, and so can the Congregationall
men clear you, I believe; there is one report that goes for truth, and that
amongst persons of note, and upon that ground I perceive, I mean some men
here, they much satisfy themselves in this scorn cast upon you, viz. That the
Assembly of Divines, when things were likely to settle on the Presbyterian
side, should determine, That Congregationall Ministers should not be allowed
any public place to preach in, nor should be allowed any public maintenance.
This is certainly believed by men of note, I wish the truth were cleared; I am
not ignorant what provocation it was, to have your people taken from you, etc.
but yet I can hardly believe the Assembly to be so hard to their Brethren.

Further (but that I am too mean to move, and know not whither my motion be
good or no in your thoughts) I could heartily wish, you would please to
declare, Page 119, 120, 121.
how far you could yield to the Congregationall Brethren: you have hinted
some things in your Vindication, which imply much; but if it were thought meet
to speak out a little more fully, then should our New England Divines clearly
understand where the greatest cause of this disunion lies, against all false
reports that are sent to them.

And now (my reverend Fathers) I beseech you accept of this testimony of the
honor I owe you, having ventured after many resolutions to the contrary
(fearing my weakness) to dedicate this Treatise to you, it being the greatest
desire of my heart to see the Kingdom of Christ, first exalted in my own
wretched heart, and then to see Classical, and Congregationall men joining
together, with one shoulder to set up his visible Kingdom in England, opposing
Error and Schism, and Christ riding in Triumph upon his white Horse,
conquering souls by his poor Instruments, that once it may be said of
England, The Lord bless thee, O habitation of Justice, and mountain of
Holiness. Ier. 31.23.


So prays he, who is unworthy to be called your Fellow Laborer in the Lord:
Jan. 19. 1651. Giles Firmin.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
I Shall briefly give you an account what moved me to undertake this task: 1.
I observed it very common among Christians, when we have been speaking about
some Minister, godly, eminent, etc. against whom no objection can be made; but
if he were a man of the Presbyterial judgment, they would make slight account
of him. He? He is a Presbyterian, and if you have said so, Presbyterian is
crime enough; hence to separate from a Presbyterial Minister, though never so
able and godly, they think it no offense at all; this made me search what they
had to say against these Presbyterial men, whether their grounds for such
contempt were solid, as also for their separation.

2. I received two Letters from New England from a worthy Divine, one some
longer time since, the other but lately, in which there were these passages: In
the first, which was writ after the overthrow of Duke Hamilton he has this
passage, We do not know what to pray for in your behalf: God has removed
adversaries, fought miraculously for you against the Scots, and put the power
of things into such hands, as have been most active for the godly party, and
yet your condition is as miserable as ever, the Lord help, for vain is the
help of man: I much fear, you that are the godly Ministers, have been too
passive, and not so zealous against Errors and Heresies, as you ought, and
therefore it is just with the Lord, to let in these inundations of hellish
opinions upon you, which damp all power of Religion, wheresoever they become;
though I am not worthy to be reckoned among the godly Ministers, yet my
conscience does not accuse me of this fault, I am rather judged a man too
severe. In his other Letter, which came at the end of this Summer, he wrote
thus:

It Is the wonderment of this side of the world, that you that are godly, and
may agree, yet will not. Neither does my conscience accuse me in this point, I
hope I shall clear it by the ensuing Discourse.

3. Among the many crimes charged upon the Independent Churches, I have noted
these two especially; 1. That they are but a back door for Errors and
Heresies. 2. That they regard nothing but their own interest, so long as they
have their liberty, though there are Ministers as godly, able, and learned, and
many hundreds of true visible Churches in the Nation besides theirs, yet they
regard not them, nor their comfort; being therefore set down by Mr. Edwards in
his Catalogue of Independents, I thought I would clear my self of all these
things, and though I be but amongst the meanest, and not worth the regarding,
yet to discharge my self, and to have my spirit free, when ever God shall
visit us for these Divisions, Errors, Heresies, etc. [for what can we expect
but some rod, if we continue in the frame we now are in?] I have made bold
humbly to address my self to our Congregational Divines, to be seech them, to
take those offers, which the Presbyteriall brethren make for agreement, that so
we may strengthen one another against the common adversaries, that trouble our
Reformation.

I thought to have taken occasion here to clear my self from what Mr. Edwards
had writ concerning me, but the man being dead, I rather let it alone, (for
sin, I thank God, he has charged me with none) I know, if ever the Lord bring
such an unworthy wretch as I am to heaven, I shall not bear Mr. Edwards a
grudge for what unkindnesse he has offered to me here. But whereas Mr. Edwards
has branded me for an Independent; some of (miserable) Colchester have told me
that I have altered my principles; but I know no reason why the one should
charge me to be an Independent, nor the other for departing from my principles;
for I never declared any thing in public, but only once, which was concerning
the matter and form of a visible Church: for the government of the Church
never troubled me, but how to have the people reformed, and scandalous persons
debarred from the seals of the Covenant, and persons brought into a posture
fit for Discipline, but what is this to Independency? Once also I expressed
this, that I conceived, a Church organized, and walking regularly might execute
all the power of the Keys within it self. I never expressed any thing more
there concerning Church-worke, but did labor to keep alive the old truths,
which I found my heart had more need of, then to preach about Church Government
in such a Town, as that was. But if you say, though I did not express it
openly, yet I was an Independent in my judgment: but how can men charge me
with that, whi^c neither in public, nor private they ever heard me express?
but then to deal plainly I shall set down what manner of Independent then I
was, and then you shall see how much I am altered. In these points I did join
with the Congregational-men.

First, I thought none but visible Saints to be fit matter for a Church.

Secondly, So the Belgic Churches.
I thought a promise from the people to subject themselves to Church Discipline
was of very great concernment, to carry on Discipline with strength and
comfort, as likewise to subject themselves to all other Ordinances, as became
Christians.

Thirdly, though I did own the Churches of England for true Churches, yet
because for want of Catechizing and Discipline, they were overgrowne with
ignorance and profaneness: I did desire the grossly ignorant and profane to
stay a while, before I gave t heir children the seal of Baptism, that having
got knowledge, and conversation freed from scandal, the Ordinance might be
administered with more comfort.

Fourthly, I thought that if Churches were now constituting, the Officers
should not receive any into Church Fellowship against the consent of the
people, giving sufficient proof against them.

Fifthly, I thought the Officers ought not excommunicate any person, If the
people did not consent to them [not that a Church must be obstructed, if two or
three have a mind to be cross.]

Sixthly, I thought a particular Church organized to be the first subject of the
power of the Keys, and according as Mr. Cotton held it out: but this I did not
express publicly.

Seventhly, I did somewhat question whether the Officers of one Church had
power to excommunicate in another Church.

But in these points I was no Independent.

First, I could not be clear that the people were the first subject of the
power of the Keys.

Secondly, neither that the Fraternity had power to ordain formally.

Thirdly, that a Minister should preach only as a gifted broth er out of his
own place.

Fourthly, I could not consent to have the godly people taken away from a godly
Presbyterian, into an Independent Church.

Fifthly, I could not approve that Independent Churches should refuse to
communicate with Presbyteriall Churches, though there were good store of
visible Saints, for want of an explicit Covenant.

By this time, I hope I shall be no rank Independent: But where is then my
thanging of my principles? let these men prove it, for I am the same still,
only since I read Mr. Hudson, I do somewhat waver about the first subject of
the Keys and this is all my change.

That my mind may be cleared against whom I write; I observe Separatists are
not all of a size; some separate from Ministers and Churches, and get into
their private houses, own no officers, but please themselves with their own
gifts and opinions; these are the persons whom I chiefly aim at, as such that
so trouble us, that no Church Discipline can hold so long as they stand.

Others live in places where there are visible and real Saints, the Ministry
godly, and able, yea, it may be called to the place by these persons, but
because they cannot have all they would picking a quarrel with the Ordination
of their Minister, etc. they choose some other Minister in some other Town,
and so depart from the Prebyterial to a Congregational Church, continuing still
in the same Parish; It is well these men hold up Ordinances and Officers, yet
the grounds of their practice the ensuing Discourse will try. I am sure, peace
and unity among Churches cannot possibly stand with this practice; it is very
sad that we should not yield a little, where we may, nay where we ought, for
peace with our brethren whom we cannot but judge holy and sincere.

If there should sometimes fall out a quotation somewhat sharp, yet I pray do
not think that I apply it to all Separatists, but to some among them, who may
deserve it.

What success my poor endeavors shall find, I know not, I look for little
good they shall do amongst the Separatists, who with an imperious scorn
neglect to listen to, or read any thing, which tends to overthrow their
practice; and though they be so confuted, as they are not able to answer a
word, yet they scorn to acknowledge their error, and return to the
Congregations, from which they have separated, which to me is a clear
demonstration, that however these men pretend conscience, yet it is no such
thing; for were these men lead by a pure conscience, considering how they
separate from holy men, such also as have been instruments of their souls
good, considering also how they weaken their hands, grieve their spirits, they
would hear, read, pray, take any course, that they might be sure to be found
in the truth. Act. 13.36.
But I leave the success to God, my desire was, to serve my Generation, and
there I rest.

Separation Examined.
I Will not trouble my self to prove that there is a visible Church upon the
Earth, or true visible Churches in England, I think there are none that own
the Scriptures, who will deny the former, though there are some who deny the
latter, unless I mean the Congregationall Churches, which they will
acknowledge to be Churches, but none else; yet many of those, whom I write
against, do not own them, for though they have opportunity, and may join
with such Churches, yet they refuse to do so, being unwilling (I perceive) to
come under, or maintain any Officers; I wish there be not too strong arguments
to prove, that Covetousness and Ambition reign too much amongst this kind of
Separatists, yet because the proving that there are true visible Churches in
England, will be of great consequence to the following Discourse (as being the
groundwork of it:) I will therefore produce one Argument to prove it, and if I
can prove that, then it will necessarily follow, there is a true visible Church
on the earth; which (as I said) I thought no Christian dares deny. But what
da^es not the vile heart of man think, say, or do, if God give it up, to its
own blindness, and wickedness?

Master Buroughs making mention of Schusselburgius, Iren. page 236.
who collected the Sects, Opinions, and ways of men soon after Luther says,
There is not any one strange Opinion amongst us now, but you shall find it
amongst them in terminis; only I remember not that one that has taken some,
who though they acknowledge the Scripture, yet think there is no visible
Church on the earth.

Many were the errors that were confuted, condemned in the first Synod in New
England, which errors I find here in England, but there was not this error
amongst them all (to my remembrance:) it was wont to be said of Africa, that
every year it produced a new Monster, but now it must be said of England, that
it has produced such a Spiritual Monster, as no Nation, that owned the
Scriptures, ever did before. The Lord save us from our own hearts. But I will
now prove the Thesis, as I said before, there are true visible Churches in
England.

Where there are many Societies of visible Saints, and true Ministers,
consenting together to worship God in his holy Ordinances, there are true
visible Churches.

But in England, there are many Societies of visible Saints, and true Ministers
consenting together to worship God in his holy Ordinances, Ergo, in England
there are many true visible Churches.

The Major is so plain, that none who know what a visible Church is, and what
the Churches in the Gospel were, but must needs yield it.

Here are the essential causes of a Church; Ergo, here is a Church.

First, here is the material cause, Visible Saints, the Ministers also, as
visible Saints, help make up the matter; but as they are Ministers they make
the Churches Organicall (which is more.)

2 Here is the formal cause, their consenting to worship God, etc. he that
yields the essential causes, and yet denies the effect, has lost his reason.

A Church, is any company of Saints in body, to set up what Ordinances of God
they know; This is a true Church, and here God dwells, In Hos. 8.1.
says Mr. Buroughs.

He speaks of a Church, as it is a Homogeneall body, but I go further; the
Separatists indeed will catch hold of his definition, as Cyprian says, the
Schismatics in his time did of that text, in Matthew. 18.20. to which eh
answered very well, De unita Eccles. and hence they will conclude, we are
Saints in body; ergo we are true Churches.

But I pray, are there not visible Saints also in the Churches, from which you
irregularly (as I shall prove after) did separate? Are they not as good as your
selves? Did not you attain to that visibility of Saint-ship, which you have,
while you were in those Churches? Do you set up the Ordinances of God so far
as you know (or may know, if error does not hinder) as they do from whom you
have separated? Nay, you cannot do it, for you neither have men fit for
Office, nor will you endure to come under Officers; and therefore if you look
into the ninth verse of the same Chapter, Faciunt faves vespae, faciunt
Ecclesias Marciouitae. Tertul.
you shall find Mr. Buroughs saying, That those, who love to live without
Ordinances, from under the government of Christ, are those that love to live in
the Wilderness. His words may be applied to many of these Separatists, who
call for separation from the word, as well as to those who are in the world.
But to my Argument.

All the quarrel will be about the Ministers, The Presbyterians speak the
same Language, if the words in Body please you, the Correlatum of
Ecclesiastical Power is a people embodied in a Church, or a Spiritual
corporation, Gillesp. Aar. rod. 191. Iren. p. 102.
and the consenting together, etc. as for Mr. Buroughs phrase, there being in
Body, this they like well, but so are not those visible Saints I mention, say
they. But to take away that Cavil, and so to return to the Ministers, you may
know what Mr. B. means by being in body, by showing what makes a Church
Covenant; says he, I know nothing more is required, but to manifest their
assent, to join with that Body, to set up all the Ordinances of Christ, so
far as they know. And do not those visible Saints actually manifest their
assent by their continual attendance upon their Officers in all the Ordinances
of God, and maintaining their Officers to that intent, that they may have the
Ordinances of Christ set up amongst them? Shall the want of an Adjunct null the
Church, when as they do the very thing, which they should express? Put case
you express your assent, and do not the things which you express your assent
unto, are you therefore a Church, because of your expressing your assent? What
then are those who do the things, though they do not express their assent in
words, but in Acts? This is good, and sufficient to prove the essence, though
both expression and doing is better, but of this more after.

But the Ministers are those who spoil all; there are those who cannot deny
there are Ordinances, but there are none to administer them; and this was the
reason, which one of the chief Members of a Church in London (who did use to
Prophecy (as they call it) in the absence or weariness of the Pastor) gave to
an honest man, who was troubled, because he fell off from the Church, and
exercising his gifts, and turned Seeker. I name not the man, nor the Church,
but it is too true.

Now suppose I could not prove the Ministers to be true Ministers, yet those
visible Saints which I named before, and those whom you call Presbyterians, do
meet together, confer, pray, and fast together; watch one over another, and
so, if you will consider them as Homogeneall Bodies, they are as good Churches
as those Separatists, which have no Officers; therefore still there are true
visible Churches in England, besides the Separatists, and so my Argument stands
firm. But I will prove there are many true Ministers, even amongst those, whom
you call Presbyterial Ministers, thus:

Where there are men sufficiently qualified by God, orderly (at least for
substance) called to the Ministry, and do that work, which Christ appointed
his Ministers to do, there are true Gospel Ministers.

But in many of the Churches of England, there are such men, ergo in many of
the Churches of England there are true Gospel Ministers.

I put in the word many, I dare venture far here, but that I would save my
self against those whom I oppose.
because I am sure I shall maintain my ground, for why should I have undertaken
to prove that all the Ministers in England are true Gospel Ministers? and that
in every Parochial Congregation in the blind corners of England, there are
such visible Saints, as ought to be, in the constitution of a Church (enough I
mean to make a Church) I should have had a hard task; but by this word many I
include abundance both Churches and Ministers, besides our Congregationall
Ministers; now to my Argument.

The major cannot be denied, for all the causes are there set down, which are
required to a true Minister.

1 The efficient cause, God;

2 Material cause, a man sufficiently qualified, I mean according to Paul's
phrase, 2 Timothy 2.2. (...), the same word with 2 Cor. 2 16 who is sufficient?
two distinctions would clear this latter text, but I spare the reader.

3 Formal cause, orderly called, I put in (at least for substance) because I
would include many of the Presbyteriall men.

4 Final cause, Ephesians. 4.12. the end of the Ministry is, for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ. So that no rational man can deny the major.

Now for the minor, that there are many such Ministers in England, we shall see;

1 For the efficient cause, there is no controversy there.

2 For the material, that they are sufficiently qualified in that sense above
mentioned, who can deny it? many, yea abundance qualified with real grace, and
experimental workings on their own hearts, besides their Ministerial
qualifications, and these many others have, who it may be have not the former,
as could be wished; but I hope, though some do whisper, yet they will not
undertake to defend it, that there can be no true Minister, unless he have
real Grace: I have heard some that have affirmed as much, but they are not
such as dare undertake the Question. But as for Ministerial qualifications, I
do believe the gifts of Ministers were never larger then now; since the
Apostles days never were the truths of God more clearly laid open then now;
God does seem to give out such large measures in these days, as it were in
opposition to this wild Generation, that when they are crying out, there are no
Ministers, God confutes them, by pouring out more of his Spirit in point of
Ministerial abilities upon them, then before; indeed where other holy men have
gone before in such Parishes, and places thereabouts, we find not that
preaching works now, as it did when it came new to the places, yet I say the
gifts of Ministers now are as strong, as they were before; but this is one of
the Ministers heavy burdens in our days, their Trading is dead.

Thirdly, formal cause: Our Ministers, abundance of them are orderly called
(for substance:) there are but two things that I know of to make up this call,
Election and Ordination: For election, many, if not all, of the godly Ministers
are elected by the people, some by the whole Parish, and others by the best in
the Parishes. But you say the Patron presents: It is true, but not so, as to
bring one in against the consent of the people: Verily for Patrons to present
an unworthy Minister, and bring him in against the consent, especially of the
godly, and orthodox Christians, it is an act of cruel Tyranny, and worthy of a
Petition to the Parliament to get such an horrible abuse removed; but you have
a way now to help your selves against scandalous Ministers by the
Civill-power, and should have had it by Church Power, if once Discipline were
set up.

But if the Minister be not an unworthy man, though the Patron did present, as
in former times, and he came in without the consent of the people at the first,
but had it afterward; this makes his election good: Hear what the New England
Ministers say to this point: Yet sometimes the peoples acceptance and
approbation afterward may supply the want of election at the first, Ans. to the
32. Quest. p. 69. V. Ames Consc. l. 4. c. 25. q. 7.
as Jacobs after consent and acceptance of Leah, made her to be his wife,
though he chose her not at the first; and by this we hold the calling of many
Ministers in England may be excused, who at first came into their places
without the consent of the people. So Dr. Ames.

But are all these Separatists so regular? I doubt not: I can give instance of
a Weaver, who lived in a Town, where I had my abode for a little time; the
Minister of the place was a very able man, regularly called, and inclining at
that time to the Congregationall way; yet this Weaver (I think that was his
calling) separated from him, and the other Christians, and had his own
society, to whom he did preach (as they said) but when the wind did settle in
the Independent quarter; this Weaver had a mind to a Pulpit, but I hope then
he will look to his orderly calling; he will not dare to venture but by the
Gospel-way, that now we shall judge; his way of election was this, as an honest
Christian of the same Town, and one of this man's friends told me, that Goodman
B. an honest Carrier being a Sequestrator in the Town, he puts him in, and
this is one part of his calling, as for Ordination that is a Toy: But is this
regular? then let these Separatists for ever hold their tongues; I know not,
but if a Sequestrator may put a Weaver (let him be a godly and a pretty man, as
some say he is, I love not to judge other folks godliness, I have enough to
do at home) into a Parish, when as the people call him not, then may a Patron
put in able and godly Divines into their Parishes with the peoples consent
first or last: as the noble Earl of Warwick, I believe has helped many
Parishes to as able godly Divines, as any one Sequestrator has done. I could
give the Reader instances of others, but so much I perceive by these kind of
men, that I little regard what they say, for if there lie any matter of
advantage in their way, they will stretch their principles, as far as they
please.

As for their sufficient qualification, which should make the material cause
of a Minister, we must not question them in our days: Paul indeed said, Who is
sufficient for these things? our language is, Who is not sufficient for these
things? much might here be said (I am privy to mine own insufficiency, and
desire to bewail it) but let me propound one thing to these men, and see how
they answer it. Amongst the opinions which Mrs. Hutchison had brought forth in
New Eng. this was one, That there was no inherent grace in a believer, no new
creature, nothing but Jesus Christ, and he was the new creature; one of Mrs.
Hutchisons followers, on a Lords day stood up in the Congregation, and would
defend it against the learned and reverend Teacher, and told him the text was
read so in the original, If any man be in Christ, the new creature, 2 Cor.
^.17. (...), what can these men say to this that know not the Original, nor
Grammar, both which a man must know to answer this: so if another should defend
a heresy, and tell you the text is so in the Hebrew: for the Jesuits subtle
and crabbed disputations, we must not mention them, these men are doubtless
sufficient; not but that I could allow a solid, humble, experienced, orthodox,
and well-gifted Christian, called regularly, and set apart to the work of the
Ministry, with the neighborhood of some learned able Divine to have his
recourse to, I say, I could allow such a one to preach in dark corners of the
land. But when men will cry out of other Ministers for want of orderly calling,
separate from them, and thus carry themselves, that the bones of their ambition
stick out, and then through unfoundnesse in opinion, though no way able,
though not regularly called, yet they will get into Livings and Pulpits, this
is abominable.

So much for Election, that part of their calling will hold; as for the other
requisite, Ordination, to prove our Ministers have that also; (for the
substance of it) here will lie the pinch of the controversy, therefore I
reserve it for another place.

Fourthly, for the final cause, here also the Ministers will appear to be
true Ministers; for conversion and edification, the Lord has honored the
English Ministry with as much success, as any Nation under heaven; the Lord
has set seal to hundreds of our Ministers, in giving them some souls in
conversion, and building up many, according as are their several gifts; and
for a proof of it, let me appeal to your selves, who have thus separated from
them: Cannot you say, that you have found God in their Ministry? I am sure your
own words must witness against diverse of you, if you deny it, for you have
acknowledged, by them you were first awakened, and brought home: Now I beseech
you consider what you do, you who are the soberest, and retain the savor of
God in your hearts: If Christ shall say to you, Why do you deny these to be
true Ministers? I own them to be such, I have qualified them with Ministerial
and personal gifts; I have sealed to their Ministry, by making them my
instruments to bring home many, and to build up those, who were brought home: I
have often humbled, awed, cheared, refreshed the hearts of my people by them,
your own selves (who are mine) are witnesses of it, I found you out by them,
etc. They had their call from the people, and though there were some
circumstantiall defects in their setting apart to the work, yet those they
freely acknowledge, and I do as freely pardon, will not my presence with them
make up that defect in your hearts, still to own them, and reverence them, as
my Ministers, since I do?

Now I say, what would you answer to the Lord Jesus? I doubt not, though many
have their infirmities (as who have not many infirmities) yet Christ does own
them for his Ministers, and Paul, or the Apostles, if they now were alive,
would not deny it.

Object. If you say, that indeed God did go along with the old Ministers, but
not with these.

Answ. But the same argument you give against these Ministers from their
Ordination, does make as much against these old Ministers, as these now living,
they were no true Ministers neither by your opinion.

2. We can say, that even with the labors of these Ministers does Christ go
along, though not so much as he did before, when the Gospel came first into
places, for edification we find it, which is one end in that Ephesians. 4.12. and
I pray take heed that your scorning of them, be no occasion to hinder their
work, for you must answer for it, what ever the Decrees of God be. So much for
my first argument.

2. I would use a second argument to prove we have true Ministers, etc. And
here I would propound one question to these men, who thus deny the Ministry: It
is this, Were there ever any true Ministers and Churches (let me put in them
also) since the Apostles days? I hope you will say yes: But I pray how long
were there such Ministers and Churches? in which Century did there cease to be
true Ministers, and true visible Churches? I suppose you will say, when
Antichrist began (here now you would do us a good turn, if you could make it
out clear to us when that was, that so we might know how long our miseries
shall last) if so, then to be sure for the first three hundred years after
Christ, which were times of persecution, yea, and diverse years after, you must
grant there were true Ministers. Let us then compare our Ministers, and
Churches with them; for our Ministers, many are godly, as well as those, all
the Ministers then were not truly gracious I believe; nay by stories we can
learn they were not. As for Ministerial gifts, those who have skill to
compare the works, and Sermons of our Ministers now, with their works and
Homilies, shall find that the Presbyterial Ministers are not behind them, but
in opening the doctrines of Free Grace, Christ, promises, which are the glory
of the Gospel, as also for discovering of Hypocrisy (without any dishonor to
those Ancients,) I may say they do excel them.

For the Churches, it is true, we know not what we should do, if the Lord
should call us to sufferings; but this we know, the same power, which carried
them through, is able to carry us through: for losses of estates, leaving of
their native Country, etc. I am sure New England has gone very far with them
for that kind of suffering, and so have some here also, yea, and for not
submitting to superstitious Ceremonies, and inventions of men in the worship of
God, which they even in those times made nothing of: How many vain rites and
ceremonies were then used in Baptism, By Tertul. Cyp. Ep. 59 The kissing of
the child. By August. time there were many Ceremonies added Symb. ad Catech.
l. 4. c. 1. Lib. de Coro. mil. Ep. 70.72. Tertul. de Bap.
which our Ministers did never own, but were silenced, etc. for less matters,
yet these were the primitive Churches.

Besides those Ceremonies in Baptism, there were other strange things used,
which our Divines never owned, I say, in those primitive Churches.

As the Anointing of the baptized, As Cyprian, It is necessary that the
baptized person be anointed, etc. yea, and puts much in it, as one may see, who
reads those Epistles.

Tertullian also makes mention of this.

Hence Fabianus ordered, that this oil should be prepared every year, and
reprehended those, who kept it two or three years together, in secunda Epist.
and Episc. orient. Hence also care was taken afterward, that none but Bishops
should make this, the Presbyters must not dare to do it. Sylvester in Council.
Romans

Also holy Vestures for the Ministers to be used only in the Churches; many of
ours never owned these, Epist. Steph ad Hill.
all have cast them away.

Also in the Lords Supper, the mixing of water with the wine, which how ever
some say, it was because of the hot Countries, yet Alexander, who they say was
the first that mixed water with wine, Epist. ad omnes Ortho. Apol. 2.
does not give that reason, but because water and blood came out of Christ's
side. In Justin Martyrs time, it seems this was their manner also, but this
was not the Institution.

Also we find several Church Officers among them, as appears by Gaius Bishop
of Rome, who ordered, that all the orders in the Church must ascend, from the
doorkeeper to the Bishop. Ostiarius, Lector, Exorcista, Acolythus,
Subdiaconus, Diaconus, Presbyter, Episcopus. The ordination of these Officers,
with their Ceremonies are after set down in the fourth Council of Carthage.

If the Decretals of Gaius be of any Authority, all these were in primitive
Churches, before Constantine came to the Empire.

More things I might add, but I forbear.

And though there were many glorious Martyrs, yet all their Church Members were
not such, many did yield to the heathenish Idolatry, when persecution began,
yea, and there were foul sins among them Churches, as Adultery, Whoredom (yea,
even among those, who had been Confessors, as Cyprian affirms, ingemiscimus
says he, to see it) drunkenness, swearing, and what not, as any one may well
gather, who is but a little versed in Antiquity, De unita Eccles.
and by reading over the Canons made in their Councels, we may learn what they
were troubled with.

As for the Ministers, they also were ordained by Bishops (though they were not
such lordly ones as ours were) with Presbyters joining with them, this no man
can deny that knows any thing of those times; whence then I am bold to affirm,
that if there were true Ministers, and true visible Churches in those times,
even while they were under persecuting heathenish Emperors, then there are
true Ministers, and true visible Churches now in England, and if there be none
now, neither were there any in those times; but I think no man is so impudent
to deny that there were true Ministers and Churches in those times. I plead now
for many Presbyteriall Ministers, and their Congregations. So I have done with
my second Argument, which if I should draw into form, it runs thus:

If there were true Ministers, and true visible Churches in the first three
hundred years after Christ, then there are true Ministers, and visible
Churches now in England.

But the Antecedent is true, ergo the consequent is true.

Some we have that dote, they tell us, they expect men to be sent from God, and
endued with extraordinary gifts, as were the Apostles, etc, and these are the
men, who shall set up Churches, and reform us. Good Lord, whither will our
vile hearts carry us, if thou do leave them?

These persons are not worth the answering, but yet let me say a little to
them, and so pass on to the chief thing I intend.

For the gift of Tongues, I need not speak, what is necessary God has given
to most, and many excel in that gift.

For Miracles.

I They were given but for that time, to help on the work of the Ministry (as
sauce does meat) but now if God does that by the Ministry of his Servants
without Miracles, which he did then by the Ministry accompanied with Miracles
(viz. Convert, Edify, Formalize, etc.) this does but more confirm our
Ministry, and prove that God ownes these despised Ministers. The plain word
preached, has made as good Christians, as preaching, and Miracles.

2 If any Body has need of the gift of Miracles, then Master Eliot in New
England has, who now preaches to the Indians, and others with him; but God
carries on his work amongst the Indians without miracles.

3 Do not you your selves believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God? if so,
what need have you of such kind of persons so gifted? The greatest Miracle
which I desire to confirm me in the truth of the Scriptures, is to find the
power of Christ his Death, and Resurrection in my heart, without which I care
not for miracles. But enough for these.

There are others, who having been Members of an Independent Church, where
divisions have fallen out, and so have broke in pieces, they have said, that
Ministers are not fitted with a spirit of Government, to keep Churches in
order, and therefore these are not times as yet for such Reformation, I answer;

1 The more shame for your Church Members, who are of such proud, and turbulent
spirits, that godly and able Ministers are not able enough to govern them;
those who come into Church Communion with the awe of God upon their hearts, we
can govern them; some such spirits we find among the Independents, but if we
could see more it would be better.

2 I wonder not at your Divisions, when I see what Principles some godly
Congregationall men have gone by, for the ordering of their Church Government.

3 Your Argument is as strong against the Apostles, for there were Heresies,
and Schisms in their days.

But I leave these, and return to that, from whence I have made a digression;
Having then proved there are true Ministers, and Churches in England, let us
examine the grounds, why these men separate from these Ministers, and Churches;
I conceive their grounds may be referred to one of these heads: Either to The
Ministers, Either to Or Worship, Either to Or the Congregation, Either to Or
the place of meeting;


If there be any thing else that cannot so well be reduced to one of these, yet
I am sure I shall meet with it, before I have done.

For the Ministers, they are indeed made the Dung of England, who are more
scorned then they, especially the Presbyteriall men, be they never so holy, or
learned? Whether there be just cause in respect of men, I leave it to God to
judge; I am sure when Ministers were in honor, we found the Word had good
effect, but since they came to be thus scorned, little good has been done. I
deny not but God may have a just quarrel against us, and give me leave
(without offense) to propound the Reasons why.

1 The first I had rather conceal, because I should seem to spy out a mote in
my Fathers, and Brethrens eyes, when I have a beam in my own; but therefore I
rather propound it, as I heard it from a Reverend and judicious Divine, a man
of a gracious and moderate spirit, Mr. Nathaniel Rogers in New England. I was
talking with him there, when the news came of the Covenant that England, and
Scotland entered into; the thing pleased him, and all our Churches exceedingly:
This only, (said he) I have not heard of, That there has been a general
Humiliation amongst the Ministers, for their yielding so much to the
superstitious inventions of that Hierarchy.

2 I conceive God may justly have a quarrel against us (the younger sort of
Ministers) for our woeful conformity to the Fashions of the times; what long
hair now do we see most young Ministers wear, and if any new fond fashion
comes up, who follows it sooner then they? Who take more liberty here then
Independent Ministers, the younger sort?

3 There has been a too great Idolizing of Learning, and abusing it in
Sermons, by reciting of the Fathers, or Schoolmen, some men fondly making, it
may be, a quarter of their Sermons to be Latin, or Greek sentences out of
them, and then turning them into English, to make people admire them, and
conclude them to be great Scholars; not but that it is lawful to quote a
Father, or a Schoole-man: but I speak of that excess, and pride also, that
went along with it, that they thought themselves so exalted above the people,
and looked on them, as the Pharisees, Joh. 7.49. Hence God does now let
Ministers and Learning be trampled upon. But this was not the fault of those
godly men, who now are despised, as much as the worst.

4 There is in some young Ministers a too base esteem of private Christians,
that are not learned; I have heard my self those, who have spoken very
contemptibly of them, scorning they should have any hand in Church affairs;
now it is true, there are abundance of private Christians very weak, but some
there are, solid, understanding men; and though we do not admit these to be
Governors in the Church (unless chosen to the Office of a Ruling Elder, to
join with us) yet Ministers shall find sometimes, that they have no cause to
repent, in giving an ear to what they say.

These things I have observed, and wish (especially for the three latter) that
God has not brought us down for them. I might have added, some young
Ministers study more quint-essentiall Notions, curious Phansies, and please
people much with fine speculations about Christ, and Free Grace, but have left
the old way of Preaching, which did the good. This Chymicall Divinity has
pleased men's ears, but not awed, nor humbled men's hearts; it makes frothy, but
not solid Christians.

But these are not to be imputed to all the Presbyterians, who are thus scorned.

But now to the Ministers.

The general apprehension that these men have of the Ministers, is that they
are Antichristian Ministers, and what is more common in their mouths then to
call them so? This is a heavy charge, if it could be proved: but this term
Antichristian is both a simple term, a complexe Proposition, a Syllogism, i.
e. they think it sufficient proof to charge them with it, though hundreds of
these know no more then a Babe, wherein the formality of Anti-christianisme
does consist, but every thing that displeases them, that is Antichristian;
Infant Baptism is Antichristian, the Ordination of Ministers is
Antichristian, singing of Psalms is Antichristian, it is proof sufficient,
they have said it; now this seems to me very strange, that those men, who
Instrumentally, 1. Convert men to Christ. 2. Build up men in Christ. 3. Oppose
Antichrist to the utmost. 4. Who have cast off Antichrist. 5. If they were
under Antichrists power, should soon find his favor to be Fire and Faggot,
yet these men to be called Anti-christians, I say with the Text, The Lord
rebuke thee, O Satan: But if you will take Antichrist in a large sense, why
may not those be as truly called Anti-christians, who do throw down, what
Ordinances Christ has set up; as, The Ordinance of the Ministry, giving his
promise to be with it to the end of the world; the Baptizing of the infants of
believing Parents; singing of Psahnes, any form of external
Church Government; all these are thrown down by most of you, and many walk
above Ordinances. I say, may not these be called as truly Anti-christians in a
large sense, who thus throw down, what Christ has set up, as well as those,
who set up such Ordinances, as Christ never did set up? (which is one sign of
Anti-christianisme.)

But if you would know what is properly Anti-christianisme, Exposi. on Hos.
first Book, p. 162.
I pray take it from a far more able man then my self, one well known, and
that deserves honor, Mr. Buroughs; he well observed the madness of people,
that cry out against any thing, that displeases them, that it is
Anti-christianisme, then sets down thus, wherein it consists.

1 Whosoever shall obtrude any Doctrine upon the Church, to be believed by
their own Authority.

2 The intrusion of such Offices, and Officers in the Church, as merely belong
to the spiritual man.

3 The imposing of any Ordinance, or new Institution upon the Church.

4 The imposing of Laws so to bind Conscience, as the Laws of Christ do.

This, says he, is to set up another head. I need not add the owning of the
Pope as a visible Monarchical head over the Church, who does all that, which
Mr. Buroughs has mentioned; but this then I desire, that any, who thus call
the Ministers Antichristian, would charge them, and make it good, that they are
guilty of any of these things, or else be ashamed for ever after to call
faithful Ministers of Christ, Antichristians.

But what color have these men for this vile aspersion, I never heard but
only this, their Ordination. The sum of all they say, amounts to this, The
Ministers of England stand by a Romish ordination; Ergo, They are no true
Gospel, but Antichristian Ministers, this is that, which makes the heavy stir
in England.

For answer to this, I may say as the father of the blind man, He is of age,
and can speak for himself; so the Presbyterial Ministers are of ability
sufficient to speak, and have spoken enough in answer to this cavil, to
satisfy sober minds; but what will satisfy unreasonable men? I am not very
willing to insist upon this, because I can speak but little, which has not
been spoken before (for the substance) but yet this being an ingredient unto
the formal cause of a Minister (which I have mentioned before, and promised to
prove, that for the substance of the Ordinance our Ministers have it) I must
speak a few words in answer to their cavils against it.

The Ordination of these Ministers, say they, came from the Romish Synagogue,
they also were ordained by Bishops, Ergo, They are no true Ministers, hence we
separate from them.

I answer,

First, had I thought there had been such a stir in England about this, I
should have labored to have understood the minds of our Elders in New England
about it; all the time I was there, I never heard the question moved, whether
they did look on that Ordination they had here, as true (for substance) or not.
But this I dare boldly affirm for them;

1 That they do look upon abundance of our Presbyteriall Ministers, as true
Ministers of Christ.

2 I know that they will disapprove of the practice of some, who have separated
from the Ministers, whom they have before chosen, and the godly Congregations,
upon this notion, as I know some have done, I do honor the grace of diverse of
those Christians who separated, but Satan got into an Angel of light, and
deceived
especially from that famous Congregation of Dedham, of which I dare say, that
for a Parochial Congregation, there is not the like number of real and visible
Saints in any Congregation in England; I am sure there was not before this
Separation was made; and for the Ministers I speak not of them, they are men
well known. I wish I had nothing more to trouble me, then to live under that
Ministry in that Congregation, I hope whereas now I am a sad man, I should be
as cheerful as any man in England. Mr. Buroughs said, he could communicate in
that Congregation, then it seems he did not question whether there were any
true Ministers.

Object. But if you say, Our New England Ministers do renounce their
Ordination which they had here, for they are ordained again.

Answ. See Answ. to 32. q. 70
Its true, they are ordained again, but I never heard it was upon that ground,
for let a Minister be ordained there in one Church, if there be cause of his
removal, and so be elected in another Church, they ordain him again.

Thirdly, I can say this, our New England Ministers have often desired, and
frequently admitted to preach in their Congregations, that went from hence, but
were not ordained there.

But our Ministers of New England are here judged nothing worth, but are as
contemptible as any, in the mouths of our Separatists, yet they are men of
worth.

Secondly, I answer to what you say, It came through, and from the Romish
Synagogue. If your argument have any force, you must cast it thus:

Those Ministers which stand by a Romish Institution, are no true Ministers of
Christ. But the Ministers of England stand by a Romish Institution; Ergo, the
Ministers of England are no true Ministers of Christ.

The major you will grant, and if we can prove the minor, our Ministers shall
utterly renounce their Ordination, I dare undertake for them; but the minor is
very false, they stand by no Romish Institution: for Ordination is none of
their inventions, but instituted by the Lord Jesus himself, long before
Antichrist was. But your Argument runs thus:

Those Ministers which stand by an Institution of Christ descending to them
from the Apostles through the Church of Rome, they are no true Ministers of
Christ.

But the Ministers of England stand by an Institution of Christ, descending to
them from the Apostles through the Church of Rome, Ergo, They are no true
Ministers.

This is the true meaning of your Argument, but the major is very false: shall
the passing through Rome null the Institutions of Christ? did not the
Scriptures, Sacraments, and what ever Ordinances we now have, descend to us
from the Apostles through Rome? Shall we therefore cast them away? That
Argument runs as strong against our Baptism, and any other Ordinance, with
which though the Church of Rome mingled their inventions, did they therefore
null the Ordinance? the vessels that were once dedicated to God by his own
Institution, though they were put into the house of Nebuchadnezzars gods, and
those that were fit, very like used by Belshazzar to drink wine in, when he
praised the gods etc. they were not so much as new cast again, but carried to
Jerusalem. Ezra 1.7. ad fin.


I pray what do you think of the judgment of Mr. Johnson? a man great, I am
sure, among the brethren of the Separation (though the Separatists in our days
make a tush at the judgment of any man, yea, although he were of the
Separation; but yet consider the reasons which swayed him, and then judge.) The
case was this, One that was a Minister in the Church of England, was after
chosen Teacher to a separate Congregation, without any new Imposing of hands,
this he undertakes to justify thus:

1 Imposition of hands is of God, and not an invention of man: It was not a
postor threshold first brought by Antichrist into the Temple of God, but had
therein before Antichrist sat there.

2. Baptism and Imposition of hands are joined together among the principles
of the foundation spoken of, Heb. 6.2. therefore it ought to be regarded.

3. Imposition of hands is in the Church of Rome still given to the office of
the Ministry, and in the name of the Lord, as they do also still administer
Baptism.

4. We found not either precept, example, or ground in the Scripture binding us
to the repetition of it.

5. The Priests and Levites in Israel becoming unclean, when afterward they
were cleansed, retained still their places of being Priests, and Levites; and
the children of the Priests and Levites succeeding after them, ^id administer
without a new anointing, or new imposition of hands etc. Thus then, as Mr.
Johnson and Mr. Ainsworth opposed Rebaptization, because Baptism is an
Ordinance of God, which was had in the Church of Rome, before she fell into
Apostasy, and has been there continued ever since the Apostles times (how
ever comingled with many inventions of their own:) so Mr. Johnson defended the
Ordination of that Minister, which he had in England, because Imposition of
hands was in the Church of Rome from the Apostles times, before her Apostasy,
and is there continued to this day, though mixed with many pollutions of their
own.

I pray only note this, that whereas I say, they stand by their Ordination, I
do not mean that only, but also they have the election of the people, of
which I spoke before, and that the Separatists cannot deny, which yet they make
the greatest matter in a Ministers call.

Thirdly, I answer, If this argument be of any force, it would rather prevail
against the first Reformers, as in other Nations, so against our first
Reformers in England, who came newly out of Popery; but what is this to us, who
have been above ninety years out of that bondage, and have cast off their
Government, Worship, and Doctrine (so far as Antichristian) for a long time;
but if our first Reformers were able enough to maintain their call, then much
more our Ministers.

Fourthly, but if you will throw away all that comes through Rome, let us see
what course you will take, when you have denied all the Ordinances, that have
been administered for these ninety years in England [for if no Ministry, then
certainly no Authoritative preaching, no Sacraments] and thus you have
renounced yuor Baptism, which you had by these Ministers; what method will you
take in your Reformation? how will you come to be rebaptized? you will tell
me, You will covenant together, and then elect and ordain a Minister, and he
shall baptize: Of this more afterward.

But let me examine what you say at present; You will covenant together
(supposing your selves to be Saints first) say you so? are you Saints by
calling? how came you to be so? what did God call you immediately? No, you must
say many (if not all) of you, who have any truth of grace, by the preaching of
the word; what, by those Ministers from whom you separate, as no Ministers,
because of their Ordination? has the Lord so far owned his despised members,
as to make them the instruments to bring you to be visible Saints, fit to
imbody or covenant, etc? and are these now no Ministers? are you the effect of
their Ministerial labors, and they no Ministers? Surely in this one thing you
have overthrown your selves; but then you say, you will ordain him, this I
will consider in its own place; Then he shall baptize: but since he did
renounce his own baptism also, who shall baptize him first? you must have a
Minister to do that, to be sure he cannot do it himself, nor none of you, for
you are private persons; to administer the Lords Supper before you be baptized,
is contrary to Scripture rules.

There was a report when I was in New England, that a Carpenter re-baptised Mr.
Williams, In Just. Mar. time none received the Supper, but such as were first
baptized, Apol. 2. Ius Divi. Apend. p. 269.
and then he did re-baptize the rest: I do not stand to defend the thing
whether it be true or no, but it was like enough to be true, and suitable to the
other opinions and practices of that wild generation. Where are we now?

Fifthly, that is very observable, which the London Ministers have added in the
defense of their Ordination, That in this Church of England, the corruptions
which the Church of Rome would have introduced about Ordination of Ministers
and other Ecclesiastical affairs, were withstood and opposed by the Kings of
England: Nor do we read of any Ministers that were ordained by any Agents sent
from Rome, but only some idle ceremonies of Confirmation, or them that were
ordained by the Pall and the Ring brought thence into England. Thus far the
London Ministers: In the margent they have set down the Authors that prove it.

Sixthly, There might be another answer given by some, who are good Historians,
[which I confess I am not, wanting both time and such bookes] so far as I
can go, I will. That the Churches in England were at first rightly gathered
and constituted, it is not to be doubted, Mart. 1. Vol. p. 237 last Edition.
the instruments of gathering being Apostles or Apostolical men, as is evident
by Mr. Fox; neither is it to be doubted, but they did ordain officers in the
Churches, for we read of Ministers and Bishops. The land falling to the
possession of the Saxons about the year 568. p. 147.
the Story says by them, all the Clergy and the Christian Ministers of the
Britains were then utterly driven out, in so much that the Archbishops of
London and York went into Wales: thus long then it seems the Ministers of
England had no ordination from Rome; P. 149.
this appears also by Austine, who came into England in the year five hundred
ninety eight, he about the year six hundred, P. 153.
assembled the Bishops and Doctors of Britain (so that still here were
Ministers, but where their abode was, the story sets not down, but supposed to
be toward Wales,) and charged them to preach the Gospel to the Englishmen,
and also that they should among themselves reform certain rites in their Church
(so that still here were Ministers and Churches) specially for keeping of
Easter-tide, baptizing after the manner of Rome, etc. to which the Scots and
Britains would not agree (this shows they did not depend upon Rome.) Afterward
there was another Synod gathered, where seven Bishops of Britain were present;
and though we find a great battle fought presently after, where the Britains
were overcome, yet the Story does not mention that the Ministers were all
slain there. Now the thing I aim at is this, that since there were so many
Ministers and Bishops in England, who had their ordination by succesfion from
those Apostolical men, and not from Rome, and we find so many, when Austine
came, why may we not suppose that these might again preach the Gospel to the
Englishmen, though at first they were opposite, when they had smarted for
their folly? and why may we not suppose they might return into England again,
especially into those parts near Wales? also those who were driven out, as the
Story says they were, suppose into some other parts, might not they return
into England? also must we take the words of the Story, (All the Clergy and
Christian Ministers were driven out) strictly so, as none at all were left,
though latent, etc? those, who are good Historians, may help here, and it
would be some answer to that objection of our ordination coming from Rome,
though unto me, the objection is very feeble, if this answer cannot be made out.

As for the Churches of England, being rightly at first gathered, Way of Chapter in
N. E. Chapter 7. p. 111.
as above mentioned; Mr. Cotton yields it, so as he says, That all the work
now is, not to make them Churches, which were none before, but to reduce, and
restore them to their primitive Institution, etc.

To that part of the Objection, They were ordained by Bishops; I pray what do
you think of Master Bradford, and the rest of those holy Ministers and Martyrs
that were ordained by the Bishops in those days, Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, etc?
was he an Antichristian Minister, and all those Ministers, who were then
ordained, though now they were scarce got out of the Popish Ceremonies? etc.
the holy Martyrs then did never offer to separate from Mr. Bradford, and the
rest, nor call them Antichristian Ministers. I pray how many such Bradfords
have you among you? Not all the Separatists in England can afford such a one;
Christ calls him his faithful Minister, but you say Mr. Bradford is none;
cursed be that doctrine. Now if those Ministers were true Ministers, though
they had an Episcopal Ordination, then so are ours, notwithstanding their
Ordination by Bishops. It is vain to say those Bishops were godly men, so were
ot ours: for it is a bold assertion to say, that none of the Bishops since have
been godly men, no doubt there are diverse in Heaven. And besides, it is absurd
to think, that the truth and efficacy of an Ordinance depends upon the truth
of Grace in him who does administer it; as for Ceremonies, if you search, they
were not clear then, no more then our Bishops were.

It is a silly shift to say, They walked according to their light; I hope there
was the same rule to judge of the truth of Ministers then, that is now; it was
not their light which made them true Ministers, but the rule. But the truth of
their Ministry was never questioned, till our Separatists rose up, who are not
comparable to them in parts, or holiness.

2 I pray, what do you make of those Ministers who were ordained in the
Primitive Churches? Cyp. Epis. 33,
they were ordained in Cyprians time by Bishops, and Presbyters; and by Hieroms
time the Bishops had engrossed that power into their own hands, as appears by
that speech of his, Excepting Ordination, Epist. ad. Evagr.
what does a Bishop that a Presbyter does not? so that by this time it should
seem that the Presbyters were turned out, and the Bishops only Ordained. It is
possible this might be but in some Churches, for the fourth council of
Carthage ordered, That no Bishop should Ordain without the council of his
Clergy, Can. 22. Can. 3. Now, what were these no Ministers? Antichrist was not
yet got into his Seat, for the years of his reign had been expired before
this time. It is strange, that those should be no true Ministers, who lived so
near the Apostles times, and under persecution also, as in Cyprians time;
neither was Cyprian surely the first Bishop that did Ordain, for there were
Bishops before him; yea, besides this Ordination by Bishops, we find the
Papists contending strongly for strange Rites, which they use in Ordination,
and they say they were also used in those Primitive times: for the anointing of
the hands of the Presbyter that is ordained, this they would prove from
Cyprian, or at least the Author of The Card. work of Chapter who shou ld seem to
be as old as Cyprian; also from Eusebius Hist. Eccles. l. 10. c. 4. which place
would seem to favor it; and others there are, whom they quote. See Greg. De
Val. to 4. d. 9. q. 5. Also for the shaving of the heads of their Ministers,
this we find indeed in August. time, Ep. 26. and Ep. 147. And this Calvin
himself does not deny to have been used then, and gives the reason why it was
used; which Greg. de Val. scorns, and gives other reasons, To. 4. D. 9. q. 5.
p. 3. If the Decret. Epistles of Anicetus be of any Authority, we shall find it
in his days, long before Augustine; and I wonder that Greg. Val. does not quote
him. I am apt to think, being they were so prone to Ceremonies in other
Ordinances, that something was added to this also; Just. l. 4. c. 19 Sect 27.
and I marvel that in the fourth Council of Carthage, where they set down
their rites in Ordinations of other officers, and some very ridiculous, that
the ordination of Presbyters should be the most pure; but still with Bishops as
well as Presbyters, which is the thing now in hand.

3 A Bishop, if you consider him merely as a Bishop, was but a Minister, and
set apart to do the work of a Minister, the same, which all other Ministers
may do; Bishops did Pray, Preach, Baptize, administer the Lords Supper,
Ordain, Suspend, Excommunicate, and these things other Ministers do, and may
do; that he did lift up himself above other Ministers, that was his error,
that he would take upon him the sole power of Ordination, and Excommunication,
this was his error; but as the addition of an human invention did not null the
Ordinances, (as suppose only grown persons had been baptized, and that by
dipping, and after dipping they had been signed with the sign of the Cross,
would this have nulled the Ordinance in the Anabaptists esteem?) no more this
usurpation of the power of administering these Ordinances did null a Bishop, so
as he was no Minister; the Ordinances were, and are Christ's institutions.
Indeed you may call him, an Over-growne Presbyter, but a Presbyter. 3 Ep. Ioh
ver. 10.
Diotrophes loving of pre-eminence did justly deserve reproof, and John did no
doubt deal with him, but yet for present did not deny him to be a Minister,
though a corrupt one; for the sole power of Ordination, they tell us, It is the
order of the Church of England, as of the Council of Carthage, that when a
Presbyter is Ordained, all the Presbyters that are present shall lay hands. As
for the sole power of Excommunication, though it was an error gross enough,
yet by the 17. Canon, Council. Sardic. Ofius who was the cause of that Ganon
being made, was also at the Council of Nice.
it should seem the Bishops by that time had got that power to excommunicate
alone; which Canon provides a remedy for a person wrongsully excommunicated by
his Bishop, to got relief by Appeals; now if that corruption had got in so
early, long before Antichrist had got to his Seat, no wonder though it was
found among our Bishops, yet I hope they were true Ministers whom they
Ordained. As a Bishop was a Lord Bishop, his Lordship was but a mere civil
addition annexed to the Bishopric by Regallfavour, his Lordship was no
ingredient into Ordination.

4 The Laws of this Realm do account nothing Divine in a Bishop, but his
being a Presbyter, Land. vind. 125. Dr. Seam. answ. to Diat. p. 85.
and therefore the Parliament in their Ordinance for Ordination, tells us, that
they did ordain as Presbyters, not as Bishops, much less as Lord Bishops;
yea, I have heard a reverend Minister (now Pastor of a Congregationall Church
in Essex) say, that when the Bishop ordained him, he told him, I do ordain
you as I am a Presbyter.

5 The Ministers of England are ready to acknowledge those defects, and
corruptions which did cleave to their entering into the Ministry by the Bishops;
hear their own words, London Vindica. p. 124.
We do not deny, but that the way of Ministers entering into the Ministry by
the Bishops, had many defects in it, for which they ought to be humbled; but we
add, that notwithstanding all the accidental corruptions, yet it is not
substantially, and essentially corrupted. They acknowledge then the error, and
desire to be humbled for it: what more would you have, God will accept of this
I doubt not, and why not you? How to mend Dr. Seamans Divinity I know not,
where you have also the error acknowledged implicitly (for it is in answer to
this Objection) then giving his judgment in the case: When sin cleaves to
the manner of Calling, Answer to Diat. p. 85.
through the general error or corruption of all sorts of people who are
concerned in it, etc. it is nototherwise to be invalidated here below, then by
doctrinall Censure, and Repentance, and not by iteration. Repentance through
Christ's Blood does take away corruption out of Gods fight, and will it not
(when they are so ingenuous) out of your sight?

6 There is a maxim taken up among the Independents, Many may truly bear the
name, yea they own it, and practice accordingly.
(yea and others) and it goes for as good Divinity as any the Gospel has,
viz. That errors in Non-fundamentals must be borne withal in Churches, we
must labor indeed to convince people of such, but if they will not be so
convinced, we must not proceed any further to cast them out. I have heard the
New England Ministers sharply censured, because they have excommunicated for
some errors, ( i.e. denying of some Ordinances) which are supposed to fall
within the compass of Non-fundamentals; This maxim is cried up among the
Separatists. For the Thesis it self (considering into what a narrow compass
Fundamentals are pent up) I think it to be Apocryphal Divinity, and just it
is with God to let in errors in Fundamentals, when such Church, and
Truthdestructive Principles are drunk in by godly Christians; yet let us bring
this rule, and lay it to the case in hand: I hope they do not make rules for
themselves, if it be a true Christian Rule, it is for all Christians; Here then
we have men qualified by God with Ministerial, and (abundance of them)
personal gifts, they have the election or consent of the people, they are
separated to the work of the Ministry by persons, who were Ministers, but did
erroneously assume too much to themselves, now grant that here is an error,
yet I hope it is not in a fundamental point. Some great Divines call
Ordination but an Adjunct, and your selves less, you think it a Toy: so then
if you must not be separated from a Church for errors in Nonfundamentals, then
neither ought you to separate from a true Church for an error, which is not
fundamental. Certainly if that rule has place any where, then here: you will
by this rule keep Anabaptists, Anti-Sabbatarians, Antinomians, (truly such)
Anti-Psalmists, Arminians, etc. within your Churches, and not cast them out;
but (forsooth) a little error (in comparison of them) and that acknowledged,
in the Ministers, that is ground sufficient to cast off them, and call them
Antichristians, etc. yet there are no conscientious men but these; the
Separatists Gospel will afford Rules for them, but not for other Christians.

As you trouble the Ministers here, so I doubt they will trouble you in the
Ordinations of your Ministers; that is, to make it clear to them, that private
men have power to Ordain: I have seen it my self, when two private men have
imposed their hands upon him, who was to be their Pastor. Another I know, whom
a Carpenter and a Tailor Ordained, with imposition of hands; I doubt the
Ministers will put you hard to it, to prove that this is according to the Rule,
(yea, when other Ministers [but of other Churches] were present, these have
imposed hands.) If we consult with the Gospel, we shall find it rather to
favor a Bishop (though no Lordly one) by the example of Timothy and Titus,
(from whom our Bishops proved their Superiority, and sole power of Ordination)
to Ordain, then private men, and that in the presence of diverse other
Ministers. I am sure this will be hard to prove from Scripture, I shall speak
a few words to this point afterward. Suppose any of the Bishops had been of
that opinion, that none but persons grown, and making confession of their
Faith ought to be Baptized, and they would Baptize only by dipping, would not
the Anabaptists have judged this to be true Baptism? would they null this
Baptism, because he was a Bishop, since he was a Minister, set apart to that
work? etc. as Austin baptized many thus, after he had been in England a while,
who yet was an Archbishop, was that no true Baptism? I do not think that
the Anabaptists (if they have any brains in their heads) will deny that
Baptism were null; if that were good, so is Ordination for the substance of it.
If there have been no true Ministers, nor Ordinances, nor Churches, but where
there has been no humane mixtures, nor wicked persons, then there has been
but few Ministers, Ordinances, or Churches, since there was a Church upon
earth, and if there ought to be separation from such Ministers and Churches,
then we should have found Separatists enough; how hardly was Superstition kept
out in the Church of the Jews before the Captivity, say, how many years?
Alsle. Chron. p. 2153. Goodw. Mo. Ar. l. 1. c. 10. Chemnitius in 10. Ioh. takes
thieves there to be the Pharisees, for their order was not instituted by God,
nor brought in by the Prophets, but only a humane invention, and through their
own boldness.
Afterward, when Christ came, were they clear? what think you then of corrupt
Caiphas the High Priest, his corrupt entering into, and his continuance in the
place for one year? So the Pharisees, a Generation that God never instituted,
their School began, some say, two hundred and forty years, some say more,
before Christ, and for their Superstitious inventions they were not barren in
them: but did Christ, so soon as he came to Preach call away the people, and
bid them separate? here are corrupt Officers, etc. No, we find no such word;
nay, he bids then hear, Matthew. 23. After Christ, I pray tell me, how long did
the Churches continue without Superstitious mixtures, I doubt you will find
the Church has not been long free, but we do not find separation presently,
and nulling of Ministers, as now Men should do well to give us a precept, or
example out of the Word, where Ordinances have been dispensed true for the
substance, though some humane mixtures have been joined to them, that therefore
they were iterated. If they cannot give us a direct precept or example, show us
it by a necessary consequence from Scripture. I wonder men should be so forward
to iterate Baptism, and Ordination, as these Separatists call for, without
Scripturall grounds.

9 There are hundreds of Ministers in England, who were not Ordained by
Bishops, but you separate from those also; they had the election of the people
first, then with fasting and prayer, solemnly set apart to the work by diverse
godly and learned Divines, who were against Bishops, yet these are also scorned
by your selves, as much as the others; but (forsooth) because they were
Ordained by Bishops, and had not renounced their Ordination, and taken their
Ordination from you, therefore that infection spreads even to all Generations.
Out of what I have said, I may pick up some answers to this, but for troubling
the Reader; and the truth is, they are in some sense unreasonable men I deal
with; but this let me say, it is strange, that when an Ordinance is purged in
it self, and those who administer it, renounce what defects have cleaved to
their own Ordination, only for the substance owning it (as another Ordinance
may be corrupted, or rather have corruptions annexed to it, but not nulled by
those accidental corruptions) that this infection should adhere so strongly,
that it cannot be mended, but by nulling of it. Friends, this cavilling will
not do in the Day of Judgment. Besides, I pray give me an instance where it
was ever practiced, that persons, that were not Baptized, did Ordain a
Minister? If you ask me, What need that question, for we are Baptized,
therefore it does not concern us? By whom I pray? If you say, by the
Ministers, then I desire no more; if they were so far Ministers as to
administer Baptism to you, then they may well administer Ordination to us;
renounce therefore the Baptism you had by them, so I am sure you cannot
ordain; and when you are regularly re-baptised, and can warrant your Act, and
prove that you have the power to Ordain, then we will listen to you.

For my own Ordination, it was in the face of my people, the day was spent in
fasting, and Prayer, those who carried on the work were Mr. Dan. Rogers, Mr.
Marshall, Mr. Ranew, with other godly Ministers, who joined with them in the
imposing of hands (the Ministers lived about me) I never saw that Ordinance
carried on with more solemnity in my life, the people showed their election by
suffrage, holding up their hands; all was done according to the Pattern; but
yet I am a man as much scorned as other men, who were Ordained by Bishops. (I
can submit to God in that scorn that these cast upon me, for I deserve it at
his hands;) only there was a foul error committed at my Ordination, and it is
told up and down by some of this kind, against whom I write, and I pray what
is it? This, The Ministers imposed hands in my Ordination; this has been
talked of as a strange thing; but let me answer for the Ministers, it was no
error, much less such a great one as you make it.

1 If private men, Carpenters and Tailors may impose hands, why may not
Ministers? but the former have done it. Ergo.

2 All the Ordinations that ever I saw in New England were performed with
imposition of hands; I have seen Deacons ordained thus.

3 If you be wiser then the Elders in New England, Answ. to the 32. que. p. 67.
Survey of Church Dise. p. 2. p. 74.
and Master Hooker, then overthrow them, for they conceive it nearest to the
institution.

4 If you observe the examples in the New Testament, which are our Guides in
Church affairs, we shall find Ordinations have been thus performed; as Acts
6.6. Act. 13.3. 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Timothy 5.22. Heb. 6.2. Laying on of hands; Which
place, by Classical men, Congregationall men, and Separatists, is interpreted
of Ordination. I do not here bring in the practice of Churches in former
times, because I intend not to handle the controversy, Whether imposition of
hands be necessarily required in ordination? but bring you in as many examples
from Scripture, where there were Ministers Ordained without imposition of
hands; as also the practice of other true Churches Orthodox and sound, who do
Ordain without, etc. or else be ashamed of your ignorance, and charge not
those men with error where none was, but a true following the pattern.

The substance and essence then of Ordination being this, That persons
qualified Ministerially be set apart, or separated for the work of the
Ministry by persons in Office [ordinarily it must be thus, what may be done
extraordinarily, when no Officers can be had is another case] the Ministers in
England have that Ordinance for the substance, and they have the election and
consent of the people, (it is hardly to be supposed that every individual
person in a Parish will consent to every godly Minister, but consent there is)
hence these two concurring to the Call, which is the form of a Minister, many
Presbyteriall Ministers are true Ministers. I dare say more, but I am sure now
I save my self. But I have not done with Ordination yet, I shall meet with it
once again afterward. Let us now come and try the second ground for
separation, scil. The Worship of God; the fault here must be reduced to one of
these three heads; either;

1 Because they cannot enjoy all the Ordinances of God in these Churches. Or,

2 Because the Ordinances of God are mixed with humane inventions, that they
cannot partake of them without sin. Or,

3 Because here are other Ordinances set up in the Churches then ever Christ
did institute. I cannot conceive any more.

For the first; Suppose it were so, that there were a defect of some
Ordinances, is that a sufficient ground for separation? Mr. Hooker says no. If
a Father of a Family wants a Rod in his house, The preface to Survey of Church
Discip.
is it ergo no family? there may be some disorder in the house for want of good
Government, yet a family. Diverse Divines of great note conceive by that text,
Nehem. 8.17, 18. That the Church of the Jews did omit the celebration of the
Feast of Tabernacles almost the space of a thousand years, the Arc was absent
from the Tabernacle from the time of Eli, to the time of David, 1 Samuel 4.11.
compared with, 2 Samuel 6, 17. and it was a great fault; the Scribes rejected the
Baptism of John, but where do you find any separation all this while, that
the godly should not join with that Church, and partake in what Ordinances
they had? But this objection has no place in these Churches, for Prayer,
Preaching, Administration of the Sacraments, yea, Discipline they had in the
Episcopal days, they did suspend from the Lords Supper, and the Bishops gave
the Ministers power, but suspension is the lesser Excommunication, and now to
be sure there are none wanting (at least should not be,) if the Ministers were
not hindered in setting up all the Ordinances.

Obj. No, say you, the Classical Churches have no explicit Covenant for the
form of them, they will not admit it into their Churches, therefore we
separate.

I shall meet with this in another place, only for the present disprove what Mr.
Hooker has said, and the former examples I have given you; but yet you will
have a hard piece of work, to prove this to be a sufficient ground for your
separation, as afterward I hope I shall make good.

For the second, Humane mixtures in Ordinances.

This indeed was the ground of the old Separatists, yet in those days many
holy and learned Divines wrote against the Separation; but in these days that
stumbling block is removed; and this let me say, that if you read over all the
Church-stories, since there was a Church upon the earth, there cannot be found
any example of such separatists, as are now amongst us; the old Donatists had
their Ministers, yea, Bishops as well as Presbyters; the separate Churches of
later days had their Ministers, and how strictly did they maintain and
practice all those Ordinances, which ours laugh at, as singing of Psalms,
Infant Baptism, observation of the Sabbath, and such opinions as those learned
and godly men, Mr. Ainsworth, Robinson, Johnson, did abhor, are swallowed
down among ours; so that these men cannot ground their practice from any
example heretofore; and as for the Scripture, if they can find any grounds
there, I must confess I am altogether ignorant in the Scripture.

Suppose there should be some human mixtures (though for my part I know of
none) are all the Ordinances so polluted: preaching and prayer were kept pure
in the Episcopal days; why do you not communicate with them in those
Ordinances, which are pure?

If you object, The Ordinances indeed are pure, but those who join in those
Ordinances are not pure, therefore we separate.

This properly belongs to the third head (the Congregation) I shall there
answer to this Cavil.

Thirdly, for the setting up such Ordinances as Christ never did, I cannot
imagine where you will be, unless you mean Infant Baptism, and singing of
Psalms, for I find these are spoken against very much. But are these
fundamental errors, if they be errors, have you been forced to baptize your
Infants, or sing Psalms? are you not at your choice whether you will or not?
do not many people sit in Congregations, and not sing at all? not but that I
conceive Church Members ought to be regarded in this, and called to an account,
though they had need be handled tenderly, if otherwise they seem to be godly,
yet their being hopefully godly, is not a sufficient ground to keep them from
Church Censures, unless all circumstances being confidered they appear to be
truly conscientious, men of humble spirits, not selfe-willed, and desiring
forbearance and patience in clearing of the point, then I know Ministers would
bear with such a long time; but to have persons run into these errors, and
let alone, as if they were things of no concernment; truly by what rules you
will loose two Ordinances, you may loose four; Official preaching is cried
down, and Church Discipline also, by the Erastians, no outward form of
Government, which I suppose was the scope of Mr. Dells Sermon before the
Parliament; and so I think it is that which Rob. Purnell in his short
Prophecy of the downfall of Presbytery and Independency aims at, that there
should be no external form of Church Government, but only the government of
the spirit within; and for all Ordinances, some are above them, who have been
Members of Congregationall Churches, insomuch that when the Brethren came to
choose an Officer, a Mason rose up and opposed it, professing he lived
immediately upon Christ, and he owned none; neither was he alone I believe: but
if you take away all the Ordinances, how we shall know there is a God in the
world, I know not; to be sure, we shall not know by the dealings of these men:
I know so much by them, that one had as good deal with the Indians as with
some of them, so that in conclusion we shall have brave Churches without
ordinances.

As for Infant Baptism, this is not a place for me to prove it to be an
Ordinance of God; what the Adversaries can say is summed up in Mr. Tombs, a
man, I hear, esteemed truly godly on all hands, and for his Learning he shows
himself to be a Scholar, it is pity the man's parts were defiled in
maintaining such a wretched opinion, as Mr. Hooker calls it. I confess, Master
Tombes's abilities are such, that I may hold the Candle to him, but yet let me
say this, I can easily discern Mr. Tombs to dispute more like a Sophister,
then a Christian, that did desire to see truth. Mr. Marshall tells him, and not
without cause, In his defense, etc. p. 247.
Your faculty is far better in darkening, slurring, and plundering the
Arguments of your Adversary, then in making good your own. It is the
happiness Mr. Marshall has above many, that in his preaching, and so in
printing, he can convey his mind to his Hearer, or Reader so, as the weakest
may understand; how then his Arguments come to be so dark, to so learned a
man, as Mr. Tombs, I cannot conceive, if he had dealt heartily; but when
Master Tombs has answered Mr. Marshall, Cotton, Baxter, Cobbet, Hooker,
Holmes, Geree, etc. then we shall bethink our selves of new Arguments, but
these Worthies have maintained that Ordinance with that strength, that I
believe the contrary opinion will rarely, or never take with an intelligent
head, and a sober, godly heart.

For singing of Psalms, this is not a place neither to follow that Question:
whether it be an Ordinance of God, I never heard of any that writ against it,
except one, whom Mr. Cotton has answered, and I think sufficiently enough.
When Master Cotton is silenced, then we shall bethink our selves concerning
that Ordinance: I hear of others that have printed for it, but Master Cottons
piece is all I have seen concerning that subject, Pro or con.

Only because there was a Sectary, In Colchester.
that in a Shop scoffingly asked me, To what purpose singing of Psalms was?
the man's spirit I saw very unsavory, and the place not convenient to
discourse; I gave him no answer, but shall now give him the grounds that lead
me to believe it is an Ordinance of Christ, and let him confute them. I cannot
avoid it, but I must touch diverse things that have been touched before, but
what I do, shall be very brief.

1. If singing of Psalms were an Ordinance under the Old Testament, and not
repealed in the New Testament [being not Typical, or Ceremonial, etc.] then
it is also an Ordinance under the New Testament.

But the Antecedent is true, ergo the Consequent is true.

For the Antecedent, that it was an ordinance then, the Adversaries deny not,
and as other ordinances, which then were in use, and not repealed (as Prayer,
Preaching, etc.) are ordinances now under the New Testament, why should not
singing of Psalms also be continued an ordinance still?

They object, Singing of Psalms with the voice, is but a type of singing
Psalms with the heart.

I answer; If indeed it were typical, then it were some ground to believe it
was repealed; we read your Dictates, but we read no proofs, give us your texts
to prove it was typical, else your Dictates will not take with us; That which
makes me strongly to believe the contrary is this, That Paul, and Silas, when
none but they were in the Prison, yet they sang, Act. 16.25. now this was ill
done of them, if it were Typical, yet to keep it in practice, when they were
alone, however in other points and Ceremonies the Apostles did condescend as
far as they could to the Jews, Epia. 19.
giving the Ceremonies (being now dead) as Augustine says, an honorable
burial, yet that Paul and Silas being now alone without Jews, having no such
temptation, but may keep their liberty, should practice a Typical ordinance,
believe it who will, for I cannot. When I had framed my answer, looking into
Mr. Cotton, I perceived that he mentions this of their singing in answer to
this Cavil, P. 24.
and gives more answers, whither I refer the Reader.

2 The second ground that moves me is the express Scripture, Ephesians. 5.19. and
Col. 3.16. speaking one to another in Psalms, (...) i.e. (...) says Beza, as
the word is used, Ephesians. 4. ult. (...) forgiving one another; so in Col. 3.
(...) our Transtation there renders it, one another: Loquentes inter vos mutuo,
Beza, so Piscator, so Zanchy: When drunkards are full of wine, then they begin
to sing their Songs, says he; so Christians filled with this wine, have these
Spiritual Songs, Psalms, etc. to sing; for the difference between these, see
our English Annotations, or Hiero. in Loc.

Several Objections are here made, which I shall not study to answer, only in
a word.

1 They say, The text does not say, sing one to another, but speak one to
another; the Psalms dwelling in their hearts, they were to dispense them in
way of teaching; but as for singing, he makes no mention of that until he
came to teach them, the manner of dispensing the Word of Christ [ a dark
expression] unto God in the end of the verse, and that is making melody in the
heart.

Master Cotton answers with a grave reproof; That men should rather bow their
judgments and practices to Scripture Language, then bow the sense of the
Scripture to their own conceptions against the Language of the Scripture; for
says he, it is one thing to speak one to another in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, as is done in singing, and another thing to teach one another
out of Psalms, etc. It is true, they were to teach one another out of the
Psalms, and the scope of Paul will reach that; but if he had meant only so, he
would not have said, Speak ye one to another, In Psalms, but Out of the
Psalms, as is the Scripture phrase, etc.

2 To me it seems strange, if that were all Paul's meaning, why should Paul
mention only those parts of the Word which use to be sung? Why does he not
mention the Prophets, Isaiah, etc. as also the New Testament, to teach one
another out of them? Are there not as excellent Truths, gracious Promises, to
be found in those Prophets, and worthy for Christians to be instructed in, as
in the Psalms, or other Songs that we find of Moses, Deborah, etc? but for
Isaiah, Jeremiah, and all those Prophets, besides other parts of the Old and
New Testament, they were never wont to be sung in the Church, but only these
which Paul mentions in both places, not adding any portion of Scripture more in
the Epist. to the Colossians, then to the Ephesians, therefore I cannot believe
that should be the meaning, as the Objector says.

3 The Apostle mentions singing we see presently, now if any thing can be made
out of what the Objector says, it may possibly be this; That Paul would have
them teach one another the sense and scope of a Psalm, that all may understand
the meaning of the Psalm they sing [as is the practice of some Ministers, if
they be to sing a Psalm that is more dark, then in a few words they give the
people to understand the meaning of the Psalm they sing] and so sing with
understanding, 1 Cor. 14, 15. I say, Why may not this be something of the
meaning? I leave it to more able heads to judge. But this does not exclude
singing

But whereas he conceives singing should be only the making melody in the
heart, Hieron, in Colos. 3. Nusquam legimus aliquem sine voce cantasse, unde
necesse est hic, in cord, ex cord, intelligi, etc.
I pray let him hear what an old Commentator said long ago, upon the words;
We read no where that any one sung without a voice, wherefore it is necessary
that in the Heart here, he understood from the Heart. viz. That we sing not
only with the mouth, but with the heart, So Beza, In your heart, i. e. Serio
cordis affectu, non autem lingua duntaxat, neque enim in cord idem hic
declarat atque intus and apud se, cum mentio fiat canendi in caetu. So other
Divines, as Calvin, Zanchy, etc. whom I forbear to name.

The same text also affords a good ground for singing David's Psalms, with
other spiritual Songs recorded in Scripture; or else I desire them to give me
a reason, why Paul should direct us to the very Titles of David's Psalms, and
yet not mean David's Psalms, any one that has the least taste of the Hebrew
Language knows this. Some of them are called (...) Psalms, the word (...) is
used about forty times in David's Psalms, I do not stand upon the exact
number. (...) Hymns, the Book of David's Psalms is named by this word (...) so
(...) Spiritual Songs, See Buxto. Concord. Exodus 15.
this is frequent in David's Psalms; also Deborah uses this word, Judge. 5.12.
so now it seems strange that Paul should point us to these, and yet we must
not sing them, which were sung before.

The third ground that moves me, is the example I find in the New Testament,
of Christ himself, with his Apostles, Matthew. 26.30. they sung a Hymn; he did
not sing it between the Passover and the institution of the Supper, as being a
Typical thing, and so let it be joined to the Passover, as the Jews did; but
after he had instituted that Ordinance, which must last to the end of the
world, and they received the Bread and Wine, then he and they sung, as some
conceive six Psalms, Beza in Loc.
beginning at 112. to 117. whence it is the practice of Churches, following the
pattern, to sing after the receiving of the Supper.

So the example of Paul and Silas, Act. 16, 25. (...) Hymnos canebant Deo,
says Beza, or Hymnis laudabant Deum, Piscator, and Pasor, they praised God
with Hymns; that which some object, the text says, they sang praises, not
Psalms; this is very poor, besides the original word, how should one sing
praises to God but in some Psalm, spiritual Sons, etc. for Praise, if you
take it properly as distinct from honor and glory, is but the honorable
making mention of another, and that externally by tongue or pen; also that
text, Heb. 13.15. by him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, etc. intimates as much.

And this text over-throws that conceit of singing only in the heart, which one
that was a member of the Church of Rowly in New England had taken up, and upon
that ground, and some other notions he had, denied singing, and maintained (as
well as he could) that singing of Psalms was no Ordinance of God. I do not
know how this man's opinion came to be known, for had he kept his own
counsel, I suppose none should much have taken notice of him, which makes me
think it was of his own venting at first; our Elders labored with him to
convince him (the Elders of Ipswich, besides his own Pastor) this text was
alleged to prove singing with an Audible voice, for they sang, and the
Prisoners heard him: yet this man could not [or rather would not, for the thing
is plain as any one may understand] be convinced of the thing; the man after
long laboring with him, but to no purpose, for he was tenacious in his own
opinion, and as Hieron. said of Jovinianus, Non est contentus nostro, i. e.
humano more loqui, altius quiddam aggreditur; High flowne in his notions. The
Elders seeing that obstinacy was joined to his error, they concluded, that
either they must cast that Ordinance out of the Church, or else cast him out of
the Church, and so the Church of Rowley did cast him out. I know they have been
censured for this Act by some here, but at the Day of Judgment they will give
as comfortable an account for maintaining of the Ordinances of Christ, as they
shall do, who through their maxim of errors in Non-fundamentalls, make way
to loose all the Ordinances, and then where is the Church?

From this example of Paul and Silas we may argue, if two may sing Hymns or
Psalms together, then four may, so forty, the number hinders not, for the
voices here of many are no hinderance to the Ordinance, but rather they help to
stir up the affections one of another; as in those, who are filled with wine,
two singing together, or four, do not hinder their conceited mirth. So Christ
and his eleven Apostles sang together.

Whether will these men allow one Christian to sing a Psalm alone by himself,
methinkes the texts and examples mentioned, together with Jam. 5.13. Is any man
merry, (...) let him sing Psalms, are so plain, as no rational man can deny
it; But if one may, then the Church may. There is no act of Worship which any
member of the Church is bound to perform, but the Church is bound to perform;
but on the contrary it is not true, that what worship the Church does perform,
a member of Church can, or may; for instance for the first part, Meditation
needs no Organ of the body, and therefore I leave that. But does a Member of
the Church Pray, so does the whole Church: does he read the Scriptures? so they
are read in the Church; does he fast and pray? so does the Church; does he sing
a Psalm? so does the Church; but it is not true on the contrary, as appears
in the Sacraments, Preaching, Discipline, etc. Neither is that place, Revel.
15.2, 3. of small force, to prove singing to be an Ordinance, Exposit. Hos.
2.15. p. 525.
Those who overcame the Beast, sung the Song of Moses; This says Mr. Buroughs
I note, because hereby we may see that singing is an Ordinance in the Church of
God, not only in the time of the Law, but in the time of the Gospel, etc. he
was speaking of the text before.

4 The fourth ground that moves me is this [I know not how it will take with
others, but with me it is something] Psalm 92. The title says, it is a Psalm,
or Song for the day of Sabbath; it is clear, that one way of sanctification of
the Sabbath was by singing of Psalms; two of the words that Paul uses in
Ephesians. 5.19. are in this Title (...) Psalm, Spiritual Songs; will any say,
this Psalm was only for those times, but now is abolished with the Jewish
Sabbath? what, is that admirable promise, in the thirteenth, and fourteenth
verses vanished, and of no use to us? Should not Christians apply it, and plead
it now, when as they are planted in Gods house, and attending on him on our
Christian Sabbath? have not we as much need of the Promise as they? this with
me has much prevailed; if we own a Christian Sabbath, singing of Psalms may
well be owned also for an Ordinance of God now, as well as then.

5 The fifth is the presence of the Spirit of God with his people in the use of
this Ordinance; for the proof of what I say, let thousands of Gods people
speak, if they have not found God in the Ordinance; I will not go so far as
Augustine, but our Fathers, Confess. l. 9 c. 6. and l. 10. c. 33.
who used it in their families more then some of us do, I am sure they found
God, and so have many now in these days; those who have not found God in it,
they may cavil indeed, but let them be rather humbled, that God has not given
them, what others have tasted; those who do frequently find God in this
Ordinance, they will not so slightly, and scornfully speak of it, as that
Sectary did to me; but if God had usually manifested his presence with his
Churches under the Old and New Testament, in the using of this Ordinance, this
with the former Scriptures alleged prevail with me, to believe it is a Gospel
ordinance still.

6 The last ground that moves me, is the practice of the Primitive Churches:
Antiquity after Scripture is as a Cipher after a Figure, and does increase the
number; that singing was frequent among those Christians I find it recorded.

1 Eusebius reports out of Philo, the Lives, manners, etc. of the religious
men in Egypt; Mark being sent into Egypt, Eccles. hist. lib. 2. c. 17
as says the story, to preach Christ, he there converted many, whose
conversation (as I said) Philo Judaeus, a very learned man at that time, sets
forth in commendation of the Christians: Hierom also relates this out of Philo
Orationi vacatur and Psalmis. Catal. script. Ecclesiast.
among other things this he reports; They contemplate not only Divine things,
but they make grave Canticles, and Hymns unto God, in a more sacred rhyme of
every kind of meeter and verse. This Philo (a Hebrew) flourished about the
year forty, being sent of an Embassage to Caius Caligula about that time; so
then this was their practice in the Apostles times, Philo must needs be borne,
and well grown in Christ's time.

2 For Tertullian, Mine in Paris print, anno 1580.
there are two Testimonies brought out of him for singing of Psalms, the one
is out of Apol. c. 2. the Letter which Plinius Secundus wrote to Trajan in
behalf of the Church, where he mentions the practice; the other is out of Cap.
39. Apol. showing the Discipline of the Christians, and there it is mentioned;
but I find two other places in him besides these as clear as those; one is,
l. 2. ad uxorem, having spoken strongly against Christians marrying with
Infidels, he shows the contrary, how good it is for Christians to marry with
Christians, and among other things this he mentions; Sonant inter Duos Psalmi
and Hymni, and mutuo provocant quis melius Deo sua canet; but most clear is
that place, Cap. 3. De Anima, as for his opinion De effigy animae, I leave
that; but there he makes mention of a Sister of their Church, who had the gifts
of Revelations, which it seems she had in the Church on the Lords Day, As the
Scriptures are read, or Psalms are sung, he reckons up other Ordinances,
Prayer, etc. then matter for visions were administered, etc. Now this is most
clear, it was in the Congregation, for when the people were gone (exercises
being finished) then it seems she was wont to tell (the officers I suppose he
means) what revelations she had, which they noted exactly. Tertullian then is
so plain and full for this practice, that none can doubt whether the Churches
used this Ordinance or no.

Socrates Scholast. speaking of the Hymns, which Chrysostom. appointed his own
people to sing in opposition to the Arians, Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c. 8.
in the end of the Chapter tells us that Ignatius, a man very familiar with the
Apostles, saw a vision of Angels which extolled the blessed Trinity with
Hymns, that were sung interchangeably, and delivered unto the Church of
Antioch, the order and manner of singing expressed in the vision; so he would
make Ignatius the Author of Anthemes: I somewhat doubt whether that manner of
singing was so ancient, but that singing was, I doubt not, then in practice.

4. Quest. and Resp. Orth. q. 107.
Just. Martyr (or whosoever was the Author of that book) shows it was in use
in that time, setting down with all the benefit that comes by singing.

So that in the Apostles times, and the ages next to the Apostles, we find
singing was in use.

If we come a little lower to the year three hundred sixty four I find in 15.
Canon, Council. Laodic. none were allowed to sing praeter Canonicos Psaltes;
here was a corruption got in by this time, cross to the command of Paul in his
Epistles to the Ephesians. and Coloss. but this implies that singing had been
before in use in the Churches, and that the people were wont to sing, that now
they limit singing to the Canonical Psalmists.

That Athanasius used singing in his Church, appears also in August. Confess.
l. 10. c. 33. also that the Psalms of David were sung then appears in the
same place, and in his 119. Epist. c. 18. where he affirms, that for singing
of Psalms and Hymns, we have the examples and precepts of Christ, and the
Apostles, blaming withal the Donatists, that learning David's Psalms, they
sung Hymns of their own inventing, etc.

As for those, who would allow singing, if it might be of some spiritual song
composed by some Saint now upon some occasions, I do not now trouble my self
about them, only I wish them to make better songs, then that brother of one of
the Churches in London [I do forbear to name whose Church it was] who
composed a song to be sung on the day of Thanksgiving for the overthrow of the
Scots at Dunbar; I heard the Song read over, and the party who read it, told me
it was sung in the Church: I deny not but the man who composed it, might have
an honest heart, but sure he had but a shallow head, in comparison of what men
should have, that compose such Songs.

If these be not grounds sufficient to answer that scoffer, let him give me
better grounds to prove singing of Psalms is no Gospel Ordinance.

So much for the second branch, the worship can be no ground of separation. Now
I come to the third.

Let us see if there be sufficient ground for separation in respect of the
Congregation. The Congregations are very corrupt they say, hence they think
they are bound to separate, and allege these places, 2 Cor. 6.17. Revel. 18.4.

1. That there are very many corrupt persons in the Presbyteriall
Congregations, there are none deny it (and I wish the Independent Churches have
not some corrupt persons also amongst them) you do not hear them justify all
their Churchmembers, but you shall find them complaining of this corruption,
and endeavoring by degrees to correct it, yea, I believe, had they power in
their hands, they would soon show what they would do: I pray hear some of
their words, Vindica. p. 115.
the London Ministers, Though we dare not make separation from a true Church,
yet we do make separation in a true Church. Read over the whole Answer, and
you may perceive their minds, P. 76.
before this in their exhortation to the Ministers and Elders, you have this
one branch of their exhortation, That they would labor to make their
Congregations pure as well as peaceable, following after piety, as much as
after verity and unity, that all your people under your charge, may be visible
Saints at least, Review of Mr Hoo a p. 89. ad 97.
you may feel how the pulses of these men beat. I observe also Mr. Cawdry
differing very little from Mr. Hooker, in this point about visible Saints,
being the material cause of a Church; where you may see what he would have, if
Discipline were once stablished; that the Congregations are thus corrupt, See
him also p. 202
the fault is not in them, but in the old Hierarchy, whose Errors while they
go about to mend, you go away from them.

2. I am sure, very many Parochial Congregations in England, have both visible
and real Saints: must these and the Ministry be cast off for the sake of other
corrupt ones? whom they would gladly also mend, if they could, or else purge
them out.

3. I wish you would give us precept or example, where there have been
Churches with so many visible Saints, and such Ministers, and these Ministers
desiring and laboring to reform as they do, and yet that Christians have
done, or should separate from them. Those Texts above mentioned, and often
alleged, if you please to view them well again, are very far from proving
it: Corrupt members there were enough in the Jewish Church, and so in the
Christian Churches soon after, and in the Apostles times; but you have no
example of separating from them, but in them, say the London Ministers, we do
separate,

4. But I pray wherein do these wicked men trouble you? I hope you will give
men leave to hear the word, be they never so wicked, but many of you come not
so much as to hear.

Object. But they trouble us, because they mix with us in prayer.

Answ. No mixtures ever troubled me in Ordinances, so much as my own heart,
The Grecians before they went to kill the sacrifice, used to cry out to the
people, (...) Let us pray, Rous. Arch. At. l. 2. c. 9 They prayed also in the
Temple. c. 7.
if I could separate from that I should be happy.

But for Prayer, why would not you have them join in prayer? when as,

First, Prayer is a part of natural worship, the light of nature dictates this
to every man, if he own a God, then pray unto him, Jonah 1.6. Call upon thy
God, etc. but I hope none in your Congregations, but own even the true God,
therefore they are bound to pray to him.

Secondly, Peter when he saw Simon, Act. 8.22. in the very gall of bitterness,
yet bid him, Pray God: Then worst of men may pray.

Thirdly, Prayer God has used to be a converting Ordinance; I have known one
my self that now is in heaven, but was at first a notorious wretch', a
mock-God, Captain of Drunkards, who coming into the Church as the Minister was
in prayer, God brake his heart, and followed it on so, as he became an eminent
Saint.

Object. They mix with us in our singing, mixed worship we cannot join in.

Answ. I cannot conceive what harm this can do to you; is the mixing of your
own corruption in your service less prejudicial to the acceptance of it with
God, then the presence of wicked men joining in the service?

If indeed you can prove to me that God will not have wicked men sing, but if
they do, he will not accept of the service of his people, this is some ground
for your exception; but I conceive you will not be able to prove the former,
much less the latter.

That wicked men may sing, I prove thus:

First, If wicked men may pray unto God (as the light of nature teaches) then
they may praise God; the light of nature teaches this also: nature teaches me
to pray to God for what I want, and nature teaches me to praise God for what I
receive. If then natural men may praise God with their mouths [for praise must
be expressed with tongue or pen, if you take it properly, as I said before]
why not by singing? God has given this gift to them, as well as to others. But
that to praise God is a part of natural worship, and belongs to all men, we
may conceive by the example of the Philistims, Judge. 16.23. They met to offer a
great sacrifice to Dagon, and to rejoice (because of Sampson.) Here is a day of
Thanksgiving; so 1 Chronicles. 10.9. because Saul was slain, etc.

If we go to the Romans, we shall find nature had taught them to sing to
their feigned gods, Godw. Romans Ant. l. 2. s. 2. c. 19
not to transcribe their rites in their sacrifices, After the portion laid out
for the gods had been burnt, then did all the people repair to a common
feast; where, as they were eating, they sung hymns and songs in the praise of
their gods, and playing on Cymbals, they danced about the Altars, intimating
thereby, that there was no part of their body, but should be employed in the
service of their gods, etc. If nature taught the Romans to sing hymns and
songs to their feigned and foolish gods, why should wicked men be debarred from
singing to the true God?

2. We find Exodus 15.1. Moses and the sons of Israel, sang a song to the
Lord, in v. 12. Miriam bids the women sing; I doubt not but among these sons
and daughters of Israel, there were persons as corrupt as any in our
Congregations: then the presence of wicked men do not so defile you, or the
Ordinance, as is supposed; to themselves indeed it was polluted, as are all
other things, but this hindered not Moses, nor Miriam, they did not separate all
those, who were godly, from the rest, and sing only with them; I doubt they
should have had but few songsters.

3. May a wicked man read a Psalm, or one of those songs? give me a reason why
not? Will you debar a wicked man from reading the word? If he may read a
Psalm, why may not he sing the Psalm? To read the word is worship, so to sing
the Psalm is worship: It is true, he cannot sing as he should, no more he
cannot read the Psalm as he should, nor hear, etc. therefore he must not read
nor hear the word: To sing, is we see taught by the light of nature, as well
as the other, to pray, read, or hear the word. This Ordinance is not, as the
Sacraments, which we do not see so by natures light, but have them by divine
Institution revealed, having also a sealing nature annexed to them.

4. We find the word calling upon all sorts of persons to praise God, Psalm.
96.1. Sing unto the Lord all the earth, Psalm. 68.32. Sing unto the Lord all the
Kingdoms of the earth, etc. Several such texts we find.

I might add more Arguments, and answer to some objections, but I content my
self with these.

Object. But they mix with us in the Lords Supper.

Answ. That the presence of others defile you [especially if you have done your
duty to keep that Ordinance cleare] is a thing that our Congregational men
utterly deny; those who are acquainted with their works, may see it often
mentioned, therefore I quote none.

2. I will be bold to say there are many Presbyterial Ministers, who have as few
wicked men, at that Ordinance, as were in the Church of Corinth. There were
more matters of exception in that Church for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
then are in abundance of these Churches; besides, you see what course they did
take to keep that Ordinance clear, and when they could not obtain what they
desired of the Civil power, yet they resolved to go further, which gave Mr.
Prynne occasion to write against them.

3. I doubt if we examine things well, your selves are most to blame in that
for which you separate. Suppose you be in a Congregationall Church, and have
all things, as you desire; if there be any person there, who falls
scandalously, that he deserves to be suspended from the Ordinance, I pray tell
me, what method will you take? I am sure the method is this, If thy Brother
offend, tell him, if he hear thee not, take two, if not, tell the Church,
Matthew. 18. What shall the Minister alone suspend him [it may be he knows not of
it] when no Witness comes in against him? No sure; yea, suppose a Minister saw
a man drunk, one of his Members, and none saw him, or knew it but himself; he
deals indeed with this Member, but the man denies it, he said he was not; the
Minister is sure he was drunk but wants witness; the man comes to the Supper
[denying the thing though the Minister had wished him privately to forbeare]
shall the Minister now debar him? No sure, the text lays another method, the
Minister must not be the sole Witness and Judge too; For if Ministers may
debar upon their own heads without Witness, they may soon do strange
things; now have you done thus, dealt with the Person, or two of you gone to
the Minister, and told him, you know such things by such persons, which you can
and will prove, such things, as if not repented of, make him unfit for the
Ordinance? See Master Barro, Hos. cap. 5. v. 3.
and has the Minister yet received him [if he has, you have discharged your
duty, and no guilt lies on you, you may partake] I doubt there are few have
done-thus, but if they be persons of quality (especially) then you pull in your
horns, afraid to appear, but yet you will have the Minister to suspend him,
when no Witness comes in (contrary to the rule) or else you separate; this
blame will lie on your own heads.

All your shift here is, we have no power to deal with men, we want an
explicit Covenant.

Though I could heartily wish all our Ministers would follow the practice of
the Holland Churches, who cause all, Apollon.
who come to the Sacrament, to promise to subject to Discipline, yet for the
present I say this, there is an implicit Covenant in all these Churches, and
if you be afraid to speak to these persons first, whom you would have
suspended, then go to the Minister, and carry sufficient Witnesses [as you
must do in any Church] and I am confident, without satisfaction given [no more
can be required in any Church] thousands of the Presbyteriall Ministers will
keep away scandalous persons; [at least you are clear as I said before] yet
to see these men separate for that, in which themselves are most to blame.

Obj. But they baptize all Children, making no difference though never so
scandalous.

A. Though this is very seldom urged, yet because I would draw out all that
can be said, I add this.

For my own practice, I confess in this I differ from other men far better
then my self, but yet were I a Member of some other Presbyteriall
Congregation, I should not dare to separate upon this ground.

1 It is granted by our Congregationall men, Mr. Hook Survey, p. 3 p. 11.
that though persons be very wicked, yet so long as they live in visible
Churches, and are not proceeded against, they may justly challenge the
privileges of Church Members: but I dare not deny them to be true visible
Churches, in which there are many such, for there are many both real and
visible Saints in such Churches, where these wicked men are.

Obj. But then this makes against your self, in denying some children Baptism.

A. Learned Mr. Cawdrey came to my hand, after I had printed my little
Treatise, had I seen him before, I should have humbly presented some answer to
some things, which I see the^e, so far as concerned my question [the question
about Confederacy does not concern me] also I would have propounded some
Reasons, why his third way i. e. Adoption, I should not so easily admit under
the New Testament, till those Reasons were removed. I perceive he admires at
them who deny the Children of Excommunicated Parents Baptism, I have no place
now to answer but only this; I say, it is not good to put too much upon
Baptism, nor too little upon that dreadful ordinance of Excommunication. What
he says, p. 202. about the impotence to reject profane persons through the
iniquity of the times, which implies what he would do, if he had power,
confirms my practice.
I answer; [as I have declared in that little Tract upon this question, which
the uncivil carriage of some in the Congregation, when I had dealt lovingly
with them in private before, forced me to print] I deny not them Baptism
absolutely, but as I suspend them from one of the Seals, so I do from this
also, till they will labor to get out of their gross ignorance, and
scandalous conversations, and will subject themselves to Church Discipline; so
that I do [as say the London Ministers] separate in the Church, but not from
the Church; as the state of our lapsed Churches will give us leave: I desire to
proceed against such, yet but gently, [as for Excommunication, that is a great
worke] having the advantage in the Church, that many good Ministers [better
then my selfe] have not, viz. That the strongest Party in the Town is
religious; but had many Presbyteriall men the same advantage, I believe you
should see they would be more strict then now they are. Congregations must be
mended by degrees: to purge per vices in foul bodies, is better then at first
to give Hellebore, Scammony, and such strong workers; it will cost abundance of
prayer, wisdom, labor, meekness, to bring these Congregations fallen into
this ignorance and profaneness for want of Catechizing, and Discipline; let
the Bishops look to their account.

Besides, diverse Presbyteriall Ministers do examine their people before they
will Baptize, yea, and I have heard one who is esteemed a rigid Presbyterian
say, That if the Presbyteriall Government were settled, they would Baptize none,
but they would have the parents; 1. Examined in point of knowledge. 2. If they
were scandalous, that they should confess their sin. 3. Promise for the time
to come to reform. 4. That if persons would refuse to submit to
Church Discipline, they would deny them the Lords Supper.

Since then it is in the hearts of many to reform, and it is the thing they
would gladly have power to do, I think it is very unwarrantable upon this
ground to separate from them; besides, there are many reasons they give for
Baptizing of all that do but profess Christ, which though they are not
satisfactory unto me, so as to give the Seal of the Govenant to one, who
says, He believes in Christ, but yet is grossly ignorant, scandalous, etc. yet
their reasons prevail with me so, as to be very charitable to those, who do
Baptize upon those grounds; if there be any sin in it, let the Minister look
to that, that is not your fault.

Certainly, people think it is a very easy thing to reform Churches, it may
be done with a wet finger; but if they were in the place of Ministers, and had
what knowledge is fit for the place, they would find it a hard Work,
especially some Churches.

So then as yet we find no grounds warrantable for this Separation: I come to
the last; The place of meeting, it is Idolatrous, and I know not what.

I thought here to have given in some answers to this absurd cavil, but the
practice of this generation has given in a full answer; for it was observed in
a neighbor Town, the Minister not preaching upon a day of Thanksgiving, a
Trooper got into the Pulpit, and did, etc. This was such a pretty thing, that
diverse of the Separatists in the Town, who had not been in the Steeple-house
for some years before, ran in haste, and became Auditors of the Trooper.
Another of them, who called himself the King of England, came to me, and
offered to supply my place [the man was mad, as error had made him mad, but
for all civil actions sober enough:] now from these practices I gather, that
either it is no sin to meet in a Steeple-house [as they call it] or else they
have no good consciences, these practices are frequent, if Troopers get into
Pulpits.

For the lawfulness of the assembling in these places, Mr. Hos. 2. chapter 15.
Lect.
Buroughs has pleaded. More might be added, but I spare the Reader.

As yet then we have found no sufficient ground for separation; I shall desire
yet to come nearer, and request of these persons, what it is they would have,
which way may we be brought to an union; if what they propound be rational,
and will be borne out by Scripture, we shall defire to come up to them; for I
am sure in that posture we now stand, nothing can go forward. I have not
their proposals before me, only I may surmise what they would have, and
accordingly I will set them down, and examine them.

First, The Separatists first proposal.
We would have Ministers lay down their former Ordination, and come join with
us in an explicit Covenant, then we will call them and ordain them, and this
will be one great way to union.

Very good, but are all the Separatists of this mind, do they require no more
of their Ministers? I doubt you should have put in one clause more, i.e. They
must not expect any maintenance, but preach etc. freely. What else is the
reason that many of you do so cry out of Ministers, because they require
maintenance of the people, when as the Spirit of God has left so many express
Texts in the Scripture for it [foreseeing this generation, who run upon
express Texts.] What is the reason diverse of you keep back your tithes (the
maintenance the State for present allows) from the Ministers in the places
where you live? but if you be real, They often allege Act. 20.35. etc.
Briefly I answer, 1. These Elders coming but lately out of heathenisme, could
not in an ordinary way attain to Ministerial abilities in so short a time,
therefore God did in an extraordinary way help them. 2. Before they were
converted, they had other trades, whereby they lived in their heathenisme, so
they could follow other trades, if need were, but we have not other trades. 3.
Our Churches are not so poor, so there is no such need. I could add more, but
this is enough. But these ignorant men know not the weight of the work of the
Ministry.
that you would according to the Word, allow honorable maintenance, 1 Timothy
5.17, 18. Then I shall come to your proposal.

Answ. 1. As I made use of one of your principles before, so now I will make use
of another; you admit nothing for which you have not express Scripture. Hence
you throw away Infant Baptism, Sabbath, etc. Now I pray give us an express
Text [precept or example] where we have it proved, That Ministers first chosen
by the people [or had the consent of the people freely afterward, though most
of ours were elected at their first coming.] 2. Have Ordination for the
substance, freely acknowledging the accidental corruptions. 3. Men very well
qualified, as any since the Apostles days. 4. Whom God has used
instrumentally to convert diverse, or to build up those who were converted: 5.
Have administered the Ordinances for many years; that yet after all this, they
must lay down their Ministerial call, join with you, etc.

I say, I challenge all the Separatists in England to give me one express
Text: when you have done this, we shall bethink our selves.

I call now for express Texts, for such is your own principle; if that be a
true principle, then I hope it is one for us, as well as for you. I put this
once to a Separatist, who told me, this it was they required of Ministers: but
the poor man could not bring one, and because he had held me to this rule of
express Texts in another case [though I soon made him confess, that
necessary consequence would hold, by an instance I gave him; Suppose it had not
been recorded of Christ, that ever he ate or drank, yet being it is recorded
in Scripture, that he was true man, like to us in all things, but sin; hence
I would argue, If so, then he did eat and drink, I believe that though it be
not expresely written, the man yeelded] I held him to his own principle here,
but the man seeing himself so foiled, grew froward and angry, so I left him.
To see the frame of these men's spirits, we may soon answer their reasons, but
their wills they hold: It is no disputing against men's wills.

2. Medul. Theol. li. c. 39. sect. 32 Survey chapter disc part. 2 p. 66.
Dr. Ames, Mr. Hooker, and many of our Congregationall men affirm, That the
election of the people gives the essentialls to an officer, and that ordination
is but an adjunct: And though there may be some defect in the peoples election
at first, yet there may be the substance of it, and that will save it, or an
after consent. See the places before quoted, page 5. If so, then there will be
few of the Ministers of England excepted, who are not true Ministers: This I am
sure you freely assent to, and make Ordination a thing not worth the regarding;
why then do you keep such a stir at that, which you look upon as little,
when as they have that, which you say, gives the essentials to an officer; what
have they the essentials of an officer, and must they go and lay down their
call? you must rather say, Let them lay down their election, then their
ordination; but in saying so, you cut the throat of your own Objection; for if
they have election, then they have the essentials of a Minister, and then they
are Ministers, your own selves being judges. You would make Ministers very
simple men to lay down their former Call, and you would give them a Call,
which they had before, elected before, and no more now.

Obj. But what we judge is one thing, they look upon their Ordination as
chief, and think they stand by that.

Ans. What is that to you what they think, they have that which, your selves
say, gives the essence, so that they are Ministers, you cannot deny it, unless
you will cross your own Position; and let them think so, why should this
trouble you? Suppose a Deacon thinks his Ordination gives him the essentials
of his Office, the people think their election does; what then, will you
separate from him, and not go to him for relief in case of want? he has
Election and Ordination, so that to be sure a Deacon he is: the case is the
same with our Ministers, Iren. p. 183 184.
see Mr. Buroughs urging this instance.

To cavil here, they were indeed elected, but not by the godly Party, it is
very false, first of hundreds of the Ministers, some visible Saints had their
Vote, or gave after their consent; I believe many of you, who now separate, did
join in the Call of the Minister, from whom you now separate, which is worse;
but however this is a feeble Objection.

3 Before they renounce their Ordination, you must prove they have not so much
as the substance, and essence of that Ordinance; they will acknowledge
accidental corruptions, but still affirm they have the essence, and this none
of you all have disproved.

4 In this which you require you intimate, that they are no Ministers at all,
for if they be true Ministers, though there were something humane mixed in
their Call, their work must be to renounce those humane mixtures [which they
doe] but if they be not true Ministers, have not so much as the essentials of
the Office, then they are no Ministers at all; Consequently, we have had no
ordinances at all; if you say, Yes, I pray tell me, how may any one, who is not
an Officer dispense the Seals, preach Authoritatively, etc? You practice
indeed some of you as if he might, but it is a thing abhorred of all men, both
Classical, and Congregationall; God is a God of order in his House, as well as
in the world: In the Civil State none must be Justices of Peace, unless set
apart to the Office, Heb. 5.4 Ier. 14.14
every man cannot make Warrants, nor execute Justice [yet some men have as much
knowledge in the Law, as many Justices have] but in the Church of God, there
must be no order. Our Ministers then have been but private men, all this while
they have dispensed the Ordinances: it is the Call to a Place, or Office, that
makes men Officers or public persons, but Call they have none by your esteem.

Learned Chamier proves, To. 4. l. 5. c. 14. Survey chapter dis. part 2. page 42. 45
That Baptism administered by a private person is no Sacrament at all.

Mr. Hooker speaks home to this point: he laid down this conclusion; That
there is a causall virtue put forth in a subordinate way under Christ, to bring
in the specificall being of an Ecclesiastical Office to a person, etc. After
three things premised he comes to a fourth, viz. Persons though gifted and
fitted every way, be they never so many, they are not therefore Officers.

A call they must have, without which none can warrantably do any act, which
belongs to an Officer.

Without this, whatever is done in that behalf is void, and of none effect.

The validity of an outward Call appears in this, if it proceeds from such,
who may give it by rule, because whosoever has regularly received this Call,
he is then a true Officer, though not inwardly graced, and fitted worthily to
such a place, etc.

Afterward he speaks to this purpose again; Page 3. p. 9
It is a Frenzy of the Anabaptists, which begins to labor with the
loathsomenesse of it self, that any Christian gifted, who can teach, or
administer a word of instruction to win a Disciple after him, that he in a
corner may Baptize him; but as Paul said of Jannes and Jambres, their madness
is made to appear to all, etc.

If the Lord Christ in his infinite Wisdom, and Kingly care, conceived it
necessary for the honor of the place, and the execution of the work of a
Deacon, to appoint choice men, and solemn Ordination to Authorize them to the
work, etc.

The sum is, the practice is but loathsome, and the Acts of such men are
void, who do such things as properly belong to a Church Officer, and are not
called to the Office; thus Mr. Hooker.

Mr. Keys, p. 6 Inst. l. 4 c. 15. s. 20 In par. 2. 1. Vol. p. 766. Bell. ener.
to. 3. l. 2. c. 2.
Cotton he speaks against such practices, so does the stream of all Divines,
Calvin, Zanchy, Perkins, Ames, etc.

Hence then if you null their Call, you must null all the Acts they have done
as Ministers, and you will be troubled (as I said before) which way to come
into order; you had better therefore be quiet, and if you will needs quarrel
with their Ordination, yet content your selves with their election, which you
say is the chief.

Before I pass on to my last answer, let me a little examine this Thesis, viz.
Election gives the essentials, and Ordination is but an Adjunct. Heretofore I
have indeed been of this opinion, never much weighing the thing, being wholly
carried away with the Authority of Dr. Ames, and Mr. Hooker, and others,
admiring their learning and holiness, seeing my self but a mere babe in
comparison of these men, and so I judge of my self still; but I remember a
passage of Mr. Hookers in his conference with forty Ministers, said he, We see
things fall cut in our Churches, which puts us upon further searches; so when I
observed what use is made of this Thesis in England amongst our Sectaries, and
what confusion is brought upon us, for any number of Sectaries will elect one
(be he what he will) but Election gives the essence, Ordination is but an
Adjunct, therefore may be left out; these practices have made me to search
further into this opinion, this being my greatest trouble, that if I cast off
the opinion, I must go cross to such men, whom I do so much admire and
reverence; I am apt to think our holy Men did in this as our first Reformers
did in other points; Luther let some words fall against the Law, which might
have been spared; so our Divines in their definition of saving Faith, in
opposition to the Papists; so in this point the Papists cried up ordination too
high, ours now are run on the other side, and cry up popular election as
high, and cry down Ordination, but surely a medium might have been found out,
which had come nearer to the rule (with submission I speak it.)

Reverend Mr. Hooker lays down his Thesis thus, Survey part. 2. page 66.
Election of the people rightly ordered by the rule of Christ (I wish he had
set down this right order) gives the essentials to an officer, etc. but I
doubt (with honor to this choice Saint) he has not laid down his Thesis so
clear, as Dr. Ames (whom he quotes after) I presume he intends the acceptance
of the person elected must concur; nay, I will affirm the acceptance is as
essential, as their election, for what if this, or that, or four Churches more
choose I will refuse them all, if I please; if election gives the essentials,
then it seems I must be a Pastor to that people, who elects me, will I, nill I;
but this reverend Mr. Hooker will not own: then I say election does not give
the essentialls. Secondly, I say my own acceptance, is as essential to my
Call, as their election, therefore Dr. Ames lays it thus, Medul. Th. l. 1. c.
39. s. 32.
Vocationis essentia est in electione Ecclesiae, and acceptatione electi; but
this is not material, for our Sectaries are forward enough to accept, if any
will elect.

In searching out this truth, I shall desire to set by all men, and consult
with the Scriptures; I will first search what texts we have for Election, then
what for Ordination, and this I set down with my self, that if Ordination be
but an Adjunct, and the election so essential, then the Texts for Election are
far more clear, full; and those for Ordination more dark and rare; for an
Adjunct, the meanest Logician knows, is but little in comparison of an
essential cause; it does consentire, but modo quodam; 2. It supposes the
subject complete in its essence before; 3. Therefore potest abesse; much might
be spoken this way.

The Texts I find for Election are three; neither do I observe our Divines to
quote any more.

1. The first is, Act. 1.23. where we have these things observable, as here are
eleven Apostles in this election, but we allow those to choose, where there is
no officer to guide them, and many times very weak persons.

2. It is very easy to choose one of these, for v. 21. It was one who had
accompanied them from the time, etc. This was easy for the meanest to know,
but to choose a man fit for a Pastor, requires more skill then so.

3. If we observe it narrowly, they did not so properly elect the Apostle, for
when they had appointed two, Joseph and Matthias suppose one should have asked
Peter, or the rest, which of these is the Apostle? he must have said he could
not tell, properly God made the election: then they knew who was the Apostle,
like to some Corporations in the choice of a Mayor, the floor nominate two,
but the Aldermen choose which they will have, whence the people say, The
Aldermen choose the Mayor. 1. Something may here be gathered for popular
election, but very different is this practice from ours; I could add other
scruples, but I forbear.

2 The second place is Act. 6.3. a very clear place for the popular election
of a Deacon, but the last words of the verse do very much shake this notion of
Ordination, being but an adjunct, yea, it shakes the essential causality of
popular election, Do ye look on, etc. but they add, whom We may appoint
over this business. How do the Apostles appoint them over the business? It
is by Ordination verse. 16. Those that do authoritatively appoint another, or
others over some business, they put forth a causall virtue surely in that
appointing; these appointed by this Act of Ordination [the Apostles did not not
meddle here with the election] then the Apostles Ordination was more then an
Adjunct.

From this place Divines argue commonly, If they may choose Deacons, then much
more Pastors, to whom they are more engaged, must honor, maintain them, etc.

Thus we argue one while a majori, the people elected an Apostle, ergo, they
may elect a Pastor; here now a minori, the people elect a Deacon, ergo, they
may elect a Pastor, but then those Axioms one of them must be false, a majori
licet (...) solummodo, and a minori solum (...), both which experience proves
to be false, and Logicians observe it; but put the case we should question this
argument; The people may elect a Deacon, ergo, their Pastor; election follows
the judgment, and is guided by it, but must we needs suppose the people to be
as able to judge, who is fit for a Pastor, as who is fit for a Deacon? Dr. Ames
says, a minori ad majus, si quantitas probabilitatis intelligatur, semper
concluditur affirmate. Is this as probable? These. log 143.
Sure it is less probable, that the people should be fit to judge of the
fitness of a Pastor, then a Deacon. I am confident there are hundreds of
Congregations in England, in which there are many real Saints, yet all the
Jesuits in Rome might scatter themselves into these Congregations, and not be
discerned, if the people were left alone to their own election: Medul. l. 1.
c. 39. s. 31. and Bell. ener, To. 2. l. 3. c. 2. s. 23.
Hence therefore our Divines dare not trust the people alone with the election
of an officer, but tells us they must have the counsel of the Presbyters, as
Dr. Ames, and Mr. Cartwright upon Act. 14.23. Rhem. Test. We do not only give
unto the Bishops (Scripture Bishops) Ordination, but also we make them the
chief, and directors in the election, says he, where is this practiced?

The third is that of Act. 14.23. (...), but certainly if we come to find out
the substantives to this participle, they must be the same which were
substantives to (...), and they were Paul and Barnabas: I know what is said
about (...) to defend the peoples election, as the custom was taken from the
Grecians; Dr. To. 4. l. 5. c. 14. s. 65.
Ames says (...) apud veteres idem sepe sonant, so it appears by that passage
of Basil quoted by Chamier to prove, that no private person may baptize (...),
but if it it be taken in that sense here, I do not know how it will pleasure
the people, unless we should go cross to the gramaticall construction.

The sum is, Zanchy in 4 praec. Calvin in loc. Piscat. in loc. obs. 2 Malcol.
in loc. Diodat. in loc. English Annot. etc expound it of the ordination of Paul
and Barnabas
there are no places brought for the peoples election, but those who are but
shallow, will find enough from the Texts to wrangle very hard, thouh I am for
the peoples election my self.

The Texts brought for Ordination are these:

Act. 6.6. When they had prayed, they laid on hands on them.

Act. 13.3. When they had fasted and prayed, and laid on hands, etc. they did
not separate Paul and Barnabas by Election, but Ordination.

Heb. 6.2. The laying of bands there, is meant of Ordination, say Pareus,
Dickson, Gillespie, Johnson. H. Jacob urges the Text, so that he would
overthrow all the Ministry of England, because (he said), they erred in the
Foundation, but he mistakes: Mr. Hooker proves Church Discipline to be a
fundamental point of Religion from this place thus: That which is a
fundamental point of Religion, that has Divine Institution, etc.

But Church Discipline is a fundamental point of Religion, Heb. 6.

Laying on of hands, being by a metonymy of the Adjunct, put for Ordination;
Ordination, one particular, put for the whole of Church discipline. So Mr.
Hooker.

1 Timothy 4.14. With the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: I know not
that this Text is questioned by our Divines, Mr. Hooker, and our New England
Divines from this Text conceive Imposition of hands in Ordination to be nearest
the rule, as I have quoted them before.

1 Timothy 5.22. Though some would have it of the admitting of penitents, of which
we have no example in Scripture, yet the common interpretation is of imposition
of hands in Ordination; this interpretation has other Scriptures to confirm
it, the other none.

1 Tit. 5. Ordain Elders in every City. I do not find that our Divines
oppose this place neither. What Sectaries carp at, I weigh not.

Romans Miscel. p. 37.
10.15. How shall they preach, except they be sent? Mr. Gillespy has, I
think, sufficiently cleared this Text. To be sure, he is not alone in his
interpretation. He likewise clears Ordination from that, Heb. 5.4. and first
verses.

Now since the Scripture is more copious, and plain in giving us examples, and
presidents of ordination of Ministers, then of the peoples election of
Ministers (though I grant something may well be drawn out of those Texts for
election against the Papists, besides the ancient course of the Church) I
cannot see any reason (if Scripture be our guide) why we should cloth these
Texts for Ordination with this logical affection of an Adjunct, and the other
with the affection of a formal cause: I should put most upon that, where the
Scripture is plainest and fullest, which I am sure in any man's esteem, that
observes those Texts with an impartial eye, is ordination.

Whether Ordination according to Scripture Light be not as essential to a
Minister as Election, Vind. chu. Cath. vis.
let any one judge. I think Mr. Hudson speaks Christianly, I prefer one
Divine Testimony, before ten arguments, and one good argument, before ten
humane Testimonies. But thus by clothing these Scriptures with these logical
affections, we have cried up election, and cried down Ordination, sectaries
take advantage of this, and hence come in our disorders. Ordination is a Divine
institution.

Ars est in rebus, and Logic is a general Art, so that we must give some
logical terms to Election and Ordination: I deny not this, only it is good to
bring Art to Scripture, and not carry Scripture to Art: If you ask, what
logical Arguments are there between a Ministers call, and Election and
Ordination? I said before these two constitute the form of a Minister, mutata
affectione, mutatur argumentum. Survey par. 2. page 68. in 4 praec.
what if I should answer, The Call is Totum integrale, Election and Ordination
are membra constituting this Totum; Thus I make Election to be essential, and
so I speak the highest of Election, though I must profess upon serious
thought, I rather question whether Election be essential, then I do
Ordination. Reverend Mr. Hooker indeed says, Ordination is but the approbation
of a person constituted in his office; but I am apt to think, Ordination does
most respect that inward, or Arcanam vocationem (as Zanchy calls it) which God
gives a man into the Ministry, fitting and qualifying of a man first for the
work (which none else can do) and giving him an earnest desire to the work,
God did there as it were, separate him inwardly, and now he does it outwardly
in Ordination. The particular Congregation does but give him a Call by their
election and subjection to him, to exercise this power among them pro hic and
nunc; That which moves me to think so is,

First, Churches may not choose whom they list (as do our Sectaries) but
persons qualified by God.

Secondly, the Scripture is so full and clear for Ordination over it is for
Election, though I deny not but Election may well be proved.

Thirdly, because a man may in some cases be ordained to the Ministry, when no
election of the people does precede, as I shall give instance afterward.

2. I argue thus:

If the election of the people does give the essentials to an officer, then may
a man elected execute all official power without ordination, and that commonly.

But no man may execute official power, and that commonly without ordination;
ergo, election does not give the essentialls; by the essentials here, he means
the formal cause, for as for the material cause, they cannot give that, and
we have but two causes that do dare essentiam, though all four do dare esse.

The consequence is clear, that they may execute, etc. without ordination, for
forma dat operari; but election gives the form, say these Reverend men, and
ordination is but an Adjunct, effects do not depend upon Adjuncts, for
operation the form gives that.

The minor, that they must not do so.

First, it is cross to Scripture presidents; if it were but a Deacon, Survey
part. 3. page 9.
says Mr. Hooker, yet, we see, he was ordained.

Secondly, It is cross to your own practice; it is frequent in New England to
have a man elected, and preach half a year, a whole year, yea, I know one
elected and preached two years to his people, and they maintained him all that
while, and yet all that time he never administered a Sacrament to his people,
but he and they, when they would partake of the Lords Supper, went ten miles to
the Church, out of which they issued, to receive the Sacrament; but this was
very hard and needless, if he had the form given him in election.

2. That which does nextly invest a man with official power, so as now he may
perform official acts, and before which he could not do so, that does give
essence, and consequently is not a mere adjunct.

But Ordination does nextly invest a Minister with official power, so as now he
may perfome official acts, which before he could not do; ergo,

The minor is clear by the Scripture examples.

Secondly, it is clear by your own practice, for those who for two years, and
more, stood only by election, but that while dispensed no Sacraments, when
they were ordained, did presently put forth all official acts.

The major, take all together, I suppose will not be denied; it does nextly
invest a man with official power, so as now he can perform official acts, and
before he could not do it; to say he had official power before given him by
election, but could not act it, is strange, frustra est illa potentia, etc. had
such a person continued twice as long unordained, he had not executed any
official power, nay, his preaching all that time was not esteemed preaching by
way of office.

Neither can it be said such preach only upon trial, for I now speak of
such, as had been tried before, nay, have been preachers in England long
before they went over, and such I am sure, as the people would willingly had
them ordained within one month after they had chosen them, they were so well
satisfied in the persons, whom they had chosen.

Fourthly, it is something that solemnity the Scripture expresses, that was in
the ordination of Ministers, prayer and fasting, and imposition of hands: we
read of no such solemnity in election, though people ought to pray before they
do choose. So it was in New England, this act was very solemn; when notice
was given of the ordination of an officer to the several Churches (as before
any ordination, all the Churches adjacent had notice given) it ran in that
form, There is an Ordination to be this week at such a Church, etc. for the
election of the person, we knew it long before, whom they had chosen, and
though the people did by their suffrage declare their election in this day of
Humiliation, yet they declared no more then the Country knew before; and I hope
you will not say, he was not elected before now, when first they chose him to
go with them, or come to them, and there continued a year or two preaching,
and they contributing to his maintenance; the same I might say in regard of
myself, I had as full an election of my people at my first coming, as was
declared at my ordination, and it was above two years, before I could get my
ordination in the place where I was elected (through the troubles of the times)
but all that while I did not conceive my self invested with official power,
till I was also ordained. The Scripture then expressing such solemnity in this
act, and not in the other, makes me think, this is not such a slight Adjunct,
and the other only essential.

Fifthly, I observe two Texts, which make me think ordination is not an
Adjunct, 2 Timothy 2. And the things which thou have heard of me among many
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who should be able to teach
others also. And that Text, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly upon no man,
neither be partakers of other men's sins etc. Timothy is a Church Officer, here
is a charge given to him to take heed, who comes into the Ministry, yea, he may
be partaker of other men's sins, if he have not a special care, whom he
admits into the Ministry, Nam si quem cito ordinaveris, qui indignus sit,
Communicare cum dicit peccatis qui non probatus fuerit ordinatus. Hieron in
Loc. v. Zanch. in 4 praec. p. 784. etc.
communicabis peccatis alienis, dum ille male docebit, aut vivet, says Gerhard
in Loc. He quotes also Leo Papa, Ep. 87. Ad Africanos Episc. Quid est cito
manus imponere, nisi ante aetatem maturitatis, ante tempus examinis, ante
meritum laboris, ante experientiam Disciplinae, sacerdotalem honorem tribuere
non probatis? Calvin also on the last words, Keep thy self pure; Ac si
dixisset, si quid perperam fiat ab aliis, vide ne ulla ex consensu, vel
approbatione contagio ad te perveniat. He referres it to Timothy, joining with
others in ordaining unworthy persons; now these texts do not belong to the
people, but Ministers, Officers, as was Timothy, which makes me think, that
what the Ministers do in examining, trying, ordaining, is more then the
peoples election; where do we find such things spoken to the people? Where
the greatest blame lies, for unworthy men coming into the Ministry, surely
there must lie the greatest power of admitting men into the Ministry, else the
blame is not just; but we see the blame is here laid upon the Ministers;
Paul no where writes to the people to commit the things they have heard, etc.
nor does he bid them not lay on hands suddenly, etc. he bad them indeed look
out men for Deacons, but that does not answer these texts; but if the great
stroke, the formal cause lie in the popular election, the Ministers may well
say, We do but ordain, we give but an Adjunct, the people did the maine Act,
they gave the essence, the essence being given, we must give the Adjunct, so
that there will be no blame left for the Ministers.

6 It should seem by a passage of Doct. Bellar. Ener. To. 2 l, 3. c. 2. S. 12.
Ames, that ordination is more then an Adjunct; Bellarmine had said, Vocatio
seu missio ministrorum non ad populum pertinet, sed ad Episcopos, etc. Doct.
Ames in his second answer has these words; Absurd ad modum distinguitur
vocatio ministri, ab ejus Ordinatione and electione, tanquam pars distincta;
neque in Scripturis, neque in antiquis Patribus alia vocatio ordinaria
memoratur, quam illa, quae exurgit, quasi Totum, ex electione and ordinatione:
what Totum the Doctor means, is plain by his words, Exurgit ex ordinatione
and electione, he means Totum integrale; so then ordination and election are
members of this Integrum, but all the members do give essence to the Integrum,
for Membra sunt symbola causarum essentialium. If so, then ordination cannot be
an Adjunct in respect of a Ministerial Call, for no Adjunct gives essence, but
follows the essence, supposing the subject complete in its essence before; if
then ordination does give essence, as well as election, this notion may hold,
else we should have an Integrum consisting but of two parts, and but one part
give the essence, which cannot be. This notion of a Ministers Call to consist
as a Totum ex electione and ordinatione, is much nearer the Rule, then to have
election alone to give the essence, and ordination to be but an Adjunct.

To this agrees Mr. Jacob [a man well known] There are two essential parts of
calling to the Ministry, Election, Ordination: Dr. Seaman quotes him, Ans. to
Diat, p. 64
so the Calling is a Totum. As for the Objections made against this, if
ordination be essential, what then shall become of our Ministers, whose
ordination is not legitimate? This I have spoken to before; and so, what will
you do in case a Church were so cast by providence, that they could get no
Officers to Ordain them an Officer? [for those who are of this opinion deny
the People power to ordaine] it is easily yielded by our Divines, that may be
done in an extraordinary case, which ordinarily ought not to be done. See
Rutherford, Due right of Presbytery, p. 187. Gillespie, Miscel. p. 34. etc. for
my part, I conceive then the Church fasting, and praying, for such a one, who
is elected, may do that which is aequivalent to ordination, though it be not
ordination formaliter.

The strong argument wherewith reverend Master Hooker proves, That Election
gives the Essentials to an Officer is this: One Relate gives the essential
constituting causes to another.
But Pastor and People are Relates; ergo.


The answer which Mr. Rutherford gives to it, viz. That ordination made him a
Minister before, and election does but appropriate him; This Mr. Hooker denies
to be any answer, because it supposes ordination to antecede election, which
is quite cross to the Scripture pattern, Act. 6.3.6. But (with favor) I
should humbly propound this question, This is not a bare supposition, for one
of the young Scholars does now preach to the Indians in their language.
Whether Ordination may in no case precede election? As now in this case,
Suppose one of the Scholars in the College, or suppose four, or more had
learned the Indian Language, and upon examination they were found to be
Ministerially qualified; suppose now the Presbytery should solemnly set apart
these young men to the work of the Ministry, and send them forth to preach
among the Indians, though the Indians have not elected them; here indeed would
the essentials of an Officer be given without election: I pray what breach of
rule would here be? If it be said, that the examples mentioned, Act. 6. and
Act. 14. show their election goes first; It is true indeed where there are
Churches, but here are none. Besides, Act. 13.3. when Paul and Barnabas were
sent out to preach among the Gentiles they were ordained, Though some deny
ordination here to be meant, yet many learned men affirm it.
when no election did precede; it is true, they were extraordinary Officers,
but what then? though this does not make those young men extraordinary
Officers, as were the Apostles, to have power in all Churches, yet I see not
any breach of rule in separating them to this work. If it be said, what need of
that Ordination, they may preach without? It is true, they may, but it is not
so comfortable, as when men are set apart by a Divine institution, there is an
authority more conferred; they may now baptize as they find success of their
Ministry (which was the old way) and shall not need be put to those troubles,
which now they are; Suppose laborious Mr. Eliot were not ordained, who should
baptize the Indians, called home to Christ by him? The first preachers, that
came into England were ordained, before elected here.
as suppose they should convert diverse Indians forty or fifty miles from any
Plantation, how shall these be baptized? what, shall they now elect, and
ordain these men? shall unbaptised persons ordain an Officer? where have we a
rule for that? then it seems all these must come to another Church, etc. forty
or fifty miles distant, to a Church also whose language they understand not,
and there be baptized by a Minister, whom they understand not, nor he them.
Here are many odd things fall in, cross to all Scripture presidents, but to
have these ordained and sent forth, is not cross to the Scripture presidents;
but if this be granted, then Ordination without election may give the
essentials to an Officer.

But further, here you say election gives the essentials, I beseech you, what
shall we do then with all those Scriptures, where ordination is held out so
fully? shall we omit them if they contain but an Adjunct? No, I am sure this
gracious Saint would not do so, his heart was so awed with high thoughts of
God, and his Word, that he dared not omit such a Divine institution, as those
Scriptures hold out; are then those six or seven Scriptures alleged for
ordination, as necessary to a Ministers Call, as those three which are brought
for election? if not, I pray give a reason, why some Scriptures should be less
set by, then others in this nature; Divine Authority we acknowledge in both:
but this was far from this reverend man's thoughts, for we see him prove
Church Discipline to be a fundamental point of Religion, from imposition of
hands; then if these Scriptures be equally as necessary to the constitution of
a Minister, that none must dare to omit them, we do but (...) in saying, that
ordination is but an Adjunct, etc. In constituted Churches, those, who omit
ordination, go cross to those many texts of Scripture, they follow not the
pattern, Some I know make little of election, but I would give it the most
and so sin against the second Commandment, as do they, who go cross to the
texts for election; and if election in an extraordinary case may serve without
a formal ordination, in the like case may ordination be without election, and
so we are even.

Further, in answer to the Argument, they are Relates; suppose I should say,
The election of the people gives a part of the essence to the Officer [for so
we considered the Call of a Minister to be a Totum arising out of election and
ordination, as Doctor Ames] it may be you will say, Relata, qua sic, do not
give a part of the essence, but the whole: here then will be our trouble,
whether we must bring Scripture to Logic, or carry our Logic to Scripture;
why then do not Ministers act officially upon bare election, as I said before?
But it is answered, their election gives the essence, as he is their Minister,
but ordination gives the essence, as he is a Minister; Mr. Hudson has spoken
closly to this. Vind. Chur. Cathol. vis^^ p. 138. ad. 151.
for ordination does invest a Minister with power to act beyond those, who have
called him, giving him an habitual power in actu primo to exercise and
perform the Acts belonging to his Office elsewhere upon a Call. I know indeed
our New England Divines, many (I say not all) as well as reverend Mr. Hooker,
are of another opinion, That a man is an Officer only to his own particular
Congregation, Relatorum mutuum est iter; but suppose I should say, A Minister
bears an habitual relation to the whole Church-Catholick visible, which some of
our Divines do now (I think) strongly prove; for my part I could never
swallow that notion, that a Pastor preaches only, as a Pastor, to those who
elected him, and to other Churches, as a gifted Brother. I dare boldly affirm
in the Apostles times, and the purest Ages next them, this notion was never
heard. As for this notion of a Catholic visible Church, I have not so much
busied my head about it till of late, and in my weak judgment I think, there
is so much said for it by Mr. Hudson (especially) and others, that I suppose it
will not easily be answered; that which made me lean to this opinion, was;

First; the light which his Scriptures and Arguments bring along with them.

2 I did not see by this notion, that the people were at all defrauded of what
is properly theirs, they may elect officers, they may have power to bring in
testimony, to exclude unworthy communicants, yea, or may object against any,
who should be admitted Church Members (if Churches were in their first
constituting) if they knew good reason why they should not be admitted; neither
are they debarred from consenting with their officers in excommunication; I
say, I do not see but these privileges may consist with this notion.

3. Mr. Huds. vind. 160. 161. Let particular churches walk as they should
regularly and they have as much liberty as they can desire; if they walk
irregularly See Mr. Cottons Keys 53.54. the second Impression.
I saw this notion did not cross that Position, which I have held out, viz.
That a particular Church organized, and walking regularly, may execute all the
power of the Keys within it self. I see not how a particular Church in this
case is at all hindered, for such a Church to walk irregularly, and to claim
exemption from all other Church Power, let those, that will, be members of such
Churches, I desire not to be so, but in such Churches, where there may be
means to help a wicked heart.

4. In this notion I saw a way how Congregations, that have no Ministers may
have Ministers ordained successively by officers (which I am sure was the old
way) yea, and officers may be judged per pares and excommunicated; I saw it
would bring in much order into Churches.

5. The practices I observed in New England that did imply such a notion as
this, did lead me much to it.

1. As that members of one Church did so frequently partake of the Sacraments,
both the Lords Supper, and Baptism in other Churches; one Pastor it may be
might administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to the members of five or
six Churches at one time; I know it is often said that a Mayor of one
Corporation, may administer justice to the members of another Corporation, if
they be under his jurisdiction, but he must not go to them, but similia ad
pompam, non ad pugnam. The Analogy between a Commonwealth, and the Church
will not hold, as I may touch afterward; but this I am sure, according to that
practice, that seven make a Church, they may admit five or six whole Churches,
and a Pastor chosen by none of them may administer the Sacrament to them all at
one time; but do we find whole Corporations go to the Mayor of another
Corporation for Justice? Mr. Philips Pastor of the Church in Water-town, while
Mr. Wilson Pastor of the Church of Boston was here in England, went to Boston,
and administered the Lords Supper to that Church (I was not then in the Country,
but I heard of it soon after, when I went over with Mr. Wilson) I know no sin
in that act. I thought to have given some Instances, how frequent this was in
the Primitive Churches, Vind. Cath. a 192 ad 196
for one Minister to act officially beyond the people, who elected him: But Mr.
Hudson (a man far more able) has set down those examples, which I would have
given, and many more, to whom I refer the Reader; Yea, it was ordinary for
the members of one Church to dwell one or two years; nay, six, or seven years
in another Town, and to partake of the Sacraments there as frequently, as any
of the members of that Church: Indeed of late the Elders have not liked this,
to have them live so remote from the inspection of their own officers, and
therefore have required such to join with the Church, where they dwell, this
is good and orderly: The letters also of Recommendation, which the Churches
make for the members, when they come over hither, requiring of the Churches
here what communion, counsel, or comfort they shall need, promising the
performance of the like debt to others, etc.

2. Also I saw, if a man were excommunicated out of one Church, he stood
excommunicated out of them all, but if a man be disfranchised in one
Corporation, another Corporation may receive him, and give him his freedom, if
they please, this shows there is something more in a Church, then in a
Commonwealth.

3. I saw they preached frequently in other Churches, but that it should be
only, as gifted brethren, this is so harsh to conceive: I pray what act does
the mayor of one Corporation do in another Corporation like this, that carries
authority in it? and that here we must distinguish of the Mayor, if he did this
at home, he did it as a Mayor authoritatively, but in this Corporation he does
it as a private man?

Further, they are Ministers or Pastors only to those, who elect, and the
fraternity only elect (where there is no officer) but there are diverse in the
several Towns, who are not joined to the Churches, so they did not elect,
then it seems they preach as pastors, only to those, who elected; but to the
rest of the Town, as gifted men; consequently, when God blesses their labors
to the conversion of any of those, they convert them (instrumentally) not as
Ministers of Christ, ordained, separated to that work, but only as gifted
men; yea, they never convert any, as Ministers, unless some of those, who
elected them be close hypocrites, and so they convert them; but ordinarily
those, who choose, are reputed godly already, and they are Ministers only to
them. Hence rises that vile notion, that some here have taken up, That Pastors
should preach only to the edification of the Saints, not to others.

4. I have heard since I came away, that when people have chosen an Officer,
and had no Officers to ordain him, that the Ministers of other Congregations
have done it, and the Confession of Church Discipline by the Synod of New
England, as also Mr. Hooker, Survey part. 2. page 59.
allow as much.

5. If one Congregation should prove pertinaciously scandalous, and heretical,
then though they do not formally excommunicate such a Congregation, yet all
the Churches in the Country would proceed to the Non-communion of such a
Church; and for all the Churches to express so much to such a Church, We do
all renounce communion with you, etc. this amounts to a censure, and is
equivalent to excommunication, containing in it all the effects, that appear in
excommunication, and so I should reckon my self as much excommunicated.

Mr. Buroughs says, They may by a solemn act in the name of Christ, Iren. 43.
refuse any communion with them, till they repent. They may declare in the name
of Christ, that these erring Churches are not to be received into fellowship
with any Churches of Christ, nor to have communion one with another in the
Ordinances of Christ; all this solemnly in Christ's name: Only some (may be)
will say, if this be an Ordinance of Christ, bring out the texts to prove this,
and then we shall see, if those texts will not bear it out, that the Churches
united thus in this censure, have not some authority over that particular
Church. If you go to the old polity, the Synedrion had power over particular
Congregations; if to light of nature, that will carry it; so that we must have
texts to decide this Question. For my part I must leave this to better heads.

Laying all together, the Churches seem to pactise, as if there were such a
Church.

Some things there are, which a little trouble me in this notion, that make me
not come off so roundly in receiving it; I question not the
Church-catholicke-visible, but I mean that it is one organicall body, but as
he said Veritas est temporis filia, so I believe Time will cleave out this, but
so much I see, as commands me to lean to that side.

I was thinking how dangerous this might prove; If the major part of the
Catholick-visible-church should decline, grow superstitious etc. other Churches
yet remaining pure, if they did not subject to the major part, what then? but I
saw inconveniences also on the other side, if a Congregation be so entire, that
they can elect, ordain, and are exempted from all power, then Arians,
Photinians, and all manner of Heretics may elect, ordain, etc. who shall deny
them? and besides, suppose the major part of Congregationall Churches should
decline, they would proceed to Non-communion of other particular Churches more
pure, and this is in a manner all one.

Further, If so, then if a Minister be removed from one Congregation to
another, or if his people should dye, he now is but a private person, and may
nor baptize, etc.

Hence also he must have another ordination when elected, and as often as he is
elected; I have not heard any there, but here allege it.
I confess I am not clear in the practice; I have searched to find what
Scripturall grounds there were for it, but I find none that these Reverend
Elders express; some have alleged in conference, that Act. 13.3. Paul and
Barnabas were ordained before, and now they are ordained again: but I find
Mr. Hooker saying, To. 4. l. 4. c. 24. s. 25.
here was no ordination to office at all. Survey part. 2. page 83. then I
perceive this will not warrant it; I find learned Chamier also of that
opinion, he says, So our English Annotations, and Calv. in Loc.
there was not properly any ordination into a new Ecclesiastical office, but
confirmatio missionis ad Gentes, ad quas nondum erant ex professo missi. The
Author of the Diatribe, says they were Ministers before, Act. 12. ult. but I
doubt that place will not prove it, for their fulfilling of their Ministry or
Charge there, may refer to C. 11.29, 30. the carrying of the relief to the
Saints at Jerusalem, which they might do, though no Apostles.

Here then we are in the dark what to judge of the text, if we rest only upon
men's opinions, there are many, who are for the contrary opinion, that here was
ordination, as I have named before, and I think those, whom Chamier quotes in
the twentieth Section of the former Chapter, conceive so, says he, Act. 13.
Imponuntur manus Paulo, and Barnabae mittendis ad Evangelii praedicationem in
Gentes, quid hoc est? Chrysostomus, Theophylactus Oecumenius, (...), ad
Apostolatum. Me thinks when I see here are the same acts done, which are done
at another Ordination, and there was no Ordination before, nor after, where any
more acts were done, why this should not be understood for Ordination, I know
not: A man to be separated to the work whereunto God called him (the work of
the Ministry) therefore to have prayer, fasting, and imposition of hands, this
was done at other Ordinations, when others were separated, though not to be
Apostles, as these were. I dare not say that these were not Apostles before
now, because I see so many Divines are of that opinion; for Barnabas we find
him made mention of, Act. 4.36. a Levite, and a man of excellent gifts, no
doubt, as it appears in Chap. 11. but to say he was an Apostle before, I do
not see it made so clear, Act. 13.1. There were Prophets and Teachers, as
Barnabas, so that Barnabas was one of them, but as yet not an Apostle, for we
know these are distinguished, Apostles, Prophets, etc. though I dare not
gainsay it, but impute it rather to my ignorance; for Paul, there seems to
be more said for him, Act. 9 for those that say Ananias his imposition of
hands upon Paul, was to separate him to the work of his Apostleship (for that
was one end of Imposition of hands) I dare not oppose Divines in this, Pareus
upon Gal. 1.1. when Paul says he was an Apostle not by man, thinks he points
to this Act. 9. but so he was not, though here he were first called to that
office for his call was immediate, as Chamier notes. To. 4. l. 4. c. 24
the 12. verse. says, He saw one in a vision, putting his hands upon him, that
he might receive his sight, and Ananias says, verse. 17. The Lord has sent me,
that thou might receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. Now if
that necessarily implies that ergo now he was ordained to his Apostleship, I
will not oppose, though it is possible that might be, though he were not yet an
Apostle; and this is somewhat different from others, that first Ananias alone,
secondly in a private house, (the question is who were with Paul in the house)
3. before he was baptized, should be ordained thus to be an Apostle, though I
cannot oppose much, for if Christ will have it, it is orderly enough; but if
they were men extraordinarily qualified, and not set apart to the office of
their Apostleship, then this place of Act. 13.3. may be interpreted of their
ordination to the office of their Apostleship. But suppose they were Apostles,
yet will this text be sufficient proof to maintain, that Ministers must be
newly ordained, if they remove from one particular Congregation to another? I
am sure there may be sufficient grounds, given, why they may remove; if indeed
the case were now, as then it was with the Gentiles [ Act. 11.19. The scattered
Disciples preached to the Jews only, but the G entiles had none sent among
them before in this manner, as those were sent (though Peter had been with
Cornelius) to be Apostles of the Gentiles) we might allow a second Ordination:
In Antiquity we do not find a second Ordination made mention of; something we
find to the contrary, as in that Tract of Cyprian, which though it may be
proved not to be Cyprians own, yet no doubt the Author may be as ancient as
Cyprian, written in his time, as Pamelius observes, neither does Goulartius
oppose him in it; De Ablutione pedum
Nemo sacros ordines semel datos iterum renovat, etc.

In the 67. Can. Apost. thus, Si quis Episcopus, aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus,
secundam ab aliquo ordinationem susceperit, deponiter tam ipse, quam qui ipsum
ordinavit, nisi forte constet ordinationem eum babere ab haereticis, etc.

Augustine speaking of Baptism and Ordination says, Contra permian l. 2. c.
13.
Vtrumque enim Sacramentum est, and quadam consecratione utrumque homini datur,
illud cum baptizatur, istud cum ordinatur; ideoque in Catholica utrumque non
licet iterari. To the same purpose he speaks in his book, de bono conjugali,
contra Jovin. c. 24.

From which places I gather it was not their manner to iterate Ordination;
indeed Scripture and strong Argument, is more then humane Testimony; but that
is not sufficient to say, Ordination is but the approbation of a person
constituted in his office, unless it could be proved that Ordination is no
more, which will easily be denied.

For our Modern Divines, I do not know any that maintain this iteration of
Ordination, in case a man remove from the place where he was first ordained.

The second Argument which Reverend Mr. Hooker uses to prove that Election
gives the essentials, etc. is this:

It is lawful for the people to reject a Pastor upon just causes, and put him
out of his office, ergo, it is in their power to Call him outwardly, and put
him into his office. By this Rejection, he means Excommunication, for so he
says afterward, This rejection cuts him off from being a member, etc. So
consequently it must needs make him cease from being an officer.

For that phrase of putting him into his office, if it be taken secundum quid,
and as to their officer, it has not been opposed, but if taken absolutely,
that their election makes him a Minister, (as Mr. Hooker does) that is it which
is denied.

As for the Antecedent, whether people have power to reject, (or if you mean
Excommunication, as it seems that is meant) that is another question; If there
be officers, and the people consent with them to cast out an officer,
pertinaciously scandalous and heretical, none doubt of that; but for the
people, being but a homogeneall body, to reject, i.e. excommunicate an ossicer,
will cost more to prove; had Reverend Mr. Hooker been alive, and saw what work
Church Members make here in England in very many Churches, I think it would
have caused him to bethink himself again of the peoples power. Something we
hear of, is done in a Church not far from the place where he lived, it
cannot be kept close; the light of that fire shines into England. For the
people to withdraw their subjection from such an officer, when there are no
other officers to join with them to excommunicate him, this is not denied, for
by their subjection to him, they made him their officer (that was some part) so
they may withdraw their subjection again.

But for Excommunication, Mr. Cotton says, It is one of the highest acts of
rule in the Church, Keys p. 16
and therefore cannot be performed but by some Rulers.

Mr. Buroughs says, Iren. 51.
If the Church be without officers, they cannot do that which belongs to
officers to do, they have no Sacraments amongst them, neither can they have
any spiritual jurisdiction exercised amongst them, only brotherly admonition,
and withdrawing from such as walk disorderly, for their own preservation.

So then here is a way for the people to preserve themselves though they cannot
excommunicate, and those Texts which Reverend Mr. Hooker brings, Matthew. 7.15.
and Phil. 3.2. do not prove the Church, as a homogencal body, to have power to
excommunicate their officers, though they may prove withdrawing, as also Romans
16.17. may prove it.

For the reason of his consequence, that staple rule, ejusdem est Instituere,
destituere, this maxim is turned every way, sometimes to prove the people may
excommunicate their officers, because they do Instituere.

The people in Election put forth no act of jurisdiction, therefore they may
put forth the highest act of jurisdiction, in excommunication; that there is no
act of jurisdiction in election, Doctor Ames acknowledges; Ovas rationales
possunt eligere sibi Pastorem, sicut sponsa eligit sibisponsum, non per
jurisdictionem aut Gubernationem sed potius per subjectionem. In the answer
before he affirms the same, and elsewhere: now what arguing is this, Bellar.
ener. to. 2 l. 3. c. 2. S. 19. Ib. S. 13.
to argue from subjection, to the highest Act of Jurisdiction? there was no
Authority in election, for electio non cogit [yet there is more power seen in
Civil elections, then Church-elections, as I shall touch afterward] but in
Excommunication, Authority appears. That also is denied, that the people do
instituere in constituted Chruches, and ordinarily what may be done in an
extraordinary case is no ordinary rule.

Here the maxim is turned, to prove that they may Jnstituere, because they can
destituere, but that will be denied, unless it be in the sense before
mentioned, i. e. in what manner, and how far they did instituere, i.e. by a
subjection to be their Officer, so they may withdraw their subjection from
him, and not own him to be their Officer; but to Excommunicate is more.

Quest. But suppose this be granted, that the Fraternity cannot
excommunicate;their Officer, but withdraw their subjection they may, you say,
and so he ceases to be their Officer; but what, is he now an Officer to other
Churches?

A. If the withdrawing their subjection, and rejecting be irregular, then
though they make him not their Officer de facto, [which he is still de jure]
yet his relation to the Church-Catholick visible does still hold, and another
Church giving him a Call, he has then power actu secund^ to administer the
Ordinances there.

For instance, the separatists cast off him, whom before they chose for their
Officer, supposing now, unless he will renounce his ordination he is no
Minister, does he therefore cease to be a Minister? how bufie some
Congregationall Churches are in withdrawing from their Officers, it is too
manifest, and many go to the Anabaptists, some turn Seekers, and-if all the
Members do thus, do they now cease to be Ministers?

2 But if the withdrawing be regular, the cause just, tried, etc. then that
which is sufficient ground for their withdrawing from him, is just cause, why
he should be excommunicated, being pertinaciously scandalous, or Heretical, as
Mr. Hooker supposes. If then the case of a Church be so, as they are cast by
providence into some remote place, where are no Churches besides to combine
with, then as their election of him, etc. [as I said before] may supply the
want of ordination; so this withdrawing in such an extraordinary case may be
Analogum to excommunication; but (say our Divines) if that Church be in
combination with other Churches, as now under a Classis, then the people shall
not need to stay there, in their withdrawing, but the case being judged and
tried by the Classis, they as they ordained him, when the people elected him
[the people consenting] do excommunicate him; then as a man cast out of one
Church, is cast out from the Catholic Church visible; so he who is cast out
from being an Officer to this Church, is cast out from being a Minister to the
Church-Catholicke visible.

For the other Argument, Burro. Iren. p. 50 Nort. resp. ad Apoll. p. 76, 78
the people conveying of power to an Officer; I know of no power the people
conveyes, only a designation of such a person to officiate in this or that
Society; but their power they receive from Christ immediately (as our
Congregationall men affirm) and hence they act in his Name, not in the name of
the Church.

5 The last answer I would give to this Proposal is this; if you conceive this
to be the only way of Reformation, then you must give the Ministers strong
proof that you may ordain; the Ministers will as much question your power to
ordain, as you question the Bishops power; so that we take it for granted you
are able to prove this, because you are so punctual, you say, for reforming by
the word. But of this practice I much doubt.

1 My ground is, because I find not one Iota of any such thing in the New
Testament.

Obj. Though you do not in the New Testament, yet in the Old Testament there
is, Numb. 8.10.

A. That place is the only resuge, but

1 It is commonly answered, That it is no fair arguing to go to the Old
Testament for one thing we would have, and when another comes to the same
Polity for an argument for their turn, now to debar them, and tell them
this is the old Polity; either leave out the Jewish Polity altogether, or
else give others leave to fetch Arguments from thence, as well as your selves.

2 If you will go to that Polity, why may I not as well prove, That the
Civil Magistrate may ordain, as well as Moses did Aaron, Levit. 8.?

3 But in that Church at that time there were Officers, Aaron and his sons,
thence (if that be a rule) it must follow, that though there be Officers in a
Church, yet the people may ordain, which I am sure those Divines, who are for
the peoples power in ordination, will never admit, being cross to their own
Principles, and Scripture.

4 We find in the eleventh verse, that after that was done, Aaron did wave
these Levites before the Lord, so that they were not complete till Aaron had
done his Act; whence I remember learned Master Cotton (in his discourse with
me) said, the peoples (...) there, did but answer to the peoples (...) in the
New Testament, and Aarons waving of them did answer to our (...): this clause
only I remember, but he had a larger answer, which I took from him in
discourse, by which, I remember, he did enervate this Objection, but I lost his
notes, with all my other helps, in my shipwreck.

These men call for precept and example, give you us one for this in the New
Testament, for you put us to that also, we must give you them out of the New
Testament; yea, Iwould go further, and desire them to give me one examplein
the first six hundred years after Christ, that ever the people did ordain
their Minister; now this is strange to me, that we can find no foot-step of
any such thing in the Scripture, nor in the Ages next, and yet that we should
make it so frequent, that they must ordain most frequently; for if every
particular Church be Independent (as now such a Church where I am in a small
Village, where the maintenance will not keep one Minister, and therefore to be
sure we cannot have more Ministers) then if the Minister remove, or dye, if
there come a new Minister, the people must ever ordain, thus it must be in
most places in England, few will be excepted; Justin. Mart. Apol. 2
and if every new election must have a new ordination, then it must always be
in the peoples power; In the Primitive times, there were Churches in Cities,
and Villages, but that the Christians in Villages did ordain their Officers, I
would gladly see that proved.

Ordination in those times was carried by a continued succession, the Apostles
ordained some Ministers, those ordained others, so downwards, but never by the
people.

Learned Dr. ^ell. ener. to. 2. l. 3. c. 2. s. 6
Ames seems to answer this; for whereas Bellarmine had said, In novo
Testamento ubicunque mentio fit manunm impositionis, semper ea Apostolis
caeterisque Episcapis, nunquam vero plebi tribuitur. The Doctor answers to
this; In Historia novi Testamenti, exempla babemus constitutionis Ministerii,
and ejusdem etiam conservationis, sed non restaurationis ejus aut reformationis
post generalem Apostasiam; omnia igitur quae pertinent ad plebem fidelem, in
tali casu non representantur ibi certis exemplis. However these words seem to
carry it, as if the Doctor did hold, that the people had this power, in a
general Apostasy, yet I question whether the Doctor would look upon the
Churches of England now under such a notion, neither would he deny the
ordination of our Ministers, to be valid for substance; but yet here one might
cast in something, in times of Reformation it may be, he says:

1 To Reform the Minister, is to Form it now as it was first formed.

But the Ministry was not at first formed by the people, ergo the Ministry
cannot be now reformed by the people.

I think the Major will not be denied, for the Minor, let any prove that.
According to this some will say, We must have Apostles, they formed the
Ministers first [we speak of ordination] I say, Non sequitur, unless you can
prove the Apostles ordained only qua Apostles; if so, I know not how those
Ministers, whom the Apostles did ordain, could ordain others, but to be sure
they did.

2 I defire a text of Scripture that holds out this, that the people may
ordain in a general Apostasy.

3 I doubt we shall rarely find such times, when there is a Society of godly
Christians to ordain, but there is some Ministers also; ordinarily there are
Ministers who teach this people.

4 It will be a question, Whether the Apostasy has been such as to require
this, for if Baptism was not repeated, but was thought valid, though
administered by a Romish Minister, because he was set apart to the work, and
kept the essence of the ordinance, why might not the ordination administered by
those Ministers hold as well?

2 A second ground that makes me doubt is this, it seems strange to me, that
Christ should appoint extraordinary officers, and make that a part of their
work, which the people themselves may do; Paul leaves Titus to ordain, but
what needs that? the people might well say, what need Paul leave Titus to do
that, which we can do our selves? Frustra fit per plura, etc. the Apostles
never needed but to preach, and convert the people to the faith, when they had
done so, they should have said, we have now done our work, brought you to be
believers, you may now elect an Officer, and ordain him your selves, the power
is yours, (only here would have been some trouble about baptizing) since then
I find, that this was part of their Office, then I cannot believe this is the
peoples work. Paul might easily have left us a president in some Society of
Christians, that would have quieted all our disputes.

More might be said (and is said by others) but I see our New England Divines
do almost yield it, by giving power to some Ministers to ordain in other
Congregations.

Since nothing can be drawn from Scripture, by precept, or example to prove
this, hence some would draw it out by Argument.

Those who can do the greater, may do the less.

The people can do the greater, viz. elect.

Ergo,

The minor is as freely denied, as it is affirmed, election is not the greater,
Scripture Light being judge. That was the design I doubt of making Ordination
but an Adjunct, for so indeed it would easily be granted, if election gives
the essence, and this only be an adjunct, the people may well ordain; Yea, and
in a Church, where there are Officers to Ordain, I know not why they, who give
the essence may not give the adjunct, why should an adjunct be proper to the
Officers only in that Church, when the essence does not belong to them, Mr. N.
W. Omnis quaestio non per aliud quod quaeritur babebit resolutionem nec
ambiguitas per ambiguitatem, sed ex elaris manifestis, etc. Irenae l. 2. c. 10.
further then as members, they join with the people? for so it seems the
Officers elect as members, and if you do elect only as members, why should you
not also ordain as members? for election is the greater, this the less.

The other Argument is, the people are the first subject of the power of the
keys. Ergo: But this is not easily yielded; it was a witty speech of him, Let
the Elders keep the keys, and the people the keyclog; it proves so too often.
What our Divines have said about it is well known. I think they have battered
this notion pretty well.

Augustine sometime is quoted for this opinion, but I am confident it was never
in Augustines thoughts; In Evan. Joan. Tract. 50. Tract. 124. I am mistaken, if
he be not rather for the Catholic Church by his words especially in the latter
place quoted, not mentioning what other Divines have spoken, there are two or
three things that have made me doubt of this, so as I never did thoroughly close
with this notion, when I was but a private member of a Church.

1. That which is the primum subjectum, is the proprium subjectum: none doubt
of this, Proprium subjectum est quod cum suo accidente reciprocatur. Animal est
proprium subjectum sensus, homo risus, hence we say, omnis homo est risibilis,
and omne risibile est homo, this is Axioma (...): but every Axiom that is
(...) does include in it the rule (...), where the predicate is true de omni
subjecto, omni loco, omni tempore, this is true of animal and sensus. So it
must be true of the power of the keys and the Fraternity, Omni tempore; but if
we find the power of the keys exercised before there was a Fraternity, then
there was some other subject before the Fraternity; When Paul came to Corinth,
he preached Authoritative, Ergo there was the power of the keys in some
subject, but the Fratemity was Non-ens at this time, how then could they be the
subject?

Those, who are the effect of the power of the keys, are not the first
subject, that is clear.

But the Fraternity is the effect; it was so in all the Churches, which the
Apostles gathered, and is indeed to this day. This was one Argument troubled me.

So that which is primum, is immediatum subjectum: but how can this be? since
Mediantibus Apostolis, and so now Mediantibus Ministris the Fraternity is made:
The elector is before the elected: its true of Christ, who elected the
Apostles, and gave to them the keys, from whom by a continued succession of
Ministers still the Fratemity was made; but had not the power of the keys had
some effect, there had not been a Fraternity to choose an Officer: though they
are now in time before him, whom they now elect, yet they were not before him
or them [qua fratres] who by the power of the keys in the ministry made them
capable to choose an Officer; therefore the power of the keys was in some
subject before them.

Besides election is no part of the power of the keys, Doma: log. p. 461.
Keckes. syst: log. l. 2. c. 20.
therefore to argue, the people elect, ergo they are the first subject, etc. is
fallacia non causae procansa [causae nomen hic usurpat ur pro quo vis
argumento] taking that to be a part of the power which is not.

2 If so, that which is primum, est absolutum subjectum, cui accidens absolute
sint ulla limitatione partis inharet: sic animal est absolutum subjectum
sensus, adeoque visus and auditus; ideoque tantum animal dicitur recte videre
and audire: oculus non videt proprie, quia non est Animal: quando ergo oculus
dicitur videre, id non subjective intelligendum est, sed instrumentaliter, quod
animal videat per oculum. To apply this to our case, the power of the keys is
in the whole body, so the power of preaching etc. there is the power subjective
and proprie; so that if we ask who preached to day, we must answer, properly
and subjectively the people preached, but instrumentally only the Pastor
preached; so for the administration of the Sacraments, this is very harsh;
hence again, because animal videt, if a man dye, or beast, the eye which was
the instrument of seeing, excepting it may be the dissipation of the animal
spirits, else as an Organ, it remains entire in the coats, humors and optic
nerves, but yet it sees not.

So it seems a Minister, in case his body, the people, should dye, he being
but the instrument of their preaching, he can preach no more: this is strange;
how do they preach out of their own bodies ordinatily? If the men dye, and
only women and children be left, the officer has lost his preaching, and
cannot preach to them authoritatively, because the Fraternity, in whom the
power was subjective, is dead.

3 I have observed, that seven have been esteemed enough to make a Church;
suppose now one of these should offend another of the seven, he must deal with
him, if he will not hear, he must take two more, here are four of the seven,
if he will not hear them, tell the Church, that is, the three left, the rest
are parties.

Some to prove that Mat. 16. To thee I give the Keys, must be meant the
Fraternity, say, that To Thee, here is the same with Mat. 18.

But this is somewhat doubted, for that in Mat. 18. may well be meant of a
particular Church, The visible Church is here meant says Mr. Hoober Sur. p.
278.
but in this place the Church must be meant of the Catholic visible Church:
for it must be such a Church as must not fail.

But particular Churches may, this or that particular Church I mean.

2 But suppose i the so, yet why must that Mat. 18. be meant only of the
Fraternity? Tell the Church, i. e. the Fraternity, if he will not hear the
Church, i. e. the Fraternity, where are the Officers, are they no body? one in
New England would needs know of me, why they should tell the Ministers of it,
when as it is, Tell the Church, not the Ministers? this indeed would confirm
it, and here we should have brave order.

Mr. Vind. vin. p. 6.
Cawdry upon that Text seems to have a good Argument, since that the Kingdom
of Heaven is there meant the Church, the keys are given to Peter as
distinguished from the Church; It is not a reasonable construction (says he)
of the Text to say, I give to thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that
is, of the Church, and to mean, I give to the Church the keys of the Church;
whence he concludes, they were given to Peter, and so to the Officers for the
Church, as the keys are given to the Steward for the family. This Argument is
worth the Answering.

Object. The strongest Objection to me is this, the first subject takes up the
whole adjunct, for there is a reciprocation; therefore the Presbytery cannot be
the first subject, for the keys are not reciprocated with them; instance is
given in Election, Admission of Members, Discipline, which cannot be performed
without the Fraternity.

Answ. If reciprocation be so required, etc. then this will as well deny the
people to be first subject, for reciprocation cannot be with them; for
Preaching, Administration of Sacraments, Government etc. to be sure the people
cannot do; there will be more said for the Presbytery; they actually choose,
they actually admit, they actually govern and exercise discipline, they have
both the Power and the Act: but for the people they cannot do any Act which
belongs to the Officer, nor have so much as the power of it: we may see by
this, where the power will chiefly reside: to say, the Fraternity, though they
have not official power, yet they have power to choose an Officer, and so
consequently, they are the first subject, this is very unsatisfactory, to have
the Adjunct reciprocated at the second hand, it being denied before that they
have the Adjunct; the reciprocation between homo and animal risibile is not at
second hand

2 This does not at all shake me, but I stand on my ground still, conceiving,
that the Church or ganized is the first subject of the power of the Keys, not
that I make the people equal sharers in the power of the keys with the
Officers, but what I mean I shall express afterward.

3 Yet am I not satisfied (nor could ever be) that whatever belongs to the
Church must needs be included in the power of the keys; Election, I look at it
only as Potest as circa claves, but not to be a power of them.

The Text tells us the use of them, what thou bindest, what thou loosest, to
bind and to loose is the use of them: but what is this to the election of an
Officer? when as he may refuse their Call, or the Call of any Church? how do
they loose him or bind him? Electio noncogit.

For the other two things, Admission, and Discipline: Those Divines, who say,
that Baptism makes men Members of the Church, if they can prove this strongly,
they will carry away the former, scil. that the people have nothing to do in
Admission of members, for baptism makes members; now to this I cannot yet
fully agree, there might be much said for the contrary. I conceive the New
England Divines have spoken well to this besides the opinion of M. Cartwright,
Ans to 32. Qu. p. 12.
and Ames, who join with them.

So, those Divines who affirm the Presbytery may excommunicate, renitente
plebe, if they can prove it strongly, they will carry away the latter, and then
indeed its clear, the people have no interest in the power of the keys; but
this neither can be admitted, and the stream of Divines oppose this.

But though I yield the Ministry cannot orderly do these things without the
people, yet I deny the people do these things in the same way and order, that
the Ministry does them: And therefore Quaere, Whether it be proper to say, the
people has any power of the keys?

For Admissions, this will be more troublesome, because we find no examples of
the Churches where the people did show their power in Admissions: for that act
of Paul, Act 9.26, 27. Whether it be sufficient to prove it, I leave it to
consideration; they did not admit, why? they were afraid of him, the text
says, being a persecutor, then no wonder the Apostles, as well as the people,
were afraid of him; the 27 verse says, Barnabas carried Paul to the Apostles,
not to the people, which would imply, the Apostles carried the stroke in
Admissions.

Further to search into this, let us suppose the Ministry of the Church of
Corinth preach, an Infidel hear them, the man is so far convinced of the
vanity of his Heathenism, and danger of his sinful lusts he wallowed in, and so
far convinced of the necessity of that Doctrine which he hears, that he
renounces his Idols, reforms his conversation, etc. now he comes to the
Ministers to signify what is done, and what he desires, to be received into
the Church, and be baptized, being willing to give up himself to that
doctrine: the Ministry [instrumentally] has wrought this; now what power has
the people here to hinder this man? is it at their choice whether they will
admit him or no? when the Officers see what effect the preaching has had, here
being a Disciple made, shall they be hindered from baptizing him? what power have
the people here? what shall they go first and examine him? I know not where
examination was ever given to the people; must he make his profession of faith
before all the Church, as Victorinus that brave Rhetorician? Aug. Con fes. l:
8. c: 2.
we find it was not their course to do so with all those whom they admitted,
for many did only to the Presbyters: This power indeed the brethren have, that
if any know this man to live in a known way of wickedness, that cannot
possibly stand with any hopes of faith, to come and give in witness against
such a person to the Officers: I suppose this will be yielded, and the Officers
would not now baptize him. But what power more they have, I know not; they see
his conversation, and can testify of that, but it were strange that it should
be left to the peoples choice, whether they will admit a man or not, when the
word has had so much power, and they cannot bring in sufficient objections to
the contrary. Put case the major part of the members of the Church had drunk in
some errors [that a major part may do so, has been proved in our time] and
they will not give their consent to the admission of the man, if they find him
not of their opinion [commonly those who have drunk in error, use to look
untowardly upon those who are contrary] now the Ministers have no power to
admit this man, nor baptize him, though they see he has right to it. But I
leave that.

For Discipline, I conceive renitente plebe, the Eldership should not
excommunicate: it is in vain to do so indeed, if the people will hold
communion: but yet this does not argue that the people do here act, as does
the Eldership; For the Eldership does it Authoritative, the people by a popular
consenting with the Officers, that the person be excommunicate: the people do
act here obedientially to their Officers, therefore a vaste difference is
between them. I remember a passage of Mr. Hookers in the Assembly of Divines;
When a case is brought to the Elders, the Elders having searched all things to
the bottom, now the Elders bring the case to the Fraternity, and lay it down
clear before them, this is the case, and this ought to be done, now (said he)
the people are bound to obey us, as well as when we preach. And it is clear,
for as in preaching they discover the mind of God, so in this sentence they
declare the same concerning this act. Keys 15
2 Cor. 10.6. We have in readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your
obedience is fulfilled. Mr. Cotton says, the Apostles revenge of disobedience
by way of reproof in preaching, does not follow the peoples obedience, but
proceeds, whether the people obey or not; it was therefore their revenge by
way of censure in Discipline, which they had in readiness, when the obedience of
the Church is fulfilled in discerning and approving the equity of the Censure,
which the Apostle, or Elders have declared to them from the word.

That phrase, discerning and approving of the equity, needs a little more
clearing; but I leave them: However this Reverend Divine seems to refer that
obedience unto the will of Christ, by the words going before his exposition, yet
that hinders not, but it may in some sense be applied to their officers [who
also obey Christ] for that phrase is not strange to have people obey their
officers, Heb. 13.17. O bey your Rulers, there may be some thing in it, not
only obey your Teachers, but Rulers; when they rule, as when they preach, Mr.
Norton expressing, Resp. ad Apol. p. 67.
as I conceive, how the brethren act with the Eldership [for so I remember it
was in his Tables which I had, and had some thoughts to have Printed them, but
in that great fire, when Colchester was besiedged (having lent them to a
friend) they were burnt, as I hear) Parts judicii in rebus jurisdictionis,
quales sunt fratrum examinatio, dijudicatio and sententiatio Causae per modum
obedientiae, Presbyterio debitae, 2 Cor. 10.16. and cap. 2.9.

Mr. Gillespie, also besides his own opinion gives reasons, Aar. rod, p. 289,
etc.
and alleges diverse Divines, who interpret this place of Church censures: and
these words, when your obedience is fulfilled, gives him one ground for his
interpretation: for as Estius and Novarinus explain the Apostles reason, it is
in vain to excommunicate all such as are worthy of excommunication, when there
is a general renitency in the Church: but still we observe the people act
obedientially to their officers, that they did not at that time, was their
fault.

Besides, if excommunication be the highest act of Rule, and therefore cannot
be performed where Rulers are not, as says Mr. Cotton: and if a homogeneall
body can express no spiritual Jurisdiction, but only withdraw, as says
Master Buroughs, then the people having Rulers, are not now made Rulers, nor
have the power of jurisdiction; there is indeed jurisdiction exercised among
them by reason of their Rulers, to whom they consent and obey.

Government is proper to the Presbytery, says acute Mr. Norton, Resp: ad Apol.
p: 65 67:
and shows under seven particulars how the Presbyters govern in Church
affairs, and so in this exercise of Discipline: if so, then the people are
governed in this act; how then does a people governed, act in reference to
Rulers governing, but by way of obedience? So that to me there appears a
vaste difference between the power of Discipline, as it is in the hands of the
Presbytery, and as in the hands of the people, though the Ministers cannot
excommunicate without the people.

I speak a few words to this point here, because I would spare the labor in
another place.

As for the Analogy drawn from the civil power, the people are the first
subject of civil power; Ergo the Fraternity is the first subject of Church
power; For the Antecedent I leave that, but the consequence I should deny,
there is a great disproportion.

First, The People are not the effect of their Magistrates, or follow after
them (as the people of Israel were not of Saul) but the Fraternity, qua sic, is
the effect of the Ministry: The Apostles converted, and after them the
Ministers converted; Converting is but to make the people such, for whom the
power of the keys is given:

Secondly, There is some thing in this; In Corporations, if the people have
elected a man to be an Alderman, or Mayor, if he refuse it, there is a Fine set
upon him; some have been fined 20 li. some more according as the Corporations
are: but if the body of the people will choose an Officer, and he will refuse
it, what then? I know no kind of Church act that reaches him: this shows there
is something more in civil then Church power,

Thirdly, The people do give to their Magistrates a power to make Laws, etc.
for their good; but the Church gives no power into the hands of her Ministers,
but they have all their power immediately from Christ.

Fourthly, Hence the people may limit their people, or enlarge it: But the
people cannot limit, nor enlarge the power the Ministers have.

Fifthly, We see the Magistrates Act in the name of the people [in the name of
the Commonwealth of England] but Ministers do not act in the name of the
Church, but Christ; as says Mr. Buroughs and Mr. Norton before quoted.

More might be produced, but I content my self with these; and though that
maxim be received, Salus populi, Suprema lex, yet it hinders not but the
people may save themselves, though they be not the first subject of the keys.
Mr. Richardson, whom Dr. Ames and Mr. Manuscr: Tables.
Hooker, honored much, and follow much, places the power of binding, and
loosing in the Governors, not in the people.

This discourse I have run into by answering to the first Proposal, which
being the maine, I have bestowed more lines about it; the rest I shall run over
quickly. Come we now to the second.

The second Proposal may be this; The second Proposal. No Congregational
Divine dares put the form of a Church in the explicitenesse of the Covenant,
but these do. Survey, pare first, p. 47, 48.
We would have an explicit Covenant in every particular Church, this we judge
to be the form of a Church, and we cannot join with a Church without it.

A. Many people have taken up this by the end, a Covenant is the form of a
Church, understanding it of an explicit Covenant, but they know not what a
Form is; if they did, they would be more wary then they are. But let us hear
what Congregationall men say, from whom you take up this word.

1 Mr. Hooker says, an implicit Covenant preserves the true nature of the
true Church, etc. and an implicit Covenant is, when in their practice they do
that, whereby they make themselves engaged to walk in such a society,
according to such rules of government, which are exercised amongst them, and so
submit themselves thereunto, but do not make any verbal profession thereof.
Thus the people in the Parishes in England, when there is a Minister put upon
them by the Patron, or Bishop, they constantly hold them to the fellowship of
the people in such a place, attend all the Ordinances there used, and the
Dispensations of the Minister so imposed upon them, etc. by such actions, they
declare that by their practices, which others hold forth by public profession;
thus far Mr. Hooker, so Mr. Norton, Resp. ad Apollon. p. 22.28. so the
Confession of Church Disc. by the Synod of New England.

2 You have a National Covenant, a solemn one, I think it is strong enough
if you observe it well: there is that which answers the Covenants you find
made in Scripture.

To say, by that we are made a National Church; this were very silly, yet I
think there may be so much said for a National Church that will not readily
be answered. But suppose the Churches in New England [which God forbid] should
decline, etc. If the General Court should make such a Covenant to pass
through all the Churches in the Colony, would it make a National Church? they
would conceive their Churches still to be Congregationall.

3 I make no doubt but you should have found (if you had but a little patience)
that when the Ministers had come to set up Discipline, they would have brought
their people under some stricter tie, to subject to Church Discipline, I have
heard some speak of it; they would have found it too laxe, that implicit
consent to make people put in execution that, Matthew. Read his first chapter, in
some Churches he says, there was Solennis protestatio subjection is, sub
disciplina Ecclesiastica. p. 13.
18.15, 16, etc. as some have found before them; and it was not without some
cause that Apollonius sets down that, as one thing that is required of a
Churchmember, and whom they will admit to the Lords Supper, That he shall
promise to subject himself to Discipline; he tells us, thus it was concluded
upon in several Synods, he mentions fix Synods. I have found the experience of
this so already, that I should think my self in a poor case to exercise
Discipline without it; the people feel some stricter tie upon their spirits,
and I thank God I have known good effects by it.

4 If you will needs go closer do, you may enter into a close Covenant, as
did those worthy Christians in Wetherfield, in that old Prophets days, who
sets down their Covenant in his seven Treatises; but they did not separate as
you do. Excel those Christians if you can.

The third Proposal; The third Proposal.
We would have no Church Members but visible Saints.

A. This were a thing to be wished indeed, and that I believe which the
Ministers would be glad, if they could attain it; I gave you instances before
out of their Books, and it is that which they would put forth their power to
effect, so far as the state of the Kingdom is capable of, if once they were
invested with power to exercise Discipline; and indeed as the condition of
England stands, there is need of a Civil Power to back them; the case is not
now, as in the Primitive times.

2 You must put a difference between Churches new erecting, and these in
England, which have been Churches so long; when I raise a house new from the
ground, I may then do as I please, but if I be mending of an old house, I must
do as well as I can, repair by degrees.

3 What would you have done with all the rest, Excommunicate them? that is a
piece of work indeed; and besides, there is a great deal of work to do
before we come to that, it may be many will not be found contumacious; nay you
see, they do separate them from the Lords Supper, and diverse begin to look
something more narrowly to baptism.

4 How many corrupt Members do you find in the Church of Corinth and Galatia?
for the latter, what a change was there made in their affections toward Paul?
Gillesp. Aar. rod. 287.
who close did they cleave to those Judaizing Zelots? who turned them away
almost to another Gospel, insomuch that though Paul wished those Seducers were
cut off, Gal. 5.12. i. e. by Excommunication, yet he did not peremptorily
command it, renitente Ecclesia. The Church of Corinth had drunk in vile
errors, the women it should seem (disorderly) would speak in the Church; and
for Members, 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. you may conceive by the sins there mentioned,
what they were many of them, Chapter 13.2. Aar. rod, 289.
Paul indeed says, he will not spare them. This place Master Gillespie thinks
gives light to, Chapter 10. and 6. When your obedience is fulfilled; our Ministers
debarresuch from the Supper.

5 If you did not thus separate from them, they might do more toward the
reforming of their Congregations, but you weaken their hands, as I shall touch
hereafter.

6 But what do you mean by visible Saints, what is required, or how would you
judge of one? what, would you have them real Saints? I suppose you do not
think so, cross to the texts, the Floor, the Drag-net, etc. what would you
have such, as by the exactest scrutiny that can be made, we may judge to be
Saints really? I defire your Texts for this. Did the Apostles do thus when
they baptized any? surely they must either judge by an Apostolical Spirit, but
we see they were mistaken if they did so; or else they must stay a good while
and try men, winter them, The Churches after took more time, but they did not
come to that exact scrutiny, etc. Bell. ener. to. 2. l. 2. c. 1. s. 5.
and summer them (as we say) before they did judge of their Saint-ship; but
this they did not do, they baptized them quickly; such Members as the Apostles
admitted, we may, or else give us texts to the contrary. I have touched this in
another Tract, desiring, that those who are for such strictness in Members,
would give us their grounds; remember Doctor Ames, Falsum est internas virtutes
a nobis requiri, ut aliquis sit in Ecclesia quoad visibilem ejus statum.

The fourth Proposal; We would have power in admission of Members, and in
Excommunication.

Ans. For admission of Members:

1 When you bring proof out of the Word, what power Church Members have
exercised in admission of Members, I hope you shall find none shall debar
you from having that power.

2 When there are Members to be admitted, who never were Church Members, you
shall find it granted, but that is not our case here; if you would have power
in admission to Sacraments, you have that liberty given you, to bring in
Testimony for, or against; and if you bring in sufficient proofs against
persons, you shall find they shall not be admitted; thus must you do in any
Church whatever. If any good Christian shall come, and give in testimony for
another, the Minister will gladly receive it.

For Excommunication, the Presbyteriall Ministers will not Excommunicate
without the peoples consent; you shall have liberty [first asking leave of the
Minister, who is the Ruler, and Mouth of the Congregation] to propound any
question soberly, and gravely, which you would have cleared, before you
manifest your consent, if there be any thing dark to you, that so you may
clearly obey them [for I hope you do not look to be equal with Officers in
this Act] and I hope this is more then ever you saw practiced in old times. Now
that the Ministers will not Act against the people [I suppose they mean the
Body of the People, for if they mean, unless all the people consent, I would
not consent to the Presbyteriall Ministers in this, that some few particular
persons, guilty it may be themselves in some degree, shall obstruct the
sentence, when the sounder and major part of the Church consents] hear their
own words.

In the great Censure of Excommunication, Land. vindic. p. 25
we say, That it ought not to be executed against the consent of that
particular Congregation, to which the party to be Excommunicated belongs; The
fifth Propos.
this is full.

The fifth Proposal; We would have the liberty to Prophecy, as 1 Cor. 14, etc.

A. What do you mean by Prophesying, or Prophets? If you mean such Prophets
as we find in 1 Cor. 14. and 12. etc. you have two things to prove:

1 That these were Prophets in no Office.

2 Rutherf. Div. right, presbyt. p. 271. Gillesp. Mis. c. 5
That the gift of Prophesying there mentioned was ordinary, and perpetual; of
the Presbyteriall Divines you have two men [there may be more for ought I know]
to grapple with, that have strongly debated this question, and have answered
all that is brought. Of the Congregationall Divines I find two men of no small
worth, who though in some extraordinary case in places where Ministers are not
to be had, if there be any able Christian fit to speak, they would grant such
a liberty in a regular way; but for the places you bring to prove that it is an
Ordinance of Christ for private members to prophecy, Keys 20.
they oppose this: Mr. Cotton says, That place 1 Cor. Resp. ad Apol. p. 125.
14.31. does not speak of ordinary private members, but of men furnished with
extraordinary gifts, he proves it afterward. Mr. Norton says, Prophecy,
concerning which Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 14. is not to be understood of any
ordinary and perpetual gift whatever, much less of an ordinary and perpetual
gift of private brethren, and that he proves.

I intend not to lanch forth Into this Controversy, for others have answered
all those arguments that are brought; but let me say this, When I considered
these places, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers. The 29. verse, Are all Apostles? are
all Prophets? are all Teachers? In the same order he reckons them. So Ephesians.
4.11. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. So Act. 13. 1. There was in
the Church at Antioch certain Prophets and Teachers, as Barnabas, etc.
Prophets have ever their place next Apostles, and are ranked before Teachers;
these texts are to me strong proofs, that these Prophets were no such private
men as ours, nor their gifts ordinary; those that would be such must needs take
place of their officers, you are before them, for these Prophets are always
placed before ordinary officers. That 1 Cor. 13.2. and 14. v. 22.30. these
places well considered will prove it was no ordinary gift.

But I would leave that way of arguing? and would argue against it from what I
have observed about it.

1. It is needless, what need is there of it? I have observed that the
ordinary time when these Prophets go to work, is after the Ministers have
done preaching: what need is there of these men now to go to Prophesying? why
do they not go home and meditate upon the Sermons they have heard, and call
them over in their families? but (for sooth) now the brethren must go to
Prophecy.

2. It is not only needless, but it is dangerous, Satan has a design in it.

First, to undermine the power of the word preached, these persons who have
heard two Sermons before, run now to Prophesying, where is the word the people
heard before? Tortul. has an observation of the heretics then, Nec suis
praesidibus reverentiam noverunt and hoc est quod. schismata apud hereticos
fere non sunt; quia cum sint, non apparent schismata. Praescrip. adv Hae^^t.
This is very true of these kind of people, so far as I have observed among
most of them.
this fine thing has put out that.

Secondly, his design is to blast the Ministers, for I have observed,
Ministers, nor their preaching is in any request with this generation, and the
people are more taken with their prophesying, being a pretty new conceit, then
they are with their officers preaching; be it never so solid.

A near friend of mine (yet living) a Divine well known traveling into
Germany, coming home in Holland he went to hear Mr. Ainsworth, who preached a
very strong Sermon (the person was able to judge) while Mr. Ainsworth was
preaching, my friend observed the carriage of his members, it was, he thought,
not becoming the Ordinance (I will not write all he told me, left I should be
thought to write out of malice) very dull and dead that was the fairest; when
Mr. Ainsworth had done, they now were to prophecy; my friend said he observed,
that those, who sat so dully and unreverently, while their Pastor was
preaching very excellently, now their turn came to prophecy, rose up, and
were so perke and lively, that he could but note their carriage. The word
preached by officers, though never so able, does little good, where this trade
is driven.

3. I have observed, order with peace and unity, is seldom or never kept,
where these persons flourish: one thinks his parts are as good as his
brothers; this man he carps, and finds fault with his brothers doctrine; then
come differences in, and heart-burnings; this man would be thought to be the
chief, and most called upon to exercise, another likes not that, jangling,
discord, breaches, I have known to be the fruit of this good work.

4. I have rarely known any of these persons that were humble men: the bones
of pride, and selfe-conceitednesse have stuck out shamefully in the chief of
those, whom I have known; what others are, whom I have not known, I cannot
tell, but the most gracious, savoury, humble persons that I have known, though
as able as those who are so forward, yet they cannot be brought to this
practice, but content themselves in improving what talents they have otherwise.

5. I do not find private men to be so able, as these suppose themselves to
be; some particular persons, Christians of good experience, and ripe
understandings, and some that are scholars may be able to speak to some
points very well; but most what our Prophets deliver, either vile errors, as I
have known, or else wrong the Scriptures very grossly many times: This man does
use to prophecy much, this is commendable in him that he is adverse to other
errors. I have known other Christians besides him, very eminent and sound yet
give gross interpretations of plain Scripture.
One of late was handling that Text of Cornelius, Act. 10. that he was a devout
man, prayed, gave alms, etc. he cast this gloss upon it, that Cornelius was
but as our devout Papists, that use also to pray, and give alms; this is
strange that Cornelius was no other then such a one, does the Scripture set
such commendations upon such a person? I doubt the man did not well know what
it was to be devaut in Scripture account; the next words, fearing God, might
have helped him to understand what manner of one he was. Being at London within
less then a year, I heard there was a meeting of Christians, and the brethren
were to prophecy, and it seems it was their manner to speak ex tempore after
the first had spoken; I suppose they would imitate that text, 1 Cor. 14.30. If
any thing be revealed to another that sits by, etc. I had no great stomach
to go, yet I thought I would go hear, supposing that these persons who cry up
prophesying, had something more excellent then other Ministers, especially
being such adversaries to Black-coats: The text was 1 These. 5. Quench not the
Spirit; the next words, Despise not prophesying, were brought in be sure, and
charged home, that people should observe that, as one way of quenching the
Spirit, I believe they spoke ex tempore: Learning, and Ordination they were
cried down; the glorious new lights brought in by the illiterate men were
cried up; but such a mess I had, that should our poor Country Black-coats
prophecy no better, we should teach our people to despise prophesying.

These things I have observed in this new invented Ordinance: the sum is,
when you bring us the men that are qualified for such a work (such as that
worthy and honorable man Mr. Winthrop, who was a solid man, a good scholar,
and natural Philosopher, fitted to speak excellently, and did sometimes,
before Mr. Cotton went over to New England, when the officers desired him, but
I never heard whether he did, after Mr. Cotton came) and can prove those texts
to be meant of ordinary gifts, and the Prophets to be persons out of office,
then we shall give you leave to Prophecy, but not after other Sermons preached
by your officers.

The last proposal is this, The last proposal.
We would have liberty of Conscience.

Answ. Iren. p. 30.
Mr. Buroughs says, The Devil uses to take sanctuary in conscience, hoping
there men will be tender; but enquiry is to be made, whether he be indeed got
in there, or in some other room of the soul. What that worthy man has spoken
to this point, I refer the Reader to Chap. 6. of his Irenicum.

Because conscience is so often pleaded, and made the Asylum for every
opinionist, let us search when a man may be judged by Christian rules to be
swayed by conscience.

First, I would look that such a man be one, that according to the best
observation that can be made of him, has a renewed conscience: I must find
him to be uniforme, else I weigh not what he says about his conscience. There
will be infirmities, but then they are but infirmities, and those truly
lamented.

Though a man have a renewed conscience, Posito abstracto and concreto non
statim ponitur modus agendi.
yet I will not say that a true renewed conscience is the cause why he
maintains such an opinion, he may not be rightly conscientious in that.

Secondly, such a one is ready to give an account of his conscience if you call
him to it, if he will not give me a reason what moves his conscience, I regard
him no more: Conscience is but a Deputy, it cannot make Laws, but they are
made before.

Thirdly, such a man has used all means, the best means he can, to find out
Gods mind, prayer, reading, conferring with the ablest Saints, and such as have
most skill to guide; yea, prayer and fasting, any way to find out the truth
his conscience is troubled about: If he has not used the best, and all means,
I weigh not his plea of conscience.

Fourthly, if after searching he cannot yet come to see what the stream of
holy and learned men do hold and practice, but must differ from them, it will
be a trouble and grief to his spirit, that he should differ from them, fearing
lest God should hide it from him, seeing others how holy and able they are, and
therefore thinking they may know more of Gods mind, then he does.

Fifthly, such a man will walk very humbly and respectively toward those men,
from whom he differs, being he knows so holy and able, let us hear Mr.
Buroughs speak: Exposit. Hos. c. 5. ver. 5. p. 395.
But you will say, every man pleads conscience; how shall we know whether it be
the stoutnesse of his heart, or the tenderness of his conscience? Thus, if
this man behaveth himself humbly, and the rather humbly in all other things,
because he cannot see what his Brother does in such and such particulars, and
so is in danger to be an offense to his Brother, and therefore his soul is
humbled, this is a good witness that it is mere conscience, and not
stoutnesse that makes him differ: But now, if his behavior be high, and proud,
when he differs from his brother, he does not take it to be an affliction to
him, that he cannot see what his brother does, but censureth him, and thinks
that it is either through his weakness, or through his wilfulness that he
will not see, and so carries himself high, and proudly before his brother,
this witnesses to his face that it is stubbornness, and singularity. Nay,
then Mr. Buroughs, you have scarce left ten conscientious Separatists in
England, the former part of this I have not seen in any, the latter I have seen
enough.

6 A man truly conscientious, etc. in those points where he does agree with
other learned and holy men, will there cleave close to them, in opposing also
all other points which he judges to be false; he will not be a slye enemy, or
scoffer of such, and a conniver at, and a favourer of other Sects and Opinions,
which his heart tells him are not sound, or at least he doubts much of them.

Now the grounds of all these several heads in the trial of him, who differs
purely out of conscience, are these:

1. Because such a conscience in the very formal notion of it carries this,
viz. this man's heart is awed, and carried away with the Majesty, and Authority
of God and his Truth; it argues much grace, if one takes it in the true
notion, then I am sure such a heart will do all these things.

2 Such a man is awed with all truths, Ephesians. 4.3. Phil. 2.2. 1 Cor. 1.10
and therefore the command of unity, to be all of one mind, to speak the same
things; these have such a power on his spirit, as it puts him upon all these.

3 Such a man considers that to be an offense to other godly Christians, from
whom he differs, is a thing that he had need take heed of; also a fear of
weakening the work of God in the place where he lives.

4 Such a one knows the vileness of his own heart, and is prying into his
own weaknesses, others he can see more holy and able then himself, and hence
he fears himself, and conceives such men, being so holy and near to God, I
fear he may reveal that to them, which he conceals from me.

Now then, if you can bring us men who express all these, and walk truly by
these rules, you shall not need to go to the State, to get an Act for
Toleration of tender consciences, for I doubt not but Churches will be very
tender of such; God seldom leaves these to drink in any vile error, if for a
time they be mis-lead, he will discover his mind to them ere long, I am
assured. But alas, how far are our people from these things? I do not
rehearse them over again, but either let these be disproved to be no rules to
judge by, or if they be, there are not ten (as I said) of such scarce to be
found in England, who separate from the Ministry, and Churches, and have
betaken themselves to their private houses; yea, if we go to our
Congregationall Churches, and examine these, who plead for Liberty of
Conscience, we shall hardly find these Rules observed. The sum is, you see,
if indeed you be right conscientious men, and lead by a pure Conscience in the
points wherein you differ, you shall have that liberty that Christ would have
allowed you, and none will Domineere over your Consciences.

I know of nothing more can be alleged, but I think I have taken in all that
is brought against the Ministry, and Churches. It may be, some would be apt to
cast in this, That the Ministers are no friends to the State, ergo, etc.

I shall not stay to give any answer to this more then thus:

1 The Separatists were, before this Government was erected, to be sure the
leaven of all was laid, if not all actually separated.

2 Where there are Ministers, who are friends to the State, it is all one, for
they separate for all that.

3 Matters of State differ from the Church matters, and they were also very
intricate and dark, especially as some conceive, the Covenant and Protestation
having been taken before, therefore in intricate things more time should have
been given, till you had seen God tying a knot upon things.

4 I know that many Ministers had not hung off so from the State, but that they
saw such Separatists to be wincked at, they thought too much.

Obj. But you will say, Grant all this, that their grounds are insufficient,
why cannot you go on in the work of Reformation, set up Discipline, etc. and
let these alone? how do these hinder your work from going on comfortably?

Ans. If their grounds be insufficient, Schism was esteemed a great evil in
the Apostles times: those little matters in the Church of Corinth not
comparable to ours, how does the Apostle speak against them? so in the Ages
after, as may be seen in August. contra Permeni: etc. Irenae says, Nulla ab
eis tanta fieri potest correptio, quanta est Schismitis pernicies, l. 4. c. 26.
So our Divines of late against the Papists, to prove they were not guilty of
Schism, have labored strongly, but outs do but fancy grounds, and make a
tush at Schism.
then why do they not come back again to the Churches from which they have
departed? but before I give the answer, let these things be observed.

1 Few of these, who have any true good in them, but must and have acknowledged
they have received it from the Ministers, yea, in those times, when there was
much more corruption in the Churches then now.

2 Since they have left their Ministers they have got nothing; many lost the
savor once they had, and some their comforts that were true, and some of these
I know have come home again; generally they run out of one error into
another, that is their thriving.

3 I never heard of one true Convert that was ever brought home to God amongst
them all; indeed the Principles they maintain, will not stand with sound
conversion; for no Law must be to awaken men, and show them their vile
condition naturally, work of faith is easy; teach no duty, but all Christ,
[as if men could truly teach Christ, and no duty] these things speak enough
against them.

But I answer further, If the Classical and Congregationall men would but
join together [as they may if they will] and set upon that work, they might
do something, notwithstanding these persons, but yet they cannot comfortably
hold so long as these are tolerated.

Quest. Why, what harm have these done, or will they do?

Ans. I shall tell you, under several particulars.

1 They have much weakened the hands of the Ministry in the work, they were
once the joy of their Ministers, their Crown, and had they held close to them
still, holding up their old Principles, and walking reverently, they had very
much comforted their hearts, and strengthened their hands, now they came to the
work of Reformation; they could in time of Persecution, when Ceremonies, and
such trash abounded, cleave to them, and to those, who were silenced, they were
a comfort; but now those who should have joined with their Ministers, and
carried on the work with joint prayers, they are gone. Cyprian compares the
unity of the Church, De unita Eccles. 1 Kings, 11.30.
to Christ's Garment which had no seame, nor was divided; Schism he compares to
the Garment which Abijah rent in twelve pieces, that was not good for Salomons
house, how did it weaken the Nation? thus have these rendings weakened our
Churches exceedingly: Vis unita fortior.

2 They are now turned the greatest Persecutors the Ministers have, for tongue
persecution it is wheeled about, and resides in this Generation: Puritans,
Precisians, were the old terms, but now the terms are, Baals-Priests,
anti-christians, Priests, and Black-coates are the soberest terms, besides
other jeeres and scoffs; nay yet worse, many of these would have the Ministers
utterly rooted up [we heard of a Petition drawn up by some of them to be
presented to the house for that end] they have threatened us what they would
do, and I doubt not, if the State would give them their wills, this should be
their first vote, Down with the Ministry; so that all the old Persecutors were
not comparable to these, they would have some down, but honor the calling,
these would cut down all.

3 They are the Nurseries of all Errous and Heresies; where is there one
society that is not tainted? who can tell how gross they are [though we know
many gross enough] for they meet in private houses, who can tell what they
vent there? but if they get into Pulpits, then they will vent something, and
thence we may guess of the rest; some of them have spoken a against the
Scriptures, yet some again would have the Apocrypha to be Canonical; as a
company of Anabaptists spent the afternoon of a Lords day, to prove the
Apocrypha to be so; the London Ministers have set down some bad enough in
their Vindication, Mr. Edwards also [only he should not have jumbled all
Independents together, as if they did favor such vile Opinions, he should have
spared some] now if we have such Nurseries among our Churches, we shall find
it a difficult work to keep our Churches clear: some of these cursed seeds
will be blown into the Gardens.

4 They cause Church Members to walk irregularly: if any do not walk as they
should, or have drunk in any poison, if now the Brethren first, and then the
Officers come to deal with them, they care for no body. If they be of any
number to make a Society, that they can meet together, then they will rend
away, and so meet together; but if not so many (if but one) yet they know where
there is a Society of Separatists, who will take them in; and hence, what care
they for all Officers and Churches? But have you experience of this you will
say? Yes that I have, I could instance quickly in more then one Church. Hence I
have heard Congregationall Ministers say, it was but a vain thing to go about
to gather a Church in a Town where the Separation was, or if it were near,
neither have they gathered any.

5 They do labor to draw away the hearts of our Members from us; it has been
the language of some to my people, You must not believe the Black-coats.
Another time preaching about family duties, as it lay in my Catechize in
order, one of them would needs know of one of my people, what I had to do to
preach such things, I must teach Christ; so none shall find any settling who
attend upon Ministers; but blessed be God, there be many who can tell them its
false, and I pray God keep me from their settling.

6 They have spoiled many hopeful young Plants, persons newly awakened, who
have given some hopes; they have come in, and [like the spirits at London]
stolen them away; this blessed Buroughs complained of, whose Ministry in the
beginning of these troubles worked excellently, and hoped for a fine crop, but
this Generation got away those young ones, Cap. 5. v. 7. p. 431.
as they saw them moved, and leavened them with their errors; thus this man
lost many of his hopeful Plants; yea, I find something in his Exposition upon
Hosea, where though he does not express his own particular trouble concerning
this [for what I mention, was his speech to some friends, I could set it down
larger then I have done] yet there is the thing, I know no such dreadful
argument of Gods displeasure against this Nation [these are weighty words, yea,
he repeates it over again at the end of the same Paragraph] as this, that as
soon as young ones begin to know Jesus Christ, there are presently corrupt
errors infused into them, under the notion of honoring Christ and free grace,
etc.

For my own self I am but weak, and God has not honored me in that kind,
so as others of his Servants, yet I have known where I have been bestowing
pains, and have had some hopes, within a fortnight that an apparent change
has been discerned: Some of this generation have come to draw them away into
their Societies; telling them they shall never be settled if they attend upon
Ministers.

If these things be seriously considered, you may easily judge how comfortably
our work will go on, while these are tolerated amongst us; this is poor
comfort for Ministers to go about Church-worke, when as if their members will
prove wanton, if their officers come to deal with them, and send for them,
they shall scorn to come at them, and send them base letters abusing their
officers (I could set down in the margent where such things have been acted,
but I forbear) this is nothing, so long as the Separatists, the enemies of the
Ministry, are tolerated, for they can resort to them, yea, if all the members
of Congregationall Churches, as well as of Presbyterian Churches, will separate
from their Officers, and go into their private houses, they may if they will,
if they do but meet together and exercise their gifts, it is sufficient. So
that though Christ has appointed the standing ordinance of the Ministry, and
left the example how these shall be orderly called, yet here is the foundation
laid to destroy that Ordinance, and bring in nothing but confusion; Christ was
faithful in his house as a Son, and ordered all things in that house, he
has used his Ministers hitherto to bring home those that he has elected and
purchased, he will have his house upon the Mountains, but now we are come to
this point not to care whether we have Ordinances or no, officers or no, what
comfort then can we have in going about this work of reforming our Churches?

But further if it be well observed, these people are no such friends to the
State, though they are looked upon as the only friends the State has; it will
appear if we consider them in a moral or political respect.

First, for the moral respect, the strength of a Christian state lies, in
having Christ on their side, and I am sure the strength of our State lies
there; now is that a way to keep Christ on our side, to tolerate those who
seek to undermine that whereby he is known in the world? take away
Ordinances, and the Ministers who are appointed by him to dispense these
Ordinances, where shall we know Christ? but these labor to do this. Can it be
for their safety to tolerate such, that hinder his visible Kingdom from being
set up, (at least with poor comfort?) what is the reason that all this while
there is no Discipline set up? why are we in such a shattered broken condition?
no man has any mind to stir; our obstructions are not from the Drunkards,
Whoremongers, profane swearers, etc. chiefly these carry so much conviction in
their own consciences, that they dare not much appear; but these Schisms and
Errors tolerated have been our obstructions: If it shall please the State but to
put forth some power to heal these (not that I would have all errors knocked
down with club-law) and but stand to the Ministry, I hope we shall see the
Churches of England in another posture, and things so carried, that no man, who
walks by a pure conscience, shall be justly offended; for as for the Classical
and Congregationall Ministers, they are come so near, that I believe there will
be no difference between them. Those who hinder Christ's Kingdom, cannot be
true friends to a Christian civil State. If any shall object, the State has
prospered since these Schisms, and Errors have had their liberty, therefore
God does witness for them: I should say there is little Divinity in this kind
of arguing, viz. to argue from Providence, to the maintaining of things cross
to the word of God: besides here is fallacia non causae pro causa; For next to
Gods own free and sovereign pleasure, which was the main cause, the
instrumental cause of the prospering of Army, etc. must be referred to the many
precious Saints of God, Ministers and others, who are men resolute for Christ's
Ordinances, and Officers; men who stand to their old Principles, abhorring
these Errors and Schisms; who very much fearing, least if the Scottish party
prevailed in this way, there would be little liberty for the sound and moderate
Presbyteriall men, as well as Congregationall, and therefore they lay in hard
with God, by fasting, and Prayer, for the disappointing of the Scottish
designs: and surely Christ has more respect to his own people, who are
tender of his Ordinances, Truths, and Officers, and long to see him set up in
all his Ordinances before they dye, rather then to such, as make light of all
the former. Few of these Separatists trouble fasting and prayer very much, they
are so full of joy; they cast off those flesh-afflicting Ordinances.

I would have none to mistake me, as if I were an enemy to the Church of
Scotland. No verily, I do much honor diverse of the Ministers, and the Church
of God is much bound to bless God for their labors; both of former times,
Rollocke etc. and also in these latter days; I conceive that man is either
proud, or ignorant, or erroneous, who shall read Mr. Rutherford against the
Jesuits, and Arminians, and does not bless God for him. Yea, the pieces that
he, and Mr. Gillespie have writ concerning the controversies of these times,
for their learning, and sweetness of spirit in them, who can but bless God
for them, yea, though in some places cross to our Congregationall men? though
they are condemned and slighted here, yet they are reverenced, and highly
esteemed amongst the worthies in New England.

Yea, I add further, I wish from my heart, that the Discipline of the Church
of Scotland, as I find it set down in Mr. Rutherford, and others, were set up
in England, though in some points a little cross to Congregationall
principles; and yet lay all together, what I find in Mr. Gillespie, I am so
satisfied that I know men of moderate spirits in the Congregationall way, may
be borne with, and live sweetly with them. What the practices of the people in
Scotland are, I know not [I am sure they have not worse hearts then mine] they
are not their Practices, but their soundness in Opinion, and Discipline I
desire, they must be honored for their purity in Worship, against humane
mixtures, and for their soundness in the faith.

2 In a political respect they cannot be judged true friends to the State.

This appears, First, From what we have observed already among them; in that
time, when the Levelling party stirred, how many of these did strike in with
that party, is well known here in the Country, and other great Towns, by
drawing up Petitions [onely they were interrupted in their worke] some again
speaking most basely of the Parliament, they could match the old Royalists in
their language; such, I say, as are now, and then were tolerated; and I doubt
if that party moves again, we shall see what faithful Subjects these are,
though now they are tolerated as friends.

Secondly, The tolerating of these keep other men of great holiness, learning,
and abilities from cordial closing with the State; the Covenant to be sure, is
expressly against Schism, and Heresy. I have heard leading men say, if there
were a good Aristocracy set up in the Nation, so that we might have true
Patriots for the Nation; and if they would take some order with these Schisms,
and Errors, so that the Ordinances and Government of Christ might be set up,
indeed they could submit very well, if God shows it to be his mind to lay by
Monarchy: Now it would be more honor and safety for a State, to have such men
close with them, rather then such as these are; I have heard this from such, as
are leading men before the Worcester fight, which I add because it may be
thought, now they would do it, now they see no other hopes.

I shall wind up this Discourse against our Separatists [many of which, I am
sure, have before owned the Ministers; yea, and received Baptism and the Lords
Supper at their hands] by propounding a few Questions unto them.

1. Quest. Questions propounded to the Separatists
Have you any thing against your Ministers in respect of their conversations
[if they be scandalous in their lives, you have a way to help your selves] do
they not walk in some measure as becomes Christians?

2 Is not their Ministry wholesome? do they not preach soundly, converting,
and edifying truths? though all have not the same gifts.

3 If you can charge them with either of these, have you with that respect,
which becomes their places, dealt with them, and told them of such faults? have
you told them once and again, yet they have refused to hear you, while you
have patiently waited? you must do so toward a private brother, before you
part, much more with a Minister.

4 Have you called in other Ministers to hear the Case, and to judge in it? or
are you only your own judges?

5 Do they mix any thing in the Worship of God, so as you cannot join with
them in the worship without sin? and have you dealt with them as before?

6 If there be some thing which you would have received or done, have you given
them convincing Arguments to prove it ought to be?

7 Was the thing you desired Tanti, of so great consideration, that the word
will clearly bear you out for separating, because you could not enjoy what you
would have?

8 Might not meekness of spirit waiting a while have won your Ministers to a
yielding in some degree to what you desired?

9. Was there no Church in the Town before you separated, and entered into a
Covenant together? (this I add because some of these call themselves The
Church) and are there no visible Saints in the Town but your selves?

10. When you did separate, whose counsel had you? what Churches joined with
you in the act, and also were present when you did join together, to hear
your Confession of Faith, whether you were sound in the Faith or no?

I heartily wish they would give in Answers to these Questions according to the
word clearly, I think they will see themselves snared. Let us in few words
hear what others say concerning separation.

Mr. Hooker, Survey Chu. dis. in Pref.
that eminent man of God says, The faithful Congregations in England are true
Churches, and therefore it is sinful to separate from them, as no Churches.

Mr. Norton, Resp. ad Apollon. p. 156. etc.
another Congregational man, acute and holy, has written upon this subject
excellently: If the Separatists do understand the Latin tongue, they shall
find their practices overthrown and condemned, Rejicimus Separatistas non
distinguentes inter ecclesiam, and impuritates ecclesiae, Grave crimen
schismatis. I wish we had a few of these Mr. Nortons in England, though he be a
man who stands much for the peoples liberty, yet he so orders their liberty,
that our Ministers would be glad if they had their Churches governed, as is the
Church whereof himself, together with Mr. Na. Rogers, are officers; these are
Congregationall men. De schismate.
I will not rehearse what I find in Camero, because he wrote before these
times, and will be reckoned for a Presbyterian; four grounds he gives for
separation, none of which I am sure our Separatists can allege, 1. Grievous
and intolerable persecution. 2. When the Church is Heretical. 3. When Idolatry
is set up. 4. When the Church is the seat of Antichrist. I shall conclude with
a speech of his, Vt nihil aeque arguit ingenium spiritus Christi, ac studium
conservandae societatis and unionis, in quo charitas elucet; sic etiam nullum
est evidentius argumentum pravitatis ingenii humani (unde and inter carnis
opera contentienes nominantur) quam tumultuandi and rixandi studium.

Object. But you have spoken against godly men all this while.

Ans. Not against their godliness one word, their schism and errors only I
have opposed. But I know not what new Divinity we have got up in these days,
that if they be godly men that drink in errors, or practice inordinately; Oh,
take heed how you speak, they are godly men; there may be an unwise speaking,
when men shall only fling out against persons, but confute nothing; but
certainly godly men deserve reproof as well as others; I hope the being of a
godly man does not make that to be no sin in him, which is sin in another;
but here is the subtilty of Satan, and it was all the game he had to play in
those times, I must now, says he, get into an Angel of light, and I must work
among these godly professors, This w^^ Satan's plot in Cyprians time as he
mentions in his book De unita Eccles. yet when he saw his heathenish worship
would not prosper. but was cast down, then he plagued the Church with heresy
and schism.
if I can get some of those away, I shall get other hollow ones to cleave to
them, and make a party: If I now make not a division among them, but that they
join all with one shoulder to set up Christ's Kingdom, and thrust down mine,
it will go hard with my kingdom; now therefore, find fault with the
Ordination of Ministers, it was Popish, so separate from them; plead
conscience, that is a tender piece; strive for exact purity (though it be
beyond the rule as to visible Church Fellowship,) and thus he has found out
his ways to damp all the work of Reformation.

I shall say no more but this, though some of these Separatists are godly men,
yet if godly men stand thus as now we do, I believe God will not spare us,
though we be godly men, but he will ere long bring such plagues upon the
professing party in England, as shall make their hearts ache. For my part, I
look on England thus, there have been choice servants of God in England, who
labored under the Hierarchicall oppression, many strong cries have they made
for the removal of that burden, and that they might enjoy him in his own
Ordinances, without the mixtures of men's inventions; God has given us in the
answer of those prayers, as to the removing of what offended: and now says
God, look you to it, ye Professors, I give the power (which never your
Fathers saw) into the hands of the Puritanicall The old scoff.
party, let me now see how you will improve it for the advancement of my Church
and glory; but verily if we improve it no better then now we do, we must look
that God will not entrust us with this power long (he does not use to stay long
before he visits his Churches) but quickly deprive us of this liberty, and Lord
if thou do, thou shall be just.

Having done with the Separatists, I shall now take a short view of the
agreements and differences that are with, and between the Classical and
Congregational Divines, and then shall make bold to present an humble request
to the Congregational Divines.

1. Do the Classical-brethren stand for all the Ordinances of Christ, as
Praying, Preaching, Sacraments, Discipline, etc? so do the
Congregational-brethren.

2. Do the Classical-brethren stand for Christ's officers, Pastors, sach ers,
Ruling-elders, Deacons, allowing such, and only such? o do the
Congregational-brethren. They agree in worship and in officers.

3. Do the Classical-brethren hold to the old doctrines of Faith, Repentanee,
holding up the preaching of the Law in its method, to prepare before faith, to
guide after faith? so do the Congregational-brethren, such as we look upon as
sound, and esteem worth the regarding.

4. Do the Classical-brethren hold the government of the Church to be
Presbyterial? so do the Congregational-men, such as are the most acute. Besides
what Mr. Norton (none of the lowest rank) has asserted in his book which I
quoted before, I have heard him say, That if the Congregational-government did
make the government of the Church democratical, he would give up the cause.

For my part, I am but among the weakest of Gods Ministers, but yet I think it
were no hard matter to prove the government of the Church to be Aristocratical:
I enter not now into the debating of the question, but this has much stuck
with me.

First, there is government in the Church, I mean an external polity,
besides an internal government of the Spirit, what ever our fantastical
Spiritualists have dreamed of; the Scripture is too plain against these.

Secondly, then there are governors and governed; this must needs be yielded,
else government cannot be; for governors there are, none that are sound in
their wits can deny, if they own the Scriptures.

Thirdly, the affairs then of the Church must be so carried, that these
Relates may be kept distinct: for that government which destroys these, by
making the Correlate, i. the body governed, to be governor (and so there are
none governed) cannot possibly be, a government standing so much with the light
of nature. There is no government, if all rule.

Obj. But how can the government of the Church be Aristocraticall, when as you
carry things by the suffrage of the people?

Answ. I should desire also to propound these questions.

First, would you not, if now Churches were constituting, give the people this
liberty, that if any could bring in good testimony against a man, who was to
be received into the Church, that they should do it, and if the thing be
proved, will not you refuse to admit such a one?

Secondly, if it now come to casting out of a member, will not you give liberty
to any of the brethren, who shall (first asking you leave to speak) in a sober,
grave way, propound some question to the clearing of the case in hand, before
the people join with you in cutting off a member, I say, would not you give
this liberty?

Thirdly, will you excommunicate renitente ecclesia? your books say otherwise,
and you know what both our Ancient and Modern Divines have affirmed in this
point, and therefore I quote none.

I do not mention election to be given to the people, for that has nothing of
government in it, and this you give fully; but if you grant me the three former
heads, then which way you will prove the government to be Aristocraticall, the
same way I shall. I have spoken to this before, and therefore conclude with
Chamies, and others, the government is Aristocraticall.

Obj. But how can this be, if the people will not consent, how are they
governed?

Answ. Put case Jonathan had been indeed a great malefactor, and Saul would
have had him legally and justly put to death, but the people would not consent
to their King, but rescue Jonathan, shall we hence conclude, ergo the
government of Israel is not Monarchical? the case is the same here.

Now I am upon this head, I shall desire to make a little digression, before I
proceed to any more heads. Mr. Edwards in a Sermon at Colchester laid down this
Thesis.

That there was no such tyrannical government in any Church (unless it were
in the Church of Rome) as is in the Independent Churches; he proved it thus,
They carry all things by the suffrage of the people, and if all do not
consent, they will censure them; how he will prove this? a special example, in
the Church of Boston in New England, when they excommunicated Mrs. Hutchison;
because her own son did not join in the casting out of his own mother, he
was likewise censured; an unnatural thing, said he, and so carried it, that
both his own friends, and other Ministers, who were strangers, thought he was
also excommunicated, as they told me when I spoke with them.

The story does something concern the head I am upon, and therefore I make
bold to insert it here. I was a little troubled at the passage, knowing well
how things were carried, being present at that time, and so took occasion some
few weeks after, to give a bare narrative how the thing was carried with so
much meekness, I am sure as none could accuse me. The sum is this, When all
ways according to the word had been tried with Mrs. Hutchison to recall her,
but none would prevail, the question was put to the Church to manifest consent
for her excommunication; her son and sonne-in-law (one more then Mr. Edwards
mentioned) stood up to put some stop in the way (had they sat still, as any
body would have expected, though they had suspended their votes, I know not who
would have spoken one word to them) Mr. Cotton rose up, and gave them a grave
admonition, that though their natural affection might now work, for which he
did not blame them, yet he would not have them prefer their mother before
Christ, nor hinder their mother from that Ordinance, which might be a means
to save her soul; with these words they both sat down: they never had any
other censure (if this be a censure) and the Church proceeded in her
excommunication. Now I appeal unto all, to judge where was the tyranny in this
act? yet though I carried this with all mildness, this was the only cause why
Mr. Edwards raked up all he could against me, and put it into print, even such
things as never were in my thoughts. But here you may see, they stand not upon
the suffrage of all the people.

Fifthly, do the Classical-men call for Synods? so do the Congregational-men,
Mr. Cotton, Keys c. 6. Mr. Norton, Respon. ad Apollon. p. 112. etc.

And certainly they are men of strange spirits, who deny Synods to be useful,
and no Ordinance of God: I doubt he did not well consider what his pen let
drop, and left it to posterity, That he never saw any good that came by any
Synod, but rather the contrary. A great Clerk indeed he was, but surely the
man was in some passion; I am sure I have known the contrary, much good come
by Synods; but some of our Independents snutch up this sentence of his, as if
it were Apostolical. This is the difference, say the Congregational-men, the
Synod binds directive, non juridice, the Classical will have both.

When I observe what both sides speak of Synods, methinks this can be no such
matter of difference.

The Classical Brethren say, Land. Vind. p. 23
All the determinations even of National Synods are to be obeyed no further,
then they agree with the word of God; and that a Synod est judex judicandus;
That Congregations are to examine with the judgment of discretion, what is sent
to them from Synods.

Mr. Rutherford says, Peac. plea. p. 322.
The Acts of the Assembly oblige all the absents, not present in all their
members, not because of the Authority of the Church, but because of the matter,
which is necessary and agreeable to Gods word.

That people may not examine decrees of their Synods according to Gods word:
That people may not reason or speak in their Synods, Ib. p. 246.
we acknowledge no such Synods. This latter needs a little fencing, otherwise
we should have confusion enough; our Churches in New England chose out of every
Church, two of the ablest of the private brethren, and sent them as their
messengers, these indeed had liberty to speak and propound doubts in the
Synod, but it was not left free for any body to speak, that would.

Mr. Gillespie states a question; Suppose a scandalous person would come to the
Sacrament, Aar. rod. 477, 478.
the Minister knowing him to be so, advises the Eldership to join with him,
and do their duty in keeping this person away, it may be they refuse; Appeal
is made to higher Assemblies, Classis, Synod, etc. they it may be will judge
him fit for the Sacrament, this is their sentence, must this Minister now obey
the sentence of the Classis or Synod? His determination is, That the Minister
being clear in his conscience, and the matter of scandal sufficiently proved,
he must not do an unlawful act in obedience to men, but follow the rule, 1 Timothy 5.22. Keep thy self pure, his conscience illuminated by Gods word is a
rule to him of his own personal acting, or not acting.

Come to the Congregational-men, Mr. Cotton says, Keys p. 25
We dare not say that the power of a Synod reaches no further then the giving
connsell, they bind burdens, they bind not only materially, but formally,
from the Authority of the Synod, See more, p. 53, 54.

Neither do I see, that our reverend Divines in their preface to that book do
oppose Mr. Cotton; for say they [in laying down Mr. Cottons judgement] Christ
has not furnished them only with ability to give Counsel, but with a
Ministerial power and Authority, to determine, declare, and enjoin such
things, as may tend to reducing such Congregations to right order and peace.
But is there Authority? it may be my shallowness; but for the present I do
not call to mind any power invested with Authority, but if they injoyne a thing
to be done, and it be refused, that Authority will reach further. Authoritas
cogit, as is the kind of the Authority, Civil or Ecclesiastical.

Blessed Buroughs [in answering to that which some would have, Iren. p. 44.
scil, that a Synod may formally excommunicate, because by excommunication,
they ( i.e. Heretical Churches) are put out of the Kingdom of Christ, into
the Kingdom of Satan, and this will terrifie] says, consider whether this be
not done before, and that with an authority of Christ, by those former six
things (mentioned in the page before) for Heretical Congregations, or persons
are judged, and declared in a solemn Ordinance, by the Officers of Christ
gathered together in his name, to be such as have no right to any Church
Ordinance, to have no Communion with any of the Churches of Christ; now if this
judgment be right, are not such persons or Congregations put out of the
Kingdom of Christ, and put under the power of Satan, consequently?

Certainly, this cannot be a ground of such difference, shall Non and Ex make
such a stir, when Non is as bad as Ex? I should judge my self, I am sure, to be
in as bad a case by the one, as the other, though for my part this notion of
Catholike-visible-Church, has made me ready to yield to Synods juridicall
power; I could I say yield it, and yet not differ from these reverend Divines,
if they follow home their non-communion close.

Now if you say, what does this help against Heretical Congregations, though
you have proceeded to Non-communion, they regard it not, but still go on in
their Heresies, and leaven others? to that they will say, what do they care for
your excommunication, if all the Heretics in England were excommunicated, they
would not care, but go on still. Indeed our New England Divines will teach us a
way how to help it, viz. if a Synod has declared against an Heretical
Congregation, being pertinacious, and so has proceeded to non-communion, they
will call in the Civil power to help, and so they have a way to help by their
non-communion, and this must be the help of them though they be excommunicated.

This Mr. Norton intimates, Resp, ad Apol. 148 Keys 50 Iren. c. 4. Mr. Marshal
relates, that Zuinglius in a public dispute did so stop the mouths of the
Anabaptist; that they appearing to the Magistrates unreasonably obstinate, were
banish d the City, Defen. ag. Tomb. 58.
Ecclesiae appellant Magistratum in causis Ecclesiae non ad doctrinam
declarandam, vel disciplinam exequendam, sed ad doctrinam a Cencilio
declaratam, vel disciplinam ab ecclesia applicatam sanctione Civili
confirmandam. The dury which Mr. Cotton shows to lie upon the Civil
Magistrate inferres as much. As also Mr. Buroughs. And thus it was in New
England; when the Synod (at which the Civil Power was present, as to hear, so
to keep civil order) had consuted and condemned the Errors and Heresies, and
so was broke up, then a General Court was called, which soon suppressed those
Heresies, and brought the Churches to peace again.

If the Civil power would do as much here, we should soon see our Churches in
better order. What Civil Magistrates have done in this ease before, I need not
mention, books are full. Its true, the Churches were, when there was no Civil
Power to defend them, but oppose them; but we can find how many Heresies and
Schisms they were then troubled with; shall the Church be in no better case
under a Christian Civil Power, Nursing-Fathers, then at that time?

6 Do the Classical godly men look upon their Congregations, having visible
Saints among them, to be true visible Churches? so do the Congregationall men
judge them also. I gave instance before.

7 Would then the Classical brethren, have their members (being such as have
right to the Ordinance) to partake with Congregational Churches in the Lords
Supper to show their communion? certainly so they ought; but why Congegationall
men do refuse godly men, members of Classical Churches, not admitting them to
the Lords Supper, when they have desired it, is very strange to me; I wish our
reverend Brethren would give us solid grounds for this practice, for it gives
offense, and that justly. Preface to survey chapter dis.
Mr. Hooker, and Iren. p. 266.
Mr. Buroughs have both said they should be admitted: Shall a Church be
acknowledged to be a true Church, where Doctrine and Worship is pure also, this
person a member of it, a visible Saint (it may be a real Saint) and shall he be
denied communion?

8 For Classes, Pref. surv. chapter dis.
the Congregationall men say Consociation of Churches is not only lawful, but
in some cases necessary. So Mr. Hooker. Mr. Cotton speaks fully to this, Keys
p. 54, 55. weighty matters such as, Election and ordination of Elders,
excommunication of an Elder, or any person of public note, the translation of
an Elder from one Church to another, it is an holy Ordinance to proceed with
common consultation and consent. I suppose thus much might have been obtained
of the Classical-brethren, that though in cases of weight, as excommunication,
they would not have such an Ordinance carried on by one Minister, but have the
thing seriously examined first, and debated in a Classis, yet when the thing
had been concluded upon, they would leave the execution of the sentence to the
officer, or officers of the Church, where the case lies. If so much might be
obtained, I should be very far from opposing a Classis, I would not willingly
live without one.

I know of no other material point of difference, as for the first subject of
the power of the Keys, that is but a notion, though its true, much practice
depends upon it, yet I find not that our Divines here would have the
fraternity to be the first subject, by their owning of Mr. Cotton his book of
the Keys; for Mr. Cotton makes a Church organized to be the first subject,
and not the Fraternity, as is apparent in diverse places of that book.

The sum is, I wonder at our differnces, well might that worthy Divine say in
his letter to me from New England, Its the wonderment of this side of the
world, that you that are godly, and may agree, yet will not! surely the cause
lies more in the Will, then any thing else. Give me leave therefore I pray, to
make my humble request to our Reverend Divines, the Congregational-men, that
they would please to close in with the Classical brethren, and not suffer these
groundless differences to trouble the Churches any longer. If you ask, Why
do you make your request to us, are we the cause why they are not bealed? I
cannot think the cause lies only in the Ministers; nay I have heard long
since there had been an agreement among the Ministers, had not some others that
live by divisions, broken it; but whether all Ministers are of the same mind I
know not: nay, I have observed the spirits of some Congregational-Ministers
carried with more eagerness against the Classical-brethren, then e converso,
and I am sure, if there be any blame among the Ministers, it is charged most
upon the Congregational-men, whether justly or no, it concerns you to clear
your selves: Besides, at this time the Civil power most smiles upon you, and
now it is a good time to show you seek the peace and flourishing of all
Churches, by joining with your fellow-brethren, and not to be content though
your Interest be safe, unless the whole may have comfort as well as your
selves; for you cannot but judge that there are more true visible Churches,
then those which are called Independent Churches, and that there be others that
are true Ministers, besides the Independent Ministers; why then should not the
comfort of these Churches and Ministers be sought? which cannot be, unless
your selves be pleased to declare against these errors and schisms of the
times, and fall in with these Ministers to carry on the work of Christ
together. Let me, I beseech you, present to your view a few things to be
considered.

First, the Classical men have bid very fair for peace and agreement with you;
hear their words, Land. in Vind. p. 120. 121.
We do here manifest our willingness te accommodate with you according to the
word in a way of union; and (such of us as are Ministers) to preach up and to
practice a mutual forbearance and toleration in all things, that may consist
with the sundamentals of Religion [what need then any other Toleration?] with
the power of godliness, and with that peace, which Christ has established in
his Church; but to make ruptures in the body of Christ, and to divide Church
from Church, etc. there is no warrant for this out of the word. The page before
this, they offer as much as this, and speak so Christianly and ingenuously,
that it must needs move any Christian heart that loves the peace and prosperity
of the Churches, to meet them half way, and not suffer any differences more to
appear.

As for that exception they make, the ruptures of Churches, I think it to be a
very just exception; that golden rule has place here, ut tibi, sic aliis,
would any of us be content to have other Ministers take from us the best of our
people that have chosen us before, and owned us for their officers? say what
you please, you are men, and I know it would be a strong temptation, when as
for want of these, also their hands are weakened in the carrying on of
Reformation in their Churches.

If you take away the best (who are the joy of a Minister) take away the worst
also. If you live near a place where there is no Minister, and take in such
Christians to you as the place affords, and return them when the place is
furnished: or if there be a Minister, and but few Christians, so that he cannot
give the Lords Supper with comfort, if he and his people will join with you
they may, none oppose this; but when a godly Minister has visible Saints
sufficient in his Parish, to have these taken from him, is such a thing which I
would not have offered to me, therefore I would not offer the same to another.
I know where the pinch lies, on the Ministers part, Our maintenance arises
from the members, etc. but for this the State has provided an answer (and
certainly it is a great mercy) reform you in the place where you live, take
none but Scriputre-visible-Saints to the Sacraments, catechize, and do what
you can to reform the rest, the State has provided for your maintenance, none
shall keep it from you, as well as the word gives it you, Gal. 6. Let him that
is taught in the word communicate to him that teaches in all good things.
Christ sent Paul not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17.
preaching is the spending work, and the chief, of this all the Parish are
partakers, I am ready to dispense the Seals to all visible Saints, therefore I
know no scruple why I should not receive from all, since all receive from me.

O but your members will not be content with this. I know not but your members
may find God in a godly reformed Classical Church, we see the differences are
very small; but suppose the worst, let then your members remove into the
Parishes where you live, and this is no offense to any; if they say, It will
something hinder their estate: Mr. Buroughs will tell them then they love their
bodies better then their souls, Expos. Hos. c. 2. v. 1.2. p. 225.
if they look upon things very much concerning their soul, and will not buy
them with some abatement of their profit: could this have been once enjoyed,
New England sufferers had not been there now; Though Parishes are not Churches,
yet Ministers care must be bounded some where. I presume you are willing to
close, so that you may not sin.

I beseech you first, what sin is it to let a godly Classical man enjoy his
own members?

Secondly, What sin is it to admit a visible Saint, and member of a Classical
Church to communion with you?

Thirdly, what sin is it to declare against the errors and schisms of the
times? you see it is the thoughts of the New England Divines, that through our
too much connivence at these, this inundation of errors is like to destroy
all. If these three be but yielded, I believe you may live and enjoy your
liberty of conscience, and no man will trouble you.

2. A second consideration is this, you see those who call for agreement, they
are no babes, they are men, holy, learned, excellently gifted, and the
arguments they give for their Classical form of government are not slight, but
such as deserve strong heads to answer; it may be my shallowness, but truly I
cannot yet see some things they plead for to be clearly answered, as their
arguments for the Catholick-Church-visible; their arguments for their
Presbyterial Church, from the Church of Jerusalem, Corinth, etc. yet I have
read the answers with a kind of prejudice against the Classical way, being
before engaged in the Congregational-way, and usually then men are apt to make
a little serve the turn: But I cannot yet be satisfied, and that such a Church
as is in this small village where I live, should have equal power with the
Church of Corinth, and be exempted from all other power, though (which God
forbid) we should walk scandalously, is a piece of Divinity that I cannot yet
believe. There seems to be something in that which learned Mr. Hudson hinteth
from 1 Cor. 14.34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches. Here are
Churches in Corinth, he does not say, Let women, but Let your women (that
indeed which is a rule for the Churches of Corinth, is a rule for all Churches)
those Congregations are called Churches, yet one combined Church of Corinth.

There are other points besides which I mention not, but certainly the
controversy is not so clear as the controversy against Papists, Socinians,
etc. therefore I should think that we had need close the more with these men.

A third consideration is this; unto me it is something, I know not how it
takes with others, the strange things that God in his Providence has suffered
to fall out in Congregationall Churches, I mean for Divisions especially, and
errors; that charge cannot be denied of many Congregationall Members what
errors they have drunk in; and for Divisions, they are not secret things, but
such as the whole Nation knows, insomuch that I have heard a serious
Congregationall Minister, and an able man say, when he has heard what crackes,
and rendings there have been in Congregationall Churches, he thought seriously
whether it were the way of God or no; how many Congregationall Churches may be
reckoned where these have been, and if Ministers do not let their Members take
their own course, even what they will, and drink in what errors they will,
it is hard to keep a Church from rending, Ius Divi. p. 114 that learned Book.
England gives strong proof of this. It is a very unhappy Story that Mr.
Edwards relates of the Church at Arnheim, if it be true, I find it quoted by
the London Ministers: where that Act was done in New England, that Mr. Cawdrey
mentions in his Epistle to the dissenting Brethren, I cannot imagine; but that
is also strange, if true; I suppose he relates as it was related to him, I know
indeed where there is a sad example of this kind there also. This use I make
of these things, that we had need take another review of Congregationall
principles, in respect of that power which is given to the Fraternity, and in
the mean time to be very tender toward the Classical Brethren, and study
agreement with them.

The fourth, The Classical men are opposed in reforming their Churches, as
well as the Congregationall men; now for these to be opposed, not only by the
profane part, whom they keep off from the Lords Snpper, but to be opposed also
by the Congregationall men, that they prove a grief to them, this is a hard
chapter; certainly we had need more close with them, and help to comfort them,
rather then grieve them in their work, they are scorned by the profane party,
let not us scorn them.

5 These Nurseries of errors [I mean the Separatists, who cast off Orthodox
Officers] are as bad enemies to the Congregationall Churches, as they are to
the Classical; nay worser, your Members will quickly drink in their poison,
yea, and go away from you to them, Page 119.
as experience has testified; therefore it concerns you to join with the
Classical men against them; but by one passage I meet with in the London
Vindication, it seems some Congregationall men do not think so, for they in
their complaint to you thus speak; Are there not some of you that choose rather
to join with Anabaptists, and Episcopal men then with us? and that will give
letters dimissory to your Members, to depart from you to the Churches of the
Anabaptists? and at the same time deny them to such as desire them, for to
join with Churches of our Communion? we charge not these things upon you all,
but upon some, whose names we forbear to mention; this is very strange, but
this confirms what I said before, that the cause of our disunion is not
altogether in the Classical men.

6 I pray consider what a fine Game the Devil has played by this opposition
between us, has he not turned our Reformation into a deformation? Has he not
caused the building of the Temple to cease? Do not all things that concern
the Reformation of the Church stand at a stay? What do we now? indeed those
who are for Congregationall Government, have the opportunity to gather Churches
[as they call it] but what becomes of the whole? It was told me when I was in
Spain, [which was the winter before Naseby Fight] that diverse that were in
religious Orders that lived there, were got into England; Certainly Jesuits, or
Devils have been here to hold the Congregationall, and Classical Brethren at
such a distance, that while they have been contending about Government, we are
in danger of loosing Ordinances, Truths, Government, and be swallowed up with a
deluge of Errors, Schisms, and Heresies; Divide and impera, that has been
Satan's project.

7 I beseech you consider, whether we lie not open to Gods stroke: is there not
matter of provocation given him, by reason of these Divisions (that his work
stands at a stay) Errors, Schisms, Heresies, and decay of godliness that
follows upon these, that he should take away the Liberties he has given us,
and make us feel a heavy yoke again? Surely these things will not be long
borne. Mr. Caryll has a sad speech, Expos. on Job, c. 5. ver. 9.
God has begun to do so many marvells amongst us, that I verily believe the
work he is about, will end in a marvel too; and we in the close shall be made
either a wonder of Mercy, or a wonder of Judgment to all the Nations round
about.

We are made indeed a wonder in regard of the strange Opinions, Heresies,
Divisions, they wonder at us in New England; but till God sets up his Kingdom
in our hearts, Romans 14.17.
consisting in righteousness, peace, and joys of the Holy Ghost, and sets up
his Kingdom in the Nation, riding in triumph in his Ordinances, converting of
souls, and battering down the profaneness of our hearts, scattering our
Errors and Schisms, we shall not be a wonder of mercy to other Nations; but if
God shall be pleased to let our hearts feel his inward Kingdom, and our eyes
see his external visible Kingdom after that manner exalted, then Lord, some
of us care not how soon we fall asleep.

FINIS.

