A TRUE RELATION OF THE Twenty weeks Siege of London derry, By the Scotch,
Irish, and Disaffected English, with the Daily Proceeding Passages thereof: As
also the number of men killd, and taken Prisoners on both sides.

RELATED In two Letters from Captain Henry Finch, one of the Captains of
London derry, and one of the Aldermen of the City.

To His Friend in London.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for S. G. and A. W. and are to be sold at the
Exchange, and at Westminster. 1649.

A True Relation of the twenty weeks Siege of Londonderry, By the Scotch,
Irish, and Disaffected English.
Londonderry 19 June 1649. Worthy Sir,
LAtely I have received none from you, My last to you was the 14 of February of
all passages; with some relation of the alteration since, but I thought it
would never have come to this height, as then there was a grumbling, and
presently it grew hotter, and in the Lagon they began to deny the payments
agreed upon, so as Soldiers were sent out for Distresses, and brought in some
money, but Sir Alexan. Stuarts Quarters refused to pay any.

March 22. Two Troops of Horse went to Letherkenny (...) ^keteers went out to
make good the horse retreat, but went not a mile off.) where we took 45
prisoners, killed 16. whereof one was Maj. Belfore an able soldier, and a wise
man, and another Captain. 30 and odd. of the prisoners were exchanged for so
many boules of meal, the rest being Lieu. Col. James Galbraith; 2 Majors, 1
Captain and other Officers and Country men, who are reserved for ransom or
other ends; brought eight coulors, and narrowly escaped many other Commanders,
and all this without the loss of one man, one hurt.

26 We begin to fire our Sabberles over the Bog, and pull down the cabines,
ditches, and cut down all the Orchards and Gardens.

May 2, A party of our men went over the water and fired some of the houses,
killed some men, and brought away some plunder.

The 3. All the Cowes we had about the Derry (which was about 80) was taken by
the enemy, which was very grievous to the poor people, and many householders.

The 5th. They came with their Tents and laid close siedg to Derry within
Cannon shot of the town, and in one night entrenched themselves beyond
expectation, which daily since the enemy have been strengthening.

May 13 Our Horse upon the Strand beyond the Gallows, was charged with a
stronger party of their Horse, but God gave us the Victory, and five of theirs
was laid dead, and only one was brought alive into the Town, being shot through,
and exchanged for one of ours then taken, but he dyed within a few days after
his return, we had little hurt.

May 15 Another Skirmish by the Bogge side, where was three prisoners of theirs
taken, and six killed.

17 We gave an allarm in the night, to the other side of the water, with our
Boats, but landed not, yet raised the whole Country from Strabaine to
Magilligan.

19 They desire a Treaty, which was continued to the 23 day, but it was on
their parts feignedly, not with any real intentions, and so to no effect, but
to gain time to secure their leagure by making new works which our ordnance did
annoy.

26 A comfortable supply of wheat came from London, with a boat laden with
barley, taken by the Convoy bound for Dublin, which was landed for our store,
but my Lord gave satisfaction for it to the owner, with a small Bark wherein
was some few Cowes and Horses, which were taken by the said Convoy being bound
for Scotland.

The same day came Sir Robert Stuart and Col. Mervin to the Leagure which (as
is said) had been broke up that night had they not come.

29 They took two Prisoners of ours in the night out of their beds lying
without the Bishops gate, which were restored for one of theirs.

30 Our men went over the water, and burnt some houses, some men killed, and
plunder taken.

June 1. All our Horse, 150 Foot, went over the water, the Horse went to
Goldsmiths new Town, fought with a party of Horse and Foot, routed them, fired
the Country, killed about thirty, took two prisoners, more they might, but
would not, brought over some English, took a prey of 300 and odd cowes, as
many sheep, some horses, with other plunder, fired and killed to the very Mough
without any loss, only one man, which lost himself in a glotious attempt,
and God was merciful in showing so great a mercy to so few hands.

3. The Cows being too many to keep for eating up our grass, and not fit to
kill, so many as were not useful, was sold to the Enemy for 10 s. a piece,
upon parrole, and was currantly paid.

8. The Enemy in one night had built an incredible piece of work within almost
musket shot of our Town, upon the top of the hill upon the way of
Ballymackerooty: upon which my Lord President drew out all his Horse, and about
200 Foot marched up to the work, who immediately left it, gave alarm to the
Leagure, our men marched round about it, a party of Horse encountered theirs,
routed them, and our other part of horse coming in, gave them the chase for
two miles, killed 25, took prisoners 6, got many horses, good store of cloaks,
some arms, and came and threw down their new work, and after sent a challenge
to the Leagure to come out and fight them, standing in Battalia above an hour
within Musket shot of their Leagure, but they came not out, nor gave any answer
to their summons, although they were more then three for one; much shot was
exchanged this day between their Musketteers and ours, but no hurt done to our
party, many slightly wounded, but none mortally; the charge of Horse was in
sight of the Town bravely and resolutely given and received on both sides, but
admirable was the success, and divine providence did show it self mightily
therein in the chase they fired two miles, and beat up all their out-guards,
some of their powder in the Leagure blew up, and killed one man.

13. A new Fort which were a building at the Windmill was near finished, being
thrown down by the Enemy this night, the wind being high, he was not
discovered till done.

15. Three companies of English came in about 200. besides officers, without
victuals or clothes, and a great defect in Arms, not above half armed, which
is supplied by my Lord President in some measure.

18. White Castle was this night plundered by some of our men, and the Seamen,
got some Malt, Barley, meal, and much other luggage from thence, and other
places.

19. The Scotch boat that was taken with the Cows and Horses bound for Scotland
before mentioned, was manned out, and this day brought in two other small
Scotch boats bound for Scotland from Colraine, laden with staves, Clobords,
Rounds, and some butter, but they missed of their maine design, being a Bark
laden with Butter, Tallow, and other good commodities, etc.

As if the Lord President had had a foresight, or some inspiration of this
business, before any appearance was here, caused some 80. Horse, and about
100. and odd Foot, to come hither Feb. 5. out of Connough, and made stay of
all manner of victuals and provisions, of which at this time of the year this
Town was never so furnished, which has mightily disappointed our adversaries,
who did believe one month would have starved us, but praised be God, after
three months siege, there is not one sick or feeble body among us, and now in
a better condition then the first day of the siege, our greatest want is and
will be firing, there being no other firing but old houses and trees got out of
Orchards; for we suppose provisions will be plentifully sent us by the
Parliament, which we daily expect: It is not without a great providence of God,
that salt Beef, Herring, salt Cod, salt Salmon, at the time of the year
drinking little (some nothing) but water, should prove so nourishing as it
does, and not rather breed diseases. This is a part of the proceedings here
since my last; but should I write you the laborious care, industry, and
vigilency of our Governor, scarce once in a week going to bed, nor sleeping at
most times above two hours in twenty four, the gallantry of our horse, and
stoutnesse of our foot, with every particular action. I should be too large, I
shall I fear, lose the conveyance of this by my prolixity. So I conclude, with
commendations to your self, friends, and rest,

London derry 15. June, 1649. Your assured friend and servant, Henry Finch.
I cannot say punctually that just so many men were killed at the skirmishes
mentioned, yet by the report of the Soldiery, and of the Country, they were
rather more then less.



Londonderry, August 15. 1649. Worthy Sir,
MY last I writ to you, was of 19. or 20. of June, since no occasion has
presented, nor none came from you, nor indeed from any place else, all passages
having been obstructed.

June 24. What had past from the beginning of our siege to that time, I
advertised; since the most material are: Most of our horse, and 100 foot
before day, went to surprise the Enemies horse-guard, which lay at Mervins
Mill, a mile of the Town, but were discovered by the guards on the other side
of the water, the alarm being given, they took horse, and left the place,
killed three men, and took nine cowes, so we took the plunder, and fited the
Mill, and four or five houses.

28. These days past was spent in pulling down of houses, and the mills,
bringing home the wood for firing, and the stones for horse-mills, only one
day a skirmish of the foot, where the Enemy lost four men.

30. The Presidents brother, and other officers of Connaugh (the number of
twenty horse in all, who were long before expected with their forces) came
hither, having made a cessation for a month with the Scotch, but were to
return in 48 hours, which they did, but July 2. in the time of their stay, a
great skirmish was almost all day between our foot and theirs, our horsemen
being all in Town dispatching business with their friends of Connaugh, only
a few which guarded the horses, 12. whereof went to second our foot, which was
presently encountered with a like party of theirs, which had scarce exchanged
their pistols, when 100 and odd horse comes amain upon those few, and all
their foot upon ours, beat our men to the walls, and with a full carrear came
all along the wall within pistol shot thereof, and close under our new work,
firing all the way; yet blessed be God, we lost not a man, five of theirs was
killed, and 2 taken prisoners, some of ours hurt, most recovered; in
probability had the horsemen been out, and our foot had Ammunition, which they
had not, having spent it in the skirmish, a glorious day had been on our parts.
Sligo sold to Clanricard by Henderson, whereby Connough his lost.

These eight days past, have resorted to the Enemy great numbers of horse and
foot, and daily skirmishes, and have brought to their Leagure 12 pieces of
Ordnance, whereof they shot three pieces, carrying 4 l. bullet, but being
without effect, they have made no more use of them. Col. George Monroe came to
them with a party of horse and foot, who more then a month before, came to them
with (as reported) 3 or 400 horse, 12 or 1500 foot English, Scotch, and Irish,
which have miserably harried all the Country, retaken Colraine, and those parts.

12. They built a Fort at the Knock of Ember, to stop shipping and boats to
come to us (which for 20 days past, mightily relieved this place out of
Emstoun with fresh victuals) and having many hands, by noon, had made a
defensible piece of work; to slight which, and to get their Ordnance, the
President sent Cap. Keyser (a Par^ship here) with 100 musketteers in boats, but
they were so provided, that after exchanging on both sides good store of shot
both great and small, the ship and boats went to Culmore, and could not return.

13 Keyser went his way without leave, taking a great disheartning to lose him,
who stood us in great stead, and 100 of our best men which would not return.

16 They vapoured very much all day, but approaching something too near, two of
their horses, and one man was killed by one of our pieces of Ordnance, which
indeed is all the hurt I know they have done: some fault there is in platforms.

19. This day came about 400 horse, and 150 Dragoons of Connaugh forces on the
other side the water, unexpected by us, and brought Humfry Galbraith and Dean
Bartly, and a Lieu. prisoners, immediately they send down a party of their
horse to bring off out 100 men went with Keyser, who had lived the week past
upon Emstowne, wanting nothing, but taking what they pleased.

20. The last night they remove their siege, and our men this day bring all
their Cabins and Huts that was in the Trench, and made of it for firing about
20. or 30 li.

21 The enemy within a mile of the Town draws up into battalia both horse and
foot, and seem resolved to fight, ours the like, but the ground being bad, and
night approaching, nothing was done.

24 A party of 24 of our horse being sent out to discover the enemy, met with a
party of theirs of 80, sent for the same end, charged and routed them, took two
prisoners, both English, whereof Henry Pige, Col. Mervins Barber was one, 11
horses killed, 9 or 10 men, without any loss to us, only two men hurt; this
night a party of 100 horse, and as many Dragoons, were sent into Emstown for
contribution.

25 The Enemy appears in great numbers, not less of horse and foot then 3000.
which put us in a great fright, our party out of Emstowne not being returned,
about noon they drew into Battalia, so did we, and stood about an hour; when
they marched to Emstown to get between our party and us, who by Gods providence
came only time enough to get the shelter of Culmore, but so near were they,
that the Van beat up our Rear, one quarter of an hour longer had endangered or
lost them all, a part of their prey they did take, but brought 500 Cows besides
Sheep, etc. The way not passable on this side, they Ferryed over at Culmore,
and came on the other side, but by that time they came here, the prey was
reduced to 200, or less.

26 The Lord of Ards, ordered by the Prince to be Governor, or Commander in
chief of Ulster, by commission, whereof he sent the Lord President a Copy and a
Summons in a threatening way, sets down before this Town, at a little more
distance then the former Leagure; but in the night forty of our men gave them a
hot alarm, and put them in a cruel confusion.

27 One of our Scouts was shot by an Ambush of Musketeers, we took several
prisoners this day going to their Leagure, all saying they would not rise till
they had the Town.

21 A little before noon the enemies foot draws near our horses, then a
grasing, and before they could well bridle were upon them, but they presently
mounted and gave them the chase, cut and killed very many this was upon the
side of the hill, the enemies horse were ready but out of sight, fell in the
pursuit of the foot, ours discovered them, who having spent their shot were
glad to retreat a maine speed, and were followed with much eagerness; at the
foot of the hill the enemies charge was received by a few of our horse, the
main body of horse not moving as they say for want of Commanders, however great
was the confusion, and the enemy followed our men to the windmill or as near
the town, but immediately they rallied and faced about: the enemy made an
orderly retreat, but so as the dispute was hot, this Skirmish continued near
two hours all in much confusion, yet blessed be God we had no more loss, when
once all was in hazard, we lost four men upon the place, two dyed n xt day, 12
or 14 wounded, I think most is past the worst;

Of the other party, Lieu. Col. To. Galbraith, dangerously wounded, Cap
Fleming, of Phaughanvaile, Li u. Macklehan a bloody fellow, some other
Officers, and about 30 or 40 in all killed: taken prisoners 1 Lieu. 2 troopers of
theirs, of ours eight, whereof one dyed.

We have two ships at Culmore, came up to try the Fort to come by, the wind
fell calm so as they could neither come up nor return, between them and the
Fort was discharged 80 pieces of Ordnance, without any great hurt on either
side.

29 While our horse came home the enemy removes in great have and leaves their
new leagure, marching away, gave order to the Country to shift for themselves,
as they did when they l ft their former leagure; we settle a Garrison at John
Elumes house.

August 2 and 3 We burn Carganes, Sir John Cuninghams Newtown Colmacktreene;
and St. Johnstown.

4, 5 and 6. Some overtures and interchanging of letters have been about
exchanging of Prisoners, and offers of Treaty; but nothing done more then the
prisoners exchanged, who came hither the 6th.

7 Upon some Articles of agreement, came Owen -- Oneale with 300 Horse and 4000
foot to our releife, and encamped on the other side of the water.

8. O Neal sent to summon Goldsmiths town which was rejected, a party of our
Horse and Dragoones with 500 of Oneales foot marched into Emstowne for a
present releif of Oneals men and ours, but their contribution being not ready;
they take of the readiest 160 cowes and 30 or 40 Oxen.

9. Oneale by a party of his again comes to Goldsmiths town, attempts to scale
the bawne but were put off with the loss of a Captain and 30 or 40 Soldiers.

Sir Robert Stuart with so many as would side with him marched away, would have
had the Country gone with him, promising to return suddenly with an Army of
10000.

10 New Buildings or Goldsmiths town quitted and taken by Oneale wherein was
good store of malt and other provisions.

11 Their new Fort called Charles Fort upon the water was surendred to the
President wherein was 180 men 11 Pieces of Ordnance and 4 small Drakes upon one
carriage, little Ammunition or provision.

The Soldiers left all their Arms: but their powder-bags, horns,
Bandaleeres, etc. being laid upon a heap (through accedent or negligence) blew
up and burnt several of our Officers and some Soldiers very sore, and some
horses, one or two in danger of death.

Two piece of Ordnance were taken at new Buildings.

12 Eale Castle delivered up a Sergeant and two file of men left in it,
Mogerline, Lieu. Col. Jam. Galbraiths house delivered up, and Cap. Gore and a
party of 20 or 30 left in it.

13 Rophee Castle Summoned but rejected the Summons.

Cap. Kilner came to town (having till Saturday at night past, in a manner been
kept prisoner by the Scots) who then left them, the English and Irish return
thither who has about 40 good men, arms and ammunition and will suddenly be
strengthened.

The Scots in these parts all fled to Ballicelly and Ballicastle which they
victual and intend to make good.

14 A party of our own horse and foot and some of Oneals marched with 3 pieces
of Ordnance to Rophee Castle to beleagure it. The whole Country in effect comes
in, submits, and gets protections.

Thus briefly have I given you a relation of our business which you may
believe to be true, a few days will either strengthen or alter our conditions
much, the grand party of the Scots drawing to heads I hear Mr. King is going
down for aid, Now thinking I have been over tedious, communicate this to such
and so many of our friends as you think fitting to whom I desire, with your
self to be remembered, I rest, your assured Friend.

Henry Finch.

FINIS.

