A TRUE AND EXACT RELATION OF THE MOST REMARKABLE PASSAGES, WHICH have happened
at Warwick and Banbury since my Lord of Northamptons taking away the Ordnance
from Banbury Castle.

Sent in a Letter from a Gentleman of good worth, to his Son in Burchen-Lane,
London. Which Gentleman has been in all the Oppositions to the Earl of
Northamptons Proceedings.

Likewise, A Declaration by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That all such
Persons upon any pretense whatsoever, that shall assist his Majesty, with
Horse, Arms, Plate or Money, are Traitors to the King, Parliament, and Kingdom,
and shall be brought to condign punishment for the same.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. for John Hancocke in Bnrchen-Lane, August
the 20. 1642.

A CREDIBLE RELATION.
SON,
AFter my Love remembered, These are to let you understand, that after my Lord
of Northamptons bringing the Ordnance from Banbury Castle, where coming to
Warwick to besiege the Castle and Magazine there, where he has not only
received loss of some of his men, but has lost by the Bullet of a Musket part
of his Lip, which has affrighted him to oppose the Castle any farther, and as
this day he purposes to return for Banbury, hoping to speed as well as he did
before; but the Country is fully resolved to cross his expectation; Two days
since he discharged a Piece of Ordnance against the Castle, which the Ordnance
breaking, killed the Cannoneere; Sir Edw^^d Peto Debutie-Lievtenant of the
Castle to gratify his Salutation, returned a Piece of Ordnance, and brake
down a Pinnacle of the Tower of Saint Maryes Church, upon which the Ordnance
was planted: Presently after this Accident a Butcher carrying a shoulder of
Mutton in his hand, going over the Bridge, in the sight of the Castle, held it
up in derision, and cried, Here is Meat for the Roundheads in the Castle:
VVhereupon a Musket was discharged out of the Castle, and gave him thanks for
his offer, with the depriving him of his life at the same instant; which may be
a warning to all other scandalous tongues.

On Thursday last they assaulted Banbury again with two hundred horse and
foot, but through Gods assistance they beat them off; they looked for another
Onset on Saturday last; there is as yet no Aid come from London into these
parts; we daily expect them; we stand continually upon our Guard; keeping a
strong VVatch night and day; and well disposed people with us are gone to
Banbury, Resolving rather to die than to loose the Arms of the Town to the
Cavaliers. Now we have a Commission to shoot, which before we durst not; For
the Cavaliers swear they will possess themselves of Banbury Castle again,
because they cannot get Warwick, but we hope so soon as the Army comes down
to deal well enough with them; For behind them from Coventry, Brimigam, and
Auston, we hear of 1400. gathered together, who have taken a Load of
Ammunition from them, and sent it to Coventry; We hope for help to morrow;
they lie all up and down the Country, pillaging in the little Towns; they
steal Horse, Cowes, Sheep, Clothes, and Victuals, and all the Arms they
can find out; but if the Army come, we hope to hem them about, though they
have some great persons with them, as the Lord Compton, Mr Wilmote, Mr Walter
Pope, and Mr Chamberlain, that aid them with Horse and Ammunition: We
expect help from Northampton, for there are gathered together of the Trained
Bands of the Country and Volunteers, about 1500, or 1600. They take a good
course to train them at Northampton; and we hear that there they have all
shut up their Shops, and stand upon their Guard.

The Lord bring a happy end to these great Differences, and unite the King and
Parliament, that we may not only enjoy our lives and estates, but which is
greater, our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, all which lie at the Stake. Thus
till the next opportunity, I rest,

Your loving Father, JOHN GOLS^^E.

A DECLATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHereas the King, seduced by wicked Counsel; does make War against His
Parliament and People; And for the promoting of that War, diverse Fo^ces both
of Horse and Foot, have been levied and are raised by several persons, and His
Majesty's good Subjects are most cruelly robbed, spoiled and slain. To the end
that no man may be misled through Ignorance, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament declare, That all such persons as shall, upon any pretense
whatsoever, assist His Majesty in this War, with Horse, Arms, Plate or Money,
are Traitors to His Majesty, the Parliament, and the Kingdom, and shall be
brought to condign punishment for so high an offense.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsynge,
Cler. Parl D. Com.
FINIS.

