Gold tried in the fire, OR The burnt Petitions revived.
A Preface.
June 14th 1647
COuteous Reader, I shall give thee a short Narative of some passages upon the
following Petitions, first concerning the large Petition: Diverse printed
coppies thereof being sent abroad to gain subscriptions, one whereof was
intercepted by an Informer, and so brought to the hands of Mr. Glyn Recorder of
London, and a member of the Commons House: who was pleased to call it a
scandalous, and seditious paper: Whereupon it was referred to Colonel Leighes
Commitee (it being that Commitee appointed to receive informations against
those men who preached without license from the Ordainers) to find out the
Authors of the said Petition; upon this a certificate being drawn up, and
intended by the Petitioners, to have been delivered to the said Commitee, for
vindication of the said Petition, as will appear by the certificate herewith
printed; and notice being taken of one of the petitioners named Nicholas Tue,
who red the said certificate in the Court of Request; for the Concurrence of
friends who had not formerly seen nor subscribed the certificate: and for his
so doing he was sent for presently before the said Commitee, and for refusing
to answer to Interrogatories, was presently by them Committed, and still
remains in prison, it being at the least three Months since his first
commitment.

Likewise Major Tuledah, was upon complaint of that Commitee, the next day
committed by the House; but since discharged upon bail, without any just cause
shown for either of their Commitments: and others of the Petitioners abused,
and vilified by that Committee; some of them offering to draw their swords upon
the Petitioners. All which, with more was ready to be proved to the whole
House, but could by no means be obtained, though earnestly desired, by a
Petition, presently delivered into the House, humbly desiring the examination
of these miscarriages; but after eight weeks attendance, with much
importunity; after many promises and days appointed to take their Petition
into consideration, they obtained a very slight answer: which was that they
could not like of their Petition.

Occasion being taken suddenly after to commit one of the Petitioners named
Mr. Brown to the prison of Newgate; for his importunity in desiring an answer
to that Petition, after many promises and delays. Shortly after the slight
answer obtained to the said Petition, the Petitioners thought good to deliver a
second Petition to the House, to see if it were possible to obtain a better
answer to their just desires; hoping that they would better consider of things,
but after attendance and importunity, they obtained an answer in these words.
That the Parliament had Voted it a breach of privilege, scandalous, and
seditious, and that Petition, and the large Petition, to be burned by the hand
of the Hangman; which was accordingly done by Order of the House, in these
words.

Die Iovis 20 May, 1647,
Resolved etc. That the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, be required, to take
care that the Petition and paper be burnt, which accordingly was done, before
the Exchange, two days after the said Vote and Order of the House.

And shortly after this the Petitioners prepared a third Petition, which is the
la^t Petition herewith printed: and after much importunity with the Members of
the House; after almost two days attendance, obtained so much favor from one
of the Members, as to present that Petition to the House, and after all this
could obtain no other answer to that Petition; but the House after long
dispute thereupon passed this Vote.

Upon the 2d. of June 1647. That no answer shall be given to the Petition at
the present: and two days after the Petitioners attended the House, for a
further answer delivering copies of their Petition to the several Members of
the House, but could obtain no further answer thereunto; but received many
vilifying, and disgraceful speeches, from several Members of the House: and
so after a whole days attendance, departed without any hope, to receive any
answer to their just desires in the said Petition.

And thus I have faithfully, and truly (though briefly) given ye an account of
the proceedings upon the ensuing Petitions. Now let the judicious and
considerate Reader judge whether the Petitioners have received equal and even
dealing herein from this present Parliament: the Petitioners being such who
have laid out themselves, both in their persons and purses, far above their
abilities; who have not valued their lives, their childrens lives, nor their
servants lives, nor estates, to dear for the service of the Parliament, and
Commonwealth.

And is this the reward they shall receive, after they have thus laid out them
selves? Nay, they have just cause to fear that they and their friends are men
appointed to utter ruin, and destruction; otherwise what means all the
railing, reviling, and reproachful speeches of their Ministers, and Agents,
out of the pulpit and press, to stir up the rude multitude to fall upon
them, and destroy them; is not this ingratitude in the highest degree, shall
not the very Heathen rise up in judgment against such a generation, of
degenerate men as these? Who could say, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris.

You cannot choose but take notice of several Remonstrances, and Petitions
presented to the House from these men, who call themselves Lord Major, Aldermen
and Commons, of the City of London in Common Council assembled, what high
affronts they have offered to the Parliament; yet they have in some measure by
steps, and degrees, answered the Remonstrances, and granted their Petitions,
and you may observe what answer they have given to their last Petition, for
raising of Horse, etc. (The tendencie whereof may be of very dangerous
consequence if well weighed) which is thus. Mr. Speaker by command of the
House, express unto them the true sense the House has of their constant good
affections to this Parliament; and that no alterations whatsoever can work any
change in their duty, and love; for which he is to give them the hartiest
thanks of this House.

I could enlarge my self, but I affect brevitie, and the judicious and
considerate Reader, may enlarge himself in his own thoughts: well weighing the
matter in the said Remonstrances, and Petitions; and upon due consideration may
judge whether their Petitions, or the Petitions burnt, vilified, and disgraced,
deserve most thanks, or tend most to the safety of the Parliament, and
Commonwealth.

And will hence forth conclude, that as there is little good to be hoped for
from such Parliaments, as need to be Petitioned; so there is none at all to be
expected from those that burn such Petitions as these.

If the endeavors of good Common-wealths-men in the House could have
prevailed, these Petitions had not been burnt, nor the Petitioners abused; but
the sons of Zerviah were to strong for them, that is to say, the Malignants,
and Delinquents, the Lawyers (some few excected) the Monopolising merchants,
the sons and servants of the Lords; all these joining together, over Voted them
about 16 Voices; but God in time, will we trust, deliver the people of this
Nation, from their deceit, and malice; and therefore let us not sorrow as men
without hope, nor be discouraged, but go on and persist, for the just
liberties of England, a word to the wise is sufficient.

Farewell,
By a well-wisher to truth and peace.
Printed in the year 1647.


