INDEPENDENCIE GODS VERITY: OR, THE NECESSITY OF TOLERATION.

Unto which is added the chief Principles of the Government of INDEPENDENT
CHURCHES.

Written by J. G. B. D.

London, Printed for William Ley 1647.

Independency Gods Verity: OR, The necessity of Toleration.
I Am not ignorant, that I am now entering the field, where many Combatants
stand ready to encounter me; but I hope the judicious Reader will not lay the
crime of presumption to my charge because I undertake in one single sheet, to
vindicate that which whole volumes have calumniated, nor that I devulge my
thoughts in the defense of that which of late was so much opposed, even that
which so many learned and pious men, surviving at this present, both in Town
and City, in Parliament and Army, have seen to their grief trampled under foot,
and to their joy exalted.

Many there are who hurried on with the violent stream of their passiions, if
they but once hear Independency named with applause, like a gald horse, winch
and kick, and bear down all before them: Edwards, Vicars, and Bastwick, have
wrote much but proved little or nothing of what they undertook; but like some
unskilful Statuaries, who in framing a Colossus, if they make it straddle
wide, look big, and gape, they imagine they have equalled Apelles his
Masterpiece; so they, binding in one volume a whole bundle of invectives,
framed against that, which in truth they are not able to oppugn, conceive they
have framed pieces both lasting and inimitable.

The grand Engine with which our adversaries would beat down Independency, is
that Text of Scripture, Cor. 11. every one of you says, I am of Paul, I of
Cephas, and I of Christ: But alas! they do not consider, that this place
makes altogether against them; for in these words, we are given to understand,
that there were in the Primitive times diverse Churches and Congregations under
several Pastors, S. Paul does not tax their manner of order, but reproves
those contentious spirits, that vaunted themselves to be under a more real
Pastor then others were, as that Paul exceeded Apollos in the gifts of the
Spirit, Apollos Cephas, and a third depraving them all, and causing a Schism,
boasting he and those of his faction were the only followers of Christ: some
there are that employ these words of S. Paul Cor. 10. to extirpate Independency
root and branch, where he says, Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions amongst you. I answer, that for us to take this saying of S. Paul as
a Precept, that all men must be of one belief, and speak one thing, is
rediculous; for it is impossible and cannot be otherwise, but that while there
are different men, there will be different minds, and that will seem good and
right to some, which to others will appear erroneous and impious.

Therefore Saint Paul must be understood otherwise then so, and to that end, we
ought to consider that S Paul gives this precept in reference to their
temporal actions as well as their spiritual performances, as it were
persuading them to policy, lest by their divisions and factions, the heathen
amongst they then were conversant, might have just occasion to despise their
Worship, and fit opportunity to injure their persons; but let us grant that he
spoke to them wholly, in reference to their spiritual performances; yet it
will not follow, that the Church of God ought to be tied in one knot, and
kneaded in one lump; for the Church of God, though divided into distinct
Congregations, as they were in the Primitive time, may speak one and the same
thing, although in different manner; and like birds that sing diverse notes yet
make one harmony agree in one thing, though diversely delivered: besides if it
were, as these men would have it, who profess themselves utter enemies to
Toleration, that every Christian by these words, ought to be compelled to give
outward obedience to what is enjoined, what sundry grievous, and dire
inconveniences may happen I shall set down:

First, That service cannot be acceptable to God which is not performed with a
willing mind, and a curse lies on him that dosthe work of the Lord negligently,
which must inevitably happen if this course were taken, to tyranize over men's
Consciences.

Secondly, by compelling them, to do that which their Conscience allows not,
they sin against the clear and destinate light of knowledge, and so in part are
guilty of the sin of the holy Ghost; but now that all men may have a good
conceit of us, and be incorporated with us, let him consider;

First, What a sweet and heavenly communion we have amongst our selves, how
nothing is attempted prejudicial to tender Consciences; who though perhaps not
resolved in some points, yet Christ who alone ought to rule his Church, we know
in his good time will inform them.

Secondly, That though we acknowledge Christ to be the only ruler of his
Church, yet ye divest not the temporal Magistrate of his power to punish all
gross crimes.

Thirdly, That we allow none to be capable of our Member-ship, till we have had
a sufficient trial of their Conversation, and have heard the confession of
their Faith, and the evidences of the truth of their conversion, and till they
have entered into a solemn Covenant, and have the joint assent of the whole
Congregation, whereby we come as near as in us lies, to the form observed by
the Church at Jerusalem, Act. 1. 15.

But on the other side consider, our adversaries, who are continually at
variance amongst themselves, how they constrain tender Consciences to obey
their rigorous and Antichristian commands, how they bestow on the temporal
Magistrate, the office belonging only to Christ, how they admit of all persons
whatsoever without the least examination, how their Ministers do deny,
exclaim, and preach against Christ's kingly Government, how they and all the
people under their Ministry, are unconverted, or at least but in part, wanting
the main thing, to wit, Christ's kingly office, men visibly out of the Covenant
of Grace, who have not so much, as an outward profession of Faith, and deny
Christ to be their king.

The necessity of Toleration.
PResbitery, is the rival of Episcopacy, but Independency is of another
strain, and admiteth not of humane prudence in Church Government: for the
Church which is of a spiritual building, framed of such lively stones, as are
not of the world, nor of the wisdom of the world, but founded only upon the
wisdom of God, revealed in the word by his Spirit, is sufficient to constitute
and and maintain a Church without any assistance from the Kingdoms of the
world, whose power they leave entire to it self, for the Bishops, and
Presbyters, by their Church policy, stand Compettitors with the Magistrate, to
whom we leave all save only the kingdom of Christ, (which himself has said)
is not of this world, and so can be no trouble to it, unless it be first
troubled by it.

But as the case stands now at present, Independency is the only line that can
stanch our wounds, the only damme that can stay the inundation of blood, which
is else likely to overwhelme us; for the very name of Presbitery, is hateful
to the people, and it were too strange a relapse to give them again their
Bishops and their Litturgy, and if either of the other be permitted, there can
be nothing expected but murmurings, and clashings, if not open mutinings, but
if a Toleration were allowed, it would take away all occasions of tumults and
Garboiles, for when every man is permitted to use his Conscience according as
he is persuaded in himself, they will esteem their burdens not half so heavy
as before, and be encouraged to yield obedience to those injunctions imposed on
them by their Rulers, which otherwise is not to be expected from them; so that
it is not only convenient, but also very necessary that there be a Toleration.

Again, any man the least enlightened will dispense with any compulsive
ordinance more tamely, then when he is constrained in point of Religion, and we
know well that the original of our late War was the Bishops assuming to
themselves that power, which Christ never gave them, to wit, Of compelling men
to yield obedience to what ever they imposed; and men now, are grown more
various in their opinions then ever before, and will be as easily persuaded to
forsake their meat, as to relinguish their Tenets; and moreover, it is come to
that pass, but by what means I will not question, that every man esteems it
as properly his own, as any Immunity contained in Magna Charta, to use his
Conscience without control; and when they shall be debarred of what they have
so long enjoyed and so much covet to keep, what they may attempt let the wise
judge; therefore there is not only a reason, but also a necessity of Toleration.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

G. M.


