Die Jovis 31. Decembr. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That this House gives thanks to
Mr. Good, one of the Assembly of Divines, for his great pains taken in his
Sermon preached the last Fast before the Lords of Parliament in the Abbey Church
Westminster: And he is hereby desired to print and publish the same, which is
to be printed only by authority under his own hand.

John Brown Cler. Parliamen.

I do appoint Nathanaell Webb and William Grantham to print my Sermon.

William Good.

JACOB RAISED: OR, The means of making a Nation happy both in spiritual and
temporal Privileges.

Presented in A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable House of PEERS in
the Abbey Church at Westminster, at the late Solemn Monthly Fast, December. 30.
1646.

By Willam Good B. D. and Pastor of Denton in Norfolk.

Published by Order of the House of Peers.

Psalm. 68. 1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered. Ezekiel. 36. 11. I
will do better to you then at your beginnings. 1 Chronicles. 22. 19. Now set your
heart and soul to seek the Lord your God, arise therefore and build ye the
Sanctuary of the Lord God. London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Nath. Webb
and Will. Grantham at the sign of the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1647.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The House of PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
AS the goodness of God, that hitherto has afforded a miraculous preservation
to the Parliament of England, and has never failed to give in merciful
Deliverances in time of need, and to make many admirable returns of Prayer,
does manifest that God is with you in your pious endeavors for the settling of
Truth and Peace: So is it evident that our sins do withold good things from
us, that notwithstanding the Balm that is in Gilead, and the Physicians there,
yet we are not healed.

The Sword is not sheathed, the Pestilence not ceased, and Famine a Plague
worse then these, begins to threaten us. Ignorance, Profaneness, Heresies, get
ground in many places of the Land; and hence such as are enemies to Peace and
Reformation, encourage themselves with hope to see the time when they shall
cause your work to cease, and bring us back again to Egypt.

It therefore highly concerns all of all conditions, to examine what their
iniquities are, that put a stop to the current of Gods Mercies toward us; and
when they have stoned the Achans in their own bosom, to mourn for the sins
of others, and to wrestle with God for pardon, and such a spirit of repentance
as may fit the Land for those high and excellent Mercies, both for soul and
body, which hitherto have been the object both of our prayers and hopes.

Now as no means of cure are successful further then Gods own power and
blessing have a concurrence with them; so the only way to procure Gods
assistance, is, to make such application to him as may most strongly engage him
to be with you in all your endeavors. And seeing God does all things for his
own glory, to advance such ways as will make the name of God most glorious
in the Land, must needs be the greatest engagement you can make of God.

Some few directions for this purpose by your Lordships command I presented to
your ears; and now by the same command present them to your eyes. The chief
whereof was this, the advancement of Gospel Truth, and the power of godliness.

The Psalmist tells us. In Jury is God well known, his name is great in Israel:
Where God is best known, he is most glorified; God is rightly made known only
by his own truth revealed in his Word* and as this is more or less defended,
propagated, and obedience thereunto yielded; so is* God more or less honored
by any Nation, and their spiritual and temporal privileges more or less
enlarged.

Basil and Ambrose say of the Echineis or Remora a little fish, that if it
join it self to a Ship under sail, it will make it stand still and quiet,
though driven with the greatest tempests. Like this Echineis to a Ship, is
Religion to a State, which while your Lordships have endeavored to reform and
establish, you have been preserved in safety, while so many dreadful storms
have blown from one end of the Land unto another. God therefore having trusted
you in a special manner with the guarding of his Truth and Ordinances, let it
be your greatest care to preserve and propagate these in their power and
purity; And then you may commit both your own and the Kingdoms safety with
confidence unto Gods keeping. And whatsoever storms shall be raised against
you, and such as be with you in the Cause of God, he will quiet them in his
appointed time, and give a prevailing command to all your enemies, saying,
Destroy not the Cluster, for there is a blessing in it, Isaiah 65. 8.

Thus may your Honors not only be Physicians to heal our Land, but make
plentiful provisions for your own happiness to eternity: whereas otherwise
those great talents of honor, authority and wealth, which God has entrusted
you with, will be but the improvement of your everlasting misery. Alcibiades
bragging of his great possessions, Socrates to abate his pride, fetched him a
Map of the World, and desired him to show him where his possessions lay, but
there he could not find them; All Athens in that being but a point. Remember,
that what ever possessions great men have here, yet Not many wise, not many
rich, not many mighty, shall have inheritances in heaven.

As therefore God has done great things for you, so do you great things for
God. Let your authority be the bulwark of the innocent, the axe to cut down
profaneness, injustice and oppression in the Land: Let Ireland be releived, and
such at home as the Public service has made Widows or Orphants, or
necessitous, be succored. Let those little Sisters that have no breasts, be
provided for all the Kingdom over; Let grace and holiness be seen in their own
colors in your lives and examples, that your copies which are seen and read of
all men, may make them in love with godliness, that, when God shall divest you
of your great possessions here, he may invest you with a glorious inheritance
among the Saints in his own Kingdom for ever, which that he may do, is the
prayer of

Your Lordships humble servant in the Lord WILLIAM GOOD.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable House of LORDS at their late
Solemn Monthly Fast, December. 30. 1646.
Amos 7. 5. last words. By whom shall JACOB arise? for he is small.
THe great miseries which this Prophet saw were coming upon the people of
Israel, and those desolating judgments which he had a commission to denounce
against them, were the cause of this mournful question in my text.

He Prophesied in the time of Jeroboam the Second, who was the Son of Joash, 2
King. 14. 24. In his reign Israel had some restoration in regard of their
outward estate, but he being a wicked King, walking in the ways of Jeroboam
who made Israel to sin: the Peoples sins grew to so great a height; as they
were ripe for judgment, and therefore God sent this Prophet to mind them of
those breaches and desolations which were speedily to come upon them, without
their mature repentance. And in the Nine first verses of this Chapter, declares
a most sad vision which he had concerning their future condition.

Verse 1. He saw an army of Grasshoppers or Locusts, a kind of green worm that
should devour all their grass, and so bring a degree of scarcity upon them.

Verse 4. He saw a Fire, by which God would contend with them, which should
devour the great deep, and eat up a part: Calvin reads it not a part, but the
whole possession which the word (...) will bear, that is all that the Locusts
had left.

This Fire is conceived to be a great drought, when the violent heat of the
Sun beams shall pierce the deepest of the earth below the roots of Corn or
Trees, and so make a perfect famine.

Verse 8. He saw a Plumb line, which was a certain measure of time taken by
God, beyond which he would not spare this people, as the text says, I will not
pass by them any more, I will inevitably bring my judgments in their full
current; as it follows verse 9.

Now while the people were under the two former judgments, there was some hope
of recovery; yet their sins were so great, and they so obstinate in them, and
God in his wrath resolved to bring them so low, as the Prophet being deeply
affected with the sense of their calamity, and yet at a stand how they should
compass any deliverance, complains to God and says, By whom shall Jacob
arise? for he is small.

For Explication of these words, we must understand, First, that,

By Jacob, is meant the ten Tribes chiefly; yet Judah is not excluded, because
Amos prophesied to them also, Amos 2. 5.

Secondly Small. By this is meant the afflicted and low estate of this people
in regard of their Temporals, under the forenamed judgments, and likewise in
regard of their Spirituals. Verse 9.

The Sanctuary of Israel shall be laid wast, and I will send a fumine, and not
of bread, but of the word of the Lord, Amos 8. 11.

Thirdly, By whom shall Jacob arise? (...) of (...) signifies to arise, to
stand, to establish; but here by the most it is taken transitively and
signifies to raise; and then it is read, Who shall raise Jacob? And if we read it
so, the sense is still the same: who shall raise, deliver, restore Jacob, and
make him happy in the enjoyment of Temporal and Spiritual privileges?

The Text thus explained, affords us these Two Propositions: First, 1. Propos.


That Gods people may be brought so low, in regard of Temporal and Spiritual
privileges, as no means may be visible, or if visible, for the present not
effectual for their restoration.

Amos makes it a question, because he could not see, by whom Jacob should be
raised.

The Second Proposition is this, When there is no means visible, or if
visible, not effectual for our recovery, then we ought to apply our selves to
God to work deliverance for us. Amos though he could see no means whereby Jacob
should be raised, yet he prays Verse 3. O Lord pardon, and Verse 5. O Lord
cease, and asks God this question, By whom etc.

Of these Propositions in order, and first of the First, That Gods people etc.

Such was their condition in the beginning of Jeroboams reign, 2 King. 14. 26.
The Lord saw the affliction of Israel that it was very bitter, for there was
none shut up, nor any left, nor any helper in Israel. In Jehorams time, 2 King.
6. 28. they were so low with famine that They that did feed delicately, were
desolate in the streets; they that were brought up in scarlet, did embrace the
dunghill. This was the state of Gods people in Egypt, in the Wilderness, in
the Babylonish Captivity, and under the Romish servitude. This was Job his
case, Job 1. when estate, and friends, and reputation, and health were all
taken from him. This was David's case with Akish King of Gath, 1 Samuel 21, and in
Ziglag, 1 Samuel 30. 6. when his wives were taken prisoners, his substance
plundered, and the City ready to stone him.

And as this is the condition sometimes of Gods people in regard of their
Temporal, so of their Spiritual privileges: when the Worship of God is
generally corrupted, his Truths despised, and his Ordinances polluted and
contemned. Thus it was in Ahabs time, when there was a general face of
Idolatry, and such a persecution of the Ministers of God by those that had the
highest authority, as Obadiah was forced to hide an hundred of the Prophets of
the Lord by fifty in a cave, 1 King. 18. 4. And Elijah complained, They have
for saken thy Covenant, and thrown down thine Altars; and for such as did
visibly worship God truly, he says, I even I am left alone, and they seek my
life also: 1 King. 19. 10.

The Reasons of this dispensation of God, are, First, 1. Reason.


To take us off from Idolizing means, or resting upon creature helps for
deliverance, and that we may both expect this from himself, and give him the
praise of it, when we have it.

We naturally are not willing to come to God, as long as we have any means to
go unto; and therefore God removes these, or makes them ineffectual to relieve
us; and increases our affliction, to bring us to trust in him, and to seek for
restoration at his hand. Hos. 5. 13. Ephraim and Judah sent first to Ahab and
King Jareb; then God turned their Moth into a Lion, and says, I will go away
and tear, and none shall rescue, until they seek my face. In their affliction
they will seek me early.

God will have the honor that is due unto him, which is, to be trusted as the
adequate cause of all our deliverances; according to that, Psalm. 62. 8. Trust
in God at all times: And that, Jer. 3. 23. In vain is salvation looked for from
the hills, or from the multitude of mountains; for God is the salvation of
Israel.

Secondly, for the glory of his Justice. When God threatens 2. Reason.
only, and does not strike, or if his strokes be less then his threatenings
hold out, we are apt to think our sins are not so great, or not so provoking,
as they are, or else that God is not just in punishing. Jer. 16. 10. When the
people heard of great judgments, they cried out, What is our iniquity? What is
our sin? And Psalm. 50. 21. I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thou art. As Dionysius, that robbed a Temple, and when
he had done, went to sea, and had a prosperous voyage, and he said, Surely the
gods are in love with sacrilege. God therefore, to clear his justice,
sometimes severely punishes and brings low his own people, that it may appear
how he hates sin, though in those whom he loves best. Amos 3. 2. You only
have I known of all the families of the earth, and therefore I will punish you
for all your iniquities. If David make the enemies of God to blaspheme, the
sword shall never depart from his house, 2 Samuel 12. 14. He continues and
increases his judgments, until his people confess both the heinousness of
their sins, and his justice in their affliction, Hoseah 5. 14.

Thirdly, for the glory of his Mercy. Extremity of pain makes 3. Reason.
us prize a little ease; and extremity of want, to admire a little plenty. In
time of prosperity, we make little account of rich mercies; and no mercies are
so great then, as will draw us to any considerable thankfulness. Then we do by
Mercies, as men do by Rivers; these bring us up the choicest commodities both
of our own and other Nations, and we return by them again our dung and garbage,
and such things as are noisome to our selves and others: But whenever we are
deprived of those we account but ordinary mercies, we learn to value them at a
high rate. Darius Darium illum quem Alexander magnus bis acie superavit, cum ex
fuga defessus aquam lutulentam and cadaveribus inquinatam biberet; dixisse
serunt, se nunquam in vita bibisse iucundius. Osor. de instit. regis, l. 4.
being vanquished by Alexander, and in his flight being in extremity of thirst,
drank water out of a puddle that was mixed with much blood of slain soldiers,
and said it was the sweetest drink that ever he tasted in his life. And the
Prodigal, Luke 15. that regarded not all the dainties of his fathers house,
while he was in it; when he was brought to live upon husks, and was ready to
perish for hunger, did highly prize the dry bread he remembered to be amongst
his fathers plenty.

And as we learn by our wants to prize mercies, so to give God the glory of all
our supplies; As Mariners at sea, when they are overtaken with such a storm as
breaks all their tackling, and makes all their anchors come home, and drives
their ship which way it pleases; If then they be carried into a safe harbor,
must needs give all the praise to God. Hence it is that God usually either
prevents us with his blessings, and gives them before we have used any means
for them; or else if he set us to seek them, lets us see all our endeavors too
weak to accomplish them, till his apparent hand of providence bring them in;
that so when we receive them, we may say with David: Not unto us, O Lord, not
unto us; but unto thy name do we give all the praise.

Fourthly, for the manifestation of the power and excellency of 4. Reason.
that Grace which he gives unto his children. The preciousnesse and stability
of Faith, the beauty of Patience, and sincerity of Obedience, are never so much
seen as in the deepest conflicts with the greatest troubles. The Devil did
accuse Job of hypocrisy, Job 1. 8. 11. That he served God only for wealth and
outward prosperity: But when all those miseries were brought upon him for his
trial, which amounted to the loss of all his comforts, he confuted the Devils
accusation, and his faith, obedience and patience appeared invincible.

It made Elijah his faith glorious, when in contestation with Baals Priests, 1
King. 18. 38. he not only trusted God to send fire from heaven to consume his
offering; but to consume it then, when he had powered 4 barrels of water upon
it, and filled the trench with water. So, the graces of the Saints then become
glorious, when they continue to act highly for God, in the midst of the deepest
waters of affliction. Justin Martyr acknowledged his conversion from being a
Philosopher to become a Christian, was occasioned by the invincible faith and
courage that he saw in the Martyrs, under all the torments they were put to
suffer.

Abraham's faith, David's thankfulness, Moses meekness, Calebs integrity, Paul's
zeal, Joshua's courage, had never been so perspicuous, nor had God ever had so
much honor by their graces, if he had not put them upon those hard encounters
and conflicts which he did.

Thus you see the truth of this Point cleared. God for his own glory suffers
his people many times to be so small, as they can find no means effectual for
their recovery.

And so I come to application. And the first Use of this point is, That if the
people of God, who are as dear to him as the apple of his eye, may sometimes be
under such troubles and miseries as seem inextricable; How inevitable and
intolerable shall those miseries be, which God shall make to be the portion of
the wicked?

Here is just matter of trembling for all wicked men: If the Application.
anger of God against such as he intends for ever to make blessed, may be so
great, as to bring them under such wants and straits as they can see no way out
of: What will be the fruit of his fiery indignation against such as are his
enemies, appointed to drink the dregs of his wrath for ever.

If so great judgments begin at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17. what shall be
the end of them that obey not the Gospel?

If Stone, and Gout, and Strangury, and Sword, and Famine, and Pestilence, the
worst of plagues this world has, may fall upon the Righteous; what
unconceiveable torments must those be, which God reserves for the punishment of
the Wicked?

What little cause have wicked men to joy in all their worldly pleasures and
contentments, when it is their certain portion to suffer the worst of miseries
to eternity? Who would rejoice to eat of the most exquisite banquet that can be
made, if he knew, that when the reckoning came in, nothing would pay the shot
but his own blood?

Wicked men may escape those, common miseries of Poverty, or disgrace, or sword
or pestilence, which Gods children here sometimes endure; yet shall they never
escape those unspeakable plagues which shall be the just reward of impenitent
sinners. As Elijah says, He that escapes the sword of Hazael, shall Jehu slay;
and he that escapes the sword of Jehu, shall Elisha slay. Elisha his sword, it
was his prophecy of those judgments that at length should inevitably fall
upon the wicked; who though they may escape the sword of men here, yet they
shall never escape the sword of Gods eternal wrath hereafter.

A second use we should make of this, is seriously to examine, Use 2.
and repent of those sins, that cause God thus to make his own people small.
But of this afterward more seasonably, in the second Proposition.

Thirdly, If such may be the state of Gods people, to be very low Use 3.
and small, whom yet God intends to deliver, and to preserve to his own
heavenly kingdom: Then let us learn to take patiently Gods dispensations
toward us in these times. Though Ireland remain yet in a most sad, and almost
forlorn condition; though at home the Sword be not sheathed, nor the Pestilence
ceased, and new fears of famine (a yet greater judgment) arise upon us; Though
our dangers yet be great, because of our intestine divisions, and the unwearied
plots of our enemies; and which is worst of all, Reformation of Religion with a
hedge about it, is not yet perfected; but Profaneness, Heresies and
Blasphemies, in many places, abound more then ever: Yet let us not murmr. To
be kept long in the wilderness, has been the condition of Gods people before
us: Let us wait upon God with patience, and thankfulness, improving studiously
those means for recovery He has blessed us with, until the Lord be pleased to
raise us out of these present troubles and dangers, and accomplish for us those
rich mercies which we desire, and hope for.

Patience is a quiet silent frame of soul under troubles, submiting to God
without murmuring, or declining any work God sets us about.

And to encourage and persuade us to this Patience, take these brief
Considerations. First,

They that wait for Gods salvation, with a free and full submission 1. Consid.
to his will, and bearing of his indignation, manifested in those crosses and
afflictions which he brings upon them for their sins, or trial, shall never
fail of such an issue as shall conduce most to their true and eternal
happiness, Jer. 30. 18.

Secondly. The more patient we are under cure, the sooner we 2. Consid.
shall be healed: nothing more hinders the cure of wounds then the distempered
struggling and unquietness of the Patient. When David in his flight from
Absolon came to this degree of submission unto God, 2 Samuel 15. 26. Here I am,
let him do unto me what seems good in his eyes, David quickly got the victory
over Absolon and all that rose up in that rebellion with him. When Hezekiah
came to this, after God had threatened that all his treasures and jewels should
be taken away, and his sons become Eunuchs to the King of Babylon, as to say,
Isaiah 39. 8. Good is the word of the Lord, God presently respited the
judgment, and let Peace and Truth be in his days. We could not but expect to
meet with great and long troubles, by the strongest oppositions that men or
devils can stir up against us, because we endeavor to carry Reformation to the
highest pitch. Psalm. 2. 1, 2. When Christ sets up his kingdom, the heathen
rage, and the people imagine a vain thing. The Kings of the earth set
themselves, and the Rulers take counsel against the Lord, and against his
Anointed. When the Jews began to build the Wall of Jerusalem, Sanballet, and
Tobias, and the Arabians etc. they all conspired together to go and fight
against Jerusalem, Nehem. 4. 8. When they began to build the Temple, their
enemies hired Counselors and wrote Letters against them unto Cyrus King of
Persia, Ezra 4. 5. and designed their ruin.

Evil men will strive for their lusts as for their lives, and therefore 3.
Consid.
will struggle much against that Reformation that will either curb their
extravagancies, or expose them to much disgrace and scorn, even amongst their
inferiors. And not only evil men, but Satan will muster up all his forces for
opposition, when he sees his kingdom going down. As Jaylers when they see their
prisoners ready to break out, they will then thrust them into the Dungeon, and
double their irons: So Satan when he discernes the Liberty and Purity of the
Gospel is like to take his prisoners from him, he will shakle them with all
troubles and miseries he can get commission to bring upon them.

Fourthly. All our troubles are much less then our deservings. 4. Consid.
God might have stub'd us up, when he went about to prune us. God might have
turned us into dust as he did Sodom and Gomorrah, seeing our sins are greater
then theirs could be, that never abused Gospel-mercy as we have done, and
surely it is only the Lords mercy we are not consumed. In the midst of our
judgments God has remembered mercy, and by many miraculous deliverances in our
greatest streits has let us see that he would not give us up to be a prey to
the teeth of our enemies: and still we we have balm in Gilead and physicians
there, though our sins exceedingly obstruct our perfect healing.

Fifthly. God uses by long afflictions many times to prepare 5. Consid.
us for great mercies. Joseph was a great while in the hands of strangers and
afterward in prison, before he became ruler of Egypt. Israel were instructed
with the Rod forty years in the wilderness, before they were made possessors
of the land that flowed with milk and honey: and afterward were humbled with
seventy years Captivity before they enjoyed the glory of the second Temple.
And Antichrist must reign and afflict the Saints a thousand years before the
glorious times of the Church. A field that is to be sown with curious seed,
that is all overgrown with briars and thorns, will take a long time in
stulbing and preparing. And stones that are to be placed in a curious building
will take a long time in hewing and squaring.

Sixthly. We still go on to continue and multiply our sins; now 6. Consid.
to have gods judgments removed, before we be amended, were the greatest
judgment of all. For God thus not to be angry, were the greatest anger of all.
For the Chyrurgion to pull off his salves, and to leave dressing the wounds of
his Patient before he were healed, were to leave him desperate of any cure at
all.

God does not afflict willingly, neither does he take any delight in the
troubles of his own people, and therefore sure we are not yet fit for those
mercies we desire, or else God would not continue to multiply his judgments
upon us. Now better had we be content with any cure, then to be suffered to go
on still in our sins. There is nothing so much bitterness in those rods that
drive us unto God, as in those sins by which we are separated from God.

Kingdoms are well bought, whatever price we give for them, Imperia, q^ovis
preti^ constant, been.
says a Heathen. Whatever pressures we undergo, the purchase will be happy, if
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, for the comfort of us and our posterity, may be at
length advanced among us.

Seventhly, We may be patient, because our troubles shall neither 7. Consid.
be greater, nor longer, then makes for Gods glory, and our good. One of the
sharpest and longest miseries that befell Israel, was the Babylonish captivity;
and yet God says of that, I have sent them into Chaldea for their good, Jer.
24. 5. Affliction is measured out only by God himself; neither men nor devils
can touch one hair of our heads, without license first sued out from God.
Affliction springs not out of the dust, Job 5. 6. Is there any evil in the
city, that I have not done? says God. Now God knows, our strength is not the
strength of stones, nor our flesh the flesh of brass, Job 6. 12. And therefore
God does afflict his people in measure, Isa. 27. 7. God, that is our Physician
to mix the potion of our adversity for us, is our Father as well as our
Physician, and he is the tenderest Father in the world; and therefore he will
neither keep us longer in Physic, nor put any more Ingredients of bitterness in
it, than will be for our health; but will let us see at length, All things
shall work together for our good, Romans 8. 28.

Absolon sent twice to Joab to come and speak with him, and he would not; at
length he sent his servants to set Joabs corn on fire, and so compelled him to
come unto him, 2 Samuel 14. 30. When gentle means will not prevail, God
surprizeth our greatest comforts, and draws our afflictions to a greater height
and length, that he may compel us to come to him, and draw out our souls in
prayer with that fervencie and constancy, that he may hear and deliver us,
Isa. 26. 16.

Eighthly, Wharever the afflictions of Gods people are, yet 8. Consid.
their condition is most comfortable of any other in the world: and that
appears in three things:

1. They may be filii sub ira, children under wrath; but not filii irae, sons
of wrath: For nothing shall separate them from the love of Christ, Not
tribulation, nor distress, nor persecution, nor famine, nor sword, Romans 8. 35.
The Righteous are like mount Sion, that shall never be removed. But that shall
ever be made good to them, 1 Pet. 1. 5. They shall be kept by the power of God
unto salvation. 2. Whatever they want in the world, yet they ever enjoy the
best comforts, such as issue from the special love and favor of God in Christ
Jesus; Pardon of sin, peace of conscience, and joy of believing, which is
unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 8. These are better then any comforts of
the world. When all the Stars in the Firmament shine, it is but Night; but the
shining of one Sun makes it Day: Gods favor makes it Day, when all the
Creature-contentments enjoyed together, make but a Night of comfort. And hence
it was that Habacuck said: Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither
shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields
yield no meat; the Flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no
Heard in the stall: Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation, Hab. 3. 17, 18. 3. The more bitterness they meet with here, the
more sweetness to eternity: Such may be our afflictions, as may cause us to
pay the debt of Death the sooner; yet this shall be our advantage, We shall
hereby sooner rest from our labors, and be in possession of perfect
blessedness, the reward of Gods Free Grace. And therefore every godly man may
say of his Persecutors, as Socrates of Anitus and Melitus, They may kill me,
but they cannot Interficere me possunt, nocere mihi non possunt.
hurt me. The time will come, when I shall be the happier for all my trials. As
Sampson, when he went down to the vineyards of Timnath, he slew a Lion, a work
of labor and danger; but when he returned again weary and faint, he found
honey in the dead Lion, to refresh and comfort him.

The undergoing of sore afflictions, is like the killing of a Lion, but when we
return by death, we shall find honey in the dead Lion, much sweeter
consolations for all the sorrows our afflictions have brought upon us.
Augustine having a friend that suffered much by slander, he comforted him with
this: He that willingly adds to Qui volens addidit infamiae tuae, nolens
addidit mercedi tuae.
thy defamation here, does unwillingly add to thy eternal glory hereafter. As
St. Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our light affliction which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

Thus much of the first Proposition: I come now to the second.

When there is no means visible, or if visible, not effectual for our 2..
Propos.
recovery; then we ought to apply our selves to God, to work deliverance for
us.

So Amos here: All effectual means of recovery for this people lying out of
sight, he enquires of God how their restoration shall be compassed, and seeks
to him to raise them.

Thus Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. When that great army of Moabites and
Ammonites came against Jerusalem, which he thought himself no way able to
resist, he says, We know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. And he,
and all the inhabitants of Judah, set themselves to seek the Lord.

When the Prodigal, Luke 15. had no means left of supply, but was ready to
starve, he then resolves, I will go to my father.

Thus the Prophet Hoseah directs the people in distress, Hos. 5. 13. when God
had said, He would tear, and none should deliver: when Ahab and King Jared
could afford no help: Come (says the Prophet) let us return unto the Lord, he
has torn, and he will heal.

The Reasons of this Point are: First,

Because Gods people are never so small, but God can raise 1. Reason.
them. Is there any thing too hard for the Lord? Genesis 18. 14. Though no
salvation can be had from the hills, or from the multitude of the mountains,
yet the Lord is the salvation of Israel, Jer. 3. 23.

God is the Lord of hosts, and all the creatures in the world are but soldiers
in that army which he commands; and therefore there is no power raised against
his people can be so great, but he is able presently to suppress it. He can
command an army of Stars to vanquish his peoples enemies, as he did Sisera and
his host, Judge. 5. Or an army of Fire to defend them, as he did for Elisha, 2
King. 6. 17. If they be in want of necessary food, if the heavens be like
brass, and the earth like iron, yet he can rain down bread upon them, as he
did upon Israel. He can instantly turn the greatest famine into plenty, as in
Samaria, when one day the women did eat their children for want of bread, the
very next day two measures of Barley were sold for a shekel, 2 King. 7. 18.

Secondly, Because God has made many comfortable promises 2. Reason.
to a people in such a condition, to invite them to seek his help. Psalm. 50.
15. Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. Psalm. 34.
19. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
all, Jer. 30. 17. Alas, for that day is great, so as none is like unto it, even
the day of Jacobs troubles, but he shall be saved out of it.

But it may be objected, What if God have decreed to bring Object.
desolating and destroying judgments upon a people, Zeph. 2. 3. can any
application to God divert those?

Whatever God decrees against a Nation, where he has a Answ.
People, yet four things God will not fail to give to his own children that
rightly seek his favor:

1. Spiritual peace with himself. Let him take hold of my strength, that he may
make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me.

2. Spiritual support under troubles. God is faithful, who will not suffer you
to be tempted above that ye are able, 1 Cor. 10. 13. When thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee; and through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, Isa. 43. 2. They that wait
upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall run and not be weary,
they shall walk and not be faint, Isa. 40. 31.

3. Sanctification of their troubles. God chasteneth us for our profit, that we
might be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10. and that we might not be
condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32.

4. God will give such an issue as shall be most for their happiness. Lam. 3.
26. It is good for a man to wait quietly for the salvation of the Lord: For
they that wait for him shall be blessed, Jer. 30. 18.

Thirdly; Because no condition makes the Righteous so despicable, 3. Reason.
but that still they are most dear unto God: these are always his Jewels, Mal.
3. 17. and he that touches them, touches the apple of his eye, Zach. 2. 8.
God never quits his relations to his people, He is always their friend, their
father, their husband, and his compassions are more tender then the compassions
of a mother, Isa. 49. 23. And as parents are most compassionate over their
children when they are in distress, that though they will correct them in
their health, yet they will hug and cocker them in their sickness: So God is
then most tenderly affected toward his people, when their burdens are the
heaviest. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? For since I spoke
against him, I remember him earnestly still, my bowels are troubled for him, I
will have mercy upon him, Ier. 31. 20. Gods Children may at all times go with
confidence unto God, but much more then when their streits and calamities are
such as none but God can deliver them; and when evil men seek most of all to
crush and destroy* them.

Fourthly. Because no unworthiness of ours can hinder Gods 4. Reason.
mercy to us. Many will say, If I had not been so great a sinner; If I had not
thus and thus provoked God; I could have some encouragement to seek unto him:
but this can be no just bar to our seeking unto God for mercy, who freely loved
us when we were enemies. That answers all objections which you have, Ezekiel. 36.
22. I do not this o house of Israel for your sakes, but for mine own names
sake. God for his own names sake, for Christ's sake, can and will show mercy to
his people though they be never so unworthy. National mercies are the fruits
of free grace, not of free will.

Fifthly. Because it is our duty to compassionate our brethrens 5. Reason.
troubles, 2 Cor. 12. 26. and then especially, when their calamities are at the
highest, should we most earnestly seek God for them. It falls out many times
that some of Gods people are like Gideons Fleece, dry, when all the rest are
wet; enjoy variety of blessings when thousands of others want them: but then
they must not forget the afflictions of Joseph, but ply the throne of grace for
their redress. Lam. 1. 12. Where the Church complains, Was there ever sorrow
like my sorrow: There is reproved the want of compassion toward her, saying,
Have ye no regard all ye that pass by? When Daniel foresaw the great miseries
the Jews were to suffer, by the cruelty of Antiochus, he fasted and mourned
many days together, Dan. 10. 2, 3. When Nehemiah heard by Hanani the Prophet
of the great affliction and reproach of the Jews that escaped the Captivity,
he sat down and wept certain days and prayed unto the God of heaven for their
deliverance, Nehemiah 1. 4. And when Hester knew the Decree of Ahashuerus was
sealed for the destruction of the Jews in all his Provinces, she fasted and
prayed and adventured her honor, and life, and all, for their preservation,
Hester 4. 16.

Sixthly. Because all the felicity of a Nation, depends upon the ^. Reason.
Churches welfare. Gospel Truth revealing Jesus Christ, and conveying his
graces, and privileges unto a people, is that tree of life without which no
Nation can become a Paradise. While the Jews neglected the building of the
Temple, they prospered not. There was much sowing and little reaping, the corn
was rotten under the clods, and all their earnings as wages put into a broken
bag, Hag. 1. 6. But as soon as the foundation of the Temple was laid, God says,
From this day will I bless you, Hag. 2. 19, 20.

Gospel Truth, and the Ordinances of Jesus Christ are the Churches Treasures,
and upon the Restoration, Preservation, and Propagation of these being the
means of godliness, depends both our Spiritual and Temporal happiness;
Godliness having the promises of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. And therefore the smaller any people are made, by their
sins, and Gods judgments upon them, in regard of Church Privileges; The
greater necessity lies upon them, to make the most earnest Application unto God
for their Restoration. And thus much for the Proof of the Doctrine. I come now
to Application.

If when all means seem uneffectuall for the recovery or deliverance Use of
Direction.
of a people, we ought then to apply our selves unto God, that by his Power and
Wisdom, and goodness he may work and perfect deliverances for us: Let this be
our direction what to do in this present condition we are in.

The Children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.
We looked for healing, but behold troubles, and fears, and dangers are still
upon us, from the sword, the pestilence, the famine. The Nation is very little
reformed, or Religion propagated: But notwithstanding all our glorious
deliverances, and the means that has been used for the purging, and settling
of Religion in the power and purity of it, We are yet very Small, and if God by
his power and goodness prevent not, may yet be smaller, by reason of the
increase of Divisions, Ignorance, Profaneness and Errors destructive to the
power of godliness. And many other National sins amongst us.

There is therefore now no way left us, but to lie in more with God, and to
labor more strongly then ever to engage God for us, that he may heal and
raise, and establish us in a comfortable condition both in regard of our
Spiritual and Temporal privileges.

As the Woman with the blood issue, that had spent all upon Physicians, went at
last to Christ and he healed her; so ought we to do, though we have as yet
found no means effectual to raise and settle us in a happy condition, yet God
can do it, who is able to do above all that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20.

But how shall we engage God for us? How shall we apply our selves to him that
we may prevail with him? I Answer this may be done 3. ways. First,

By removing impediments that hinder our prevailing.

Secondly, By advancing such things as will make Gods name great in the land.

Thirdly, By the right performance of such duties, as make our power great with
God.

First by removing impediments of our prevailing. What these are, we may see
Isaiah 59. 2. 11. Your iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God, and
your sins have hide his face from you that he will not hear. We look for
salvation, but it is far from us, for our transgressions are multiplied, our
sins testisie against us, and our transgressions are with us. Our sins are
multiplied, we have new sins, our sins are with us. Both our old and new sins
are continued; and these be the impediments of Gods assistance, and our
healing; While we continue our diseases, God will continue his medicines: while
we hold up our sins, God will hold up his judgments, or else remove them in
his wrath, and afflict us no more, which is worst of all.

Your own Consciences, and your observations of others are the best Kalanders,
to find out both your own and others, old and new sins: But I shall endeavor
to hint some of them to you. The sins of great ones were formerly Luxury,
Idleness, slighting of religion, Oppression: The sins of all sorts of people,
Pride, Coveteousnesse, Contentious, Sabbath-breaking, Lying, Swearing,
Drunkenness, Ignorance, Sleighting of the Gospel, Formality in Religion, with
many others; And are not these sins with us? Besides these we have new sins
such as help to make and keep us small. I shall insist upon some of the chief:

1. Breach of Covenant: And what judgment does not this 1. Breach of Covenant.
bring? You may see, Lev. 26. where God says, He will revenge the quarrel of
his Covenant, What a magazine of Judgments follow? and particularly the sorest
of judgments, Famine is made thepunishment of this sin. 2 Samuel 21. Three years
famine did Israel undergo, because Saul flew the Gibeonites contrary to the
Covenant that Joshua made with them, though they were of those that God had
appointed to destruction, and the Covenant they obtained of Joshua was by false
suggestions. Ier. 34. 17. Because the masters proclaimed not liberty to their
servants to be free according to their Covenant: therefore, says God, Behold I
proclaim a liberty for you, to the sword, to the famine, and to the pestilence.

2. Want of compassion to those that are in misery. How little Want of
compassion.
have we mourned for the long afflictions of Germany, the bloody massacres of
Ireland? for the poverty and wants of many Families among our selves, who have
been exhausted, and lost their dearest friends, for their affection to Religion
and the Public safety? How many thousands in Ireland yet cry for pity and
relief? and whether this has been afforded to the uttermost of our ability,
they best know that have the inspection of the high affairs of the Kingdom. Now
want of compassion is a sin that brings a Nation low. Amos 6. 6. They lie upon
beds of Ivory, they eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the
midst of the stals, they drink wine in bowls; But are not grieved for the
afflictions of Joseph: Therefore shall they go captive with the first that go
captive.

3. Want of execution of Justice. If complaints of this kind Want of execution
of justice.
be true, now this is a desolating sin. Amos 8. 4. 6. 8. Ye swallow up the
needy, and make the poor of the land to fail: Shall not the land tremble for
this? It shall rise up wholly as a flood, it shall be cast out and drowned as by
the flood of Egypt. Their Princes are rebellious and companions of thieves,
every one loves gifts, they do not judge the fatherless, nor does the cause
of the widow come before them: Therefore I will be avenged of mine adversaries.

4. Unnecessary and unbrotherly divisions and oppositions one Divisions.
against another, and these carried on daily to a greater height; Manasseh
against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, and both against Judah. Division
among brethren, is a sin that makes a Nation small, and no sin is so fatal to
it as this is. A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. They had in
Rome a Shield in their Capitol, and it was said to be the Fate of that City,
that whoever could get that shield, should likewise conquer the City. Like this
shield is Unity of Brethren; If our enemies can take this shield from us, it
will be no hard matter for them to conquer the Nation. You may see both the
description and doom of a divided people, Jer. 13. 13. I will fill all the
inhabitants of this land, even the Kings, the Priests, and the Prophets, and
all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with drunkenness, and I will dash them one
against another; I will not pity nor spare, but will destroy them.

5. New corruptions in Religion, and resisting of Reformation* Corruptions in
Religion.
It may be said now, as in the time of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 20. 33. The high
places were not taken away, for the people had not prepared their hearts unto
the God of their fathers. Many strange Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies
increase amongst us, which may be all seen in their colors, in those Books
that are written against Mr. Baily, in his Disswasive from Error, 1. and 2.
Part.
them. Now these are sins that make a Nation small, Hos. 7. 1. 13. When I would
have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered. Destruction
unto them, v. 13. Because I would have purged thee, and thou would not be
purged, I will cause my fury to rest upon thee, Ezekiel. 24 13.

Now to aggravate both our old and new sins to the height, we have added
obstinacy and hardness of heart, such as no Age has been guilty of greater;
if we consider the great Light, the powerful Ordinances, the humbling
Judgments, the miraculous Deliverances, and the choice Mercies which we have
had. To be impenitent under such sins, and under such powerful means, and such
strong obligations to Repentance, how should this but bring and keep us low? or
how hardly shall we prevail with God, while these sins cry against us?

Be exhorted then to break off these, and all your sins, by Repentance: This
is the duty of every one, this day; and further, to mourn for the sins of the
Land, and with all possible earnestnes to sue unto God for the pardon of them.

Endeavor likewise to raise the practice of the contrary virtues, both in your
selves and others. Much power to effect this, Right honorable Lords, lies in
your hands, and hereby you may raise the Nation.

First then, raise your Covenant; First labor to keep it strictly your selves,
and then to propagate it. It was piety in Ezra, to compel all the Jews to
swear to the Covenant, Ezra 10. It was zeal in Josiah, to make all Israel stand
to the Covenant, and to serve the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34. 23, 33. And it will be no
less in you. How much Covenanting exalts a Nation, we may learn by the times
of Moses, Joshua, Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, Ezra: And if we wanted these examples,
we might learn by our own experience.

2. Raise your Compassions. Let every one mourn in secret, and contribute their
best assistance by their Prayers, or other abilities* for the relief of poor
distressed Ireland, and Thousands besides who lie under many wants and sorrows
in these times: but especially let this be done by those that have the
disposing of the Public treasury and strength of the Kingdom. This is the way
to raise the Nation. The liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal
things shall ye stand, Isa. 32. 8. The merciful man shall find mercy. Break the
bands of wickedness, and let the oppressed go free, Relieve the fatherless
and widow, and such as have wasted themselves for your support; and then shall
your light break out like the day, Isa. 58. 6, 7, 8.

3. Raise the Execution of Justice in every place of the Kingdom, and this will
raise the Nation. Run to and fro through the City, and see if ye can find a man
that executes judgment, and I will pardon it, Jer. 5. 1. If ye will thoroughly
execute Judgment betwixt a man and his neighbor, and not oppress the
stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, then will I cause you to dwell in
this Land which I gave unto your fathers.

Fourthly. Raise Religion, and that will raise the Nation: propagate and
preserve the truth of the Gospel and that will preserve you. Buy the Truth and
sell it not, Prove. 23. 23. Let no engagement in the world ever cause you to
desert the Truth. Truth is too great a price to give for any purchase in the
world. Jeroboam purchased a kingdom by the sale of Truth, he strengthened
himself in it, by setting up the Calves at Dan and Bethel; but the want of
Truth proved at length the loss of both himself and his kingdom. The saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ revealed in Gospel Truth, is the root on which grows
all our happiness for soul and body. If you observe the History of the Jewish
Church from one end of it to another, you will find their happy and prosperous
times were still under such governors as purged and maintained religion in the
Purity of it, Chron. 2. 17. And their afflicted and broken times were still
when Truth was corrupted by Idolatry, or lost by ignorance. Israel for a long
season was without a preaching Priest and without the Law, and in those times
there was no peace to him that came in, nor to him that went out, but great
vexations upon all the inhabitants of the countries, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. 5.

Truth is in a double danger, and both these must be provided against, if Truth
be secured. First, it is in danger of open violence, in respect of those that
would burn it out of the world, by fire and persecution, as the Papists. And
Secondly, it is in danger of back doors to be all let run out into Heresies,
and Errors that are destructive to the power of godliness. Some deal by Truth
as Alexander threatened he would do by the River Ganges, which was, that he
would cut so many Channels in it, as it should loose both name and glory* It is
the Devils policy, that when he cannot murder Truth by violence, yet he would
bring it into a mortal consumption by Errors and corruptions. Do therefore
neither suffer Truth to be forced, or Faith betrayed out of your hands. Contend
earnestly for the Truth, that was once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. Be
valiant for, be invincibly resolved to maintain the Truth, and to perfect the
Reformation of Religion throughout the Kingdom; and to rivet this resolution,
take but these two arguments;

First, That in Romans 1. 20. The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation: Upon
the enjoying, beleiving, and obeying of Gospel Truth, depends all the
happiness of your souls, and the souls of your posterity.

Secondly, That in Psalm. 128. 5. I will bless thee out of Zion: The certainty
and sanctification of all temporary blessings comes out of Zion, in particular
where the truth of the Gospel is upheld and obeyed, it gives first,

The greatest strength and security to a nation that can be, Rev. ^ 10. Because
thou have kept the word of my patience, therefore* I will keep thee in the hour
of temptation. Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks to that
righteous nation that keeps the Truth. As Caesar said once to the master of a
Ship that was afraid in a storm, Fear nothing, thou carriest Caesar; So may I
say, Let that Nation fear nothing that upholds and advances true Religion.
Jehosaphet advanced the true knowledge and worship of God, and God strengthened
the kingdom in his hand, 2 Chronicles. 17, 5.

2. Propagation of Truth brings Peace. The fear of the Lord fell upon all the
kingdoms that were round about Judah, and they made no war against Jehosaphat,
2 Chronicles. 17. 10.

3. Riches. Jehosaphat had riches and honors in abundance* 2 Chronicles. 17. 5. And
in the glorious times of the Church, God promises, For brass I will bring
gold, and for iron I will bring silver; and for wood, brass, and for stone,
iron, Isa. 60. 17.

4. Victory. The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish.
Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy
borders; but thou shall call thy walls Salvation, Isa. 60. 12. 18.

5. Glory. The Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon
thee: the glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, to beautify the place of my
Sanctuary. I will make the place of my feet glorious Isa. 60. 2. 13.

5. Raise the Unity of brethren, and this will raise the Nation. The Motto upon
our Coin may be our instruction, Concord makes Concordia parvae res crescunt*
small things great. The Apostles were exceeding earnest in persuading to Unity
in Judgment. In the first 5 Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, this Precept
is five times repeated: Be of one Acts 1. 14. 2. 1. 46. 4. 32. 5. 12.
mind. But that place is very emphatical, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you
brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
things, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment.

Contrary winds will never bring our ship to the harbor: Nor can any thing so
persuade our enemies, that we are building a Babel that must down again, as the
confusion of our Languages. Gods people are a Cluster with a blessing in it,
Isa. 65. 8. The way to preserve the Blessing, is, not to destroy the Cluster.
But how should the Unity of brethren be maintained? I answer, 2 ways:

1. Let them join their strength against all Heresies and Blasphemies and
Errors that are destructive to the Power of godliness: these are the works of
the flesh, which all that are godly ought to set themselves against. And which,
it is the Magistrates duty by his power with Civil censures to restrain.

2. For lesser differences in Judgment, which may fall out among godly men,
and are not destructive to the peace of the Church, nor hinder the propagation
of the power of godliness, let them be covered and healed by love. Luther
says of these differences, Ignecharitatis funt ^^m^^rende.
they are to be burnt with the fire of love. As Constantine, when some Bishops
brought him books of their private quarrels, to read, He took them and threw
them into the fire and burnt Constantinus in synodo Niceno, libellos accipiens
querelarum plenos, quos ei de privatis injuriis obtulerunt Episcopi, cos ne
legendos quidem sibi esse putavit, sed continud flammis tradidit. Ruffin l. 1.
c. 2. Socrat l. 1. c. 5.
them, and so ended the controversy.

Pride and selvishnesse are the cause of most of our divisions, and might
easily be cured with love and humility, which we have infinite reason to labor
for. The Apostle tells us of the danger of divisions, Gal. 5. 15. If ye bite and
devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of another. But this is
not all our danger: There is nothing in probability in the world, that can so
certainly make the plot of the Jesuits to take, in making us become a prey
unto our enemies, as our own contentions. Let us not have less wisdom then
those two Heathens, Aristides and Themistocles, that when they were to go
together to negotiate the affairs of their country, to a city of their Enemies,
could lay down all the difference betwixt themselves. Either we are not
brethren, or else we should ask our selves this question, Why should we
contend? Let all that are godly lay this to heart in time, that we may have
that unity in affection, that we may live together as Brethren, and the Power
of godliness may be carried on in the Land, and our united strength may be
employed for defense against the adversaries of Peace and Truth.

The second direction how to prevail with God to raise the 2. Direct.
Nation, is, To advance those things that will make the name of God great in
the Land: If we would have God to honor us with his blessings, we must study
how to honor him by making his Name glorious.

There be 5 means, whereby the knowledge and service of God, and consequently
his glory, be principally promoted:

1. Good Magistrates, that will use their authority for the suppression of vice
and profaneness, and the encouragement of such as are godly. When God will
enlarge the privileges of his Church, he will give Kings to be nursing
fathers, and Queens to be nursing mothers unto it, Isa. 49. 23. and Isa. 60. 3.
Kings shall be thy brightness. And ver. 16. Thou shall suck the breasts of
Kings. Whence we may take notice how great enemies they are to Religion and the
glory of God, that would divest Christian Magistrates of their power to command
and strengthen Ecclesiastical Reformation; or make it none of their duty to
advance the knowledge and the true worship and service of God, and to crush
profaneness, and restrain and purge out such corruptions in Religion as are
destructive to it, by their Civil sanctions.

2. The Ordinances of Jesus Christ. The administration of the Word, and
Sacraments, and Prayer, etc. By these God does dispense his Grace unto his
servants, whereby they are enabled to believe and to walk according to the rule
of Holiness, and to do good works, whereby they glorify their Father which is
in heaven, and make his Name great.

In all the places where I shall record my Name, there I will meet you, and I
will bless you, Exodus 20. 24. God communicates all his spiritual blessings in
holy Ordinances: These are the Throne, out of which issue the seven Spirits,
Rev. 4. 5. In this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make a feast of fat things
to all people, Isa. 25. 6. In a feast are plenty, dainties, and varieties: So
in Gods ordinances, not only a beginning, but a supply and increase of the
choicest gifts and spiritual abilities to glorify God, are communicated.

3. Able and godly Ministers, for the preaching of the Gospel, and dispencing
of the mysteries of Christ, are choice instruments of making Gods name great in
a Kingdom.

God does use these as Co, workers with himself, for the planting and watering
of grace in the hearts of his children, 1 Cor. 3. 6. 9. For this cause they are
called sometimes Fathers that beget us through the Gospel unto Christ, 1 Cor.
4. 15. sometimes Nurses or Pastors, that feed us with the milk of the Gospel, 1
Cor. 3. 2. Sometimes Stewards, that faithfully dispense the rich treasures of
Jesus Christ unto all such as belong unto the election of God.

4. Order, or Government, according to the Word of GOD. If the holiness of any
people make the Name of God great, that is called upon them: If it be the
honor of the husbandman, that his vineyard brings forth fruit which is
amiable and useful; Then it must needs be much for his honor also, that this
vineyard and these fruits be preserved from waste or corruption. Now,
Government, it is the hedge of Gods vineyard: A hedge is used, as for
separation, to divide a Vineyard from common and open places; so for defense,
to prevent it from the incursion of such as would pluck and destroy the fruits
of it. Censures are Gods Pruning-knife, to lop off the dead boughs, that his
trees may bear more of that fruit that he delights in: They are Gods medicine,
to drive out that leven that would sour the whole lump of his people, 1 Cor.
5. ^. 5. 7.

5. The Saints. These are the magazines of Grace and Holiness, and therefore no
people in the world make the name of God so great and glorious as these do; nor
does God make any Nation so great and happy as that where his own people
receive entertainment. When Israel were the only visible professors of truth
and holiness, Moses says, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. Is there any Nation so great, who has
God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon
him for?

Justin Martyr calls the Saints the Supporters of the world. (...).
It is no paradox to tell you, That you may thank the Saints for your Wives,
your Children, your Estates, your Honors, and all the comforts you enjoy;
because when once the number of the Elect is complete, all that remains in the
world shall be burnt with fire.

Gods chosen people are called, A blessing in the midst of the land, Isa. 19.
24. and they are such a blessing as preserves all other blessings where they
are. There is no such fortification can be made to any Nation, as the Christian
entertainment of the Saints: for whose preservation, God will destroy both
Kings and Kingdoms, Isa. 43. 3. 4. I gave Egypt for thy ransom; since thou
wast precious in mine eyes, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee:
therefore will I give Men for thee, and People for thy life. When God intended
to make Jerusalem victorious and prosperous, then he says, The Governors of
Judah shall say in their hearts, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my
strength in the Lord of Hosts their God, Zach. 12. 5. The strength and
blessings of God which make a Nation both secure and happy, are not so
certainly brought in by any means in the world as by the prayers of his Saints
to whom he says, Concerning the works of my hands command ye me, Isaiah 45.
11. according to that of Saint James, Iam. 5. 16. The effectual fervent prayer
of a righteous man avails much.

Now if these be the principal means to raise a Nation, and make it great,
because they make the name of God great, from whom all blessings come, and who
delights to make that people great, who most of all endeavor to make his name
glorious: Let us learn from hence what to make the matter of our most earnest
and constant prayers to God, namely, First*

That he would continue and increase the number of godly and zealous
Magistrates, according to that direction of Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I
exhort therefore, that first of all supplications, Mayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty.

Secondly, That the holy Ordinances of Jesus Christ may be kept from contempt,
and propagated in their power and purity all the Kingdom over.

Thirdly, That the faithful Ministers of the Gospel may have protection and
just encouragement in their work, by the continuance and supply of an honorable
maintenance in all the places of the land; and that the Universities may be
purged, and that God would thrust sorth so many more faithful laborers into
his vinyard that the saving light of the Gospel may be carried into all the
dark places of the land.

Fourthly, That a government warranted by the Word of God may be settled and
perfected.

Fifthly, That all that are truly godly, may be cherished and have that
entertainment in the land, that God may raise and bless the Kingdom for their
sakes.

Now these means, Right Honorable Lords, which others can only further by
their prayers, you are able to advance by your authority and power: Let it be
therefore your care, to act as godly and zealous Magistrates in proving all
your advantages which you have above other men, in advancing these means which
may raise the Nation.

First, Improve your Authority: You have the power with others of making and
disannulling Laws; you have the power of rewards and punishments, which are
the great wheels upon which the generality of the world are turned this way or
that way.

Secondly, Improve your examples: The Ordinances of God were never so esteemed
and frequented, as when the godly Kings of Israel accounted it their happiness
to enjoy them and be present at them: witness that Passover appointed by
Josiah, 2. Chron. 35. 18. Like to which was no Passover kept in Israel from
the days of Samuel the Prophet.

More may follow the light by one Sun then by a thousand stars.

Thirdly, Improve your merits: Toward the relief of the Saints, or the
encouragement of godly Ministers, one of you may do more then a thousand others.

Fourthly, Improve your opportunities: God has now made you so great, and
brought your adversaries so low, as there is nothing to be done for the House
of God but you may do it.

Philip King of Macedon thought himself not so much engaged to his gods that he
had a son by his wife Olympia, as that he had him then when he might have
Aristotle to instruct him in those Sciences that might afterward make him
glorious in the world. It adds much to the greatness of your opportunities,
that you have not only many thousands to join their prayers to your endeavors,
but many in their several Spears are ready to contribute their best
assistance for the furthering of all means that may conduce to the carrying on
of true Religion and the power of godliness.

Consider, I beseech you, all the advantages ye have before others, are so
many obligations above others to be faithful in the Work of the Lord; you are
but stewards (no more then other men) of what you have, and you must give an
account: now he that has his talent great, and his work small, will make but a
sad reckoning when God shall render to every man according to his works.
Euchrytes being asked whether he would be Craesus Craesus vivens Socrates
moriens.
or Socrates? He answered, he would be Craesus living, and Socrates dying: but
this cannot be, great men that will dye happily must live piously.

The Aethiopians anciently used to choose the greatest men of stature to be
their Kings, because they would have them outwardly as well as inwardly
accomplished for government Aethiopes olim qui supra Aegyptum habitabant eum
regem eligebant qui proceritate corporis ^nteiret Osor. de instit. regis lib. 4.
God has made you outwardly great; labor you to be inwardly holy, that so the
work of raising this Nation by settling Peace and Truth may prosper in your
hands, that you may not only be happy in your own persons, but in after times;
be like Jehojada who was honored because he had done good in Israel: and
likewise receive a rich blessing upon your posterity.

Thirdly, A Third Direction how to prevail with God to 3. Direction.
raise a Nation, is, the right doing of those duties, which may make our power
great with God. I shall only speak of Three of these, and that in a word,
because the time gives me warning to be very brief, and these are Fasting,
Prayer, and Reformation.

God has made large promises unto these; yet we use them, and obtain not the
promises, and the reason is that which Hoseah gives, Hos. 6. 4. Your goodness
is like the morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away. Our Fastings and
Prayers they want that soul, and substance, and sincerity that God requires in
them: we put off God with the shells of Duties, and therefore in some things God
gives us but the shadows of mercies. Let us raise our Duties, and God will
raise his blessings.

First then raise your Fasts; and that, First,

In their End. Let your main end in Fasting be to get your sins pardoned and
your souls purged, and the Land cleansed of all abominations, that God may have
more glory by your selves and others. All our Fasting is in vain, if God may
truly say to us as he said to the Jews, Zach. 7. 5. When ye fasted these
seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me?

God accepts no such Fasts as are chiefly out of fear or custom.

2. In your Humiliation. Isaiah 58. 5. Is this the Fast that I have chosen, to
bow down thy head like a bull rush? Be thoroughly sensible of your own
vileness, yet be fully submissive to Gods pleasure under his corrections,
Levit. 26. 41. Be truly and deeply afflicted in spirit for all your own sins,
and for both the sins and miseries of others in the Kingdom, and for Gods
displeasure against us. It is in vain to put sackcloth upon our loins, and none
upon our hearts, Psalm. 51. 18. God owneth not dry Fasts, he calls for Fasting
and Weeping, Joel 2. 13. Vessels that are brim full, if you do but stir them,
they will run over. But all the sins and miseries of three Kingdoms can scarce
pump a tear or a sigh from many of our hearts. Take heed of continuing in such
Fasts; for if God cannot draw tears, he will draw blood from our hearts, when
there shall be no remedy. Soul-affecting Fasts are raising Fasts, and no other.

Secondly, Raise your Prayers. Acceptable prayer will raise a Nation out of the
dust, Psalm. 102. 14. 17.

1. Raise your Fervencie. Jam. 5. 16. Fervencie prevails much. Jacob wrestled
and prevailed with God, Hos. 12. 4. God has long cried to us, and we are not
awakened sufficiently; And let us not think that less then our strongest cries
will awaken God to rise up for us. God deals with us, as mothers with their
children; while they only whimper, they are not much regarded: but if they
begin to cry in earnest, and will not be quiet, then presently they take them
and give them suck.

2. Raise your Faith. Faith is the strength of Prayer; nothing lays hold on
God without this. Let us lean with confidence upon Gods strength and goodness,
according to his promises; and then nothing is so difficult but God will effect
it for us in the best season. Psalm. 34. 10. The walls of Jericho fell down by
faith. Psalm. 22. 4. Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou
did deliver them.

Thirdly, Raise your Reformation, and this will raise the Nation. Amend your
ways thoroughly, Jer. 7. 5. True Reformation will make your Fasts prevailing
Fasts. They turned every man from his evil way, and God saw their works, and
repented of the evil he said he would do unto them, and did it not, Jonah 3. 9,
10.

It will make our Prayers prevailing Prayers, Isa. 5. 16. Strive to grow and
increase in Holiness. If you would have England to be the Mount of Happiness,
you must make it first, as Judah was, the Mount of Holiness, Zach. 8. 3. New
wine must be put into new bottles. The way to enjoy great mercies for soul and
body, is to get such a degree of Holiness as will enable you to improve the
choicest Mercies to Gods glory.

Raise therefore your Holiness, First,

Above Formality. Let it be visible in your conversations, that ye have not
only a form, but the power of Faith, and Love, and other graces of the Spirit.

2. Above Partiality. Allow your selves no Sin, but universally make conscience
of every Duty, as Zachary and Elizabeth, walking in all the commandments of
God.

3. Above Lukewarmnesse, or the lowest form of Christians. Be holy as He is
holy that has called you, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Labor to reach the highest step of
holiness. You are raised to great hopes, you have the choicest means of
Holiness; Judgments to purge you, Mercies to draw you, Ordinances to edify
you: Walk therefore as becomes a people of such hopes, of such helps: Let
every Lust in you be like the house of Saul, that grew weaker and weaker; and
every Grace like the house of David, that grew stronger and stronger,
Perfecting Holiness in the fear of God: That so God may prevent our fears, and
remove our judgments, and raise us to that height in temporal and spiritual
privileges, that those promises may be made good to us, Jer. 3. 17. The time
shall come that they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the Lord, and all
Nations shall be gathered unto it. And Isa. 27. 6. He shall cause them that
come of Jacob, to take root; Israel shall blassome and bud, and fill the face
of the world with fruit.

FINIS.
A Continuation of the Catalogue of Sermons preached upon the Days of Public
Humiliation, before the Right honorable house of Lords. From Jan. 28. 1645. to
December 30. 1646. A Continuation of the Catalogue of Sermons preached upon the
days of Public Humiliation, before the Honorable House of Commons. From Jan.
14, 1645. to December. 30, 1646. Both Houses and the Assembly kept a special day
of Humiliation, to seek GOD for Direction about Church Government. Jan. 28.
1645. Mr. Gasper Hicks, Hos. 5. 15. Mr. Dan. Evance, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Feb. 25. Mr. Andrew Perne. Mr. Will. Jenkin, Hag. 1. 2.
Mar. 25. Mr. Robert Harris. Mr. Tho. Case, Exodus 5. 22, 23.
April 29 Mr. Thomas Foord. Mr. Reuben Easthrop.
May 27. Mr. Francis Tailor, Genesis 35. 1. Mr. Nicholas Proffet.
June 24. Mr. Robert Johnson. Mr. Charles Herle.
July 29. Mr. Samuel Bolton. Mr. Simeon Ash.
Octo. 28 Mr. Stephen Marshal, Ps. 8. 2. Mr. Will. Bridge, Zeph. 2. 3.
Nov. 25. Mr. Will. Price, Ezra 9. 6, 7, 8. Mr. John Ward.

An extraordinary Fast, for removing the judgment of Rain and Waters.
Dec. 9. Mr. Charles Herle. Mr. Francis Roberts, Ps. 51. 17.
Dec. 30. Mr. William Good, Amos 7. 5. Mr. Tho. Horton, Number. 32. 23.

Jan. 14. Mr. Stephen Marshal. M. J. Whitaker, 2 Chr. 26. 15, 16
Jan. 28. Mr. Jos. Caryl, Jam. 4. 8. 1 part Mr. Rich. Vines, Ja. 4. 8. last p.
Feb. 25. Mr. T. Goodwin, Ps. 105. 14. 15. Mr. Anth. Burgess, Number. 11. 12
Mar. 25. Mr. Sam. Bolton, Mat. 1. 21. Mr. Fran. Cheynel, Genesis 18. 19
Apr. 29. Mr. James Nalton, Jer. 13. 27. Mr. John Owen, Acts 16. 11.
May 27. Mr. Rich. Heyrick, Hest. 4. 16. Mr. John Ward.
June 24 Dr. Peter Smith. Mr. William Spurstowe.
July 29. Mr. Joseph Caryl. Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker.
Aug. 25. Mr. Daniel Cawdrey. Mr. Jer. Buroughs, Mat. 5. 6.
Sept. 30 Mr. Joseph Symonds. Mr. Herbert Palmer, Isa. 58. 12
Oct. 28. Mr. John Maynard, Phil. 3 21. Mr. Nic. Lockier, Isa. 53. 10.
Nov. 25 Mr. William Del, Heb. 9. 10. Mr. Christopher Love.

An extraordinary Fast, for removing the judgment of Rain and Waters.
Dec. 9. Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker. Mr. John Ward.
Dec. 30. Mr. St. Marshal, 1 Chr. 12. 32. Mr. M. Newcomen, Heb. 4. 13.

Reader, Be pleased to take notice, Those whose Texts are not quoted, are not
yet printed. A Continuation of the Sermons preached upon the Days of Public
Thanksgiving, before both or either Houses of PARLIAMENT. From April 2. 1646.
To November. 5. 1646. April 2. For the good success of the Parliaments Army in
the West, especially in Cornwall, and disbanding of the Kings Horse there: Mr.
Joseph Caryl, Psalm. 118. 17. Mr. Hugh Peter's, Psalm. 31. 23.
May 12. For the regaining and taking 12 several Garrisons, viz. Excester,
Barnstaple, etc. Before the Lords, Master Daniel Gawdrey. Master Richard Ley.
Before the Commons, Mr. Samuel Torshel, Deuteronomy. 16. 20. Mr. Charles Herle.

July 21. For the Surrender of Oxford, etc. Before the Commons, Mr. Henry
Wilkinson, Numb. 23. 23. Mr. Walter Cradock, 1 John, 1. 3, 4.

Sept. 8. For the Surrender of Worcester, etc. Before the Commons, Mr. Obadiah
Sedgwick. Mr. Thomas Goodwin.

Nov. 5. For the Deliverance from the Powder Treason. Before the Lords, Mr.
Obadiah Sedgwick
Before the Commons, Mr. William Strong Ezra 9. 13, 14.
Before the Lord Mayor, etc. at Paul's, Mr. Nathanael Hardy, Psalm. 9. 16.




FINIS.

