ANTI-CAVALIERISME, OR, TRUTH PLEADING As well the Necessity, as the Lawfulness
of this present War, for the suppressing of that Butcherly brood of
Cavaliering Incendiaries, who are now hammering ENGLAND, to make an IRELAND OF
IT: WHEREIN All the material objections against the lawfulness of this
undertaking, are fully cleared and answered, AND ALL MEN THAT EITHER LOVE God,
Themselves, or Good men, Exhorted to Contribute all manner of assistance
hereunto. BY JO: GOODWIN.

Be not afraid of them: Remember the great Lord and fearful, and fight for
your Brethren, your Sons, and your Daughters, your Wives, and your Houses.
Nehem. 4. 14. All that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword. Mat. 26.
52. Det Rex Legi, quod Lex Regi,.i. Imperium ac potestatem. London Printed by
G. B. and R. W. for Henry Overton, At his Shop in Popes-Head-Alley.

ANTI-CAVALIERISME, OR, TRUTH Pleading as well the Lawfulness, as the
Necessity of this present War.
THAT which some in the Gospel spoke in great amazement, by way of glorifying
God, upon occasion of an unexpected breaking out of his goodness and power, in
a miraculous cure, It was never seen after such a fashion (Mar. 2. 12.) may
now be uttered by the Inhabitants of this Kingdom, with astonishment, to the
everlasting shame and infamy of men; upon occasion of the late breaking out of
that fire of rage and cruelty, which yet burns in the midst of the bowels of
it, and threatens to consume the very foundations thereof, except it be
seasonably quenched by a gracious rain from on High. And as all that saw that
inhumane butchering and quartering out into pieces of the Levites wife by her
own husband, cried out, and said, There was no such thing done or seen, since
the time that the Children of Israel came up out of the Land of Egypt, until
that day, Judge. 19. 30. So doubtless whosoever shall consider what bloody and
horrid intendments and attempts against this Nation, have passed the hearts and
hands of some of her own Children, may truly say, There has no such thing been
done or seen in the Land, since God first caused men to dwell on the face of it*

What shall we think of that Legion of Devils (I had almost called them) who
now possess the Land, and after the manner of Devils indeed, seek all to rent
and tear it in pieces; I mean that Colluvies, that heap, or gathering
together of the scum, and dross, and garbage of the Land, that most accursed
confederacy, made up of Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck, Philistims with the
Inhabitants of Tire, of Jesuits and Papists, and Atheists, of stigmaticall and
infamous persons in all kinds, with that bloody and butcherly Generation,
commonly known by the name of Cavaliers? Have they not thorough some black art
or other gotten the chief treasure of the Land, the King, into their
possession, setting him still in the Front of all their desperate designs;
which are these, and their fellows: 1. To pull those Stars out of the
Firmament of the Land, to dissolve and ruin that Assembly* which is by
interpretation, or representation (which you will) the whole Nation. 2. When
they have opened this door of hope unto themselves, to turn the Laws, and
present frame of Government upside down. 3. To make havoc and desolation, to
root out the Generation of the Saints rush and branch, men and women, young
and old fearing God, out of the Land. 4. To make rapine and spoil of all the
goods and possessions, at least of all those that withstand them, and are not
brethren in iniquity with them. 5. To build up the Walls of Jericho, to put
Lucifer again into heaven, I mean, to advance the tyrannical Thrones of the
Hierarchy to their former height, or higher, if they know how. 6. By their
authority and power to excommunicate and cast out all the pure and precious
Ordinances of God out of his House, and to supply this defect with
Antichristian, and spurious institutions. 7. To spread that Veil, or covering
of Antichristian darkness again over the face of the Land, which God by a most
gracious hand of providence had rent and taken off many years since; to leaven
the whole lump of the Land, the second time, with the sour leaven of Romish
error and superstition. 8. And lastly, as is much to be feared, when they have
served their tu^rnes with, and upon the King, and used him as an Engine to get
all the stones together for their building, then to make rubbidge of him, as if
they had honored him sufficiently, to cause such sacred designs as these to
pass thorough his hands, and made him isntrumental, or any ways accessory in
such Angelical achievements. Do we think that the light of the knowledge of
God shines in the hearts and consciences of these men? Have these men the mind
of Christ amongst them? Do they know who is the Lord? Or do they not think
rather, that Baal, or Belial is he? Have all the workers of iniquity (says
David) no knowledge* that they eat up my people as they eat bread? Psalm. 14. 4.
i. e. That they injure, vex, and consume them with no more remorse, regret, or
touch of conscience, then they eat and drink to preserve their natural lives:
as if such men as these, the people of God, were made for the same end and
purpose to them that bread is, viz. to be eaten up and devoured by them. Have
they no knowledge (says the Prophet) that they dare attempt such a thing as
this? Implying (as it should seem) that to vex, molest, persecute, and destroy
the people of God, argues the most profound ignorance, and thickest darkness
in the minds and understandings of men, that can likely be found there; and
that the weakest impressions or glimmerings of any true light of knowledge,
would keep men from dashing their foot against this stone howsoever. If men had
but as much knowledge of God, as Pilates wife had in a dream, they would take
heed of having any thing to do with just men. And these things (says our
Savior to his Disciples concerning those that should kill them, and think
they did God service therein) these things (says he) they shall do unto you,
because they have not known the Father, nor me, John 16. 3. If men had the
least degree of the true knowledge of God in Christ, they must needs have some
knowledge of his People and Children also: and if they know these, this
knowledge would be as a hook in their Nose, or a bridle in their Lips, to keep
them from falling foul upon them, as the knowledge of Christ the Lord of
glory, would have kept the Princes of this world from crucifying him, had it
been in them.

And since we are fallen upon the mention of those men who are ready in a
posture of hatred, and malice, and revenge, with other preparations answerable
hereunto, to fall upon us, and our lives and liberties, both spiritual and
civil, upon our estates, our Gospel and Religion, and all that is, or ought
to be dear and precious unto us; and in our miseries and ruins, to render our
posterities more miserable then we, and have advanced their design this way to
that maturity and height, which we all know and tremble to think of: Give me
leave in that which remains, to excite and stir you up, from the greatest to
the least, both young and old, rich and poor, men and women, to quit your
selves like men, yea, and (if it be possible) above the line of men, in this
great exigency and stresse of imminent danger that hangs over your heads, and
threatens you every hour, Oh let it be as abomination unto us, as the very
shadow of death, to every man, woman, and child of us, not to be active, not to
lie out and strain our selves to the utmost of our strength and power in every
kind, as far as the Law of God and nature will suffer us, to resist that high
hand of iniquity and blood that is stretched out against us; to make our lives,
and our liberties, and our Religion good against that accursed Generation that
now magnifieth themselves, to make a prey and spoil of them, to make havoc
and desolation of them all at once, if the Lord shall yet please to deliver us
out of their hands. Let not our Lives, our Liberties, our Estates, be at all
precious or dear unto us in this behalf, to expose them, be it unto the
greatest danger, to prevent the certain and most unquestionable ruin of them
otherwise: Let us resolve to put all into the hands of God, to prevent the
falling of all, or any thing, into the hands of these men. There is neither man
nor woman of us, neither young nor old, but has somewhat or other, more or
less, a Mite or two at least to cast into the Treasury of the Public safety.
Men that have strength of body for the War, and fingers that know how to fight,
let them to the Battle, and not fear to look the enemy in the face. Men and
women that have only Purses and Estates, let them turn them into men and
swords for the Battle. Men that have heads, but want arms and hands for
outward execution, let these study and contrive methods and ways of
proceedings: Head-worke is every whit as necessary in such a time and exigent,
as hand-work is. They that have neither hands, nor heads, nor estates, let them
find hearts to keep the Mountain of God, to pray the enemies down, and the
Armies of the Lord up: Let them find tongues to whet up the courage and
resolutions of others. This is a service wherein women also may quit themselves
like men, whose prayers commonly are as masculine, and do as great and severe
execution, as the prayers of men. As for little Children that know not the
right hand from the left, and so are incapable of exhortation, or putting on
this way, by their weakness and innocence (innocence I mean, as concerning
the enemies, and giving them the least cause or color of their bloody
intendments, as likewise in respect of the crying sins, and horrid provocations
of other men) they do every whit as much toward the furtherance of the
service, as men do by their strength, by their wisdom, by their estates, or
otherwise; as we see in Jon. 4. 11.
the case of Gods sparing Niniveh. The sixscore thousand Children that knew not
their right hand from the left, were the great intercessors, and chief
mediators in the behalf of the City with him. Yea, the bruit beasts
themselves* the Cattle, their case and condition working upon the goodness
and graciousnesse of God, were contributors too in their nature toward this
service: As is to be seen in the last clause of the place cited from Jon* 4 11.
the Prophet Jonah. And should not I spare Niniveh* etc. -- and also much
Cattle. Therefore now I beseech you that are capable of the great evils and
dangers that threaten you, and are even at your door, be not you wanting and
backward in any thing that is in your hand to do, if it be possible, and as
far as in you lies, redeem your lives with your lives, your estates with your
estates, your Religion with your Religion, out of the hands of those men, set
them all to work for their own maintenance and preservation: yea, if you know
how to create more strength then you have, or to improve your selves seventy
times seven fold above the proportion of any your present abilities, I beseech
you do it; at least be willing (as the Apostle bears the Corinthians witness
they were, in a case not altogether unlike) above that you are able, that so
you may be sure to give out your selves to the utmost of your ability, the more
freely.

Give me leave to set an edge upon you, to quicken and encourage you, to
strengthen your hand to the work, by the tender only of two motives, or
considerations unto you.

1. Consider that the cause, wherein you are desired and exhorted to appear,
and to engage your selves to the utmost, is like unto the Law of God it self
in those excellent qualifications of it: it is just, and holy, and good: there
is nothing in it that should make you ashamed either before God, or
justly-judging men, nothing that needs make you tender, or holding off in point
of conscience. You are to stand up in the defense of your Lives, your
Liberties, your Estates, your Houses, your Wives, your Children, your Brethren,
and that not of this Nation only, but of those two other Nations likewise
united under the same government with this, in the defense of those Religious
and faithful Governors, that Honorable Assembly of Parliament, whose power
and privileges you stand bound by your solemn Vow and Protestation unto God,
(besides many bands of conscience otherwise) to defend and maintain with your
lives, power, and estates. Yea, in defense of his Majesty's royal person,
honor, and estate; all which are now in eminent danger to suffer by that
accursed retinue of vile persons that are gathered about him, as Ivy about an
Oak, which never suffers it to thrive or prosper, till it be torn off from
it. This, men that have their eyes open, may easily see and discern; though
others make a mock and a scorn of such an assertion, as ridiculous: But so did
Lots sons in Sodom, by that saying of his unto them, That the Lord would
destroy the place and City where they were, Genesis 19. 14. which yet was a
serious and solemn truth: Yea, and further, you are exhorted to stand up in
defense of the true Protestant Religion* for the name and honor of your God,
your Ordinances, and (which ought to be of very dear and precious
consideration to you) for the safe conveyance of that great treasure of the
Gospel over unto your posterities that are yet unborne. Here is nothing in all
this but what the manifest Law of God, and the common light of nature, not only
warranteth and allows in all men* but even leads, persuades, yea, urges
and presses them unto. Now how should not the goodness, equity, and
righteousness of the cause be as precious seed, out of which a generation of
sons and daughters shall be raised up unto it? Yea, and be spirit and life to
the undertakers thereof? And encouragement unto them, to plead it with the
highest hand of means and endeavors they are able to lift up? When there is a
cause that has the image and superscription of God upon it* so full and lively
as this has, is it not pity it should want Orators to plead it, that it
should suffer and fall to the ground, and none be found to take it up?

Indeed if there were any occasion to make a stand in matter of conscience, if
there were any thing doubtful in the cause recommended to you, any thing to
detain your judgments and consciences in suspense, whether it were lawful
for you or no, to appear in it, there were just cause to spare and to forbear
you, at least for a time, till you should be fully satisfied. But now the
righteousness hereof being as clear as the light, or as the Sun at noone
day, why tarry you? why are you not up in your might before this, to maintain
it to the uttermost?

Yea, but say the Rabbis and great Disputers that stand by your enemies and
strengthen their hand that they can not depart from their wickedness, that
cover, but it is with the covering of the flesh, and of the spirit of the
world, not with the covering of the Spirit of the Lord: It is not lawful (say
these men) for you to oppose them, nor to contend any ways by force against
them, because by opposing them, you resist the King the Lords anointed, whom
God commands should be obeyed and submitted unto. If you conceive him to be
your adversary, yet you ought to oppose him, (or rather that adverse
disposition of his against you) only with prayers and tears, and
supplications unto God for him, and with petitorie and humble addresments unto
himself, but to make no outward resistance at all.

To this I answer,

1. By way of concession, that the King is to be obeyed, and that by the
express commandment of God. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as supreme, or unto Governors, as
unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, etc. 1 Pet. 2
13. Here is submission to the King required in express terms, and they that
yield not the submission here required, resist the Ordinance of God (as the
Apostle Paul speaks, Romans 13.) and by such resistance shall receive to
themselves ( viz. without repentance) (...) judgment, or condemnation: God
will severely judge or punish them for this resistance. And for my part, I from
my soul could wish and desire that the sad distractions and cont^stations
between the two opposing parties in the land, might come to a comprimise, and
be issued and ended upon this point: that party that makes most conscience of
keeping that commandment of God which requires submission and obedience unto
Kings, to be submitted unto by the other; and that to yield, and sit down,
which is most defective this way, and in whom less conscience of such
obedience appears. Only two things I desire may be taken notice of from this
Scripture where submission to Kings is commanded: First, that a King or Kingly
Government, is (...) an ordinance of man, or an humane creation (as the
Original properly signifies) which yet we know is no less generally then
impudently, and in the face of express Scripture to the contrary, denied by
the Divinity and learning of the malignant faction, who by swelling the
Prerogative of Kings to a monstrous and most unnatural proportion, as if they
had a mind to make it crack before they had done, have consulted all manner of
miseries and calamities to the world, as well to Kings themselves, as to their
People. Submit to every Ordinance of man (says Peter) for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto the King, etc. Therefore he supposes the King or Kingly
Government to be the Ordinance, or creation, or creature of man* And it is
evident that so he is; for there were Kings over the Heathen Nations, with the
form of whose government God did no ways intermeddle by way of any command or
appointment concerning it, long before there was any King over See Genesis 14. 12.
etc.
Israel. Nor was it the order or command of God, that there should be any King
over Israel, but he was highly offended with the People for desiring it. Is it
not now Wheat harvest? (says Samuel to the People) I will call upon the Lord,
and he shall send thunder, and rain, that you may perceive and see, how that
your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the Lord in
asking you a King. And though he condescended in a passive way, that they
should have a King as they desired, yet as he tells them by the Prophet Hosea,
He gave them a King in his wrath, and bid them in effect take him at their
perils, if they would needs have him, he should deal but hardly by them. He
would take their sons and daughters, and make them servile to him, as you have
it. 1 Samuel 8. 11. It is true, in this sense a King, or Kingly power and
government may be said to be from God. 1. In a general or indefinite
consideration, as it is a government, not simply, or in it self unlawful: For
it is the will and appointment of God, that there should be some government or
other in every society of men, yet not any government neither, not any that is
unjust, unreasonable, or tyrannical: And in this sense all forms of
government that are lawful and just, whether they be simple, as the three
commonly known by the names of Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy; or whether
they be mixed, having somewhat of two, or all of these simples in them, are
equally and indifferently from God: not any one of them determinately, or with
exclusion of the rest. For suppose all Nations and Societies of men in the
world, from the foundations thereof until now, should have set up and
exercised only one and the same form of government amongst them, as viz. That
which we call Aristocraticall (like that in the Low Countries, by some chosen
amongst them, whom they call States) so that neither the Monarchical, or
Kingly government, nor yet the Democraticall, nor any other government
whatsoever had been ever practiced in the world until this day, we must not
think that the world had herein sinned, in not using any other, no nor yet
neglected any Ordinance of God. Because it is no ordinance or appointment of
God that any particular Nation or society of men, should have either this or
that special form of government amongst them, but only that they should have
some kind of government which is just and lawful. Therefore Kingly Government
is no Ordinance of God in this sense, viz. as imposed upon any Nation or People
by way of duty or precept to use and set up amongst them. But being set up in
any people, it is warranted, and countenanced by God as lawful, and obedience
and subjection straightly enjoined thereunto. And therefore the Apostles
expression, Romans 13. 1. is very express and punctual this way. Let every
soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power (.i. no just and
lawful form of government) but is from God, the powers that are, are ordained
(or rather ordered (...)) of God. The powers that are: Why does he say the
powers that are, are ordained, or ordered by God? Doubtless to show, that
there are some powers or forms of government, in actu signato, (as the
Schoolmen speak) that is, in respect of their species or kind, which are not
in actu exercito, actually exercised or taken up, nor need they be taken up by
any State or People in the world. But for those that are,.i. that are de facto
established, and set up by any People among themselves, (speaking only of those
that are lawful) these (says he) are ordained, or rather ordered by God:.i.
God by special instinct and work of providence (q) inclines the hearts of
several Nations, some to embrace and fall upon one, and some upon another,
some upon that which is Monarchical, or Kingly, others upon that which is
Aristocraticall, some upon that which is Democraticall, etc. and withal
commands, that that which every Nation or People chooses for it self, should
be obeyed and submitted unto by those that have chosen it, and live under it,
so long as it continues: For the time is coming, when Christ will put down
all rule, and all authority, and power. And this is 1 Cor. 15.
another sense wherein Kings or Kingly Government may be said to be from God,
or to be the Ordinance of God, viz. because where it is established and set up,
he had a special hand in ordering and guiding the hearts of the People to
choose it, before others, and withal commands it to be obeyed, as a Government
that is lawful and authorized by him, not as commanded and enjoined by him.

Thus you have the first thing made plain to you, which was observed from the
place in Peter, which was, that Kingly power or authority is directly and
properly the creation or ordinance of man, though there be that in it also,
which in a sense may give it the denomination of an Ordinance of God; viz. 1.
As warranted or countenanced by him. 2. As ordered and taken up by those
Nations, who have subjected themselves unto it, by the special disposal and
work of his providence.

The second thing I desire you would take notice of from the same Scripture, is
this, that subordinate Authority, and inferior Magistracy and power is as much
the Ordinance of God, as Sovereignty and supreme Authority it self is: and
that God by one and the same command, requires us to submit our selves to
inferior Magistrates or Governors, as well as he does to Kings themselves.
Read the passage again. Therefore submit your selves to all manner of
Ordinances of man, whether, etc. So that it is a sin of the same nature, and
renders a man obnoxious to the same danger or displeasure from God, to be found
in disobedience to subordinate Rulers under the King, as to the King himself*
But this for answer to the Objection in the first place, by way of concession
or grant, That the King doubtless is to be obeyed.

But secondly by way of exception I answer further, that though the King be to
be obeyed and submitted unto, yet this obedience was never intended by God to
be universal, but with limitatation, viz. In such commands wherein a man's
obedience to the King should not be found disobedience against God: for in
these cases, That of the Apostles Peter and John to the Rulers* Elders, and
chief Priests, must take place. Acts 4. 19. Whether it be right in the sight
of God to obey you, rather then God, Judge ye. The debt of obedience to God
must always be paid, whosoever loses by the hand: Though the truth is, that
there is no creature, King nor other, that can lose any thing due to him, by
any man's obedience unto God. The Apostles were so confident of the
righteousness of their cause in disobeying their Rulers in that, wherein they
obeyed God, that they feared not to make their Adversaries themselves their
Judges therein: Judge ye. If a King should command me not to pray for the
general good, or peace of the Church or State where I live, or to forbear the
doing of any thing, which I conceive I am bound in conscience unto God to do
for the public good, I am not in this case any whit more bound to obey the
Kings command, then the Apostle Peter and John were to obey the command of the
Rulers and Elders who charged them to give over preaching the Gospel, or then
Shadrack, Meshach, and Abednego were, to worship the Golden Image, because
Nebuchadnezzar commanded it. This limitation is plainly enough expressed in
that very Scripture, wherein we heard obedience unto Kings commanded. 1 Pet. 2.
13. Submit your selves (says the Apostle) to every Ordinance of man, for the
Lords sake. If we ought to submit for the Lords sake:.i. Either for that love
we bear to him, or out of conscience of that obedience which we owe unto him,
we ought not to submit in any thing whereby God may be dishonored or
disobeyed. It is senseless to think, that any thing can, or ought to be done
for the Lords sake, which cannot be done but to his dishonor, or (which is the
same) with disobedience to him.

Yea, but it will still be objected, though it be true, that Kings are not to
be obeyed in any of those commands that are unlawful, in an active way, we are
not always to do what they would have us do, nor to cease or forbear the
doing, of what they would have us forbear; yet are they even in such cases to
be obeyed passively: Men are to suffer patiently any punishment they desire to
inflict upon them, for refusing any such obedience; or however, they are not
forcibly to resist.

To these things likewise I answer: 1. That the unlawful command of a King,
may possibly be of that nature and condition, that a Subject cannot disobey it,
but by a strong hand, and taking up of Arms, though not properly or directly
against the King, yet against the command of a King. In such a case,
disobedience to Kings by a strong hand, and with forcible resistance, is not
only lawful, but even matter of duty and obedience unto God. For instance, A
Christian has solemnly vowed and protested before God, to defend the lives of
his godly and faithful Governors to the utmost of his power: or whether he
has made such a Vow and Protestation or no, it is not much material in this
respect, because he stands bound in conscience otherwise, and by the Law of
God, to do it. Now suppose such a man cannot perform this Vow, or do that
which is his duty to do otherwise therein, but by a strong hand, and taking up
Arms; In this case, if a King commands such a man not to take up Arms in
relation to such a defense, it is evident that this unlawful command of a King
cannot be disobeyed, but by taking up Arms against it. There are many other
cases of the same consideration and rule with this.

2. I answer further, That it is one thing to offer violence to the person of a
King, or Ruler, or to attempt the taking away of his life; another to secure a
man's own life, or the life of another, whom we know to be innocent, and much
more the public safety, by strengthening a man's self to withstand the violent
execution of any unjust command from a King, by those that have no right or
lawful authority at all, to do any such execution upon us. As for offering
violence to the person of a King, or attempting to take away his life, we leave
the proof of the lawfulness of this, to those profound disputers the Jesuits,
who stand engaged by the tenor of their professed Doctrine and practice,
either to make good the lawfulness thereof, or else to leave themselves and
their Religion, an abhorring and hissing unto the world. As for us who never
traveled with any desires or thoughts that way, but abhor both mother and
daughter, doctrine and practice together, we conceive it to be a just
Prerogative of the Persons of Kings in what case soever, to be secure from the
violence of men; and their lives to be as consecrated Corn, meet to be reaped
and gathered only by the hand of God himself. David's conscience smote him,
when he came but so near the life of a King, as the cutting off of the lap of
his garment.

But as concerning a forcible withstanding, or resistance making, against a
violent execution of any unjust command from a King, attempted by those that
have no rightful or lawful authority to do such execution either upon us or
others, yea though the King himself be at hand to second his instruments in
the execution of such commands, we have sufficient warrant for the lawfulness
hereof in the Scriptures themselves. When Ahab sent a Cavaliere (you may call
him) a man of blood, to take away the Prophet Elisha's head, as he sat in his
house amongst the Elders, 2 King. 6. 32. did Elisha set open his door for him,
and sit still till he took off his head, in obedience to the King? No, he
bestirred himself for the safeguard of his life, and called upon others to
stand by him, and assist him against that outrage and violence intended against
him: yea and this without any brand or blemish of any rebellion or disobedience
to the King; yea though he spoke somewhat roundly and freely of the King
himself. See ye not (says he to the Elders that were with him) how this son
of a murderer (meaning no beggars, no less then Ahab himself, the King) has
sent to take away mine head? Take heed when the Messenger comes, and shut the
door, and handle him (...)
roughly * at the door: Is not the sound of his Masters feet behind him?
Surely Et opprimetis, vel opprimite. Arias Mont. Comprimite. Jun. and Trem.
he that went thus far, for the safety of his life, when he was but in danger
of being assaulted, would have gone further if occasion or necessity had been;
and in case the Kings Butcher had got in to him before the door had been shut,
if he had been able, and had had no other means to have saved his own head,
but by taking away the others, there is little question to be made, but he
would rather have taken, then given a head, in this case. So when Saul the King
would needs have had Jonathan put to death, yea, and had bound himself with an
oath or curse to h^ve it so (yea and that twice over for failing) the people
knowing that Jonathan had committed nothing worthy of death (though the King
thought he had) but that contrarily, he had deserved well of the State, and had
mightily delivered Israel, (as the words of the Text are) delivered him by a
strong hand out of the hand of Saul. 1 Samuel 14. 45. Neither is there the least
aspersion or imputation cast upon this People for this fact of theirs, as if
they had been any ways injurious or disobedient to their King. Nay it
appears by the sequel of the Story. that Saul himself, though a man not of
the best disposition, when the turbidum intervallum, the fit of passion was
over, took it no ways amiss at the hands of the people, that they had
resisted him, in that unreasonable and inconsiderate design of his against
Jonathan: but went on, and reigned peaceably over them. David in like manner,
being unjustly persecuted by Saul, and those graceless and base flatterers
that assisted him in that ungracious design, and being in danger of his life
by them, did he either sit still, to see whether God would in an extraordinary
and miraculous way protect him or no? Or did he submit himself to Saul's mercy,
and lay down his life at his feet? No, but on the contrary, he provided
himself with weapons, the best that were to be had. 1 Samuel 21. 89. And
willingly entertained for the safeguard of life, and to make resistance against
Saul and his party, all the help of men he could come by, making himself an
head or Captain over them. 1 Samuel 22. 2. And yet all this while David was but
one single man, and that of a private and mean condition in comparison.

And this (my Brethren) is the very case that is now before you, or if there be
any difference in respect of a justifiablenesse in the one above the other, all
the advantage which certainly is very much, lies on your side; your scale is
much the better weight. The^e are sons of Belial that are risen up against you,
full of a spirit of hatred and revenge against you* who partly in plain words,
and without Parables* partly by their insolent carriages and behaviors toward
others of the same spirit and cause with you, threaten you with the utmost
insolences they can execute upon you, and (in effect) to stretch the line of
miserable and woeful Ireland over you and your City, and whole Nation. These
either have, or pre^end to have a Warrant or Commission from the King to do
what they do, to make prey and spoil of you, your lives, and liberties, and
all that you have; just as the Messenger had from Ahab, that was sent to take
away the Prophets head (as you heard) or as those had from Saul, that went to
lay hold of Jonathan to put him to death. Now then the question is, whether it
be lawful for you to stand upon your guard in this case, and to seek the
preservation of your lives, and of those that belong unto you, wives, and
little ones, etc. and if there be no other likely means for your safety, to
destroy the lives of those that seek to destroy yours; whether the command of
the King (suppose such a thing were, which yet I much question) to wicked
instruments to take away your lives, or the lives of those whom you are bound,
by oath or otherwise to protect; whether (I say) such a command ought more to
prevail with you to sit still and suffer the destroyer to execute his
Commission upon you, to take away your lives, or the command of God and nature
which lies upon you to defend your lives, and the lives of such others, as we
spoke of, when they are assaulted, or in danger of assault? This fairly and
unpartially is the State of the present question. The great Prophet Elisha (as
we heard) and the people of Israel under Saul, and the man according to Gods
own heart, resolved the question clearly enough by their practice.

If it be here objected and said, it is true, such acts as you have related
were indeed done by these men: but, Quo jure, whether they did well, or
lawfully in so doing, is yet in question: An act done by a good man, fearing
God, is not therefore good, or lawfully done, because such a man does it: The
ancient Fathers were generally Polygamists: yet the plenty of their practice is
but a defective proof of the lawfulness of Polygamy. In like manner, the
actions mentioned, having no testimony of approbation from the Scriptures, may
very possibly be works of darkness, though done by children of light; yea,
though there be no express brand of unlawfulness set upon them by God: for
Polygamy it self has this negative testimony of its innocence.

To this I answer, first in general: That though the goodness and holiness
of the person be not sufficient to authorize an act for lawful, yet whilst the
unlawfulness of it be clearly evicted by a contrariety in it to some command
of God, it is a strong presumption, that an act performed by such a person, is
lawful: To the instance of Polygamy in the Fathers: I answer, that it was
apparently a breach of the seventh Commandment, and contrary to the first
institution of marriage by God; the tenor whereof, according to our Saviors
own extract out of the ancient Record, runs thus, Mat. 19. 5. And they twain
(not they three, or they four, or more) shall be one flesh. And besides, it is
plainly branded and condemned by the Spirit of God, as sinful, Mal. 2. 14* 15.
as the general vote of Interpreters upon this place carries it. But there is
not the least intimation given throughout the whole Scriptures, of any thing
sinful or displeasing unto God, in what either Elisha, or the people, or David
did, in the particulars mentioned.

Those acts of Solomon, commanding Joab and Shimei to be put to death, without
any trial or due process of Law against them, 1 King 2. and so that of David,
giving away Mephibosheths estate to Ziba, only upon a displeasure conceived
against him, with some others of other Kings of Judah, of like consideration,
smelling too rank of prerogative oil, are much more questionable in point of
lawfulness, and of far more difficult reconciliation with principles of
reason and equity, and with the Law of God it self then those other. But,

2. To the particular I answer. First, for the fact of the Prophet Elisha,
calling out to those that were with him, to lay hands upon him that came armed
with the Kings authority and command, to take away his head, and to shut the
door against him; that in this he did nothing but what was pleasing unto God,
appears from the circumstance of time, and that posture of spirit, wherein the
Prophet thus contended for his head against him that would needs have had it
from him. He was now full of the Spirit of God, and of prophecy: and was in
that very instant, wherein his head should have been taken from him, ready to
cry out as a woman in travail, and to be delivered of that gracious message,
which immediately follows in the beginning of the succeeding Chapter. Now that
so holy a man, and so great a Prophet, should in that very point and instant of
time, wherein he was full of the Spirit of God, and ready to deliver a message
from him of that high importance and unexpected grace to his people, fall into
the soul sin of rebellion against his lawful King, is doubtless an
incredibilitie of the first magnitude.

Secondly, the Elders or Statesmen of the Kingdom, who were present, complied
with him in his motion, and assisted him in his opposition against the Kings
messenger, who came for his head; laid hands upon him, and suffered him not to
enter: which appears from hence, because the Prophets head stood still upon
his shoulders. And this is yet a further confirmation of the lawfulness of
that resistance, which he made, because it is unreasonable to think, that
persons of that quality, and who cannot be conceived but to have understood
themselves sufficiently in a business of that nature, being the Peers or
chief officers of the Kingdom, should have involved themselves in the danger
and guilt of rebellion against the King: which (doubtless) they had done, had
that act of the Prophet, whereof they were abettors, had any streine or touch of
Rebellion in it.

Thirdly, and lastly, the King himself (it seems) coming very shortly after
into the place where the Prophet and Elders were, finding the execution, which
in hot blood he had commanded, not done, the heat of his passion being
somewhat over and abated, sat down amongst them, and never so much as
reproved either Prophet or Elders, for making the resistance they did to his
messenger: which it is like he would have done, and that upon high terms, had
he conceived either the one or the other to have been within the verge of a
Rebellion; or any other injury or indignity offered either to his person, or
to his Crown and dignity.

Again secondly for the people who delivered Jonathan out of the hand of Saul,
there is no color to conceive any thing unlawful or unjustifiable therein.
Evident it is that themselves looked upon this fact before it was done, not
only as a thing lawful for them to do, but as matter of duty, and that which
in conscience they were bound to do. That expression of theirs implies as
much: Shall Jonathan die, who has so mightily delivered Israel? God forbid. (1 Samuel 14. 45.) As the Lord lives there shall not one hair of his head fall to
the ground. They conceived, that it had been a sin of a very high nature in
them, if they should not have appeared for his rescue and deliverance, whom
they not only knew to be innocent, and to have done nothing worthy of death,
but also to have wrought with God for their deliverance. Nor is it easy to
conceive what other ground or motive should have induced this people to run
the hazard of the Kings displeasure in Jonathans protection, then conscience
only: though its true, there is no intimation given of my complaint made, nor
of any offense conceived by Saul against the people for this fact of theirs,
which is another argument of the lawfulness thereof, yea and of the
unprejudicialnesse or in-offensivenesse of it to Saul's kingly Throane and
dignity, considering how tender and jealous Saul was of these, and how
impatient of the least touch (yea though but imaginary only) in them, as
appears in the sequel of his history, especially by his violent persecution
of David, upon very light and loose grounds of suspicion this way.

Lastly, concerning David's gathering a strength of men and arms to him,
whereby to make resistance against Saul, or rather against that bloody
association which conspired with him in a most unjust way, to take away his
life; evident it is,

1. That David, all the time of this his unjust persecution by Saul and his
accomplices, being still in eminent danger of his life, was more soft and tender
conscienced then ordinary, and more afraid of sinning against God; yea and
prayed both more frequently and more fervently unto God to be preserved from
sin, then at other times; as appears by many Psalms composed by him, during
this his trial. Now it is a thing altogether incredible, that a man otherwise
according to Gods own heart, under the best and softest frame of spirit and
conscience, that ever he lived in, and whilst he made it his earnest prayer
unto God daily to be kept from sin, should so foully miscarry, as to live in
the sin of Rebellion against his lawful King without repentance.

2. That he respected and honored Saul very highly, and was very tender of
doing him the least harm. It is said, that his heart smote him, because he had
cut off but the lap or skirt of his garment, 1 Samuel 24. 5. using moreover these
words to his servents, whose fingers itch'd to have made sure work with Saul;
The Lord forbid that I should do this thing to my master the Lords anointed,
to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the anointed of the Lord,,
verse 6. Therefore certainly David in defending himself against Saul's Cavaliers
with arms and men, neither offended God, nor wronged Saul himself in the
least measure. Yea,

3. Saul himself overcome with this expression of David's love and
faithfulness unto him, acknowleded his innocence, and the uprightness of his
heart toward him, verse. 16. Is this thy voice, my son David (says Saul) and
lift up his voice and wept. And said to David, thou art more righteous then I:
for thou have rendered me good, and I have rendered thee evil. And thou have
showed this day that thou have dealt well with me, etc. Saul did not only
acquit him from those high crimes, of treason, rebellion, sedition, etc. but
from all manner of injury or injustice at all done to him. And if Saul against
whom the offense (if any) had been committed, justifies him, who shall with
any color of or equity condemn him?

Lastly (for this particular) the holy Ghost himself gives this express
testimony concerning David; That he did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord, and turned from nothing that he commanded him all the days of his
life, save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, 1 King. 15. 5. whereas, if
that fact of his, defending himself by force of arms, against Saul and his
confederates in blood against him, had been of any such interpretation as some
would make it, (by making other cases like unto it) as either treason,
rebellion, or the like; doubtless this had been an higher and greater matter
of exception against him, then the matter of Vriah it self. But yet further
that their practice in the particular mentioned respectively, and so yours,
being only conformable thereunto, was, and is every ways justifiable; and of
perfect consistence with the rules of reason, equity and all good conscience,
and no ways derogatory to Kingly power and authority, I remonstrate and prove
by this one consideration.

Men that have no lawful authority or power to take away the lives or goods of
men, may very lawfully be resisted in any attempt they shall make, to do
either; and if their lives miscarry in such attempts, they have their means in
their own hands, (as we say) their blood is upon their own heads. This I
suppose is a pregnant and known principle both in reason and religion. If a
man assaults another upon the high way, and seeks to take away his money or
life from him; if the person assaulted slayes the other se defendendo (as the
Law speaks) there is neither Law nor conscience will take hold on, or reprove
him for it. This proposition is manifest. I go on therefore and add,

But men can have no lawful authority or power, by any warrant or commission
from a King to take away the lives, or goods, of those that are innocent and
have not transgressed the Law, no not of those that are not in a lawful way
convicted for transgressors of the Law.

Therefore such men as these may lawfully be resisted in any attempts they
shall make either upon our lives, or our goods, notwithstanding any Warrant,
Commission, or command they have, or pretend to have, from a King to do it.
And take that along with you which apparently follows from hence: If such
persons so assaulted may lawfully resist such assailants, then may they every
whit as lawfully provide themselves before hand of such means, where with they
may be able to make the resistance when time comes. As, if it be lawful for a
Traveller to kill a Thief upon the way in the defense of his life, or money;
certainly it is lawful for him to ride with a Sword, Pistol, or the like,
wherewith he may be able to do it; It is ridiculous to grant the lawfulness
of an end, and to deny a lawfulness of means necessary and sufficient to
attain that end.

But some (it may be) will deny that proposition, which affirms, that those
men have no lawful power or Authority to seize upon men's lives or goods who
are innocent, and as yet so reputed by the Law, having the authority and
command of the King to do it. That therefore no unjust, or unrighteous command
of a King, can enable any man with any lawful power to put in execution any
such command, I thus demonstrate (though indeed it be a thing evident enough in
it self without any demonstration) no King can derive any power or authority to
another, to any minister, officer, or the like, but only that wherewith
himself is invested, and possessed of, either formally, or by way of eminency
and surplussage. But no King is himself invested with any authority or power to
do any thing which is unjust, or unrighteous therefore he can not impart or
give any such power to another: and consequently those that attempt or do any
thing by virtue of any unjust command from a King, had every whit as good do
the thing upon their own heads and authority, without any warrant or
commission from the King at all^ the fact as touching the lawfullnesse of it,
is but of one and the same consideration in both cases. Now that a King himself
has no power or authority at all* to do any thing that is unjust or unequal,
is yet more evident then the former, thus: All power that a King has in point
of government, is derived upon him, either by God, or by men, or both: but it
is a truth of the cleerest evidence that neither the one, nor the other,
neither God, nor man conferreth any power upon him to do unjustly. Concerning
God, there is not the least question to be made: he gives no man Authority to
sin; but lays his Authority and command upon all the world to do righteously:
and as for men, supposing they be but reasonable men that have conferred the
power upon a King, it cannot be thought, or once imagined, that they should
give a power out of themselves, against themselves; a power to injure, or to
wrong either them or their posterity. And though they should be conceived to do
a thing so inconsistent with reason and even common sense, yet such an act of
theirs, were a mere nullitie: the King was never the more possessed of any such
power, because they that are supposed to have conferred it upon him, had it not
in themselves, nor the least right or power to derive it upon any other.

Yea, but (will the malignant Doctors) still object and reply, who shall be
Judge in this case, Whether the command or commission of a King, given to an
Officer, or other subject, to be put in execution, be unjust, or no? Is it not
fit, that rather the King himself should be judge in this case, then every
private man? Is it fit to give way or allow, that every private man should
scan, examine, judge, and determine either the righteousness or
unrighteousness of the Kings command? Does not such a liberty as this tend to
dissolve the bands of obedience to Superiors? To pour contempt upon Kings and
Rulers, and to fill the world with confusion?

To this I answer, First, that for many things that are commanded by Kings and
Superiors, there needs little or no examination or sitting, whether they be
lawful, or no. Their unlawfulness is written (as it were) in their foreheads,
with such Capital Letters, that he that runs may read it. A man needs no
skill either in Arithmetique or Geometry, nor the use of any rule or square,
to try either whether the bow be straight, or the string bent and crooked.
Half an eye is sufficient provision for this decision. The command of that
Idolatrous King Nebuchadnezzar with his Nobles, that men should worship his
golden Image, was so notoriously wicked, that those three servants of God,
Shadrack, Meshack, and Abednego, were not careful to answer the King
concerning it. Dan. 3. 16. that is, they would never take time to study or
consider whether they should obey it, or no. Such was the command of the Elders
and Rulers to Peter and John, When they commanded them that in no wise they
should speak or teach in the name of Jesus. Act. 3. 18. 19. Besides many
others both upon Sacred, Ecclesiastic, and Civil Record, of like condition
and importance.

2. If it be not lawful for inferiors to examine and enquire into the
commands of Kings, and other their Superiors, whether they be lawful or no;
then is there a necessity lying upon men by way of duty, to make men equal
with God, and to judge them as unerringly, as universally righteous and holy,
as he; which a man of conscience will hardly forbear to call blasphemy. The
sequel is evident: Because men can rise no higher in their thoughts and
apprehensions of God himself in this kind, then to judge him absolutely and
unquestionably righteous, worthy to be obeyed, in whatsoever he shall command,
without examination.

3. If men were either bound to, or lawfully might obey their Superiors without
all examination, there would be no place left for that command of our Savior,
wherein he prohibites his friends and servants, to fear those that could only
kill the body; meaning by such, either only, or principally Kings and Rulers,
who are commonly said to have potestatem vitae and ^ccis, power of life and
death. There is no reason to think, that either Kings or Rulers should take
away the lives of those that will comply with them in all their desires* and
commands: and as little reason is there for any man to think, that men should
run the hazard of being killed, by disobeying the commands and will of Kings,
if they might safely, and with the peace of a good conscience obey and comply
with them.

4. It is no more disparagement or dishonor to Kings or Rulers to have their
commands examined by those to whom they are directed and given, then it was for
Paul and the rest of the Apostles to have their Preachings and doctrines
examined by the inferior sort of Christians that heard them. These were every
whit as great (if not far greater) in Spiritual authority and dignity, as
Kings themselves are in politic and civil. Now the Holy Ghost is so far from
reproving those, who examined the things which they heard from Paul himself,
that he has left it upon Record as matter of especial commendation to them,
That they daily searched the Scriptures, whether things were so or no, as he
had taught them, Act. 17. 11. Yea, the Apostles themselves were so far from
looking upon it, as any matter of prejudice to them or their reputations, that
what they delivered and taught, should be brought to the touchstone by those
that heard them, that they required this at their hands by way of duty, and
exhorted them unto it. See 1 Cor. 10. 14. 1 These. 5. 21. etc. And yet far
greater reason is there, why the teaching of the Apostles should have been
(...),.i. privileged from account, then the commands of Kings: because they
had a promise of such a presence of the Spirit of truth with them, that he
should lead them into the way of all truth; whereas Kings, both in the framing
and publishing of their Commands, are left to an arbitrary assistance from
heaven, after the manner of other men.

5. The wrath of God has been revealed from heaven,.i. has been showed in
very remarkable and exemplary manner, upon those who have swallowed the
commands of Kings, and submitted unto them in things unlawful. Those Officers
that obeyed King Nebuchadnezzars command in casting those three innocent
servants of God into the fiery furnace, were suddenly consumed by the flame
that came out of the furnace; whereas those that streined at the Kings command,
and exchanged it (as the Scripture phrase is) meaning (I conceive) for the
commandment of God, obeying this in the stead, remained untouched of the fire
in the midst of the furnace, Dan. 3. 22. So the men of Israel that had obeyed
the commandment of Saul in giving their assistance to him for the persecuting
of David, were punished together with Saul, fleeing and falling down wounded
before the Philistines, as Peter Martyr has well observed upon 1 Samuel 31. 1.
So of that great Host of Assyrians, that joined with their King in an unlawful
war against the Church and People of God, there were 185000. slain in one
night by an Angel, 2 King. 19. 35. To pass by all other examples of the
severity of God in this kind, that is most worthy consideration, which is
recorded, 2 Chronicles. 24. It is said, ver. 17. That after the death of Jehoiada,
the Princes of Judah came and did reverence unto the King, and that the King
hearkened to them. Not long after, They conspired together against Zachariah, a
faithful Prophet of the Lord, for dealing faithfully with them, and at the
Kings commandment, stoned him with stones, in the Court of the house of the
Lord, ver. 21. But (says the Story, ver. 23.) it came to pass at the end of
the year, that the host of Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah
and Jerusalem and destroyed all the Princes of the People from among the
People, etc. The just revenging hand of God, singling out from amongst many
thousands, those persons by name, who had obeyed the King in a way of
unrighteousness, though they were the chiefest and greatest of them, and in
that respect (in all likelihood) kept furthest off from the danger, and had
more outward provision for their safety, then others.

6. (And lastly for this) If this liberty we speak of, of examining the
commands of Kings and other Superiors, were granted unto, and used by those
that are in subjection, it would not divest or bereave Kings or Rulers of any
obedience at all, that were worth the having or receiving from men, or that
were truly honorable or safe for them to receive. All that in reason it could
be conceived to do in this kind, is to prevent and cut off all such obedience
from Kings, which would endanger their cutting off, and their States and
Kingdoms with them. If this liberty, or duty rather, of examining the Commands
of Superiors, had been preached and pressed upon the consciences of men with
that authority and power, which the truth and high concernment of it will
bear, or rather (indeed) required, those crowns might have flourished upon
the heads of Kings, which now begin to droope and languish; and those Nations
enjoyed abundance of peace under them, the foundations of whose safety are now
shaken. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, because he willingly
followed the commandment, viz. of King Jeroboam, who commanded the worshipping
of the golden Calfe. Hos. 5. 11. Here is the fruit of the forwardness of a
Nation to obey and comply with an Idolatrous King, even to be oppressed and
broken in judgment*.i. Not only to be forely afflicted, but utterly ruined and
destroyed, and that in a course of justice, and of the righteous proceedings of
God against them. In this cup of trembling and astonishment which they were
compelled to drink from the hand of God, there was none other ingredient, but
their own ways; and that which it seems was predominant in the mixture, was
their forwardness to side with their King, in that false Religion and worship
which he maintained. And for the ruin and destruction of Jeroboam himself and
his house, that is much considerable from the pen of the H. Ghost, that it is
not ascribed so much to his sin and wickedness in comm^nding Idolatry, as to
the sin and wickedness of the people in obeying. And this thing (says the
history, speaking of Jeroboam's Calfe, and command given to the people to
worship them. 1 King. 12. 30) turned to sin, meaning to a provocation of a very
high nature, to such a sin, which even rooted out and destroyed the house of
Jeroboam from the face of the earth. Cap. 13. 34. But how, or by what means
did Jeroboams Calves and Idolatrous commands concerning them, turn to such a
sin or provocation, as was his ruin? The Holy Ghost ascribes this to the
obedience of the People in this behalf: And this thing turned to sin: for the
people went to worship before the one, even unto Dan. Clearly implying, that
that sin which was the ruin and rooting out of Jeroboam and his house, was not
so much his wicked and Idolatrous command, considered simply and in it self,
but as it found obedience and subjection in the people. The people in true
account, who magnified Jeroboam in his commands, above God in his, were they
that ruined both Jeroboam and his house. And generelly, all that Kings and
Princes gain, by an unlawful subjection and obedience from their People, is
little else but the kindling of the fire of Gods jealousy against them. I am
the Lord (says God, Esa. 42. 8.) this is my Name: and my glory will not I give
to another,.i. I will not suffer it to be given to, nor to be received by
another; I will sell it dear to him that shall own it, and will recover it out
of his ruin. We know Herod was smitten by an Angel from heaven, and soon cast
up that morsel of divine honor which he had swallowed, by a miserable,
shameful, and loathsome death. As those that make Images of wood, stone,
silver, go^d, or the like, to be adored and worshipped, do the greatest injury
that may be to those poor innocent creatures; they expose them to the fury and
jealousy of God, whereby they commonly suffer a dissolution of their being
before their time, as the brass whereof the brazen Serpent was made, did,
being broken all to pieces, when incense was once offered unto it, 2 Kin. 18.
4. and the gold whereof Aarons Calfe was made, being burnt in the fire, and
stamped and ground small, even to very dust, and this also cast into the river,
Deuteronomy. 9. 21. So they that will divest the great God of heaven and earth, to
cloth Kings and Princes, or whomsoever, with the spoils of his Name, as all
those do, who obey them with disobedience unto God, as in one sense they make
them gods, so in another, by making them gods, they make them indeed more men
then they were, more obnoxions to his displeasure, who has the command of
their life and breath. Consider that passage (to omit many others of like
importance) which you shall find, Esa. 1. 31. And the strong,.i. the Idol,
either because in the Idolaters conceit, it is strong like a god, or rather
strong, in respect of the firmness and durablenes of the matter of it, Shall
be as Tow, and the maker thereof, as a Spark: they shall both burn together,
and none shall quench them. Mark well: How strong and durable soever the
matter is, whereof the Idol is made, whether it be the best heart of Oak
that can be gotten, or the hardest and firmest stone, silver, gold, or the
like, or if there be any thing more durable, and more resisting corruption,
then these, yet being made an Idol, it becomes as Tow, i. of a very weak and
perishable nature: and the maker of it (says he) shall be as a Spark, viz. to
set this Tow on fire; meaning that he is the cause both why that good
substance, which was made into an Idol, perishes so suddenly, and likewise of
his own perishing by the hand and judgment of God. In like manner, when men
or women shall make Idols of Kings and Princes, and great men, and fall down
before them, and worship them with divine worship, as all they in effect do,
who yield obedience unto them against God, what do they else but shake the
very foundations of their lives, and present beeings in the world, and call for
the fire of Gods jealousy from heaven to consume them: Whereas on the
contrary, those that soberly, and out of conscience refuse to obey them upon
such terms, I mean, against God, they do them as good service, if they would
please so to apprehend and interpret it, as Mordecai did to King Ahashuerosh,
when he revealed the Treason of the two Eunuchs against him. He that refuses
to obey a Superior in an unlawful command, gives notice to him, that his
foot is in a snare of death, and that his preservation stands in his desisting
and repenting.

I shall mention only one objection more wherewith that unhappy learning of the
contrary side, uses to be very importune, and to triumph much in it. The
Christians in the primitive times submitted themselves with patience to those
most unjust and cruel commands of the heathen Emperors, when they sent their
officers to put them in execution, and to take their lives from them: they
never resisted, nor stood upon their guard, but took even death it self, yea,
and many times torments worse then death, patiently. And whereas this might
otherwise be sufficiently answered, that they made no resistance, because they
were not able, they had no considerable strength to make good any resistance;
to take away this answer; They usually cite a place out of one of the Fathers,
Tertullian by name, wherein he Si enim and hosts exertos, non tantum vindices
occultos, agere vellemus, deesset nobis vis numerorum and copiarum? -- Externi
sumus, and vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella, municipia,
conciliabula, castra ipsa, etc. -- Cui bello non idonei, non prompti fuissemus,
etc. Tertul. Apolog. Cap. 37.
disclaimes this ground of their patience in suffering, writing unto the
States, or Senators of the Empire, affirming, that they had a considerable
party of Christians in their Dominions, whereby they were able to have made
resistance against them.

Because this objection is matter of so much confidence and triumph to the
adversary, I shall desire leave to examine it the more thoroughly, and to
search the bottom and foundations of it in my answer to it, I shall first
speak to the testimony propounded, and consider the validity or likelihood of
the truth thereof; and secondly, (for argument sake) the truth of it being
granted or supposed, we shall endeavor to show of how little force or
concernment it is, any ways to disable the truth of that position we have in
hand, which justifies a resistance against the violent execution of any unjust
command from Kings, in those that are assaulted under pretense thereof;
therefore as concerning the testimony of Tertullian, touching the sufficiency
of strength the Christians in his time should have to resist the Emperor and
all his power. I answer.

First, that this Father might easily be mistaken in taking the proportion, and
making the estimate of the strength and power of Christians within the compass
of the Roman Empire, in comparison of the strength of those that were ready to
oppose them. This was no point of faith, nor of Christian Religion; and
therefore a devout father might easily fall under a misprision herein. The
common saying indeed is, that unicuique in art sua credendum, i. e. every man
is to be believed in his own art or profession, but no rule of charity or
reason binds us to believe another in any thing which belongs to the art or
profession of another, and wherein himself is little versed or exercised. Now
to weigh the strength of a Kingdom, State, or Empire, (as it were) in a
balance, and to make an estimate of, and compare together the power of
several parties or divisions of people in it with so much exactness, as to
determine which is the stronger, and which the weaker, belongs to the
profession and employment of a Statesman, not of a Divine, orminister of the
Gospel, of one that sits at the stern of the empire, not of one whose heart,
and time, and strength are taken up with the study of the mysteries of heaven,
yea for a Statesman himself to be able upon sufficient grounds, precisely to
determine such differences as we speak of, I mean between the strength and
strength of different parties in a State, where there is any neerenesse or
appearance of an equality, will require both double diligence and treble
sufficiency in him otherwise.

2. How easily might he mistake and miscarry in a matter quite beside his
profession and course, who not long after miscarryed so grievously in his own,
as to turn Montanist, who called himself the Holy Ghost, and to approve of
the dreams and furious fancies of those two vile women, Maximilla and Prisca
(Montanus his wicked associates) for true prophecies. Yea stayed not here
neither, but joined himself with those Heretics called Cataphryges, who
condemned second marriages as adulterous and prohibited by God: besides diverse
other misprisions in his own profession, which would take up too much time to
insist particularly upon: a memorable example and warning (as it were) from
heaven, how unsafe and dangerous it is to build upon the authority of men.

3. It is well observed by one, that there is an aptness and pronenesse of
inclination in much devotion, in persons devoutly given, to overvalue the
works and piety of other men. Now this Father out of such a principle or
inclination as this is, desirous to extol and magnify the patience of
Christians, might easily draw in such a circumstance as this for such a
purpose, upon very weak and slender grounds for it.

4. It is generally observed and known by the writings and records of these
times, that even in the pious and Orthodox Fathers themselves there were some
touches and st^eines, some fibrae of that root of bitterness which afterward
grew rank, and flourished above measure in the times of Popery, yea and
brought forth fruit abundantly unto death. I mean, an inclination to credit
and countenance their Religion in the sight of the heathen and the world about
them, by very slender reports and relations of things, as of Miracles, Visions
strange accidents, etc. which are generally rejected, as fabulous and false, by
the sounder and more considerate knowledge of these latter days.

5. Supose there might be considerable numbers of men of the Christian party in
the Empire (though to me it is one of the things I least believe) to withstand
the heathen party therein, yet doubtless these were kept under, as the
Israelites were in Egypt, when they began to multiply. It is no ways likely,
that if they were any ways formidable for their numbers, that they should be
suffered to have any proportion of arms or means, either of offense or
defense, in case they were assaulted. It being contrary to all reason and rule
of State, to suffer a party of an opposite Religion to the State, and
worshipping another God then the State allowed, growing to any considerable
numbers within them, to have farther any such proportion or quantity of
weapons, arms, or means in any kind, whereby they might endanger and become
formidable to the State. Now then granting that which this Father spoke
concerning the numbers of Christians amongst the heathens, that they had number
for number, man for man, and in this respect might seem to balance them, and
be able enough to resist them; yet wanting arms and other means of defense,
wherewith it cannot be conceived but that the adverse party abounded, it had
been in vain for them to have made resistance when violence was offered unto
them. And thus much for the first part of my Answer, to show the
questionablenesse, or rather indeed the great unlikelihood of the truth of that
testimony, which is brought to support the objection propounded, which
otherwise would fall to the ground of it self.

I go on to the second part of my Answer, which is to prove and to show, that
though the testimony be admitted for truth, yet the objection will not reach
the question, or case in hand.

Therefore suppose we the Father that spoke as we have heard, viz. That the
Christians under the Heathen Emperors should be able enough to have defended
themselves, yea to have opposed the Emperor himself with his party, spoke
nothing herein but the truth; yet it does not follow, that all those of his
profession, I mean all the Christians that were scattered up and down the
face of the Empire should have the same apprehensions with him herein, should
think themselves strong enough to resist their adversaries, in case they were
opposed. Those particular persons that were called out here and there, some
after others, to suffer, might very probably, yea, could not lightly but
conceive and think, that if they should have made any resistance against them
that came to lay violent hands upon them, and to put them to death, they should
have but enraged their malice against them the more, and so have increased
their own torments: yea, and happily have provoked the Heathen party, to rage
so much the more against their Christian Brethren, who yet remained amongst
them. So that in those that were called to suffer, it had been both want of
wisdom, in respect of themselves, and of charity in respect of others, if
they should have made the least resistance against those unjust and bloody
officers, that were sent against them to take away their lives.

If it be here replied and said; yea but the whole body and party of
Christians throughout the Empire, having sufficent strength might have agreed
to have risen up at once, and have suppressed their adversaries, if they had
Judged it lawful.

To this, Answer has in part been made already: as first, that it is no ways
probable that they had any sufficiency of strength, no not of men, to have
made good such an attempt, much less that they had any competent provision of
means otherwise, which had been requisite thereunto.

Secondly, that though it should be granted, that they had a sufficiency of
strength both ways, yet is it no ways necessary that therefore they should
all be of the same mind and judgment touching this sufficiency; that they
should all be persuaded that their party were strong enough to deal with their
adversaries. We know that many attempts, projects, and undertakings which have
been in treaty and agitation, have been deserted and laid aside, only through
the different judgments and apprehensions of those that were concerned, and
to have been engaged therein, touching the expedience or feaceablenesse of
them. As that project of Achitophell for the immediate and close following of
David, was deserted by Absolon, and his 2 Samuel 17. ^4.
party, and not put in execution, because of the different advise which Hushai
the Archit gave. A late instance hereof we had likewise amongst our selves:
that dangerous design of bringing up the Army out of the North against the
Parliament, proved abortive, the execution of it never seeing the light of the
Sun, through the different opinions of those that were, and were to have been
in special manner concerned therein; some conceiving it to have been a project
deserving the name of none such; others no ways daring to adventure
themselves, their lives, and fortunes, nor some (perhaps) their consciences,
upon it. In like manner for the Christians living within the Roman Empire, to
have made head and risen up against the maine body and State of the Empire to
suppress them, had been an enterprise of that dangerous and grievous
consequence, in case it had miscarryed: especially the grounds of the success
of it being so uncertain and weak as they were, that it has not the least
appearance or show of likelihood, that ever it should be generally consented
unto by the whole society of the Christians; without which there was no
attempting the putting of it into execution.

To this may be added.

3. That suppose the Christians we spoke of had been generally confident of
their strength and had made little question but that they might have carried it
against the Emperor and his; yet having no invitation, countenance or command
from any Authority, rule, or lawful power in the Empire to attempt any such
thing, their case was far differing from ours who are invited, countenanced,
encouraged, and some ways commanded by as great and as lawful an Authority as
this state has any, to do what you have been exhorted to do in opposing the
rage and violence of that malignant and blood-thirsty generation, who having
stolen away the heart of the King, make use of his name to make havoc and
spoil of your Laws, Liberties, Estates, Lives, Religion, yea of the Peace,
Honor, and safety of the whole Kingdom. It is the express command and
ordinance of God that inferior Magistrates, and Rulers should be obeyed as
well as Kings, as we observed formerly out of that of Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
Therefore submit your selves unto every, or all manner of ordinance of man, for
the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as unto the Superior, or unto
Governors, as those that are sent of him, for the punishment of evill-doers,
etc. So that inferior Governors are by the express Commandment of God to be
obeyed, as well as the Superior. Now then put the case that the inferior
Governor requires that which is only honest, agreeable to the Laws of God and
of Nature, as, viz. that we should do our best to defend our selves against
those that contrary to all Law and conscience assault us; the superior, that
which is contrary to both, viz. to sit still whilst our Laws, Liberties,
Estates, Lives, friends, godly Magistrates, and Religion it self, are
endangered, and ready to be taken from us; the question in this case, whether
we are to obey the inferior or superior Authority; (the command of God
indifferently extending it for obedience unto either, in things that are
lawful) is easily resolved, except men will complain and say it is dark at
noone day. When it shall be substantially proved unto us, that an unlawful
command from a superior Magistrate, dissolves and makes void that commandment
of God, whereby we stand bound to obey the inferior, in that which is lawful;
We may then have cause to make a demurre touching the goodness of the cause;
but till then we may be bold to say, it is day, when the Sun shines. This then
is a difference very considerable, between the case of primitive Christians,
and ours, in the point in hand, supposing they had power to defend themselves
against the persecuting agents and instruments of the Emperor, yet had they
not any countenance or command from any Authority in that State to do it,
which we have in ours.

4. Still supposing (that which yet is never to be granted, till it be better
proved) that the Primitive Christians we spoke of* had a sufficiency of power,
to have defended themselves against the persecuting Emperors, and did it not,
yet there may be this reason given, why they should rather patiently suffer,
than make resistance, because whilst they were yet heathen and unconverted to
the Christian Faith, they consented to that power or authority in the Emperor,
whereby he made those bloody Edicts for the persecuting and murdering of poor
Christians. Now it had been a very unreasonable thing and justly offensive,
both in the eyes of God and men, if the same persons who had established a
power or authority in the hand of a Ruler, should have resisted or opposed him,
or his Agents and Ministers in the execution of it. A servant of God, though he
swears or bargains to his own hurt, yet must he not change, as you have it,
Psalm. 15. 4. But we are under no such engagements, or bands, and therefore
have a liberty which they had not: For though a man's consent to an unlawful
power, be in absolute and simple consideration a mere nullity, and such a
power never the more lawfullized thereby; yet by all rules of reason and
equity, such a consent ought to be a bar against him that has given it, that
he shall not, for any carnal benefit or advantage, break out against him that
exercises this power by virtue of such consent, merely for such exercise sake.

5. Be it granted that the Christian party in the Roman Empire was very great
(as is pretended) yet could it in no sense be called or looked upon as the
whole State or body of the Empire, as the Paril mentary Assembly is amongst us.
This in a representative and legal consideration, is the whole body of the
Nation, and of all the persons in it, having the same power and authority by
Law, and in conscience too, to do every whit as much in every respect, as the
whole Nation, and all the particular persons therein could have, if they were
met together. Now that may be lawful for an entire body or society of persons
to do, which may not be lawful for a part, or some few of the society, save
only in conjunction with the whole. The Parliament (we know) being
interpretatively, and in consideration of Law, the whole body of the Kingdom,
has a lawful power, both to do and command many things, which a far greater
part or number of men in the Kingdom, have not; no, all the Kingdom besides
has no such power, as they: and many things may be done very lawfully, and
with a good conscience, by virtue of their appointment and command, which could
not be done upon any such terms without it, though a thousand times more men
or persons then they are should command them.

6. Supposing they had such a power as we have often supposed (but never granted
positively) and that it was lawful for them to have made resistance
accordingly, yet may God by way of special dispensation* and for very great
and considerable ends of his, hide this liberty we speak of from their eyes;
that they should not see it to make use of. We know there were many in the
Apostles time, who eat herbs, when as yet it was as lawful for them, in
respect of any command of God to the contrary, to have eaten flesh; but yet
they did better to content themselves with herbs, when God had not revealed
and cleared up this liberty unto them. And yet they did as well as they too,
who seeing their liberty in this kind by the clear light of the Gospel, did
take it, and eat flesh. Consider that passage of the Apostle, Romans 14. 6. He
that observes a day, observes it unto the Lord: and he that observes not a
day* observes it not unto the Lord. He that eats, eats unto the Lord* for
he gives God thanks: and he that eats not, eats not unto the Lord, and
gives God thanks. Whereby it is evident that the forbearance of some actions
by some men, wherein they approve themselves unto God, does not at all
prejudice or gainesay the like acceptance of others in their doing them: yea
that some men may be bound in conscience to forbear that, which another with a
good conscience may do. And this doubtless is (if the testimony of Tertullian
mentioned be true) the case between those Primitive Christians, and Christians
in these days. They might out of tenderness of conscience, and out of an
apprehension of some unlawfulness in it, forbear to vindicate themselves
against those bloody bucthers, that were set on work by the Emperors to
destroy them: and yet Christians in these days, seeing their liberty in this
kind, may as lawfully resist those that shall come against them in the like
manner, as the other forbear it.

If it be here objected and said that it is no ways like that the Church of
God should generally be ignorant of such a liberty as we speak of and
challenge, if there were any such liberty indeed; is it credible that God
should hide such a point of truth as this from them all?

I answer first, It is not necessary to suppose that it should be hid from
them all without exception: it is sufficient for our purpose if it were hid
from their teachers, and those that were leaders to the rest, upon whose
judgment (in things of this nature) the generality of people then much
depended. But secondly, if there were many ministers of the Gospel and
teachers* even in the Apostles times themselves, that were ignorant of that
liberty which the Gospel brought with it to the world, for the eating of
flesh, the non-observation of days and of circumcision, etc. or at least were
so fair ignorant, that they were not able to inform and satisfy the general
sort of Christians therein, it may very well be conceived, that some hundreds
of years after, when the light began to darken and wax dim (in comparison)
they might now be generally ignorant of such a point of liberty as this we now
speak of, at least so far ignorant, as not to be able to satisfy the
generality of their people therein. Especially if we consider,

Thirdly, that from the days of the Apostles, until their numbers and
strength were raised and increased to the supposed pitch of a sufficiency to
resist (which was not less then near 200. years) there was no occasion, of
studying, or looking into the point: they had been in never the better case,
whether they had had that liberty we speak of or no; and therefore it is no
marvel if they neglected the searching after it. And when cases of conscience
(as this was) lie unstudied and uninquired into, neither is it any marvel if
the resolution or state of the truth in them, be not generally known.

Fourthly, that Spirit of courage, patience and constancy, which God poured out
abundantly upon his Church and servants in those times, whereby they were so
strengthened and encouraged to suffer, that martyrdom seemed a desirable thing
unto them, might be a special reason and means to take them off from
inquiring into, or so much as thinking what their lawful liberty might be in
the case we speak of. Men that have a full estate in fair rents, as much as
they can well spend, and as their heart desires* are not like, have no
occasion to busy themselves in studying the case of usury, as whether it be
lawful to take increase for the lone of money, or no; which he that has his
estate in money, has. Whilst the Israelites were fed by God in an extraordinary
way by Manna from heaven, there was no necessity or occasion for them to
plough and sow. So whilst Christians were furnished with an extraordinary
strength from heaven, to offer themselves up in martyrdom, their edge must
needs be taken off hereby, as from seeking means to escape it, so from
studying cases and questions about the lawfulness of escaping.

Fifthly, whilst there lay a confessed necessity of suffering upon Christians,
i. e. till the supposed strength of resistance came to them (which as was noted
before, could not be much less then 200. years) Martyrdom was so extolled
and magnified by the general acclamations of the ministers, and continual
panegyricks, and orations made in praise thereof, that it is like no man would
for a long time be endured, that should teach any doctrine that might any ways
seem to take men off from the desire thereof. As there are many doctrines and
points of Religion amongst our selves that have been a long time taught with
so high an hand, and generally received with so full an applause, that it is
not safe for any man to appear so much as in a seeming opposition to them,
(though with never so much modesty and tenderness.) But,

Sixthly (and lastly for this) whether God was pleased to make use of one or
both of their particulars last mentioned, or any other like unto them, as a
means to hide that liberty of resistance we speak of from the eyes of the
primitive Christians, or no; certain it is, that the frame and tenor of his
after dispensations, did require, that such a liberty should be hid from them;
or at least that they should not make use of it; as on the contrary, the nature
and purport of those dispensations which God has now in hand, requires that
this liberty should be manifested and made known unto Christians. We know
that according to the counsel and foreknowledge of God, Antichrist was then to
come into the world: as now we know that he is about to be destroyed and cast
out of the world. Now this is a general rule, look what truths were
necessary to be shut up and concealed from the Churches of Christ, that
Antichrist might pass by, and get up into his throane; the discovery and
letting out of the same into the world, are necessary for his pulling down.
For certain it is, that Antichrist could never have gotten up into that
throane, whereon he yet sits and shows himself in his sacrilegious glory,
had not God by special dispensation suffered him to make many truths his
footstool. If all truths had been clearly taught in the Church of Christ,
and accordingly received and believed, it had been impossible that ever such a
monster should have gotten into the temple of God, that should exalt himself
above all that which is called God. But God causing a dead sleep (as it were)
to fall upon those truths, which should in special manner have opposed him,
he had the opportunity without much contradiction or noise to steal and
convey himself into that Cathedram pestilentiae, that chair of papal state,
which yet he possesses. Now amongst many other truths that were of necessity
to be laid asleep, for the passing of this beast unto his great power and
authority, and for the maintayning and safe-guarding of him in the possession
hereof, this is one of special consideration; that Christians may lawfully in
a lawful way, stand up to defend themselves, in case they be able, against any
unlawful assaults; by what assailants, or by what pretended Authority soever
made upon them. For had this opinion been timeously enough, and substantially
taught in the Church, it would certainly have caused an abortion in Antichrists
birth, and so have disappointed the devil of his firstborne. Had not the
spirits, and judgments, and consciences of men been as it were cowed and
marvellously imbased and kept under, (and so prepared for Antichrists lure) by
doctrines and tenants, excessively advancing the power of superiors, over
inferiors, and binding Iron yokes and heavy burdens upon those that were in
subjection, doubtless they would never have bowed down their backs so low as
to let such a beast go over them, they would never resigned up their
judgments and consciences into the hand of such a spiritual tyrant as he. So
that you see, there was a special necessity for the letting of Antichrist
into the world, yea and for the continuance of him in his Throne, that no such
opinion as this which we speak of, whether truth or untruth should be taught
and believed; I mean, which vindicateth and maintains, the just rights, and
liberties, and privileges of those that under authority, and subjection unto
others.

Whereas, now on the contrary, that time of Gods preordination and purpose, for
the downfall of Antichrist, drawing near, there is a kind of necessity,
that those truths, which have slept for many years, should now be awakened:
and particularly that God should reveal and discover unto his faithful
ministers, and other his servants the just bounds and limits of Authority, and
power, and consequently the just and full extent of the lawful liberties of
those that live in subjection. Evident it is, that they are the commonaltie of
Christians, I mean Christians of ordinary rank and quality that shall be
most active, and have the principal hand in executing the judgments of God
upon the Whore* Consider that place, Revel. 18. 4, 5, 6. And I heard another
voice from heaven say, go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her sins are come up
unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities. Reward her even as she has
rewarded you, and give her double according to her works, and in the cup that
she has filled to you, fill her the double. Now that this service shall be
performed unto God by them (Christians I mean of under rank and quality)
contrary to the will, desires, or commands of those Kings and Princes under
whom they live, it appears by that which immediately follows, verse 9. And the
Kings of the earth shall bewail her and lament for her, which have committed
fornication and lived in pleasure with her, when they shall see the smoke of
her burning. It is evident that the people of God spoken of before, were
subjects to these Kings, that should bewail the whore in her ruin; for they
are such as come out of Babylon; which could not be, except they had lived
under those Kings that were Babylonish, and had given their Kingdoms to the
whore, and by whom Babylonisme had been countenanced and set up. And that these
(or at least the greatest part of them) should no ways consent to the
destruction of the whore by their subjects, it is evident by this; they should
wail and lament over her, when she is destroyed. As for that which is found in
the former Chapter concerning the 10. Kings (Rev. 17. 17.) Into whose heart God
has put it to give their Kingdoms or power to the Beast, where it is said,
that these should hate the whore and make her desolate, and naked, and eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire; I conceive this is not meant of the persons of
Kings, but of their States and Kingdoms, i. e. of the generality of their
people under them.

1. The expression, will fairly, and with full consonancie to the Scripture
language elsewhere, carry this sense and interpretation; the bodies of States
or Kingdoms indefinitely taken and considered, being usually signified by
their heads, as Dukedomes by Dukes, Kingdoms by Kings, etc. as we have had
occasion formerly to observe more at large when we produced several instances
from the Scriptures of this kind of phrase. I shall (for the present) be your
remembrancer only of that one, Dan. 7. 17. with verse 23. where verse the 17.
the four great Beasts are said to be four Kings that shall arise out of the
earth. Yet verse 23. it is said that the fourth Beast shall be the fourth
Kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all Kingdoms, i. e. all the
other three Kingdoms formerly expressed by three Kings. I could direct you to
several other Texts of Scripture where the same manner of speaking is found;
but that I hasten. 2. If we take the word, Kings, properly, i. e. precisely for
the persons that are the heads and chief rulers of Kingdoms, in that
Scripture, and will say, that these shall hate the whore and make her desolate,
etc. I apprehend no possibility (for the present) of reconciling this place,
with that other mentioned, Rev. 18. 9. Where it is said, that the Kings of the
earth who have committed fornication and lived deliciously with her, shall
bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning.
Certainly they that shall hate her, and help to make her desolate, and to
burn her with fire, will not bewail her, nor lament over her, after such a
manner, as is farther expressed in that which follows in this Chapter. As for
that Exposition, which by the Kings of the earth that should bewail and lament
over the Whore in her burning, understands Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. who in their port and pomp are as Kings, it seems not probable; I
rather conceive these to be the Merchants of the earth that should weep and
wail ever her, because no man buyeth their wares any more, verse. 11. and who
are said to have waxen rich, by that long trade and trafique they had had with
the world, in those Babilonish commodities. Therefore they are the ten
Kingdoms indefinitely considered. i. persons living within the ten Kingdoms,
not the ten Kings personally and properly taken, that shall hate the Whore and
make her desolate, and burn her flesh with fire. Now this promise and
prediction of God concerning the destruction of the Whore by Christians of
inferior rank and quality, can hardly be conceived however it should be
fulfilled or take place, except the judgments and consciences of men should be
losed and set at liberty from the bands and fetters of those enslaving
Doctrines and apprehensions, wherewith they had been formerly oppressed and
made servile above measure, to those that were in place and authority over
them. Thus then we see a ground and reason fully satisfactory, both how and why
the Christians in the Primitive times, whilst Antichrist was in coming, might
well be ignorant of that liberty, the knowledge whereof would have kept him
from his Throne; and also why that liberty should now be revealed by God and
taught unto his people; the ignorance whereof would still keep and continue
him upon his Throne, when Gods Will and Pleasure is that he shall be thrown
down. And this for Answer to the Objection last propounded; and for the sixth
Particular, by way of Answer to the maine Objection. But,

7. (And lastly) whatsoever the credit or authority of Tertullian may be for
the strength of Christians in Primitive times, to make resistance against their
enemies* and how justifiable, or commendable soever the patience and subjection
of these Christians in suffering as they did, may be by some conceived to be,
supposing they had such a power to have defended themselves, as is supposed;
yet most certain it is, that as well the authority of the one as the
submission of the other, yea and both together, being both Apocriphall, are too
light to weigh against the authority of the practice of that great Prophet
Elisha, who made resistance against the Kings Messenger, that was sent against
him to take away his head (as we instanced to you in the former part of this
Discourse) as also against David, a man after Gods own heart, who being but a
private man, strengthened himself as well as he could, both with men and
arms, yea and with Goliahs sword to boot, to defend himself against the
unjust and bloody persecution of Saul; both which examples (besides others of
like importance) are Canonical. Elisha must not be censured as an evill-doer,
nor David condemned for a Traitor, or Rebel, either because Tertullian says,
that there were Christians enough in the Roman Empire, to make their party
good against the Emperor and his wicked instruments, nor yet because these
Christians did not stand up in their own defense, having sufficiency of
strength to have done it. Thus we see there is nothing at all in the patience
or submission of the primitive Christians, so much urged and insisted upon, to
discountenance that cause and service, wherein your best concurrence has been
desired, of any consideration or concernment that way. To rise up in your own
defense, in the defense of your lives, your estates, your liberties, your
wives, your children, your friends, your laws, your religion, against those,
who without any lawful Authority or Warrant either of God or men, are risen up
with all their might, and all their power to make havoc, and spoil, and ruin
of all, is no ways offensive either in the sight of God, or reasonable men.

And (to conclude) if any man be afraid that Martyrdom should suffer by this,
as either that the glory hereof should be eclipsed, or that all opportunities
of expressing our selves unto God and Jesus Christ in such a service, should be
cut off, and taken away by such an opinion. I answer, No: The glory and praise
of Martyrdom will remain as entire, with this Doctrine, as without it, and
the opportunities of showing our selves in our love and faithfulness unto
Christ in such a service, will no ways be diminished hereby.

For first, the glory and praise of Martyrdom or suffering for Christ, does
not consist in lying down, and suffering proud and wicked men to ride over our
heads, in sitting still whilst our estates, liberties, wives, children,
friends, are ruined and destroyed before our faces, when God puts an
opportunity into our hand to defend them; the name and Gospel of Jesus Christ
would rather suffer loss by such a patience as this, then any ways gain; it
were more Infidell-like, then Christian, not to make the best provision we can,
for the safety of those that are so near to us in such a case. But the grace
and glory of Martyrdom lies in this; First, when a man is resolved to
profess the name, and faith of Christ, what danger soever he incurs, what
loss soever he sustaines, or is like to sustain by it. Secondly, When it
comes to the necessity of suffering, that he baulkes not, nor saulters with
Christ: that he is not any ways ashamed of him, or any of his words, or ways.
Thirdly, When a man disdeignes deliverance upon any base terms, or by unworthy
means, that scorns to fly away for the enjoyment of any rest, except it be
with the wings of a Dove (the Scripture Emblem of innocence) which is covered
with silver wings (as David speaks) and her feathers like yellow gold. It is
ever honorable to fly with such wings as these.

Fourthly (and lastly) when God does not open a door of lawful escape unto
him, either by flight or otherwise, but hedgeth him up (as it were) with
thorns into the hand of the persecutor, that he patiently and with meekness
and composedness of spirit, without any breakings out in one kind or other,
without any expression of discontent either against God or man, submits
himself unto the stroke, in what kind soever it falls upon him.

And secodly, for opportunities of Martyrdom, of suffering for Christ, and
that in numbers more then we desire, they will not be wanting, though we shall
not-suffer every base Cavalier, that says he is for the King to cut our
throats, or to plunder our Cities, Towns, or Houses, to commit outrages and
insolences upon Wives, Children, Friends, etc.

1. It is a suffering for Christ (and so a degree or kind of Martyrdom) to
suffer those things which we do, in fears, in dangers, in distractions, in
runnings, or removings up and down, in disappointments of our affairs, in the
loss, expense, or forbearance of our estates, by those men of Belial, that are
as thorns in our eyes, and scourges in our sides, only or chiefly because we
will be that in open and constant profession, which by the grace of God we are
inwardly and in the truth of our souls; because we will not prostitute our
consciences to the lusts of their Father the devil, we will not give the right
hand of fellowship to them, in those desperate courses of wickedness and
prophannesse wherein they are engaged, and wherein (it seems) they mean to
weary, yea and wear themselves out before they will give over.

2. We lie open to the hatred and malice, to the mockings and scoffings, to the
railing and revilings, to the slanders and lyings of the whole malignant party
round about us; and that because we hold forth the Lord Jesus Christ in his
holiness and purity, in his power and authority over the world, in his truth,
and faithfulness, in his mercy, and goodness, in his glory, and Majesty, in
our lives, and conversations. And this is a Martyrdom too, or suffering for
Christ.

3. (And lastly) we know not how soon or suddenly we may be called out by God,
to suffer even a perfect and complete Martyrdom indeed, to lay down our
lives for Christ; when God will hedge up every way of escape against us with
thorns, and leave us in Peter's streights, To stretch forth our hands, and have
another to gird us, and to lead us whither we would not. John 21. 18. So that
we shall leave occasions, and opportunities enough, even as many as God
himself ever made, for the expressing of our love and faithfulness unto
Christ and his Gospel in ways of suffering, though we stand up like men, and
quit our selves with all our might, and all our strength, against those
assacinates, and sworn Swordmen of the devil, who have conspired the death
and ruin of all that fears God in the Land.

Only for a close of all that I have to say in this point, let me add this one
thing by way of caution, that opportunities of suffering Martyrdom will not
always continue in the Church for the servants of God: yea, the time draws
near, when they shall cease and be no more. The sad retinue of the first
things, (as they are called Rev. 20. 4) which has been a long time in passing
by, even for many Generations, is now almost quite passed; God is now bringing
up the reere of this host of sorrows, and when this is passed, he will turn
the wheel of his providence and dispensations, between his own Church, and the
Synagogue of Satan. That side which has been down hitherto, shall be upward,
and that which has been above, shall be below: Now the devils Saints, and the
Children of the Whore, even all fearful and unbeleeving ones, and abominable,
and murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers; and all liars, they shall be
called to their Martyrdom, and the Saints of the most high shall give them
double, of their own cup. Revel. 13. 10.
They that led into captivity hitherto, shall now go into captivity
themselves: and they that killed with the sword hitherto, shall now be killed
with the sword themselves. And who they are that shall now lead into captivity,
and slay with the sword, you may inform your selves, Rev. 18. 6, 7. Reward
her, even as she has rewarded you: you, viz. in your Brethren, that have
walked in the steps of the same faith and holiness with you: And give her
double, etc. This is the honor which the Saints shall have, to execute the
judgment that is written, upon the whore.

Another motive to strengthen your hand the same way, may be to consider, that
as the cause recommended to you is every ways justifiable, so is it a matter
of the highest and deepest concernment unto you to stand by it and advance it
to the utmost you are able, yea (if it were possible) above and beyond what you
are able to do. All your interests, relations, and concernments in this world
are bound up in it: yea, it narrowly concerns you in relation to the world
which is to come, your everlasting estate and condition is not lightly
concerned in it. First, what have you in this world amongst all that which you
call yours, any ways dear or precious unto you, but that the line of this
cause, whatsoever it proves, is like to be stretched upon it: the cause which
is now depending and pleading between you and your adversaries, will certainly
be either the rising or falling of it.

1. For your Estates, these are already designed, by your enemies, for a reward
and recompense of their labor and travel in procuring your ruin. Your
silver, and gold, your houses, and lands, with all your precious and pleasant
things besides, must call you Masters no more, if you fall into the hands of
these devourers. If they prevail, they will be like a sweeping rain (as
Solomon speaks) that will leave no food. You must look for no other mercies
from them, but those that are cruel; you hear daily from diverse parts of the
Land, of what spirit they are in this kind* what spoil and rapine they make
of the precious substance of your Brethren, where they have opportunity to
fall; notwithstanding they are not yet in a posture to their minds, to follow
this occupation of ruin and spoil, as they desire and hope to do. They have
a bridle of some fear in the jaws of their fury, they cannot stay by their
work, they cannot gather in their harvest so clean as they desire. But if they
do these things being but yet in the valley, what will they do, if they
should make good the mountain? if they commit such insolences as these in the
day of their fears, what will they do in the day of their power, if ever this
Sun should arise upon them? I beseech you consider this, you that have lived at
ease, and in all fullness hitherto, and have wanted nothing of all that your
hearts could desire, to make your lives comfortable unto you; that have had
food, and raiment, and lodging, and harbor, upon such terms, that your flesh
it self, though apt enough to murmr and complain, has yet been ashamed to
complain of any want or scarcity in any kind; tell me how, or what will you
do in such a day, wherein your fair necks, that never had yoke upon them to
this day, shall be wrung and galled, and torn with those Iron yokes, of
poverty, nakedness, hunger, cold, contempt, want of all things? Will not the
days and years of your former plenty and fullness be seen upon you in
abundance of sorrow and extremity? And is it not in vain for you to think
that this cup shall pass by you, that you drink not of it, if ever it be in
the power of those enemies of yours we speak of, to make you to drink?
Doubtless they must want of their will if you do not drink, yea and suck out
the very dregs of it. Whereas on the contrary, if you shall only this one time
make good your standings against them, and break this enterprise, as far as
humane reason is able to judge, and according to the ordinary course of Gods
admistration of things in the world, they are never like to rise up against
you, nor to endanger the peace of your outward enjoyments the second time. If
you will now be persuaded to give out your selves like men, to advance the
cause in hand, that which you do is like to be a bulworke, and an impregnable
defense for the time to come, to your possessions, and estates, against all
violence and oppression of men in this kind.

2. For your liberties, this is another precious possession of yours in the
world. I speak here only of your civil or politic liberty, which is of
equal accommodation and desirablenesse (if not of superior) with your
estates: and this likewise will certainly be oppressed and seized upon, and
turned into a miserable slavery and bondage, if that bloody generation shall
carry the day against you, and make themselves Lords over you. That of Peter, 2
Pet. 2. 19. is like to come upon you in this case: of whomsoever a man is
overcome, of the same he is brought into bondage. It may be you are not
generally so apprehensive and sensible of the pretiousnesse and sweetness of
your liberties, as of your estates; you do not place so much of your outward
comfort and contentment in the one* as in the other. The reason whereof I
conceive to be partly because we are generally borne free, and therefore take
no care or pains to come by it, whereas many are borne poor, and to inherit
little but what they can get by the sweat of their brows: partly because
liberty is as plentiful amongst us as silver was in Solomon's days; which was
therefore little esteemed because it was as plentiful as the stones in the
street, and as the wild Figtrees that grew abundantly in the plain; there is
none amongst us but is as free as another; but there is great difference in
respect of estate; partly also, because we see few in any suffering or hard
condition, we hear few cries or complaints for want of liberty, whereas we
both hear and see daily what hardship and things grievous to flesh and blood,
are endured by many, both men, women and children, for want of means, and an
outward estate. Happily for these and other reasons that might be given, our
liberties are not so high prised with us as matter of estate is; but if we did
judge righteous judgment (as our Savior speaks) or if we had but the
sensible advantages and quicknings to raise our thoughts and apprehensions
concerning our liberties, which we have in reference to our estates, and which
many others in the world have, in reference to liberty it self; we would
think our liberties every whit as worthy to be placed at our right hands, as
our estates. I must not stand to discourse the benefit and sweetness of this
blessing of liberty; concerning which, many great and excellent things might
be spoken. I shall only say this, that if we lived but a while in those
States, where the poor subject is yoked with an Iron yoke of bondage, and
bows down the back, and groans under the heavy pressure of usurpation and
tyranny, as under the great Turk, or in the State of Persia; yea or in France
it self (which is near at hand) and did but observe the miserable and hard
terms and conditions, that by reason of such slavery and bondage they live
under, then a dram of that liberty which yet we enjoy, would be as precious to
us, as a drop of could water would have been to the rich man in hell, when he
was so grievously tormented in those flames. Now then this is that which I hold
forth unto you in this motive to be considered of, that if ever you shall
suffer the hand of the Malignant party, which is now up in rage, and great
fury against you, to find their enterprise, if the day falls to be theirs, you
must look to be dealt withal in your liberty, as in your estates; there will
no partiality be shown by these men between them, they that will not spare
you in your estates, neither will they favor you in your liberties: they have
bands, and chains, and fetters already prepared for your hands and feet, and
Irons that will enter into your souls. You must know that they are animated
and acted against you, with the spirit of that fourth beast in Daniel, which
was unlike unto all the others, very fearful, whose teeth was of Iron, and
his nails of Brass, which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the rest
under his feet. They are of a Lordly, insolent, domineering and tyranizing
spirit, sporting themselves in their cruelties, and delighting to ride over the
heads of men, that they can get under them. Therefore now consider (I beseech
you) how intolerable and grievous a thing it is like to be unto you to bear
the yoke of that cruel bondage and slavery which these men have prepared for
your necks; to live by the laws of their lusts and pleasures, to be at their
arbitterments and wills in all things, to do and to suffer, to have and to
possess as they shall appoint and think meet for you; how intolerable a
condition (I say) this is like to prove unto you, who have been free men and
women all your days, and have had the disposal of your selves and of all your
ways, and of the good things that the providence of God has cast in unto you
upon your labors or otherwise. Oh you will find the change very sharp and
terrible, beyond what I am able to express, or your selves for the present,
able to apprehend. Whereas on the contrary, if you shall hold out this one
impression and onset which they are now making upon you, and make good the
ground you stand on against them; you shall break their cords in sunder, and
cast their bands from you for ever; you shall make such an intaylement of this
precious inheritance we speak of, your liberty, to your children, and
childrens children, that they shall never be able to cut off. If they be but
now broken, they are not like ever to make themselves whole again: if you will
be persuaded to be men of wisdom once, you may be men of comfort and peace
ever after.

3. For your wives and children, these (I make account) are another part of
your precious enjoyments in this world: But as for these, neither are they like
to find any better quarter in their kind from these bags of blood and
baseness, then your liberties and estates in their kind. Nay as these are
capable of the impressions of more of those vile affections which rage in these
men, so are they like to suffer upon terms yet more grievous, even according
to the utmost of their capacities in this kind: The rage of their lusts (I
mean of many of them) is as barbarous and cruel, as the rage of their
cruelty it self. And what measure you are to expect both in the one and in
the other, in lust and cruelty toward these, your wives (I mean) and
children; themselves have proclaimed in your ears aloud in those patterns and
examples of this kind, which in several places of the land, they have set for
themselves to follow in their future course. I presume you have heard of diverse
insolences and outrages of abomination committed by them with an high hand,
such as have made both your ears to tingle in the hearing. Therefore consider
and weigh it well with your selves: put your hearts upon deep and sad, and
serious apprehensions of it, how grievous and heartbreaking and soule-cutting a
sight it would be unto you to see the honor and chastity of your wives, and
daughters plundered by the barbarous lusts of those brutish men, who are ready
to pour out their abominable filthiness and uncleanness where ever they
be-come, and when they have done execution upon their honors, with the lusts
of uncleanness in the Front, to bring up the lusts of cruelty in the Rear,
to do the like execution upon their lives and blood. Assure your selves, that
the devil has the driving of them, and he will make them run and keep his
pace, as far as ever the strength of any vileness and wickedness in them will
hold out. And so for your little ones that are not for their lusts: it is much
to be feared that in that respect, they will double their cruelties upon them,
as you have heard (I presume) that their Brethren in Ireland, baptized into the
same spirit of blood and abomination with them, have done. Oh, bow can you
bear the thoughts of such a day likely to come upon you, wherein your young
children shall be taken by the hand of an inhumane monster, and dashed in
pieces against the stones, or torn one limb from another, or tossed upon the
point of the Pike or Spear. Assure your selves that the day of all these
astonishing things, and perhaps of things more intolerable and astonishing
then these, is like to come upon you, except you will be persuaded to redeem
it, and buy it off, at the rate of your utmost endeavors, and of all you are
able to do to prevent it, if God will vouchsafe the grace and mercy to you, to
let you have it at any rate.

4. That honorable Senate of both Houses of Parliament, consisting of most of
the worthies of the Land. (I mean for men of their rank and quality) to
whose unwearied labors, and diligence, and faithfulness, and zeal, and
expense, under God, you and your whole Nation owe your lives and liberties,
both spiritual and temporal, yea estates and all your sweet enjoyments
hitherto; and in whose peace and preservation all you yet enjoy, as far as
reason is able to discern and judge, is bound up; (so that I may well reckon
these amongst your temporal enjoyments) these are like to perish and to be cut
off by the right hand of iniquity, if that generation of men whose bloody
cruelties you both have been heretofore, and are now again exhorted with all
your might to oppose, shall ever get the upper hand. We know it is this
assembly, that have stood by you and stuck close to your liberties, and the
truth and purity of that Religion you profess; that are the bulwark and
defense against the furious impressions of those wicked ones, upon you, and all
that is yours; And they know as much too, and look upon them accordingly: they
are they that have robed these bears of their whelps, that have shaken the
foundation of Popery, Prelacy, and prophannesse in the Land; and that are at
work upon it night and day, to make it a land of righteousness, which is an
element that these kind of Creatures know not how to live in. And in this
regard, these are the men of their rage and hatred above others; these are the
mountains that stand in their way; and what will they not do, what will they
not suffer to remove them, or cast them down, and make them into a plain?
doubtless they are sick, and long for their blood, as much as ever David
longed for the waters of the well of Bethleem. And if they shall ever be but
able to dissolve the power and proceedings of this Parliament now sitting, the
way will be open and ready for them, either to stave off all Parliaments for
the future, or (which is of more dangerous consequence of the two) to make them
themselves: and so the Sun of the glory and peace of this Nation is like to
set upon it for ever. Therefore now consider (I beseech you) of how lamentable
and unsupportable a consequence it would be, if this Spring should be troubled
(as Solomon's comparison is) if these righteous shall fall before these wicked
ones; and Cavaliers Swords drink Senators blood: And how would it be a blot
upon you, and make your memorial an infamy and reproach throughout all
generations, if it should be said, that you sat still and did nothing, but
keep up your money, while these men perished at your side, who had been a
guard and safety to you and to all that you had: yea that labored and
travailed with the honors and safety of the whole Land, and were ready to cry
out, and to have been delivered, but that in the very breaking forth of the
children, your covetousness, and your unfaithfulness, and remissness
betrayed them into the hands of their enemies, who cruelly destroyed both
Parents and Children at once. Not to feed your enemy when he hungers, or
when he is thirsty, not to give him drink, is by the Holy Ghost himself
interpreted; to be a revenging your selves on him; and withal to be a matter
of high displeasure and offense unto God. I beseech you, if not to save the
life of an enemy when it is in danger, nay if not to supply such necessities
of his, which yet perhaps do not touch his life, be a sin of that provocation
in the sight of God; What sin will that be, or by what name shall it be called,
or what shall the measure of the provocation of it in the eyes of God be, when
men shall suffer the greatest and faithfullest friends they have, that for a
long time together have labored for them in the very fire night and day, in
the very midst of their sore conflicts and strivings with men, and that
cheifely for their sakes, to perish by the hand of their enemies, when it was
in their hand and power to relieve them? Surely men must create a New Name, and
God will create a new punishment or hell for such a sin.

5. (And lastly for matter of this worlds concernment) what do you think of
your lives themselves; if those men of blood shall carry the day, and ever come
to set up their banners amongst you? Will they not be sold as cheap as Sparrows
were among the Jews, five for two farthings? Nay, will they not be trodden
down and trampled upon like clay and mire in the Streets, by the foot of the
pride, and rage, and insolency of these men? Would not your flesh be as a feast
of fat things unto them, and your blood as new Wine? Or if they did spare your
lives, would it not be only out of a desire and intent to add unto your
miseries, to gain opportunity of inflicting many deaths upon you? Perhaps they
have learned a deliberate cruelty, from that bloody Emperor Nero: who when any
person that was accused, and under the stroke and dint of his power; desired of
him that he might be dispatched, and put to death, was wont to make answer, Non
ita tecum in gratiam redii:.i. He was not yet so far friends with him, as to
give him leave to die: he meant to have more satisfaction out of them, then so.
So if these men give you your lives for a time, you must not look to have them
given you upon such terms, as God sometimes in common destructions gives his
servants their lives: viz. For a prey, or booty: No, they will be given you
only as means or engines wherewith to torment you. It may be they will desire
to reserve and keep you alive, to make spectators of you, of all that bloody
Tragedy they mean to act upon all that belongs to you, in setting your Houses,
and Cities on fire, in taking away your goods, in offering villainy to your
wives, and your daughters, and then mangling and massacring them when they have
done. And then when they have thoroughly scourged you with such scorpions as
these, it is like they will deliver you into the hand of death. Certain it is,
that the spirit that works in these cursed children of disobedience which are
now your adversaries, lusts not only to your temporal ruin and destruction,
but to your everlasting ruin and destruction also, as far as it knows how
to be active in it. Our Savior himself seems to imply as much, Matthew. 10.
28. where he commands us not to fear those which kill the body: but are not
able to kill the soul: as far as they are able to go in hatred and malice
against the Saints, they do go, they do kill the body (says our Savior)
He does not say, fear not those that can kill the body, but, which do,
actually, frequently and from time to time, kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul; doubtless intimating, that if they were able, they would kill
body and soul, and all. And somewhat more plainly (I conceive) Joh. 10. and I
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
man pluck (or pull) them out of mine hand; clearly implying, that the devil
and his instruments, wicked men, are ready to pull and tugge hard to get even
his elect themselves out of his hands, out of that hand of election and grace,
which he has laid upon them, and whereby he holds them fast. Thus the story
of the martyrs report, that when the Popish Prelates, and Priests were ready to
have execution done upon that faithful servant of God John Husse, they used
these words, Now we commit thy soul unto the Devil: And when Hierom of
Prague, through long and grievous imprisonment grew very sick, and (as
himself thought) near unto death, desired that he might have a confessor
(being it seems, conscientious this way) the story says, that very hardly,
and with great importunity it could be obtained: which shows, that it was
grief and torment to his enemies, that he should have any thing, that in
their opinion might be a means to save his soul, after he was dead; besides
many other like streynes of the same spirit, which that story presents unto the
diligent Reader. Now then, there being a spirit of this profound, deep, and
divellish enmity against you, working in the Bowels and inward parts of these
men, to desire not only your temporal, but eternal death also, it is none
other like, but if they suspect and doubt of the strength of their arm, for
the sending of you by death into Hell (as I make little question but they do,
they have no great hope of hunting your souls into the bottomless pit, which
is reserved for their own) they will themselves create a Hell for you, as full
of torment and cruel burnings as they can make it, and cast you into it
themselves before you die, and so be gotten out of their reach. So that there
is nothing to be looked for from these men but death, or that which is worse
then death, a life to contribute toward the increase of the pains and
sorrows of your death: and so indeed death howsoever. Therefore I beseech you
consider the weight of this branch of the present motive also. Will you think
of keeping or saving your estates, to the loss or imminent danger of your
lives? Shall you not keep your money to make a goodly purchase, if you bring
all these great evils and miseries upon you thereby? Though in many other
cases you might make much gain and advantage by making the Devil a lier, yet
it will be your wisdom, to justify him in that his saying; skin for
skin, (or rather skin after skin, or, skin upon skin) and all that
he has will a man give for his life, If you have so much of men in you, as
Satan your enemy supposes (it seems) that you have) to value your lives at
any such rate above all your possessions whatsoever, show it this day, and make
a fortification and bulwark of all that you have for their defense and
safety; Solomon (we know) made some hundreds of Targets and Shields of Gold:
it should not be grievous to any man to sacrifice his estate, his Gold and
Silver upon the service of his life. There is a time to keep (says Solomon)
and a time to spend, or to cast away, Eccles. 3. 6. Certainly of all other,
that is no time to keep, when a man's life lies at the stake, and is in all
likelihood not to be redeemed but by casting away. Thus much for your
temporal and outward enjoyments, they are all involved and concerned to the
utmost, in the present occasion and service, which you have been exhorted, to
promote and further with all your strength, and all your power.

But secondly, it were well (at least it were less to be laid to heart, it
were a matter of far lighter moment and importance) if your outward
concernments only, though it were even to life it self, were imported in that
great occasion, which is now on foot, and has been again and again
recommended unto you; but behold greater things then these. Your spiritual
concernments also, are like to suffer, and that in a very high degree, if Gog
and Magog prevail, if ever you come to be at the allowance of Cavaliers,
Papists, and Athiests, that have taken the field against you, for the things of
Heaven. You are like to have stones in stead of bread, and Scorpions in stead
of Fish. Those golden Pipes, by which Heaven and Earth are (as it were) joined
together, and have lively communion each with other; I mean your pure
ordinances of worship, which have both the wisdom, and grace, and goodness
of God abundantly in their frame, will be cut off, and others of Lead laid in
their stead; ordinances I mean of an humane constitution and frame, whose
chief substance, or ingredients will be the wisdom and will, i. e. the
folly and corrupt affections of men, by which, not Heaven, but Hell, and the
world will be joined together, and the trade and traffic between both
places, much quickened and advanced, ordinances which will be ready to be cast
as dung into your faces by God, when you have been exercised in them. You must
never look to see the goings of God in the Sanctuary, as you have done, to see
any more visions of life and immortality let down from Heaven unto you, in
these houses of vision: those excellent ravishments and raptures of spirit,
those takings up into the third Heaven by seeing him that was greater then
Solomon in all his glory, will cease from you. Those pure streams of the
Gospel will be all bemired and soyled, when they are given unto you to
drink: Yea happily and poisoned too, by the influence of the corrupt minds and
judgments of those that shall give them unto you. You must look to have the
Gospel turned upside down, and to be made to stand in perfect conjunction
with Hell, with looseness, wickedness, and profaneness, and in opposition
to Heaven, Grace and Holiness; to be made a Savor of death to those that
shall be saved; and a Savor of life to those that shall perish. It will be
made to frown upon those that are godly, and to look cheerfully and
comfortably upon loose men. So that if your soul shall lust for these Summer
fruits, if you shall desire to have communion with God in communion and
fellowship with his Saints, If you shall desire at any time to be rained upon
by a shower of life and peace from Heaven; you must repair again to the woods
and mountains, or to the covert of some close and secret place, where you must
eat the bread of your souls in peril of your lives; as your forefathers did
in Queen Mary's days, on with danger of suffering whatever the malice and
revengefull spirit of your enemies shall think good or can devise to inflict
upon you.

Therefore now consider, you that have had the liberty of your Sanctuaries, and
of your public assemblies, that have been fed with honey out of the Rock, and
with the finest wheat of Heaven, you that have had an open and free trade to
Heaven, and have had glorious returns from them day after day, to whom the
Ministry of the Gospel, has been as the wings of the morning, as Chariots
of fire to carry you up and down as it were in spiritual state and triumph
between Heaven and earth; Oh how will that day be as the shadow of death unto
you, wherein you must exchange your Quails and Manna from Heaven, for the
Garlike and Onyons of Egypt, when you shall hear the Pope and his Hierarchy
preached up to the Heavens, and Jesus Christ with his Saints preached down to
the earth, and made to sit at their footstool, when your souls and
consciences shall be compassed about with lies and errors and the
Commandments of men, in the Ministry of the word, in stead of those
spiritual and glorious truths, which were wont to be as so many Angels sent
from the presence of God to comfort you; doubtless if ever you saw the heavens
opened over your heads by an effectual and sound Ministry, and Jesus Christ
standing at the right hand of God in glory, as Stephen did, if ever you smell
the savor of life by Jesus Christ preached; the day wherein such a ministry
shall be taken from you, will be like the day wherein the Sun shall be
covered with Sackcloth, and the Moon turned into blood, and the Stars in
the Firmament of Heaven lose their light. The change will be every whit as sad
unto you, as that was unto David, when he was driven from the Sanctuary and
presence of God, and compelled to dwell in Mesech, and make his habitation in
the Tents of Kedar. If this exchange made him cry out, woe is me: you must
think it will be a double woe unto you, when the Ark of God shall be taken
from you, and Dagon set up in its stead, when the dispensations and
administrations of Heaven, which were spirit and life, the light of Gods
countenance it self unto you, shall be exchanged for the statutes and
ordinances of Rome, which are like tombs and sepulchers, having nothing in
them but rottenness and dead men's bones. If such a day were now upon you, what
would you give to buy it off? and is not the purchase of the prevention of it
worth as much?

It may be there are some amongst you whose souls and consciences were never
yet engaged, either by the purity or power of any of the ordinances of God;
who never yet knew what it was to be kindly touched from Heaven by any
spiritual administration; to such as these it is like Dagon may be as good as
the Arc; the devices and inventions of men, as beautiful, as savory, in the
house and worship of God, as those ordinances themselves which have the perfect
image and superscription of God upon them: a ministry that is low, and cold,
and set in consort with the Earth, and the things thereof; as that which is
calculated for the Meridian of Heaven, and breathes life and immortality in
the faces of men's souls continually. If such as these lend but a dull or deaf
ear to the motion, cannot find so much as two mites in their estates to cast
into the treasury of God, it is not much to be marveiled at. But for you that
know how little the chafe is to the wheat; I beseech you to have this sense
of the business recommended to you, that when you have done the utmost of what
you are able to do for the advancement of it, you would yet unfainedly desire
to do more.

Thirdly, To engage you yet further to give out your selves fully and freely as
you have bin exhorted, you may please to consider, that as all your precious
interests, whether in the things of this life, or of that which is to come, are
deeply concerned in it, so are all the like interests of all your brethren,
the godly persons in the land concerned likewise. And if the cause should
suffer or miscarry, it would be as a sword that would pass through all the
righteous souls throughout the land; it would bring such a day of sorrow,
lamentation, and woe upon the generation of the servants of God throughout the
Kingdom, as scarce has been heard of in all ages: it will cause all their
hands to hang down, and their knees to wax feeble, and their hearts to wither
as the grass; it will fill all their eyes with tears, and their hearts with
heaviness: there will be no end of those great evils and miseries which will
come upon them in that day. The breach that will be made upon them will be
like the great breaches of the Sea which cannot be repaired. It was a night of
much sadness to the land of Egypt, when God slew in every house one throughout
the whole Land: the Text says, There was a grievous cry throughout the whole
land of Egypt upon it: But this cup was given to the Egyptians to drink: And
yet this stroke fell not so sore upon them neither, as the miscarriage of that
great action we speak of, would do upon the Israel of God amongst us. That
did but touch the Egyptians in the lives of one in every Family respectively:
but the stroke which is now lifted up, and likely to be given in the land,
wherever it light, should it fall upon the right hand, upon the people of God,
it would wound them all, and that very sore, yea and that not in some, but in
all their concernments and enjoyments whatsoever, as well in those which relate
to this world present, as in those, whose accommodations are more peculiarly
for that world which is yet to come (as has been showed already) If ever that
mountain of prophannesse, which now you are exhorted to put to your shoulders
to remove, shall be establshed, doubtless it will magnify it self against
all that is called Holy in the Land; it will lie heavy and oppress, if not
overwhelme and bury under it, all that have the mark of the living God upon
them. Therefore I beseech you consider what you do: If this great evil shall
come upon the Church and people of God amongst you, and you be found dull and
heavy, negligent and remiss in the preventing of it, and not improve your
selves to the utmost that way, when as it has been so fully and feelingly,
and frequently both represented and recommended unto you, shall you not bring
the guilt of it all upon your heads? Shall you not be looked upon both by God
and men, as accessaries (if not principalls) in all those sore afflictions and
calamities, which in this case shall fall upon them? will not God require their
sorrows, and their tears, and their troubles, and their afflictions, and all
the extremity they shall endure at your hsnds? When I shall say unto the
wicked (says the Lord to his Prophet Ezekiel) Oh wicked man, thou shall die
the death, if thou do not speak and admonish the wicked of his way, that
wicked man shall die for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine
hand, Ezekiel. 33. If God will require the blood of a wicked man at the hand of
his Prophet in case he did not seek to prevent it by admonishing him: will he
not much more require the sorrows, sighings, troubles, tears, extremities,
blood of a whole nation of Saints, at the hand of those by whose
unfaithfulness, coldness, covetousness, negligence in any kind, they shall
come upon them. The Son of man (says our Savior) goes his way, as it is
written of him: but woe be to that man, by whom the Son of man is betrayed:
it had been good for that man, Matthew. 26. 24.
if he had never been borne: In like manner the Church and people of God
amongst us may yet suffer grievous things, but woe be to those, whomsoever
they be, be they fewer, be they more, be they rich, be they poor, by whom
their peace and safety shall be betrayed.

Fourthly (and lastly) All our own concernments and the concernments of all
our dear brethren in the faith throughout the land, are bound up in the
business, which has bin so frequently and affectionately recommended unto
you; so are the like concernments of others of our brethren also, partakers of
like precious faith with you, in other lands and Kingdoms, bound up likewise
herein; though not all (perhaps) in the same degree. There is a common report
of a strange sympathy between Hippocrate's twins, that they always cried
together, and laughed together. And doubtless there is some such simpathye
between all the Reformed Churches (as we call them) in these parts of the
world: amongst which likewise I comprehend those plantations of our Brethren of
this Land, in America, and other Western parts, at least between all that are
truly faithful and sound in that profession which they make in these
Churches. I do not speak here of that inward or spiritual simpathie, which
in respect of reciprocal affections and mutual tenderness, intercedes
between all the true and living members of the mystical body of Christ,
though never so remote asunder, but of that mutual dependencie which the
outward affairs and condition of every one has, upon the condition of the
other, so that the prosperity and well established peace of any one, has an
influence into, and contributes more or less toward the like establishment of
the other: As on the contrary, the shaking, trouble, ruin, or destruction of
any one weakens the strength, and impaires more or less the security of all
the other. So that they must needs all weep together, and all laugh together.
Now then, this is that which I say and hold forth to your Christian and godly
considerations in this motive; that the action wherein the Church and people of
God in the Land are now engaged, and which is yet depending between them, and
their adversaries, will in the issue, close, and fall of it, be of very
remarkable concernment to all the Saints of God in all those other Churches
mentioned; if it falls on the right hand, it will be the riches, strength, and
increase of them; if on the left, it will be the diminishing, shaking, and
impairing of them, therefore consider I beseech you, the great weight and
importance of the opportunity that is before you, if through your zeal, and
forwardness, and faithfulness to advance it, and the blessing of God upon it,
your present service shall prosper, your light will be like the lightning which
(as our Savior says) shines from the East even unto the West: the heat and
warmth and living influence thereof, shall pierce through many kingdoms great
and large, as France, Germany, Bohemia, Hungaria, Polonia, Denmark, Sweden,
with many others, and find out all the children of God, and all that are
friends to the Kingdom of Heaven, and will be a cheering and refreshing to
them: Especially to your brethren in their several plantations in far
countries; and most of all to those in these united and near kingdoms,
Scotland and Ireland, it will be as a feast of fat things, and of wines well
refined: and particularly to poor bleeding, dying Ireland, it will be as a
resurrection from death unto life. Now then in-as-much as God has set you this
day, as the Sun in the firmament of Heaven, from whence he has an
opportunity and advantage to send forth his beams, and to furnish and fill
the world with his light and influence round about him; since you have the
commodiousnesse of such a standing, that you may do good to all that is Gods,
I mean to all the Saints in all their dispertions and quarters throughout so
many kingdoms, and such a considerable part of the world as has been
mentioned, so that you may cause them to rise up before you and call you
blessed; I beseech you do not betray this firstborn opportunity of Heaven:
look upon it as a great and solemn invitation from God himself unto you, to
do greater things for the world, at least for the Christian world, then ever
you did unto this day; or then ever you are like to do the second time, yea
then any particular Christian State ever did, or is like to do while the world
stands. God has prepared and fitted a Table for you large enough, if you will
but spread and furnish it with such provisions as are under your hand, that you
may feast, and give royal entertainment, to the whole household of faith,
almost throughout the whole world at once. And shall it now seem any great
thing in our ages, or be in the least measure grievous unto any man or woman
of you, even to lavish his gold out of bags, to bestow his whole substance to
divest himself of all he possesses in the world, even to his shoe Latchet,
to furnish and set out such an occasion as this is, like it self? Shall not
the very conscience and comfortable remembrance of such a thing as this done
with uprightness and simplicity of heart by you, be a thousand times better
then any superfluities of silver or of gold, or of meats, or of drinks, or of
houses, or of or of jewels, or apparel whatsoever? Nay if we shall bring
poverty and nakedness, and hunger and thirst upon our selves, to purchase and
procure it, will it not be better then an estate, then clothing, then meats
and drinks unto us? will it not take out the burning, and allay the
bitterness of all these? Doubtless the honor and conscience of the fact,
will bear all the charges, and answer all the expense of it to the full. The
opportunity and occasion is so rich and glorious, that it calls to remembrance
(as sometimes the shadow does the substance) the great opportunity that was
before the Lord Jesus Christ, for the salvation of the world: We know that he
being rich, became poor, that the world thorough his poverty might be made
rich. You have the pattern in the mount before you: See that according to your
line and measure, you make all things like to it.

FINIS.

