LONDONS GATE TO The Lords Table.

Where the Eldership does sit doing their office aright, in discovering and
shutting out the ignorant, profane, and mere civil honest man: In suspending
the suspected formal, legal, and Antinomisticall Professor, and in drawing in
the weakest humble believing soul.

In a Dialogue between

A Minister of the Gospel. Alexander an ignorant profane man. Simon a proud
Professor. And Matthias an humble penitent.
Mal. 3. 18. Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. Imprimatur

Edmund Calamy.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1648.

To the Honorable HENRY ROLL, one of his Majesty's Justices of Pleas, before
himself to be holden.
And to the virtuous Gentlewoman MARGARET ROLL his loving Wife, grace and
peace be multiplied.
MOST honored friends; custom has made the Dedication of Books almost as
common as printing of them, and wisdom directs there to dedicate where we owe
most respect, and do conceive they will be best accepted. I therefore owing my
service to you both for some favors received, and presuming upon your
favorable acceptance, have made bold to prefixe your names to this ensuing
Dialogue, which I hope holds forth a little light to that way of
Church Discipline which you, Honored Sir, have been pleased much to
countenance, by condescending so far below yourself (as some of your rank
would have esteemed it) in accepting of the Office of a Ruling-Elder when you
were chosen, in that Congregation whereof you have been pleased to admit me a
member.

I have endeavored to discover the exactness of the Presbyteriall way in the
case of examination of Communicants, and how circumspect you are who you do
admit, that so our discenting brethren, seeing how near you come to the golden
rule, may be moved thereby to come in amongst us, that we may be perfectly
joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment, and so knit
together in love according to Gods own mind, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Col. 2. 2.

For as a gracious spirit Dr. Sibs bruised reed, p. 220.
once breathed out, there can hardly be a discovery of any difference in
opinion without some estrangement of affection, so far as men are not of one
mind they will hardly be of one heart, except where grace and the peace of God
bear great rule in the heart.

Wherefore if my workmanship in the handling ^f this subject, were as (...)od
as my aims and in(...)ions are, I might boldly say, It were no disparagement
to your names to afford it your patronage; yet will I not disparage it, for
that may be thought to be a secret begging of commendations; only I say, I
having thus far presumed, I beseech you both to connive at my boldness, and
vouchsafe to favor these mine endeavors, that so by your acceptance they may
be commended unto others, and so shall you further oblige me to remain

Yours much engaged, E. F.

To the well-affected READER.
WHen I did consider that heretofore by the command of Authority all sorts of
people that were come to ripeness of years, and were endued with
understanding, were not only admitted, but also compelled by Law to receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper at least once a year.

And that now contrariwise, Authority were so far from compelling in that
kind, that by their command none were to be admitted thereunto, but only such
as upon examination were found fit to partake thereof.

I began to consider more then formerly I had done of the reason why all sorts
of people might not as well be admitted to that Ordinance, as they were to the
hearing of the Ward preached: And when I had seriously considered of it, I
found (as I conceived) sufficient reason why none but true Believers were to
be admitted thereunto, and that therefore the power given to the Eldership for
that purpose, was very lawful, and needful to be put in execution with
maturity of judgment, it being a matter of very ill consequence, if they
should either open the gate to any unbeleever, or shut it against any true
believer; and a very hard matter so to discern of the state and condition of
every one that comes before them, as never to do the one nor the other.

In which respect I conceived, they stood in great need not only of the
prayers, but also of all other helps that any of Gods people could afford them,
I therefore as a member of the body (though but a weak one) was willing to
afford my best assistance toward the carrying on of such a great work, and
not knowing which way to do it better, then by composing my meditations
touching that point into a plain and familiar Dialogue; I did thereupon
adventure to put forth a small Tract, entitled, A Touchstone for a
Communicant, and afterward upon better consideration, conceiving it came far
short of discovering all that was needful to be known touching these points,
I (in hope that my second thoughts would exceed my first) was moved to set pen
to paper once again. And the Lord having (as I hope I may truly say) enabled me
to do more and better, I have again adventured to put it forth to the worlds
view, though I am confident I have thereby exposed my self to the worlds
censure.

For indeed I do acknowledge, that if any man do but know my weakness (and
my want of those humane helps, which many others do enjoy) so well as my self
do know them, if they consult with flesh and blood, they shall see just cause
to say with Nathaniel, Joh. 1. 46. Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth; yea, and to say unto me as Eliab said unto David, I know the 1 Samuel
17. 28.
pride and the naughtiness of thy heart; these matters are not fit for thee to
meddle withal, they rather belong to some of the learned Assembly. But if they
will be pleased to consult with the Oracles of God, they shall see that in the
building of SOLOMON'S Temple there was room as well for burden-bearers as for
other more curious Artificers, 1 King. 5. 15. yea, and they shall see that at
the first making of the Tabernacle, Exo. 25. 5.
not only the bringers of blue silk, and purple, and scarlet, but even the
poorer sort, which brought Goats hair and Rams skins were accepted; yea, and
they shall find that the Lord made Balaams ass Number. 22. 28.
to utter his truth, wherefore I pray thee do not censure either me or the
work, before thou have thoroughly perused it; and whatsoever wants, weaknesses,
or imperfections thou find in it, I pray thee cover them with the mantle of
Charity, assuring thy self that I would have done better if I could: And if
thou find any good in it, I pray thee take occasion from the weakness and
unworthiness of the Author, to see God the more clearly, and to give him the
more glory, whose strength is made 2 Cor. 12. 9.
perfect through weakness.

And though thou be a discenting brother from that Church Way which the Title
Page has told thee it holds forth; yet let not that hinder thee from perusing
of it, for I do assure thee there is more matter in it concerning Christian
Doctrine then there is concerning Church Discipline; so that although it may
not please thee the one way, yet (if thou be a Christian) it may please thee
the other way.

But if thou have such a proud censorious heart, as does either hinder thee
from reading it, or else from receiving any benefit by it, yet if it bring any
little increase either of sound knowledge or sweet feeling in the mysteries of
Christ to any of the Israel of God that is of an humble spirit, as blessed be
God (I have been informed) my Marrow of modern Divinity has done to many; I
have my reward, and shall desire to magnify the name of the Lord for making
use of such a weak instrument as I am.

E. F.

A Table of the principal matters contained in this Dialogue.
THere is an ignorance and sinfulness in part, and an ignorance and
sinfulness in whole. 6 The trial of one that is wholly ignorant. 8 The trial
of a man that is wholly sin(...) ^^ A kind of striving against sin in a man
that is wholly sinful. 18 The different striving that is in a man who is
wholly sinful, and a man that is in part sinful. 21 There is no true faith in
a man wholly ignorant and wholly sinful. 25 One that has not true faith;
ought not to partake of the Sacrament of the Lords supper. 26 The danger of
receiving the sacrament without faith. 33 The exhortation of the a Apostle, 1
Cor. 11 28. Let a man examine himself does not exclude his examination by
another. 47 Not easily determined whether a man be fit to partake of the
sacrament or no. 49 It Is lawful and needful for a man before he receive the
sacrament to go to be examined before the Eldership. 50 It Is lawful and
needful for the Elders to join with the Minister in the business of
examination. 54 Description of the Elderships examining all that come before
them. 68. 149 It Is not meet for every member of the Church to have an equal
authority with the Eldership. 58 A man of great knowledge and righteous
conversation, may be unfit to be admitted to the sacrament. 61 The life of
civility described. 77 The life of rational and religious formality described.
82 God justifies the ungodly. 88 God makes a man just before he do pronounce
him just. 89 How God makes a man just. 91 Why or in what sense a man is said
to be justified by faith. ibid. The act of God in pronouncing a man just, what
it is. 95 Where righteousness of justification is imputed, righteousness of
sanctification is infused. 97 How the righteousness of justification and the
righteousness of sanctification do differ. 99 Two sorts of professors do
confound this twofold righteousness. 103 There is both a faith and a
godliness of a man's own aquiring 121 If a man has not both the
righteousness of justification and the righteousness of sanctification, he
has neither of them. 122 How a man may know that he has them both. 124 A man
may in word and judgment renounce his rwne righteousness in the case of
justification, and yet not do so in heart and conscience. 133 Signs of a man's
putting confidence in his own righteousness. 137 No cause why any man should
either desire to go, or continue in that way which for distinctions sake is
called the independent way. 164 No perfect platform of Church Government to be
found in the new Testament, said a godly Minister, in the pulpit. 166 A
gracious answer lately given by old Mr. Dod, to one that came to ask him a
circumstantiall question. 170 The heginning of conference with Mathias an
humble penitent. 171 How he was first moved to mind the best things. 178 The
Lord does first give faith to believe the pardon of sin before he give power
against sin. 181 The Lord pardons sin absolutely and not conditionally.
184 To believe the pardon of sin, is the way to get power against sin. 185
The Lord does first pardon sin, and then he subdues it. 189 A true fear of
Gods displeasure, works a separation betwixt the heart and sin. 192 A desire
to believe is faith indeed. 196 The difference betwixt natural desires and
supernatural. 199 A true evidence of a sound mind. 205 How to understand
these words, Worthy, and Unworthy. 214 Christ neither accepts any for
greatness of parts, nor refuses any for weakness of parts. 227 Though there
can be no faith where there is no knowledge, yet may there be a great measure
of knowledge where there is no faith. 129 It is the kind of faith that fits a
man to the Sacrament, and not the measure. 231 It is not a sight and sense of
knowledge, nor faith, nor repentance, nor love, nor obedience, that makes a man
worthy to come to the Sacrament, but rather an hungring and thirsting appetite
after Christ, arising from a sight and sense of the want of such things. 235
The wedding garment what it is. 236 Why the Lords supper was instituted and
ordained. 240 What meditations we ought to have at the Lords Table. 244 The
reason why we are to receive the sacrament of the Lords supper often, though
baptized but once. 254 Much good gotten by the right receiving of the Lordt
supper. 261 He that is unfit to receive the sacrament sins whether he
receive it or not. ibid. What be the hindrances that keep many from the
sacrament. 263 How to become poor in spirit. 267
LONDONS Gate TO The Lords Table.
Interlocutors A Minister of the Gospel. Alexander, an ignorant profane man.
Simon, a proud Professor. And Matthias, a weak, yet true Believer.

Simon, SIr, when I parted with you the other day, I did not think to have come
unto you so soon again: but indeed having better considered of it, I see I was
somewhat deceived in our neighbor Zacheus, for the truth is, he answered you
better then I had thought he could have done. But yet here is another neighbor
of ours, in whom I am sure I am not deceived, for all that have any
acquaintance with him, and have any knowledge in Religion, do conclude that he
is a very simple ignorant man, and a bad liver; and yet he says, That he hopes
the Lord would be merciful unto him and forgive him his sins, if he should
come to the Sacrament. And he telling me that he was going to your house to
speak with you about it, I was willing to come along with him, to see if you
would judge him also fit to partake of that holy Ordinance, and our neighbor
Matthias has thought good to come along with us to hear our discourse.


Min. You be all of you very welcome to me, and I shall be very willing to do
any good I can to any of you: And truly neighbor Simon I was sorry you went
away the other day in such a discontented manner; for I should have been glad
if you had tarried longer, that we might have had further conference together.


Sim. Sir, I thank you, it may be we may have further conference together
about those things before we part; but first of all I pray you hearken to our
neighbor Alexander, for he has somewhat to say unto you.


Min. Come near neighbor Alexander, and tell me what you have to say unto me.


Alex. Sir, I do acknowledge, that as my neighbor Simon has said, I am a very
ignorant man, and am now and then subject to drink more then I should do, and
to swear now and then an Oath when I am vexed, but I am sorry for it
afterward. Now Sir, I do desire to know the reason why I for all this may not
be admitted unto the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?


Min. Because you being an ignorant and sinful man, must needs be an
unbeleeving man, and the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not instituted and
ordained for any unbeleever.


Alex. But Sir, though I be (as I have confessed) an ignorant and sinful man,
yet I hope I am a believing man for all that.


Min. No, no, that cannot be.


Alex. Why Sir, I pray you is every ignorant and sinful man an unbeleever?


Min. No not so neither, for there is a twofold Ignorance, and a twofold
sinfulness; that is to say, there is an ignorance and sinfulness in part, and
an ignorance and sinfulness in whole; now a man may be ignorant in part, and
yet have true faith in Christ; for the Apostle says concerning himself, and
other true believers, We know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9. yea, and a man may be
also sinful in part, and yet be a true believer, witness the same Apostle,
when he says, Romans 7. 23. I find a law in my members rebelling against the
law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin. But if a
man be wholly ignorant of Jesus Christ, and of himself, and of the Sacrament,
as for ought I yet perceive you are, and wholly sinful, as by your own
confession it appears you are, then it is impossible he should have true faith
in Christ.


Alex. But Sir, I hope I am not wholly ignorant of Jesus Christ, nor of my
self, nor of the Sacrament.


Min. Well, because you say so, I pray you give me leave to ask you two or
three questions; and first of all I pray you tell me what is Jesus Christ.


Alex. Why, he is Gods only Son, who was conceived by the holy Ghost, and
borne of the Virgin Mary.


Min. But the Scripture says, That GOD has more sons then one, as it is
written, Galat. 3. 26. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ
Jesus; why do you then say, That Christ is Gods only Son?


Alex. Why I say so, because it is so set down in the Apostles Creed, which I
am sure I say many a time and often; and if it be not true, me thinks the
Apostles of Christ should not have so set it down.


Min. And what is the holy Ghost which you say Christ was conceived by?


Alex. Why truly Sir, the Holy Ghost I think is that good Spirit whereby we are
guided and ruled when we live and walk according to Gods will and Commandments.


Min. And why was Christ conceived by the Holy Ghost.


Alex. Believe me Sir, that is too hard a question for me to answer, and it
would trouble a man that has much more knowledge then I to answer aright.


Min. And why do you say that Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary?


Alex. Why I say so, because it is so said in my Creed.


Min. But why was it meet that he should be borne of a Virgin, rather then of
another woman?


Alex. Truly Sir, I know no other reason, then that I am persuaded it was the
will of God it should be so.


Min. Well, you confess you are a sinner; therefore I pray you tell me how you
came to be a sinner?


Alex. Why by yielding to the Devils tentations and mine own wicked and corrupt
heart, as other sinners do I think.


Min. But was you born a sinner?


Alex. Yea, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.


Min. And was you a sinner when you were first created in Adam?


Alex. Yea surely, or else how could I be borne a sinner.


Min. And what do you believe that Christ has done for you?


Alex. Why I do verily believe that he died for me.


Min. But what warrant have you to believe that Christ died for you?


Alex. Why Christ died for sinners, and I am a sinner, and therefore I do
believe that he died for me.


Min. And do you think that Christ died for all men?


Alex. Yea indeed, if he died for sinners, I think he must needs die for all
men, for we are all sinners.


Mi. Do you then believe that all men shall be saved?


Alex. No indeed, I am not so simple to think that all men shall be saved, for
as I do believe there is a Heaven for some, so do I believe there is a Hell
for others.


Min. Why do you then think that Christ died in vain for them that are not
saved?


Alex. No surely I dare not think so.


Min. But if he died to save them, and they be not saved, must it not needs
follow, that he died for them in vain?


Alex. Truly Sir I cannot tell how to answer that, it is too hard a question,
and therefore I pray you ask me no more such.


Min. Well then, I pray you tell me what is a Sacrament?


Alex. Why a Sacrament is the Lords Supper.


Min. And why do you desire to come to the Lords Supper?


Alex. That I might there worship and serve the Lord.


Min. Well neighbor Alexander, I might ask you many other questions touching
these points, but your Answers to these I have already asked you, are
sufficient to prove that you are wholly ignorant, of Christ, of your self, and
of the Sacrament, for though some of your answers be true, yet as we use to
say, As good never a whit, as never the better.


Alex. But Sir, for ought I see, those that have most knowledge in Religion,
and can talk best of it, are as bad in their lives as they that are most
ignorant, and therefore if I have but a good heart and a good mind, as I doubt
not but I have, I hope I shall do as well at the last as if I could talk and
prate more.


Min. I but whatsoever you think of your self, and whatever your hopes are,
the Lord tells you, Prove. 19. 2. That without knowledge the heart or mind is
not good; and although it be possible that a man of great knowledge may have an
evil heart of unbeleefe, and so perish, yet it is without all question, that
he who has no knowledge has an evil heart of unbeleefe, and therefore shall
perish, as it is written, Hos. 3. 6. My people perish for want of knowledge.


Alex. And Sir, do you also think that I am wholly sinful?


Min. Yea indeed do I, for an ignorant heart is always a sinful heart, and a
man without knowledge is always a man without grace.


Alex. But Sir, when you say I am wholly sinful, I pray you tell me what you
mean, for I do not well understand you.


Min. Why I mean you are wholly given over to sin, you commit sin with
greediness, without any strife in your will and affections against it; you
love sin, and delight in the committing of it.


Alex. Nay now Sir, I see you are deceived in me, for I thank God I do strive
against my sins, and would feign leave off my sinful courses, and as the
saying is, My Spirit is willing, but my Flesh is weak; The Lord be merciful
unto me, and forgive me all my sins, as I hope he will.


Min. But what is your meaning, when you say, You do strive against your
sins, and would feign leave them.


Alex. Why my meaning is, That when I am overcome by drinking too much, and do
thereupon fall to cursing and swearing, quarrelling, and some other sins;
when I come to my self again, and have considered what I have said and done,
I am much vexed at my self, and wish from my heart that I had never done so;
yea, and I have many a time resolved never to do the like again; and yet by
occasion of going into the company of some men, with whom I have some dealing,
who are too subject to that vice (though otherwise very honest fair
conditioned men) and also by reason of mine own natural inclination to those
sins, I am now and then overcome, and so commit the like sins again.


Min. And what has been the reason of this your striving against your sins,
as you call it?


Alex. Why truly Sir, it has been because I have considered that in so doing I
have misspent my time and my money, and have disgraced my self, and
endangered the salvation of mine own soul, if the Lord were not the more
merciful.


Min. Surely it appears to me that all this striving has been only betwixt
your Judgment and Affections, or betwixt your Conscience and your Lusts; You
do in your Judgment conceive these courses to be evil, because of the evil
effects that follow them, and therefore your conscience tells you that you do
evil in committing them, and you think it were good for you to leave them
because of the punishment that follows or is like to follow upon the committing
of them; but your Affections and Lusts do like and approve of them, and
therefore do prevail with you to act and commit them, and in the committing
of them you take great delight; so that I say, this your striving against sin
is nothing but Conscience and Lusts by the ears together, which striving Herod,
Balaam, and Pilate had within them, and so may the vilest Reprobate in the
world have: But all this while there is no strife in you betwixt will and will,
nor betwixt Affection and Affection, as there is in every true Believer; for he
having the Spirit of Christ within him is a regenerate man, and in part
renewed, and therefore the strife that is in him is betwixt the Flesh and the
Spirit, betwixt the regenerate part and the unregenerate part, and it is
against sin as it is sin, and hated and loathed by him; and therefore
assure your self that notwithstanding all your striving, you are wholly
sinful.


Sim. But stay a little, I pray Sir, this your speech seems to imply, as
though a true Believer might commit the like gross sins that he does, and
that there were no other difference betwixt him and a true Believer in the
point of sinning, but only this different striving.


Min. But assure your self neighbor Simon, that my meaning is not so, for I
do fully agree with that worthy man of God, who says, That a true Repentant,
and that is a true Believer, forsakes all sin in affection, and all gross
sin in action; and therefore I pray you neighbor Alexander consider of it,
for this does more fully prove that you are wholly sinful as well as wholly
ignorant.


Alex. Well Sir, though I be wholly ignorant and wholly sinful, as you say,
yet would I feign know the reason why I may not have true faith in Christ for
all that?


Min. The reason why there can be no true faith in Christ when a man is wholly
ignorant of him, is because it is the nature of faith to believe that which it
knows; so that wheresoever there is no true knowledge of Christ there can be
no true faith in Christ; and therefore Reynolds on the Sacraments, p. 138.
Christ himself makes the knowledge of him all one with belief in him, Joh.
17. 3.

And the reason why there can be no true faith in Christ when a man is wholly
sinful is, because holiness of life and conversation is an unseperable
companion and fruit of faith; for faith purifieth the heart, Acts 15. 9. and
faith works by love, Gal. 5. 6.


Alex. Well Sir, suppose I have no true faith in Christ, and so be an
unbeleever, as you say; Yet why was not the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
instituted and ordained for unbeleevers as well as for believers?


Min. The reason is, because the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being not the
Sacrament of Regeneration, but of sustentation and nourishment, Christ did not
institute and ordain it for the regenerating or converting of any man, nor for
the breeding of grace in him, but for the strengthening of the regenerate man
that is borne again, and for the nourishment of grace already bred and begun
in him, so that indeed the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is childrens bread,
even the bread of Gods children, that are borne again, not of corruptible 1
Pet. 1. 23
seed but of incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and abides for
ever; and therefore it is not to be given unto dogs; yea, it is spiritual
food, ordained for spiritually living men; and therefore it is not to be put
into the mouths of spiritually dead men, but into the souls of spiritually
living men; and a man is made a son of God only by faith in Christ, as it is
written, Joh. 1. 12. To as many as received him, to them gave he power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. And so Gal. 3.
16. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; yea, and it is
faith that quickens a man and maks him spiritually alive according to that of
the Apostle, Gal. 2. 20. I live by the faith of the Son of God.

Furthermore, the Sacrament is the Seal of a Covenant, Romans 4. 11. and
Covenants essentially include conditions, and the condition on our part is
Faith, so that where there is no Faith there is no Covenant, and where there is
no Covenant there is no Seal, and then consequently no Sacrament; so that you
being an unbeleever, you are an unconverted un-regenerate man, no child of
God, no spiritually living man, neither are you under the Covenant of Grace;
and therefore assure your self the sacrament of the Lords Supper was not
instituted and ordained for you.


Alex. Then Sir, it seems that you do not intend to admit me to be a partaker
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.


Min. Surely neighbor Alexander, you not having true faith in Christ, you
cannot be a partaker thereof, though we should admit you.


Alex. This is strange to me Sir, cannot I come to Church and receive the Bread
and Wine, and eat it, and drink it, if you give it me?


Min. Yea I do confess, though you have no faith yet you may partake of the
Bread and Wine; but you are not to come to the Sacrament to partake of the
Bread and Wine, but to be made a partaker of CHRIST'S Body and Blood, under the
similitude of Bread and Wine, but this you cannot do without Faith, for Faith
is the hand with which Christ is received as you may see, Joh. 1. 12. yea, and
it is the mouth by which we feed on him, as you may see, Joh. 6. 53. wherefore
I beseech you be not so simple as to think and imagine that you are to come
to the Sacrament for a morsel of finer Bread, or for a draught of sweet Wine;
nor that if you receive the outward Elements in a reverend manner, and behave
your self decently during that action, and demean your self mannerly for
that day, that then you have received the Sacrament in honor of Christ, and
done a right acceptable service to God. But know and consider, That the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a spiritual Banquet, where we are to feast
our souls with the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ crucified for us; and this
you cannot do for want of Faith: and therefore, if you should come and partake
of the outward Elements, yet would it be no benefit to you.


Alex. But Sir, do you think it would be any hurt to me, if I should receive
the Sacrament?


Min. Yea, I know it would be great hurt to you for by reason of your Ignorance
and want of Faith in Christ; you are neither able to examine your self before
you come there, nor to discern the Lords Body when you are there, and so
should you receive the Sacrament unworthily; and so not only be guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, but also eat and drink damnation to your self, as
the Apostle tells you, 1 Cor. 11. 27. 28, 29.


Alex. Sir, these things are somewhat strange to me, and therefore I pray you
give me leave to ask you a few questions about them, and first of all tell me
what I ought to examine my self of, because you say I am not able to do it.


Min. Why you ought to examine your self 2 Cor. 13. 5
whether you be in the Faith, whether Christ be in you yea or no, whether you
be dead to sin or alive to righteousness, what graces you have and what you
want, what corruptions you have overcome, and what do overcome you, what
religious actions you perform, and how you perform them; in brief, to examine
your self, is to take a true survey of the state and condition of your soul,
by comparing it with the Scriptures. Now you are ignorant both of the state and
condition of your soul, and also of the Scriptures, and therefore I say it is
impossible that you should be able to examine your self.


Alex. Well Sir, and what is it to discern the Lords Body?


Min. To discern the LORDS Body, is to put a right difference between the
outward Elements in the Sacrament, and common Pemble on the Sacraments, p. 59.
Bread and Wine, which difference is not at all in substance but in the use,
the one being profane the other sacred, being set a part to signify unto us
the benefits of Christ's death and passion; or the discerning of the Lords Body
stands in knowledge, understanding and Dike on the Sacraments. p. 90.
judgment of the nature, use, and necessity of the Sacrament; but you have
manifested by that which you said ere while, That you put no difference betwixt
the Bread and Wine at the Lords Table and common bread and wine, but would use
them as you do your ordinary food, without any regard of the spiritual use
of them, and therefore you are not able to discern the Lords Body at the
Sacrament.


Alex. But Sir, it would be a strange thing if I by receiving the Sacrament
should become guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ; I pray you Sir show me
the reason of it.


Min. The reason is, because if you should receive the Sacrament, you would do
even so as the shedders of Christ's Blood did, for look as they that crucified
and pierced Christ, poured not forth his Blood that they might Dike on the
Sacraments p. 56.
drink it, but only that they might pour it forth and shed it, so you by
your receiving the Sacrament without profit or benefit to your soul, would
rashly and in vain shed the Blood of Christ.

Or to be guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ Reynolds on the Sacraments,
p. 180.
is to offer some notable contempt unto the sufferings of Christ, to finne
against the price of our Redemption, and to vilify and set at naught the
precious Blood of the new Covenant, as if it were a common and profane thing,
when men out of ignorant, sensual, secure, presumptuous formalizing,
inconsiderate and profane affections approach unto Christ's Table to
communicate of him.


Alex. And do you think that I should eat and drink damnation to my self, if I
should receive the Bread and Wine at the Sacrament?


Min. I think you would commit such a sin in profaning the Sacrament, as
deserves both eternal and temporal Judgment, for though this Table of the
Lord be a Feast of choicest delicates for refreshing of the Pemble on the
Sacraments, p. 66.
soul, when men come rightly prepared thereto, yet does it become the bane and
destruction of souls, when men present themselves thereat with unbeleeving
impenitent and unholy hearts, as you would do if you should come there.


Alex. Then Sir, it seems you do absolutely conclude that I am unfit to be
admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?


Min. Surely neighbor Alexander, you being wholly ignorant and wholly sinful,
unbeleeving, unregenerate, unconverted, no Son of God, no spiritually living
man, and having neither hand to receive Christ, nor mouth to feed on Christ,
nor being able to examine your self, nor to discern the Lords Body, and an
unworthy receiver, and so liable to become guilty of the Body and Blood of
Christ, and to eat and drink your own damnation; I think it must needs follow
that you are unfit to be admitted to the Sacrament of the LORDS Supper.


Alex. Well Sir, if the case stand thus with me, then surely I have no cause to
be sorry (as some are) but rather glad that the Parliament have taken such a
course, that you Ministers and Elders in every Parish shall examine every one
before he be admitted to the Sacrament; for if it had not been for that, and
if all might have come to the Sacrament that would, as it was in the Bishops
days, then had I two or three times at the least received the Scrament of
late, though, as it seems, it had been to the hazarding of the salvation of my
soul: But Sir, what would you advise me to do, in regard I have heretofore
received it diverse times?


Min. Why surely, I would advise you to go unto the Lord by often and fervent
prayer, beseeching him to pardon and forgive you that, and all your other sins,
for his Son Jesus Christ's sake, and to give you faith to believe the pardon
and forgiveness of them, and to give you repentance for them, and so to make
you a new creature: And I would also advise you to become a diligent hearer of
the Word of God, and read it often, that so you may come to know your self and
Jesus Christ, with the nature, use, and necessity of the Sacrament; and by
these and other such means it may please the Lord to convert your soul, and
to make you fit to be admitted to the Lords Table, and then we shall willingly
receive you.


Alex. Then Sir, it seems I may be permitted to hear the Word of God preached?


Min. Yea indeed, I do not only permit you, but also exhort you thereunto, for
that is the special means which God has ordained for the converting of
souls, and for the breeding of grace in the heart of his Elect, and therefore
I say I do exhort you, yea, and I beseech you as you tender the good of your
soul, have a special care of that, and when you find that the Lord has
thereby wrought upon your heart, then come before me and the Elders to be
examined, and in the mean time I will pray for you, and so for this time I
have done with you.


Alex. Well then Sir, I will take my leave of you, and I thank you for the
pains you have taken with me.


Min. Fare you well neighbor Alexander, and I beseech the Lord to convince you
of your sins, and convert you to the faith of Christ.


Sim. Well Sir, now you have pleased me wondrous well, for now I see you will
not admit of every ignorant and profane fellow to come to the Sacrament, and
truly now I could almost find in my heart to come in amongst you and join my
self with you, were it not for this business of Examination, but that I
cannot approve of; and to tell you the truth, since I was here with you the
other day, I met with a friend of mine, unto whom I related your conference
with our neighbor Zacheus, and he said, That there was no warrant in
Scripture, either for Minister or Elders to examine any one before they come to
the Sacrament; indeed, said he, the Apostle exhorts a man to examine himself
before he come, but he does not exhort any other to examine him, neither is
there any place of Scripture that warrants it.


Min. But whosoever your friend was, he is much deceived, for the Apostle in
exhorting a man to examine himself, does not exclude his examination by
another, but rather includes it; and though there be no place of Scripture that
does expressly require one man to examine another before he come to the
Sacrament, yet may it be gathered from Scripture by necessary consequence, for
I think no man will deny but that command of the Lord, Deuter. 6. 7. to
Parents to Catechize their children and servants, and to take an account of
their Faith; and surely if Ministers 1 Cor. 4. 15
be spiritual Fathers, as indeed they are, then by the like reason they are
warranted to examine their people, and to take an account of their Faith. And
surely I do conceive that the practice of those Christians is both warrantable
and commendable, who in any case of conscience which is not easily determined,
do repair to some godly Minister for his advice and counsel therein,
considering that the Lord Isai. 50. 4.
has given unto them the tongue of the learned, that they should know how to
speak a word in season. And considering also that the Prophet Malachy says,
The Priests lips should keep Mal. 2. ^.
knowledge, and men should seek the Law of God at his mouth; and this case of
conscience, to wit, whether a man be fit to partake of the Sacrament yea or no,
I do conceive is not very easily determined, and therefore as the Eunuch said
unto Philip, Act. 8. 36.
See, here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? So I do conceive that
it is meet for every man and woman, before they receive the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, to go to some godly Minister, or rather now before the
Eldership, and say, I understand that such a day the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is to be administered, what does hinder me to partake thereof, and that
it is meet for them to answer with Philip, If thou beleevest with all thine
heart, thou may; and so require him either to make some brief confession of
his Faith, as the Eunuch did, or else to give an answer to him that shall ask
him a reason of the hope that is in him with meekness and fear, according as
the Apostle Peter exhorts Christians to do, 1 Pet. 3. 15.


Sim. But Sir, would you have a man to do this that has received the Sacrament
many a time already.


Min. Yea indeed, if he never yet did it, yea and although he have already done
it in private, yet do I think it meet that he should go before the Minister
and Elders, and do it again to them more publicly.


Sim. Indeed Sir, I do confess it is meet that all Ignorant persons, who are
not able to examine themselves, ought to do so. But as for such as have a
great measure of knowledge, and so are able to examine themselves, I see no
need of it at all.


Min. But I do conceive that it is meet for them also to come to be examined,
that so the Eldership may have a full satisfaction concerning their fitness,
so far forth as they are able to judge, yea and that they themselves may by
their approbation be the better confirmed in the same; yea, and that the
ignorant sort, who for want of knowledge are turned back, may have no occasion
given them to say, That the Ministers and Elders are partial, and that such a
man or such a woman would be found as ignotant as they, if they were examined.


Sim. Well Sir, I do now begin to conceive that it is meet for a godly and
learned Minister to examine a man, but I neither see it lawful nor needful
that those whom you call Elders should have any hand in such a business,
especially such ignorant men as some of them are to my knowledge.


Min. Assure your self it is both lawful and needful that there should be
Elders to join with the Minister both in admitting those to the Sacrament that
upon examination are conceived to be fit; and in keeping those back who upon
examination are conceived to be unfit, because Christ has not given this
power to the Minister alone, for when he says, Matthew 18. 17. Tell the
Church, he does not mean the Minister only, neither yet the whole Church, but
the Rulers in the Church, to wit, the Minister and Elders; and so the Apostle
mentioning the excommunication of the incestuous person, 2 Cor. 2. 6. says,
That his punishment was inflicted by many, not by the Minister only, for then
he would have said by one; nor yet by the whole Church, for then he would have
said by all: but by many; that is to say, of the Presbytery, which consisted of
many Officers. And indeed I do conceive it is very needful that the Elders
should be joined with the Minister in this work, both for the assisting and
helping of him therein, and for the preventing of occasions of suspicion of his
usurping more power to himself then Christ has given unto him, or going
beyond the bounds which Christ has set him.


Sim. But Sir, there is a Neighbor of mine, who is the Independent way (as it
is called) who has (to tell you truly) persuaded with me to come into their
way, and in our Conference together, I remember amongst the rest he told me,
that by the word Church is not to be understood the Ministers and Elders only,
but also every member of the Church, and that it is therefore meet that every
member of the Church should join with the Ministers and Elders, both in
admitting those to the Sacrament that upon examination shall be conceived to be
fit, and in keeping those back who upon examination are conceived to be unfit.


Min. I know who that Neighbor is of whom you speak, and I hope he is a man
truly fearing God; but yet I must tell you, that I am confident that therein he
erreth from the truth, for it is evident by Scripture, that in the Church of
Christ there are to be some Governors and Rulers, whom others in the Church
must honor, be obedient unto, and submit themselves, as in 1 Cor. 12. 28. the
Apostle says, God has set some in the Church to be helpers in Government. And
in Romans 12. 8. there is mention made of Rulers in the Church, He that rules,
says the text, let him do it with diligence. And in 1 Timothy 5. 17. the Apostle
says expressly, Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine, and in Heb. 13.
17. it is said, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves
unto them, because they watch for your souls as they that must give an
account. And most plainly it is said, Heb. 13. 24. Salute all them that have
the rule over you, and all the Saints. Where you see, that Rulers and Saints
are made contra distinct one to another, and thus you see it is evident by all
these Scriptures, that in the Church of Christ there are to be some Governors
and Rulers, and some to be ruled and governed, but if all the members of the
Church should have an equal authority in the Churches affairs, then should
they be all Officers and Rulers, and then who should be ruled? If all were
Governors, then where were the governed?


Sim. Well Sir, I must confess that you have hereby given me more satisfaction
in this point then ever any man yet did, and truly if I did make any question
of my fitness to come to the Sacrament, I could be contented either to be
examined by you privately, or else come before you and the Elders more
publicly, but that I thank God I do not, and therefore I cannot bring my
heart to subject unto any such thing.


Min. Neighbor Simon, let me tell you plainly and truly, it is possible that a
man may have a very great measure of knowledge, and lead a very righteous
course of life according to the Law, and yet have no true faith in Christ, and
so be unfit to come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; for the Apostle Paul,
when he was a Pharisee, and before he had any true faith in Christ at all, was
endued with a great measure of knowledge, and legal righteousness, being as
himself confesses, Act. 22. 3. brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught
according to the perfect manner of the law of the Fathers, and as touching the
righteousness which is in the law he was blameless, Phil. 3. 6.


Sim. But Sir, though the Apostle Paul when he was a Pharisee, had a great
measure of knowledge, yet had he no knowledge of Christ, as thanks be to God
we Christians have in these days, and therefore it is no marvel though he had
no faith in him.


Min. I tell you neighbor Simon, that in these days of Gospel light, a man
may have a great measure of knowledge concerning Christ's Person, Christ's
Offices, Christ's Death and Resurrection, and yet all may be but mere notions
floting in the brain, and so indeed have no more true faith in Christ then
Paul had when he was a Pharisee, the Apostle Peter speaks of some in his time
that had escaped the pollutions of the world, and that through the knowledge of
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and yet afterward were entangled and
overcome, 2 Pet. 2. 20.


Sim. But Sir, I should think it were impossible for a man that is able to
answer you any question, touching any fundamental point of Religion, and that
leads an honest and religious course of life to want true faith in Christ, for
me thinks it should be as evident, that such a man has true faith, as it is
evident, that a sinful and ungodly man has it not.


Min. No, it is not so evident, for though it be true, that whatsoever does not
glister is not gold, yet it is not so true that whatsoever does glister is
gold; even so may we say, That although it be evident, that every person that
is grossly ignorant, and is a gross sinner, has not true faith in Christ, yet
it is not so evident that every man that has knowledge, and leads an honest
and righteous course of life according to the Law has true faith in Christ, I
tell you truly, a man may have a name that he lives, and yet be dead; as it is
said concerning the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 1. yea, and a man may with the
Church of Laodicea, think himself rich, and increased with goods, and to have
need of nothing, and yet be wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked, Rev. 3. 17. and therefore I would entreat you to consider well of it.


Sim. Well Sir, I do perceive by that which you said to me the other day, and
by your words to me now, that you are somewhat jealous of me, though I hope
there is no cause; but Sir, may not both you and the Elders be deceived in a
man though you do examine him, either in thinking a man has faith in Christ
when he has not, or in thinking he has no faith when he has?


Min. Yea indeed, I think it is possible that we may be deceived both ways,
for we have none of us the spirit of infalibility.


Sim. Why then Sir, me thinks it should be in vain for a man to come before
you to be examined.


Min. No, not so neither, for though it be possible that we may be deceived,
yet considering the course that we take in our way of examining, I hope we are
seldom deceived, if at all.


Sim. Why Sir, I pray tell me what course you take.


Min. Why when any one comes before us to be examined, we first of all desire
him either to make some brief Confession of his faith, or else to answer us
some Questions which we shall propound unto him, and if a man give us
satisfaction concerning his knowledge of Christ, of himself, and of the
Sacrament, then we ask him what evidences he can show of his Conversion, or
New Birth, and so consequently of his true faith in Christ; and if he also give
us satisfaction therein, then if we know not his life and conversation we make
inquiry of it, and when we have satisfaction touching that also, we do admit
him to the Sacrament.


Sim. Surely Sir, I do like this very well, and therefore because you seem to
question whether I have true faith in Christ or no, I am contented (now I am
here) to give you leave to examine me, if you think good to take the pains.


Min. Yea indeed, I am very willing to do it for your good, and therefore I
pray you in the first place tell me, Who made the world, and all things therein?


Sim. God.


Min. And what is God?


Sim. God is a most holy Spirit, infinite and eternal.


Min. And how many Gods be there?


Sim. There is but only one true God, distinguished into three Persons, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost.


Min. And in what an estate did God create man at the first?


Sim. He created him holy and righteous.


Min. And did man continue in that holy and righteous estate?


Sim. O no, he fell from it by breaking of Gods express Commandment, in eating
of the forbidden fruit.


Min. And was the first man only guilty of that sin?


Sim. O no, all Mankind did also become guilty in that they were all of them
then in his Loins, yea, they are not only become guilty by having his sin
imputed unto them, but they are also become filthy, by having his corruption
infused into them.


Min. And what punishment are all Mankind made liable and subject unto by
reason of their guiltiness and filthiness?


Sim. Even to eternal death and damnation in Hell fire.


Min. And shall all Mankind then partake of that punishment?


Sim. O no, for God has from all Eternity elected and chosen some to eternal
life and glory, and all those shall certainly be saved.


Sim. And by what means shall they be saved?


Sim. Only by Jesus Christ.


Min. And what is Jesus Christ?


Sim. He is the eternal Son of God, who in time became Man for his Elect.


Min. And what has Christ done for their Salvation?


Sim. He has fulfilled the Law, and suffered death for them.


Min. And by what means are the elect made partakers thereof?


Sim. Only by means of faith.


Min. And what is faith?


Sim. It is a special gift and grace of God, bestowed only upon Gods elect,
and wrought in their hearts by the power of his Spirit, whereby they do
receive and apply Christ unto themselves particularly.


Min. And what is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?


Sim. It is a sign or a seal, wherein by the Ministers blessing, and
delivering of Bread and Wine according to the institution of Christ is
signified, exhibited, and sealed to the faithful Receiver, the nourishment of
the soul to eternal life, by the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ crucified,
and so his further confirmation in the covenant of grace.


Min. And do you intend to come before me and the Elders when we are together,
and so to be admitted to the Sacrament the next time it shall be administered?


Sim. I do desire to partake of the Sacrament, but I am not yet very willing
to be examined any more.


Min. And why do you desire to partake of the Sacrament?


Sim. Because I do conceive it is a duty which God requires at my hands, and
which tends much to the comfort and benefit of my soul.


Min. Well neighbor Simon, I like all these answers well except it be the
last, how ever, such answers as these, though it is true they are all
fundamentalls, yet if as they come from you they be rather Catechisticall then
experimental, if they come only from your head, and not also from your heart,
it matters not greatly whether they had been better or worse; for in a
Catechisticall manner a man may answer better, and yet want faith in Christ;
and he may not answer so well, and yet have faith in Christ; and therefore for
a more sure Testimony of your faith in Christ, I would pray you to let me hear
what heart knowledge you have, let me hear what Evidences you can show for
your Regeneration or new Birth?


Sim. Why truly Sir, whilst I was a young man and unmarried I was very wild,
and given to much vanity, and many sinful courses; but when I came to be a
married man I left them all, and betook my self to a very civil course of
life, dealing uprightly and justly with all men, not doing the least wrong to
any, being very diligent in my Calling, endeavoring thereby to get where
withal to maintain my self and my Family, and to bring up my children in
learning and good manners, and to keep my self out of debt and danger, and to
live in credit and fashion amongst my neighbors, and though I say it my self,
I did so, and had the love of all that knew me, especially of the poorer sort,
for the truth is, I was good to them: and I was also very careful to go to
the Church every Sabbath day, and to see that my wife, children, and servants
did the like, and when we came home I did usually read a Chapter either before
or after supper, commanding my children and servants to do the like, and
afterward we used to sing a Psalm together, and then I commonly went to Prayer
with them, though I must confess I then did it upon a Book; and this course
of life I led for the space of full seven years together, and now Sir, before
I go any further, I would entreat you to tell me, what state and condition you
think I was in at this time.


Min. Why the state and condition that you were in at this time, so far as I
can perceive, was neither better nor worse then the state and condition of a
mere civil honest man.


Sim. Why truly Sir, herein you and I do agree, for ever since it pleased the
Lord to enlighten me, I have thought just so of my self, and yet whilst I was
in that condition, I thought my self to be in the only happy condition, I
mean as touching my soul, for I thought that he that came short of me, and
did not so much as I, did not so much as he ought to do, and he that went
beyond me, and did more then I, did more then he need to do; but at last I
heard a godly Minister handle these words, Mat. 5. 20. For I say unto you, that
except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Whence he
took occasion to show what their righteousness was, and how far they went,
whereby I did perceive that they had gone further then I, and that in many
things I come short of them; whereupon I thought with my self, if I come short
of them that come short of Heaven, surely I must either go further, or else I
shall never come there.


Min. And what followed then?


Sim. Why then I changed my mind, yea, and my course of life also; for whereas
before I thought such men as were more zealous and forward in Religion then I
was, they went too far, and made more ado then was needful, and were more
nice then wise. Why now I saw I was deceived, for they were the only men that
should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and thereupon I fell to hearing of
Sermons, not only on the Sabbath Day, but also on the Week day, and fell to
writing after the Minister, and to make repitition of the Sermon when I came
home, and on the Sabbath Day I did ordinarily ask my children and servants
what they did remember, and whereas before I used to pray in my Family only
every Sabbath Day at night, why now I fell to the doing of it both morning and
evening every day in the week, and without a Book, yea, and I commanded both
my children and servants to learn a Catechism or two by heart, and to tell
you the truth, I also did learn them my self, and whereas before I did
usually swear by my faith and troth, thinking them to be no Oaths, and to
tell a lie now and then for advantage, thinking that also to be no sin, why
now I left those things also; and whereas before I had no delight to keep
company with religious honest men, why now they were the only men whose
company I desired; and thus have I gone on ever since I thank God, and
increased more and more both in knowledge and in godly conversation, and so
that time as I did conceive was the time of my true Conversion, or of my
Regeneration and new Birth; and now Sir, I pray you tell me what you think of
me.


Min. Why surely you have done well both in turning from being a profane man,
to be a civil honest man, and in turning from being a civil honest man to be a
religious honest man (as you term it) but yet you have done ill in resting in
either, as it appears you have done in both; for as you were kept from
religious honesty by resting in civil honesty, so are you kept from Christ by
resting in religious honesty, or rather by resting in rational and religious
formalities.


Sim. I pray you then Sir, tell me what you would have me to do more, for I
do assure you I cannot tell what to do more then I have already done.


Min. Why truly, I would have you to take off your heart from resting and
putting confidence in your own righteousness, and rest and put confidence in
the righteousness of Jesus Christ, for that is the way to have true faith in
Christ, and to be justified in the sight of God.


Sim. Why Sir, do you not think that I who have led, and do still lead such
a just and righteous course of life, am already justified in the sight of God.


Min. Alas, neighbor Simon. I fear you are of the same opinion touching this
point of Justification, which I well remember, old Master Culverwell, who wrote
the Treatise of Faith, once told me some legal Professors were, who using to
come to him for resolution in some points, would tell him, that they could not
believe their Justification, and Salvation, because they were so sinful and
ungodly; whereupon he would ask them, Whether they thought GOD would justify
the godly or the ungodly, they would presently answer, the godly sure; nay
would he say, You are deceived, for the Apostle says, Romans 4. 5. That God
justifies the ungodly; even so, if you did conceive that you were a sinful
and ungodly man, I am confident you would not believe that God has justified
you, but because you do conceive you are a righteous and godly man, therefore
you think that you are already justified.


Sim. Sir, I would pray you to tell me what it is to justify, or wherein does
justification consist.


Min. The word justify is in Scripture taken two ways; First, it is taken for
GODS Act in making of a man just: Secondly, it is taken for Gods Act in
pronouncing of a man just.


Sim. Well Sir, and does not Gods Act in making of a man just, go before his
Act in pronounsing of him just?


Min. Yea indeed, for God being a just and righteous Judge, cannot in Justice
pronounce any man just till he have first made him so.


Sim. Then Sir, how or what sense can it be said, that God justifies the
ungodly?


Min. Why that saying of the Apostle, Romans 4. 5. That God justifies the
ungodly, is to be understood only of the first Act of God in making of a man
just, and not also of his second Act in pronouncing of him just.


Sim. But then Sir, does God make any man just whom he does not also pronounce
just?


Min. No indeed, whomsoever God does make just, he does also pronounce just.


Sim. Then Sir, why do you seem to blame me for being persuaded, that God who
has made me just, has also pronounced me just.


Min. The reason why I blame you is, for that you do imagine with the Papists,
that God makes a man just or righteous, by infusing of Justice or
Righteousness into him, whereas the truth is, God makes him just or
righteous, by imputing the righteousness of Christ unto him, according to the
saying of the Apostle, Romans 5. 19. By the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous; or which is all one, God makes a man just or righteous by not
imputing sin unto him, but pardoning and forgiving all his sins for Christ's
sake, according to the saying of the same Apostle, Romans 4. Verse 6, 7, 8. Even
as David describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered; blessed is the man unto whom the Lord
will not impute sin.


Sim. Sir, this Act of God, in thus making a man righteous I do not well
understand, and therefore I pray you tell me, what is meant by Gods imputing
the Righteousness of Christ unto a man, or not imputing his sins unto him.


Min. Why, the meaning is nothing else but this, to wit, that God graciously
accepts for a man, and in his behalf, the Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
both active, that is his obedience, which in the days of his flesh he
performed for man; and passive, that is, his sufferings which he sustained for
man, as if he had in his own person both done and suffered the same for
himself.


Sim. But Sir, if the Righteousness of Jesus Christ be imputed to a man for
his Justification, and a man be justified thereby, why then is it said in
Scripture, That Faith is imputed to a man for his righteousness, and that a
man is justified thereby?


Min. It is because faith is the instrument, and as it were the hand whereby
Christ and his Righteousness is received, so that wheresoever it is said in
Scripture, that Faith is imputed to a man for his righteousness, or, that a
man is justified by faith, we are to understand it relatively, that is, as it
has relation to Christ and his Righteousness, which it receives and
applies; for indeed Faith considered in it self cannot be said to be imputed,
neither as it is a habit, nor as it is an act, because that which is within a
man cannot be said to be imputed Piscator on Justification.
to a man, but that which is without a man; but faith is within a man, for,
With the heart man believes, Romans 10. 10. and therefore faith cannot be
properly said to be imputed to a man* however, this may serve for a brief and
full answer to Mr. Shepherd in his sound Believer. page 228.
your question, that to be justified by faith, and to be justified by Christ's
Righteousness, is all one in Scripture phrase and meaning, Gal. 2. 16, 17.


Sim. But Sir, if faith do receive and apply the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, then it should seem that Gods imputation is not sufficient for man's
Justification without faiths application.


Min. No indeed, for without man's application Gods imputation is not at all.


Sim. Why then Sir, it should seem that a man does help to justify himself.


Min. O no, not so, for man's application is also Vrsinus Catechis.
from God, for God first imputes unto a man Christ's satisfaction, and then he
ingendreth faith in him, whereby he applies that which is imputed unto him, and
then is a man perfectly just or righteous indeed.


Sim. Well Sir, you have sufficiently declared wherein that first Act of God
consists, in making a man just and righteous, I pray you also show wherein
the second Act of God consists, in pronouncing him just and righteous.


Min. This Act of God is nothing else but a judicial acquiting, whereby the
Lord as a Judge pronounces just and innocent, him that is accused and brought
to the Judgment Seat; and this is done when that Satan accuses, and the Law
condemns a Believer, unto whom the Lord does not impute sin, but does
absolve and free him both from the fault and punishment; and this is that which
the Apostle means when he faith, Romans 8. 33. It is God that justifies, who
is he that condemns; where you see, that Justification is manifestly opposed
to condemnation.


Sim. Well Sir, I do now plainly perceive, that a man is neither made just
by, nor pronounced just for his own inherent righteousness, but only by and
for Christ's righteousness imputed; but Sir, Does not the Lord wheresoever he
imputes righteousness to a man, whereby he is justified, infuse righteousness
also into him whereby he is sanctified?


Min. Yea indeed, for Christ by his obedience has not only obtained
imputation of righteousness for his elect, whereby they are justified, but
also that by his Spirit, together with faith, there should be righteousness
infused into them, whereby they are sanctified, and therefore I do affirm,
that sanctification is a necessary and unseparable consequent of Justification,
so that although inherent righteousness be no part of that righteousness
wherewith a man is formally justified, yet that righteousness wherewith a man
is formally justified, is not imputed and applied to any man that is grown in
years of discretion, without the gift of inherent righteousness, whereby he
is renewed Ephesians. 4. 24. Colos. 3. 9.
in the spirit of his mind, and restored to the Image of God, which consists
in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness.


Sim. Then Sir, it seems that the righteousness whereby a man is justified,
and the righteousness whereby he is sanctified are not both one.


Min. Yea, they are both one in regard of matter and substance, but yet there
are diverse other differences betwixt them.


Sim. I pray you Sir, for my better information show we what those differences
are.


Min. Why first of all, the righteousness whereby a Believer is justified is
in Scripture, called, Gods righteousness, as you may see, Romans 1. 17. Romans 3.
21. not because it is the righteousness of the Godhead, but because it is the
righteousness of that Person who is God: but the righteousness whereby he is
sanctified is called man's own righteousness, as you may see, Romans 12. 3.
Phil. 3. 9.

Secondly, the righteousness whereby a man is justified, is called the
righteousness which is of faith, but the righteousness whereby he is
sanctified is called, the righteousness which is of the Law, as you may see,
Romans 10. 5, 6.

Thirdly, the righteousness whereby a Believer is justified, is inherent in
Christ, and imputed unto him, but the righteousness whereby he is sanctified
is inherent in himself, being infused into him by the Spirit of Christ.

Fourthly, the righteousness whereby a Believer is justified, is a most
perfect righteousness, and cannot be increased, nor admit of any degrees, for
the Godhead of Christ afforded such dignity, virtue, efficacy, and merit to
the obedience and sufferings of his Manhood, as that they were an
all-sufficient price, ransom, and satisfaction to the Justice of God; but the
righteousness whereby he is sanctified is imperfect, and there are degrees of
it according to the measure of grace received.

Lastly, to name no more, the righteousness whereby a Believer is justified,
is always imputed unto him, and apprehended by faith, before the
righteousness whereby he is sanctified is infused into him by the Spirit.


Sim. Truly Sir, I must acknowledge that I did never before this time observe
these differences, between this twofold righteousness.


Min. Surely neighbor Simon, if I mistake not, there are two sorts of
Professors, who for want of the true understanding of this difference, do
confound this twofold righteousness, making them to be both one.


Sim. I pray you Sir, let me know who these Professors be, and what they do,
that so I may know whether I be one of them or no.


Min. Why one sort of them, of whom I think meet to speak first, are such as
may be truly called Antinomisticall Professors, who confound the righteousness
of Sanctification, with the righteousness of Justification, in making them to
be both one, for they will have that righteousness which is inherent in Christ
to be the righteousness both of their Justification, and of their
Sanctification; they will have all righteousness to be inherent in Christ, and
no righteousness to be inherent in themselves, they will have God to impute
all righteousness unto them, but not infuse any righteousness into them, they
will apply a perfect righteousness unto themselves by faith; when as they have
neither faith nor righteousness, they will have Christ without his Spirit, and
so indeed have neither Christ nor his Spirit; you shall hear these men and
women in their conference with others about these points, will be ever uttering
these or the like speeches; As for me, truly I have nothing in me that is good,
but am wholly sinful; neither do I look for any thing else to be in me but
sin, and yet I do verily believe, that I am perfectly righteous in the sight
of God through Christ, or in Christ, being clothed with a garment of
Salvation, and covered with a robe of Righteousness, so that I am all fair
and clean, and there is no spot in me.

These men and women, because they are not to look for any good in themselves,
as a ground or cause of their faith, they will not look for any good in
themselves as an evidence of faith, because they are not to look for inherent
righteousness before they have by faith apprehended the imputed
righteousness; therefore they will not look for any inherent righteousness
at all, because they must not look for inherent righteousness to move them to
believe, therefore they will not look for it to assure them that they have
believed.


Sim. Surely Sir, these men and women are much mistaken, but what do you
think is the reason of it?


Min. Why truly, I have thought upon three Reasons of it, as first, because
that they have either by means of hearing, reading, or conference, been
instructed in the law of faith only, without instruction in the law of works
going before, or the Doctrine of the Law of Christ's following after, or else in
the Doctrine of the law of works, and the law of faith without the Doctrine of
the Law of Christ. My meaning is, they have been instructed, that they of
themselves are altogether unable either to do, or suffer that which the law as
it is the covenant of works requires, and that they are therefore in a
damnable condition, and that yet notwithstanding, if they truly believe, and so
apprehend the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, they shall have life and
salvation, but they have not been instructed that if they do truly believe,
then they do hereupon become subject and obedient to the mind and will of
Christ revealed in his Word; they have been instructed that he is Jesus, a
Savior, but they have not been instructed that to whomsoever he is Jesus, a
Savior, he is also to them Christ, a Lord.

The second Reason is, because they take faith to be nothing else but a mere
notion of Christ and his Righteousness, swimming in their brain, or at the
best but a mere apprehension thereof in their minds, which is but a faith of
their own forging, and so they think they have a strong faith, when as indeed
they have not the least measure or degree of a true weak faith; they think
they have Christ in their hearts, when as indeed he is but in their heads; they
think they have him in their wills and affections, when as indeed they have
him but only in their understandings.

And a third Reason is, because they mistake the meaning of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
1. 30. where he says, that Christ is made unto us of God both righteousness,
and sanctification, for whereas they do thence conclude, that Christ's inherent
righteousness is not only that righteousness whereby a Believer is
justified, but also that righteousness whereby he is sanctified; and that in a
Believer there is no inherent righteousness, nor sanctification, as I have
heard some have affirmed; the meaning of the Apostle is not so, but his meaning
is; that God has not only ordained that Believers should be justified by
having the righteousness which is inherent in Christ imputed unto them, but
that Christ also should by his Spirit infuse righteousness into them, and so
sanctify them; he having not only by the merit of his Death procured the one,
but also by the virtue of his Death procured the other, and so indeed is made
unto them both righteousness and sanctification; and thus have I showed you
the first sort of those Professors, who confound his twofold righteousness,
and how they do it.


Sim. Well Sir, I thank God I am none of this sort, and therefore I pray you
show me also who are the second sort, and how they do it.


Min. Why, the second sort are such as are truly called formal, or legal
Professors, who confound the righteousness of justification with the
righteousness of sanctification, making them to be both one; for they will
have that righteousness which is inherent in man himself, or rather those
righteous actions which are performed and done by himself, to be not only that
righteousness whereby he is sanctified, but also that righteousness whereby he
is justified; and hence it is that such men do labor and endeavor to reform
their lives, and their ways, and to perform good duties, both toward God and
man, and also to the end they may have a ground to build their faith upon, and
so far forth as they can see a righteous disposition in themselves, and
righteous and religious actions performed by themselves; why so far forth
they will believe that they are justified in the sight of God, and no further.


Sim. And I pray you Sir, show me also the ground and reason of this their
mistake.


Min. Why truly I have also thought upon three Reasons of this, whereof the
first is, because they either by means of hearring, reading, or conference,
have been instructed in such a manner in the Law of the ten Commandments, as if
a man in the time of this life were able to keep and do them perfectly, and
so might be justified in the sight of God by his own obedience to them, and
they have not been condemned and killed by the Law, in having it made known
unto them in the purity and perfection of it.

The second Reason is, because they have had little or no instructions in the
Doctrine of the Law of faith, or Covenant of promise, especially betwixt that
covenant and the covenant of works, or betwixt the righteousness of
Justification, and the righteousness of Sanctification; and therefore being
not able to distinguish betwixt them, they do confound them together.

And a third reason is, because man naturally sees no other way to be justified
and saved, but only by his own works and performances, for as Luther says,
It is the general opinion of the whole world, that righteousness is gotten by
the works of the Law; and thus have I also showed you the second sort of them
that confound this twofold righteousness, and how they do it.


Sim. But Sir, as I do conceive, he that does confound this twofold
righteousness this latter way, does not so ill, nor is not in so bad a
condition as he that does it by the former way.


Min. Yea indeed for ought I see, he does even every whit as ill, and is every
whit in as bad a condition as the other; for as he that confounds the
righteousness of Sanctification with the righteousness of Justification, does
thereby destroy them both to himself, and so indeed has neither of them: so
he that confounds the righteousness of Justification with the righteousness
of Sanctification, does thereby destroy them both to himself, and so indeed
has neither of them.


Sim. Indeed Sir, it is evident to me, that he who has not the righteousness
of sanctification, has not the righteousness of Justification, and so indeed
has neither of them: but Sir, me thinks he who has the righteousness of
Sanctification, should also have the righteousness of Justification, and so
indeed have both of them.


Min. No, you are deceived, it is not so, for as he that thinks he believes,
and so has the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto him for his
Justification, deceives himself except the righteousness of the Spirit of
Christ be afterward infused into him for his sanctification; even so he that
thinks he leads a godly and righteous course of life, and so has the
righteousness of the Spirit of Christ infused into him for his sanctification
deceives himself, except the Righteousness of Christ has been before imputed
unto him for his justification.


Sim. Sir, I grant it, that a man may think he does believe when he does not,
and therein deceive himself, because that he cannot see his faith; but me
thinks a man should not think he lives a godly and righteous course of life
when he does not, because that is to be seen.


Min. O but let me tell you, as there is a form of faith without the power of
faith, which caused the Apostle to pray for the Thessalonians, that God 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.
would grant unto them the work of faith with power; even so is there a form
of godliness without the power of godliness, as you may see, 2 Timothy 3. 5. And
as this form of faith is nothing else but a faith of a man's own hammering, or
of his own acquiring, and so is but an acquired faith, and not an infused
faith; even so this form of godliness is nothing else but a godliness of a
man's own hammering, or of his own acquiring gotten by the improvement of his
Natural and Moral abilities, and so indeed is but a godliness acquired, and
not a godliness infused.


Sim. Then Sir, it seems that a man cannot by having the one, be assured that
he has also the other.


Min. No indeed, if he have them not both he has neither of them, for as there
is no imputed righteousness going before, where infused righteousness
follows not after, so is there no infused righteousness following after,
where imputed righteousness has not gone before; so that if either of them be
wanting, and bear not witness to the other, and that in its due place,
according to Gods own order, and as his own distinct actions, they are
neither of them true.


Sim. Then Sir, I pray you tell me how a man may know that he has them both,
and that they do bear witness either to other, and that in their due place
according to Gods own order, and as his own distinct actions.


Min. Why, if a man have truly seen and considered, that in regard the Lord
did in Adam Create all men righteous, and able to yield perfect obedience to
his Law, they having all of them in him transgressed his Law; it is a righteous
thing with God to require a full satisfaction to be made to his Justice, by a
perfect obedience to his Law both actively and passively, before he do forgive
any man's iniquity, or cover any man's sin, and so pronounce him just. And that
in regard of the infinite exactness, the glorious purity, and absolute
perfection of the Law of God, he see an utter impossibility in himself, to
yield a perfect active obedience unto it, and that in regard of that infinite
Majesty that is offended, there is an infinite suffering required, which must
either be an eternal punishment, or that which is equivolent to eternal: And
that man being a finit Creature can do it no way but by an eternal
punishment, and that therefore he sees no way for himself but Hell and
Damnation; and if then it has been revealed unto him, that Jesus Christ the
Son of God, and of the Virgin Mary, was both God and Man in one Person, and
that therefore his Divine nature did so sanctify his humane nature, and did
add such dignity, worth, and excellency to it, that he was thereby made a
person of infinite value, and so by his holy and righteous course of life in
the days of his flesh, he fulfilled the Law perfectly, and by his Death and
Bloodshed made an infinite satisfaction to divine Justice, and all this as a
Surety, and in the place and stead of all those that truly believe on his name;
and if he have thereupon truly believed, that all this was as truly done and
suffered for him, as if he himself had done and suffered it in his own
Person, and that he is thereby justified in the sight of God, then may he be
sure that the righteousness that is inherent in Christ has been imputed unto
him, and apprehended by faith, and so has gone before as an Antecedent. And if
he have thereupon seen, considered, and felt the great and free love and Romans
5. 5.
favor of God in Christ, shed abroad in his heart, by the Holy Ghost then
given unto him, so as that his heart has been thereby moved, yea and
constrained to love God 1 John 4. 19.
because he has loved him first; and out of love to desire and endeavor to
keep his Commandments, so that whereas before this time he either lived a
profane and sinful course of life, or a mere civil honest course of life,
aiming only or chiefly at his own credit and profit in this world, or a
religious honest course of life only, or chiefly for his own eternal welfare
in the life to come.

If this grace of God, or this free love and favor of Tit. 2. 11, 12.
God in Christ has so appeared unto him, as that it has taught him to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world, not for faith and justification, but from faith and
justification; then may he be assured that inherent righteousness, wrought by
the Spirit of Christ, has followed as a consequent, and so consequently that
he has both the righteousness of justification, and the righteousness of
sanctification, bearing witness either to other in their due place, according
to Gods own order, and as his own distinct actions.

And now neighbor Simon I beseech you try your self by these things, and know
that if it has been in any measure thus with you, then you may be assured that
you have truly believed on the name of Jesus Christ, and are justified freely
by his grace, and sanctified by his Spirit, and so are no formal or legal
Professor; but if it has been in no measure thus with you, but that you have
labored and endeavored to live a godly and righteous course of life, that so
you might have a ground to build your faith upon, that is, upon your own
righteousness and performances, if you have been ignorant of Gods
righteousness, as the Apostle Romans 10. 3.
says, the Jews were, and have gone about to stablish your own
righteousness, as they did, then you may be assured that you have not truly
believed on the name of Jesus Christ, neither are you justified nor sanctified,
but are in plain terms a mere legal Professor.


Sim. Sir, I must confess that I have not heretofore been acquainted with
these things, and therefore I cannot truly say that I have done thus, or that
it has been so with me, but yet I cannot be persuaded that I have gone about
to stablish mine own righteousness, for I know right well, that when we have
done all that we can we are but unprofitable servants, and that a man is to be
justified by the mercies of God, and the merits of Christ, and not by his own
works and merits, as the Papists hold.


Min. I but neighbor Simon, I must tell you, that it is one thing to say thus
in words, and to hold thus in judgment, and another thing to do it in effect
and practice; I mean in heart and conscience, it is not enough for a man to
think, and be of opinion that he cannot be justified by his own
righteousness and performances, for that is only a work of the judgment
rightly informed, and not a work of the heart rightly reformed; wherefore I
do admonish you to take heed, that whilst you are a Protestant in opinion and
profession, you be not a Papist in effect and practice, I mean in the inward
disposition of your heart, as I fear me too many, both men and women in this
City are; for if I be not mistaken, their very speeches and behavior do
testify, that because they know and do more then they do conceive others know
and do, or because they are members of such a man's Congregation, and so in a
Church way as they call it, therefore they trust in themselves that they are
righteous, as our Savior said the Pharisees did, Luke 18. 9. and yet if a man
should say unto them as our Savior did to the Pharisees, Luke 16. 15. Ye are
they which justify your selves, they would utterly deny it as you do; but to
tell you plainly neighbor Simon, your speeches and behavior, when you were
with me the other day made me to fear that you were but a kind of a
Pharisaicall Professor, furely in your crowing over, and undervaluing your
honest neighbor Zacheus; in comparison of your self you did too nearely
resemble the proud Pharisee, crowing over, and undervaluing the humble
Publican, Luke 18. and in judging of him to be unfit, and unworthy to come to
the Lords Table; you did too nearely resemble Simon the Pharisee, mentioned
Luke the 7. who when he saw that sinful, yet penitent and believing woman,
washing our Saviors feet with her tears, and wiping them with the hairs of
her head, he spoke within himself saying, This man if he were a Prophet, would
have known who, and what manner of woman this is that has touched him, for
she is a sinner, and therefore I pray you consider of it.


Sim. But Sir, this is somewhat strange, that a man should put confidence in
his own righteousness, and think he is thereby justified and yet not know
it, I would you could give me some signs of a man's doing so, that so I may
know whether I do so or no.


Min. Why truly I can give you no more evidenter a sign of it then that which
I have already given you, and that is in plain terms a proud spirit, for
those men and women, that do truly believe, that they are justified Romans 3. 24
freely by Gods grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, they are
the humblest people, and the most free from spiritual pride of any people in
the world; and therefore the Apostle having fully proved free justification in
respect of a man's self, Romans 3. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. he breaks out in the
next verse into this patheticall expression, saying, Where is boasting then? it
is excluded; by what law? of works; nay, but by the law of faith. I tell you
neighbor Simon, if a true Believers heart do begin to swell, because of his
excelling others in gifts and parts, he does ere long give it a vent, by saying
to it in the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ from
another, and what have thou that thou did not receive; now if thou did
receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? But yet to
the intent you may be the more fully convinced, that you have put confidence in
your own righteousness, I pray you answer me this question; Did you ever
find it a hard matter to deny your own righteousness, to become truly poor
in spirit, to be broken off from confidence in your own performances, and to
pass through them all to Jesus Christ? I beseech you answer me truly from your
heart.


Sim. Why truly Sir, I must confess I never thought my self guilty of any
such thing.


Min. Why then believe it you are guilty of it, for it is natural for every
man and woman, when they leave off plodding toward Hell in the dirty path of
sin, yet to go on thitherward in the cleaner path of duty rested in; when
Satan cannot keep a man from Christ by sin, then he labors to keep him from
him by self; if he cannot keep a man with his sins from fleshpots in
Egypt, then he labors to keep him from Canaan, by losing himself, and his
soul in the wilderness of his own performances rested in, assure your self
that there is in all men naturally this frame of spirit, never to come to
Christ whilst they have any hopes that their own performances will heal them,
and therefore here they rest until they see it, bewail it, and pray against
it; and therefore if you never did so, it is clear that you do put confidence
in your own performances. Again, I pray you answer me another question truly;
and that is, Did you ever see so many imperfections, and so much rottenness
and corruption, as touching the manner and end of performing duties that you
have even loathed your self, and have been wearied and tired in your own
endeavors by reason of the same.


Sim. No truly Sir, I cannot say I have, for I have always had great delight
in the performance of religious exercises.


Sim. Then I do assure you this is another sign that you have rested and put
confidence in your own performances, for till a man see, and take notice of
his wandering and worldly thoughts, and of his drowsinesse and heaviness, if
not sleepiness in Prayer, and hearing the Word, and such like exercises; and
till he see, and take notice of his self ends in doing good actions he will
rest, and put confidence in them, and be thereby kept from Christ; and believe
it neighbor Simon, before that a man do take up his rest in Christ, the Lord
does discover unto him so much imperfections in his own performances, that he
cries out within himself, I see now what a vile undone wretch I am, I can do
nothing well; all that I am is vile, and all that I do is vile; I see now that
I am indeed poor, and blind, and naked; and hereupon he is quite tired out,
and sits down weary, not seeing any hopes of healing the breach between God
and himself, and this says a godly Writer I take to be the meaning of Mat.
11. 28. Yea that labor, Mr. Shepherds sound Believer. p. 134.
you that are weary in your own way, in seeking rest to your souls by your
own hard labor, or works, as the word signifies, and are tired out therein,
and so are now laden indeed with sin, and the heavy pressure of that finding
no ease by all that you do, Come to me, says Christ, and you shall then find
rest unto your souls.

Again, I pray you let me ask you one question more, and that is this; Have
you not prized the bare performances of duties wonderfully; that is, Have you
not thought when you have prayed so many times in a day, and heard so many
Sermons in a week, and turned to all the places of Scripture that the Minister
has coted, and folded down the leaf in your Bible, or else writ their
Sermons after them, and made some repetition thereof to others, and the like; I
say, have you not in so doing rested satisfied, without looking for a return
of your Prayers, or what good you have gained to your own soul by your
hearing, and so whether you have met with God in Christ, in all these ways and
means, I pray you answer me truly from your heart.


Sim. Believe me Sir, I must confess I have done so.


Min. Then I beseech you take this as another evident sign of your resting,
and putting confidence in your own performances, for if a man do not put
confidence therein, then he makes use of such performances, but only as a
Bridge or Ferry-boat to carry or waft him over to God in Christ, and rests
not contented till he be brought thither; other signs I might lay down
touching this matter, but I hope these will be sufficient for you to try your
self by, if the Lord be pleased to make them effectual to you.


Sim. Well Sir, and suppose that I should thereby find that I have been guilty
of resting and relying upon mine own duties and performances, and should come
before you and the Elders, and acknowledge the same, would you thereupon
conclude me to be but a formal legal Professor without true faith in Christ,
and therefore not fit to be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.


Min. Neighbor Simon, to the intent you may more clearly see and perceive
what we do when we meet together, and also declare it unto others if you see
occasion, I pray you understand and take notice, that if we upon examination
find a man to be wholly ignorant, and wholly sinful, as you know I found our
neighbor Alexander to be, then we do absolutely conclude that he has no true
faith in Christ, and therefore we shut the Gate against him, and keep him from
the Sacrament under the notion of an ignorant and profane man, and suffer him
not to come there whilst he remains in that condition.

Yea, and though we know a man that he lives honestly and peaceably amongst his
neighbors, and deals uprightly and justly with all men, giving every man his
due, and for ought we know or can hear is free from all gross and scandalous
sins, yet if upon examination we find him to be grossly ignorant, then do we
likewise conclude, that he has no true faith in Christ, and so shut the Gate
against him also, and keep him from the Sacrament under the notion or a mere
civil honest man, and suffer him not to come there whilst he remains in that
condition.

But if upon examination we find a man to have a competent measure of
knowledge, especially if it be experimental of himself, and neither know, nor
can upon enquiry hear any thing to the contrary, but that he leads both a
civil and religious honest course of life, though he be accused to be but a
formal legal Professor; yea, and though we upon examination do find him not
to be so clear and distinct in his knowledge touching the difference betwixt
the Law and the Gospel, or Covenant of works and Covenant of Grace, as we
could wish he were; yea, and though for want of so clear a light betwixt
Justification and Sanctification, as some have, he seems to confound the
righteousness of justification with the righteousness of sanctification, yet
if he be an humble man, and show it by confessing his ignorance, and his
willingness to be better instructed herein; then we judge in charity that he
has true faith in Christ, and so open the gate of the Sacrament and let him
in; but if upon examination we find a man ignorant in these points, and yet
because of his great measure of knowledge in others, though not so necessary
points to be known, he be puffed up, and by reason of his righteous course of
life be kept back from seeing his need of Christ, as it seems to me you are,
then are we jealous over 2 Cor. ii. 2
him with godly jealousy, as the Apostle was over the Corinthians, but yet we
dare not absolutely conclude that he has no true faith in Christ, and
therefore we pray him, as I do now pray you before you come to the Sacrament,
to command with your own heart upon your bed, as David exhorts, Psalm. 4. 4.
and to examine himself, as you know the Apostle exhorts, 1 Cor. 11. 28. and if
he come unto us again and acknowledge, that upon serious examination of
himself he has found, that that with zealous Paul before his conversion, he
has counted his own righteousness and performancers to be gain, that is to
say, that he has hitherto rested and put confidence in them, and expected to
be justified in the sight of God by them, but now with him he counted them
loss for Christ, and desired to be found in him, not having his own
righteousness which is of the Law, but Phil. 3. 9.
that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God
through faith, then do we willingly open the door and let him in; otherwise
we send not for him again, and even so are we like to deal by you.


Sim. Well Sir, you have answered me fully, and I hope I shall think of it;
but Sir, suppose that an Antinomisticall Professor should come before you, how
would you deal with him?


Min. Why though a man be accused to be an Antimonian, yet if upon examination
we find that he has a competent measure of knowledge, and we neither know nor
can hear but that he leads an honest and religious course of life, though he
seem to hold, that the Law is not to be a rule of life to a Believer, and that
God can see no sin in a justified person, and that God is neither angry, nor
does afflict his people for sin, and that Christ's inherent righteousness is
both the righteousness of a Believers justification and sanctification; yet if
we perceive that he does not peremptorily and obstinately hold and maintain
these points, but is rather induced to hold them because such a Minister, or
such a religious man whom he does reverence and has a good opinion of is that
judgment, and be willing to be instructed in the truth, then do we hope that
notwithstanding all this he has true faith in Christ, and therefore do open
the gate to him and let him in; but if upon information and examination we
find a man to hold and maintain these points obstinately, and do either
certainly know or hear that his conversion is not such as becomes the
Gospel of Christ, then we do very much suspect him, though he have a great
measure of knowledge; and therefore do not presently open the gate unto him,
but pray him to hearken to the truth, and consider of it when he comes home,
and then if afterward he come to us again, and acknowledge his errors, and
profess his grief and sorrow for the same, then do we willingly open the
door unto him, otherwise we send not for him.


Sim. Well Sir, if you be so careful and so strict whom you do admit to the
Sacrament, then me thinks some in this City, yea some in this Parish that I
know should come in amongst you, and not go the Independent way as they have a
mitde to do, for they tell me that the reason why they have no mind to come
in amongst you is, because you do admit such to the Sacrament as are not fit
to be admitted; and to tell you the truth, I my self also had some thoughts of
going that way, only I resolved to stay and see what your way would be, and
what you would do.


Min. Surely neighbor Simon, though I am verily persuaded there be many men
and women go that way who do truly fear the Lord, yet am I jealous that
there are diverse taken in amongst them, that are as unfit and as unmeet to be
admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper as any that we have hitherto
admitted; and therefore I see no reason that any Christian has to leave us,
and go to them for any such cause.


Sim. I pray you Sir, tell me what you think of the Independent way, for I
would feign hear your judgment concerning it.


Min. Truly neighbor Simon, I have neither mind nor time to fall upon any
such discourse, neither would I advise you to trouble your self, nor spend
your time about any such circumstantiall matters as I do conceive that is, but
give rather diligence to make your calling and election sure, as the Apostle
Peter exhorts us; labor to know Jesus Christ and him Crucified, and to know
your self, and whether you be in the faith or no. There are too many people
that do spend too much time about such needless matters, and too many
wrangling disputes have been thereby occasioned; I wish with all my heart there
might be no more, and I wish with all my heart, that all who are truly godly
either amongst them or us, had such humble loving hearts as Christians ought to
have, that we might neither speak nor think evil one of another, but rather
study and endeavor to make up the breaches which are needlessly made betwixt
us, that so if it were the Lords will we might all speak the same thing, and
that there might be no divisions amongst us, but that we might be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, according to the
Apostles exhortation, 1 Cor. 1. 10. and that we might with one mind, and with
one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the
Apostle exhorts, Romans 15. 6. and so have more near and sweet communion
together in all the Lords holy Ordinances, for the edifying and building up one
another in our most holy faith; and thus you see what my mind and desire is
touching these things.


Sim. Then Sir, it seems to me that you do not only desire that all those
that are godly, and have a mind to go the Independent way, should come to you
and join with you in your way, but also that all those who are already joined
in the Independent way should return to you.


Min. That is my desire indeed, and I doubt not but that it would be very well
pleasing and acceptable to the Lord, if all that are truly godly amongst them,
whether they be Ministers or people, would come in amongst us; for truly I can
see no warrant they have from the Word of God to separate from us, and to
gather Churches out of Churches as they do, surely, me thinks if they would
but read that learned and moderate Tract, called, Jus Divinum, with an
indifferent judgment, and moderate spirit, without prejudice, they should see
that our way touching Church Government comes as near the mind and will of
Christ as can be found out in his Word.

But what said a godly, judicious, and moderate Minister of the Gospel in the
Pulpit not long since in my hearing, I am persuaded said he, and it is not
only my judgment, but also the judgment of a grave, gody, and learned
Divine, who had long studied the point, that there is not to be found in all
the whole New Testament a perfect Plat-forme of Church Government, which makes
me think (said he) that it is not the mind of Christ that Christians under the
New Testament should much busy or trouble themselves about such matters. These
words as near as I can remember he uttered, and truly I think it were well if
we were all of his mind, that so we might busy our minds, and spend less
time about such matters, and bend our minds and studies more about matters of
substance, viz. about the Doctrine of Faith and Repentance, and matters that
concern Christian practice, and godly conversation, and meekness, and love
amongst our selves; truly neighbor Simon I am persuaded that all, both godly
Ministers, and godly Christians that do now live in this Kingdom, have great
cause to rejoice and be thankful to the Lord, that has let them live to see
those things which we see, to wit, that there is now power given to godly
Ministers and Elders, to keep back unfit and unworthy Communicants from the
Lords Table, the which it is well known has not been heretofore though much
desired; and O that the Lord would be pleased to move the hearts of all our
godly discenting Brethren, to come in and join themselves with us, that so we
might rejoice and praise the name of the Lord together, but no more of this.


Sim. Truly Sir, these your words have moved my heart to your way, and I wish I
were worthy to come in amongst you, but I will take my leave of you, and go
home and consider of what you have this day said unto me concerning the state
and condition of my soul, for I still fear I am not right; and I see that the
chief thing to be looked after and regarded is the true Knowledge of Christ.


Min I surely, that is the thing indeed, and O that we could all of us seek
more after that then we do, and as one in a In Bacon hi^ Catachis. Epistle
dedicatory.
certain place says very sweetly; Oh that every one in this Kingdom, that
truly desires to fear the name of God, were so wise as to forbear this
clashing and dashing themselves in pieces one against another for matters
external, trivial, and circumstantiall in Religion, and would at length
content themselves with that which is alone saving and everlasting, and account
it honor and happiness enough in matters appertaining to God to be a
Christian.

I remember I was lately told by a Christian friend of mine, that one coming
to old Master Dod not long before his death, to desire him to resolve him about
the point of Re-baptizing, or some such like point; he answered, Friend, have
you made your Calling and Election sure, or rather give diligence to make that
sure, which in my judgment was a very gracious answer.


Sim. Well Sir, I will now take my leave of you for this time, and I beseech
you pray for me.


Min. Truly neighbor Simon, I would here break off and take my leave of you,
were it not that I see our neighbor Mathias look very heavily, and therefore
I pray you tarry a while till I have spoken a few words unto him, and then I
will take leave of you both together. How do you neighbor Mathias, what aileth
you to be so sad, what is the matter with you?


Mat. O Sir, if you did but know how it is with me, you would say I had cause
to be heavy and sad.


Min. Weep not man, weep not I pray you, but tell me what is the matter with
you.


Mat. O Sir, I am troubled to think what will become of my soul when I dye.


Min. And what causes this trouble?


Mat. Why truly Sir, the hearing of your discourse with my neighbor Simon has
caused it for (I think with my self) that if he that is a man of such great
knowledge, and holy life and conversation, be questioned by you, and do
question himself, whether he be in a good condition or no; alas, then what may
I think of my self, that am such a poor ignorant and sinful man as I am?


Min. But I hope you are neither so ignorant, nor so sinful as you think you
are.


Mat. O yes Sir, it is too true, the Lord he knows it.


Min. Why, have you no knowledge in the fundamental points of religion, did
you never learn your Catechism.


Mat. Yea, when I was young I learned a little, but alas I have forgotten it
long since.


Min. No, I hope you do remember some of it, and therefore I pray you tell me,
what is God?


Mat. I beseech you Sir, bear with my ignorance, and I will answer you as well
as I can; I think God is the Maker and Governor of all things.


Min. Well said, and how many Gods be there?


Mat. Surely Sir, I think there is but one true God.


Min. Well said, and how many Persons is there in the Trinity?


Mat. I think Sir there are three.


Min. And how are the three Persons distinguished?


Mat. Alas Sir, I cannot tell how to answer that.


Min. And how did God make man at the first?


Mat. In his own Image and likeness.


Min. And wherein did that Image or likeness consist?


Mat. Truly Sir I cannot tell you.


Min. Well, but you say you are a sinful man, how do you know that you are
so?


Mat. Because I was conceived and borne in sin, and have sinned all my life
time.


Min. And what is sin?


Mat. Why surely Sir, sin is to do contrary to the mind and will of God.


Min. Neighbor Simon, you know him better then I, therefore I pray you tell me
what you think of him?


Sim. Yes Sir, I have known him a great while, and have always taken him to be
a simple honest man, according to his knowledge; only I must tell you, I have
heretofore seen him now and then a little distempered with drink, but of late
he has seemed to mind matters of Religion, for I have seen him sometimes at
a Lecture on the week day, and therefore I hope he is better now then he has
been formerly.


Min. Well neighbor Mathias, I am glad to hear that you begin to mind the
best things, and to frequent the hearing of Gods Word more now then formerly; I
pray you tell me what has moved you so to do?


Mat. Why truly Sir, a friend of mine, a godly religious man, whom neither of
you know was the first occasion of it, for he telling me in an humble loving
manner, that he feared I was yet in my natural estate and condition, and
thererefore liable to Gods everlasting wrath and damnation in Hell, his words
did so work upon me, that I asked him what he would advise me to do; and he
bad me be diligent in hearing and reading the Word of God, and get good
Divinity Books, and one Book he commended to me above the rest, called, The
plain man's path way to Heaven, and truly Sir, I hope the reading of that Book
has done me much good; but alas Sir, my sins, my sins are they that trouble me.


Min. But whether are they your sins which you have formerly committed, or
your present corruptions that do trouble you?


Mat. Truly Sir, they are both, for I am troubled at my former sins for fear
they are not pardoned, and I am troubled at my present corruptions, because I
cannot overcome them.


Min. I pray you tell me one thing truly, have you ever gone to the Lord in
prayer about your sins?


Mat. Yea indeed Sir, I have of late diverse times gone privately to prayer, and
have besought the Lord, that he would be pleased for Jesus Christ's sake, to
pardon my former sins, and give me power to overcome my present corruptions,
but yet alas all in vain, for they do still remain with me.


Min. But do you believe that your former sins are pardoned?


Mat. No surely Sir, I cannot believe that, so so long as my present
corruptions do still remain unsubdued.


Min. Weep not I pray you, but consider that you have gone a wrong way to
work, you would have your sins subdued before they be pardoned, whereas the
Lord does first pardon sin, and then he gives power against sin.


Mat. But Sir, I have thought with my self, that as when I was a child, and
had by the committing of any fault displeased my Father, he would at my
entreating forgive me, upon condition that I did so no more; but if I committed
the like fault again, then he would not forgive the former, but reckon with me
for them both: even so I did conceive the Lord would deal with me.


Min. But did not you tell me that you did beseech the Lord to forgive you your
sins for Christ Jesus sake.


Mat. Yea indeed.


Min. And why have you asked it for Christ's sake?


Mat. Because he has suffered death for my sins.


Min. And do you no^ believe that Christ by his death has fully satisfied the
Justice of God for all your sins.


Mat. Yea Sir, I do believe he has.


Min. Why then, do you not believe that God for his satisfaction sake has
forgiven your sins.


Mat. Why Sir, I do believe it so long as I do continue obedient unto God in
doing his Will, and not transgressing his Commandments.


Min. And can you not believe it any longer then you do so?


Mat. No indeed Sir.


Min. Why then you do not believe that God pardons your sins for Christ's
sake, but for your own sake, not for Christ's obedience sake, but for your own
obedience sake.


Mat. Indeed Sir, I cannot tell what to say to that.


Min. Well neighbor Mathias, as you have besought the Lord to pardon and
forgive you your sins for Christ Jesus sake, do so still, but withal,
believe that he has done so according to your Petition; yea, and that
absolutely, and not conditionally as you have done, and answerably as you do,
so you shall be sure to find and feel your sins mortified and subdued; do
but believe that you are washed by the Blood of Christ from the guilt of sin,
and you shall be sure to find that you are cleansed by the Blood of Christ
from the filth of sin; let a man (says Doctor Preston) but believe the On
the new Cov.
the promise of pardon in the Blood of Christ, and the very believing the
pardon will be able to cleanse his heart from dead works, for that faith which
does lay hold on Christ crucified (says another godly Divine) does Dyke on the
Sacr^ment. p. 292.
fetch a Crucifying virtue from him, whereby the body of corruption is
enfeebled and weakened.


Mat. O but Sir, I fear I shall not believe that my sins are pardoned, so long
as they remain unsubdued.


Min. If you will not believe that your sins are pardoned till they are quite
subdued, then will you not believe it whilst you live; for so long as you live
here you shall find and feel some remainders of sinful corruptions
unsubdued, though you do believe, and if you do not believe you shall not
have them subdued at all by the sanctifying Spirit of Christ. Indeed it is
possible, that after much striving against your corruptions in your own
strength, you may see there is no strength in you to subdue them as you would;
and may thereupon go unto Christ by Prayer, for grace and power to leave sin
and do better, and so live upon Christ that you may live upon your self; I
say, you may go unto Christ for power to do your work, that so you may earne
your wages, and it is possible you may hereupon grow in legal righteousness,
as the stony and thorny ground seed sprung up, and increased much, and came
near unto maturity, and yet this not be the work of the sanctifying Spirit of
Jesus Christ; wherefore I beseech you, go not this way to work, do not seek
to have the righteousness of sanctification infused into you before you seek
to have the righteousness of Justification imputed unto you, and so as much as
in you lies, to go about to pervert the Lords own order and method.

Do you not remember how I told my neighbor Simon, that the Lords order and
method in justifying and sanctifying a sinner is, First, to justify him, by
imputing the righteousness that is inherent in Christ unto him, and enabling
him to apprehend it by faith, and then to sanctify him by infusing of
righteousness into him by his Spirit; and this is the method which the Prophet
Micah proclaims by way of admiration, saying, Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of the remnant of
his heritage, he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy? Here is the righteousness Micah. 7. 18.
of Justification, and then in the next Verse he proclaims the righteousness
of Sanctification, saying, He will turn again, he will have compassion upon
us, he will subdue our iniquities etc. And this method the Prophet David was
well acquainted with, and therefore in the first Verse of the 51. Psalm, he
beseeches the Lord, According to the multitude of his mercies to blot out his
transgressions; and then in the tenth ver. he says, Create in me a clean
heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Wherefore I beseech you
again, and again, to acquit your self with this way, and endeavor to go on
in it.


Mat. O Sir, that I could do so, for surely I should think my self a happy
man if the Lord would both pardon mine iniquities, and subdue them; for truly
Sir, I have lately had in my heart such a deal of fear and terror of the
direful displeasure of God, and of Death, and Hell, for want of being assured
that my sins are pardoned, and I do so hate, loath, and abhor those
corruptions which are still in me, that I verily think I shall never be quiet
in my mind whilst they and I live together.


Min. Weep not I pray you, except it be for joy, for surely this fear is a
work of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, for ordinarily after conviction, he lets
into the hearts of his Elect such fears as these; for although it is true, there
may be in a meare natural man certain natural fears arising from the
accusation of his natural conscience, yet they never affect his heart so as to
work a separation betwixt his heart and his sins, but your fears do so
affect your heart as that they work a separation betwixt it and your
Corruptions, and therefore without doubt they are as Arrows shot into your
Conscience by the arm of the Almighty.


Mat. But alas Sir, how can there be a separation made betwixt my heart and my
corruptions, sees they still remain in me?


Min. Neighbor Mathias, if you do hate, loath, and abhor your corruptions
as you say you do, and would feign have them subdued, as you say you would,
then believe it, and make no question of it, there is such a separation made
betwixt your heart and your sins, as that they shall never separate bebetwixt
the Lord and your soul, for hatred of evil, says that worthy Saint, Doctor
Sibbes, is a sure and never failing Souls conflict. p. 476
Character of a good soul; wherefore I beseech you comfort your heart, though
by reason of the weakness of your faith your sins be not so subdued as you
desire.


Mat. But alas Sir, I fear I have no true faith at all.


Min. Why, did not you tell me even now, that you feared the direful
displeasure of God by reason of your sins?


Mat. Yea indeed Sir, I fear he is sore displeased with me by reason of them.


Min. And do you not believe that Jesus Christ by his obedience has pacified
his anger for you, and so reconciled you unto him?


Mat. Sir, I do believe that Jesus Christ has pacified Gods anger for all
that do believe, and has reconciled them unto him; but Sir, I fear that I
do not believe, and therefore I fear I am not reconciled unto God.


Min. But tell me one thing truly, Do you desire to believe on the name of
Jesus Christ, and so be reconciled unto him?


Mat. Yea, I do desire it from the bottom of my heart.


Min. Then I beseech you leave off your weeping, and let me tell you to your
comfort, that your desire to believe is faith indeed, and your Perkins Grain
of Mustard Seed, p. 21.
desire of reconciliation with God in Christ is reconciliation it self, for
any man that is thoroughly touched for his sins, and unfainedly desires to
have them pardoned, and to be reconciled unto God, God accepts as reeonciled,
and hence it is that Christ says, Blessed Mat. 5 6.
are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
satisfied, and again says he, If any Joh. 7. 38.
man thirst let him come unto me and drink, so that although as yet you want
firm and lively faith, yet are you not altogether void of faith, for you have
the seed, conception, or bud of faith, the immortal seed is cast into the
furrows of your heart, therefore wait but a while, using the good means to
this end appointed, and you shall see the leaves, blossoms, and fruit will
shortly follow after.


Mat. But Sir, how can these things be, for if a desire of faith and
reconciliation with God be faith and reconciliation indeed, then surely every
man and woman have faith and reconciliation with God, for what man or woman is
it that does not desire it? but I remember the Apostle Paul says, All men have
not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.


Minister. I do acknowledge that a man in Perkins grain of Mustard Seed, p. 18
the state of nature may desire true happiness as Balaam did, who wished to
dye the death of the righteous, for indeed it is the property of nature to
desire the preservation of it self, but alas, all such desires are but
natural desires, whereas your desires I am confident are supernatural desires.


Mat. I but Sir, how shall I be sure that my desires are supernatural?


Min. To the intent you may be sure of it, I will show you the true difference
betwixt natural desires and supernatural desires, and therefore I pray you
consider, that if a man's mind be blind, and his heart untouched and
unhumbled, then all his desires to believe and to be reconciled unto God can be
no better then natural desires; and the reason is, because that where the
mind reveals not, the will affects not; and if the heart be not touched with
so much fear and sorrow as does loosen it from sin, and makes sin the
sowrest, and Christ the sweetest; and if there be not so much Humiliation as
makes a man deny himself, and to renounce his own righteousness and
performances, and so to desire to be found clothed with the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, there can be no supernatural desires of faith, and
reconciliation with God in Christ, but if a man's mind be enlightened, and his
heart touched and humbled as yours is, then all his desires of believing and
reconciliation with God in Christ must needs be supernatural desires, and the
reason is, because that where the mind is truly enlightened, so that a man
perceives his miserable estate by reason of his sins, and his heart is truly
touched, cast down and humbled, it withdrawes it self from God as much as it
can; and therefore if there be any spiritual motions whereby the heart is lift
up unto God, they are without doubt from the Spirit of Perkins grain of
Mustard Seed, p. 20
God; so that although such a heart dare not make out to Christ, (says Doctor
Sibbs) yet is it In his preface to bruised Reed.
secretly upheld by the spirit of faith, showing it self in hidden sighs and
groans unto God; and such persons as these (says Master Perkins) as have
Grain of Mustard Seed, p. 38
this weak faith, can say indeed, That they do believe their sins are
pardonable, and they do seriously in their hearts desire that they were
pardoned, but as yet they cannot say they are without doubt pardoned; and this
I am confident is your condition.


Mat. But Sir, I fear that my mind was never yet truly enlightened because I
am so ignorant, and I fear I was never yet truly humbled, because I now see
that I have not renounced mine own righteousness.


Min. I pray you tell me, was there not a time, and that not long since, that
you did not know that which you now know neither concerning God, nor concerning
your self?


Mat. Yea indeed Sir, I must needs confess, that before I hearkened to the
advice of that friend I told you of, and read that Book which I mentioned
before, I neither knew any thing either concerning my miserable condition by
reason of my sins, nor yet of any remedy by means of Jesus Christ.


Min. Why then may you truly say with the man in the Gospel, I was blind, but
now I see, for as sure as Jesus Christ did open his natural eyes, so sure has
he opened your spiritual eyes.


Mat. But alas, I have such a small measure of knowledge, that I fear my mind
is not truly enlightened.


Min. For answer to this Objection, I will only tell you what a godly and
judicious Divine says, and that is this, Be not dismayed says he, at the
small measure Rogers (...) the Sacr^* p. 80.
of thy knowledge so long as there is soundness of mind in thee, if thy
knowledge be sound though weak, let it not discourage thee, and there may be
soundness of mind as well in a little knowledge as in much.


Mat. I Sir, it is like that there may be so in others, but how shall I be sure
there is so in me?


Min. It is very clear and evident to me that your knowledge is sound though
weak, and that you have a sound mind in that you know your self, your nature
and your sins, and are thereupon humbled, for unsound knowledge puffs up, 1
Cor. 8. 1. But your knowledge has discovered to you your ignorance, and so
has abased you in your own eyes, and cast you down, and therefore doubtless
your mind is sound.


Mat. I but Sir, I told you that I also feared that I was never yet truly
humbled, I pray you tell me what you say to that.


Min. And the reason why you fear it (as you say) is, for that you have not
renounced your own righteousness.


Mat. Yea indeed Sir, that is the reason of it.


Min. Why I pray you tell me truly, have you any hopes to be justified, or
accepted in the sight of God for your own performances?


Mat. Yea indeed Sir, I told you that I have had hopes, that if I sinned no
more, then the Lord would forgive my former sins, and accept of me.


Min. But I do not ask you what you have done formerly, but what you do now?


Mat. Why truly Sir, you have this day made it so evident and clear to me,
that it is only the Righteousness of Jesus Christ received by faith, that
procures acceptance in the sight of God, that I see it is my only way to
believe on his name, and as I told you I do desire so to do.


Mat. Then believe it, you are truly humbled, which is a very good and sure
foundation, and therefore you are like to erect a good and sure building,
though it may be it may not go on so fast, nor make so glorious a show as some
others do.


Mat. But alas Sir, I am so ashamed, and troubled in my mind when I consider
how far other men do outstrip me, both in knowledge and other graces, that
I know not what to do.


Min. But surely you have no cause at all to be troubled at that, for it is to
be feared there are some Professors that grow up quickly, and flourish
abundantly in a legal way, they are not troubled with inward heart corruptions
as other poor souls are, they are full of parts, gifts, abilities, and duties
which others want, and are very glorious Christians in outward appearance, and
yet for lack of an humble foundation they are but flittering fleeting motions,
and windy conceptions; whereas you or rather the Spirit of Christ in you, has
laid such an humble foundation, that questionless there shall be built upon it
a gracious building, composed of many Evangelicall Graces, and therefore I pray
you be not dismayed, though you come far short of many vain glorious
high-spirited Professors; it is like the Lord sees though it may be you do
not; that if you had such parts, gifts, and abilities which some others have,
and had not some sinful corruptions in you which it may be others have not,
that then you would he lifted up above that which is meet, and be kept in your
self from Christ; therefore it is the Lords glorious wisdom, and gracious
goodness to you, to let some of your sinful corruptions remain in you,
especially to open your eyes to see them, and to affect your heart with them,
and to let you come behind others in gifts and parts, that so your soul may
sink in holy despair of any help in your self, and rest in nothing till it
come to Christ Crucified, and the eternal sweet promise in him; howbeit this
you may be assured of, that if you be careful to use the good means to this
end appointed, you shall have such a measure of faith and all other graces of
the Spirit of Christ, as shall be most fit for you.


Mat. O blessed be the Lord if this be true; but I pray you Sir, what are the
means which you would have me to use.


Min. Why I mean hearing and reading the Word of God, meditation, prayer, and
receiving the Sacrament.


Mat. Why Sir, I pray you, do you think me sit to come to the Sacrament?


Min. Yea indeed do I.


Mat. Surely Sir, I am altogether unworthy.


Min. And why do you think your self unworthy?


Mat. Why because of my ignorance and sinfulness.


Min. Then belike you think that knowledge and righteousness makes a man
worthy to come to the Sacrament?


Mat. Yes indeed Sir, I have had such thoughts, and therefore when I heard you
question whether my neighbor Simon were worthy to be admitted to the
Sacrament, I did much admire at it, for that I know he is a man of great
knowledge and godly life, but I do much more admire that you should think me
to be worthy.


Min. Indeed, if we were to understand these words, worthy and unworthy, by
way of meriting and deserving, then he in regard he has more knowledge then
you, and it may be is more free from some inward corruptions then you, and does
more frequently perform religious actions then you, were more worthy then you;
but as I told him not long since, we are not to understand words worthy, and
unworthy by way of meriting and deserving, but by way of fitness and
sutablenesse of disposition to receive Christ, and taking them in this sense, I
say, that your ignorance and sinfulness have occasionally through the working
of GODS Spirit, wrought in you such a fit and suitable disposition for the
receiving of Christ, that I do pronounce you worthy to be admitted to the
Lords Table.


Mat. O blessed be God if this be true; but Sir, I pray you what is this fit
and suitable disposition which you say the Spirit of God has by occasion of my
ignorance and sinfulness wrought in me, or wherein does it consist?


Min. This fit and suitable disposition which the Spirit of God has wrought in
you, consists in that sight and sense of your own ignorant sinful miserable
and helpless condition, as has made you see your need of Jesus Christ, to be
made unto you of God wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30
righteousness, sanctification and redemption.


Mat. But Sir, I pray you how can such a disposition be said to make me worthy
to be admitted to the Lords Table?


Min. Why even as we, when we see a miserable poor hungry man, that is
senceable of his own miserable and helpless condition crave an Alms, with
earnest desire and entreating, we do conceive he is in a fit and suitable
disposition to receive it, and account him worthy to have an Alms bestowed
upon him.

Even so when the Lord sees a man so sensible of his own miserable and
helpless condition, that he sees and feels his need of Jesus Christ, and
therefore does earnestly desire him, he conceives him to be in a fit and
suitable disposition to receive him, and so accounts him worthy of him; and
therefore we read in the tenth Chapter of St. Matthewes Gospel, that when our
Savior sent forth his Disciples to preach the Gospel, that is to say, the
glad tidings of Justification, Sanctification, and everlasting Salvation by
Jesus Christ, he said unto them, verse the 11, Into whatsoever City or Town ye
enter, enquire who in it is worthy, and there abide. And if we compare this
verse with Luke 10. 7, 8, 9. we shall perceive that they, and only they were
those worthy ones, which testified their sight and sense of their own misery,
and their desire to receive Christ into their hearts, as their only remedy, by
receiving his Disciples into their houses, counting their feet very beautiful
for preaching the Gospel of peace, and bringing unto them glad tidings of good
things; these are those poor ones whom our Savior says, Receive the Gospel,
Matthew. 11. 5. and these are they who mourn under the sight and sense of their
own spiritual wants, unto whom he promises comfort, Mat. 5. 4. and these are
they that hunger and thirst for Christ's Righteousness, whom he promises to
satisfy, Matthew. 5. 6.


Mat. But Sir, do you not think that my neighbor Simon has this fit and
suitable disposition wrought in him.


Min. No, I fear not, for it does appear to me that his own spirit has
taken occasion from his great knowledge to puff him up, as the Apostles phrase
is, 1 Cor. 8. 1. yea, and it does appear to me that it has taken occasion
from his own righteousness to move him to put confidence in himself, and so
he is hindered from seeing and feeling his own need of Jesus Christ, to be
made unto him of God, wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30
righteousness, sanctification and redemption.


Mat. But Sir, how can such a disposition be said to make him unworthy to be
admitted to the Lords Table.


Min. Why, even as we when we see a stout and lusty Beggar come to crave an
Alms, and hear him flourish in his Rhetorique, and not speak Pro. 18. 23
with suplications, as the wise man says the poor man does, then we do
conceive he is not in a meet and suitable disposition to have an Alms bestowed
upon him, and therefore we use to say concerning such a one, He is not worthy
to have an Alms bestowed upon him. Even so when the Lord sees a man proud of
his knowledge, and confident of his own righteousness and deservings, and
sees not his need of Jesus Christ, and so consequently not to desire him, then
he looks upon him as one who is in an unfit and unsuitable disposition to
receive him, and therefore accounts him unworthy of him; and therefore we read
in the 13. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, that when Paul and Barnabas
were in the City of Antioch, and preached the glad tidings of the Gospel, as
the Apostle calls them, verse 32. It is said verse. 45. that the Jews spoke
against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming,
whereupon Paul and Barnabas waxed bold says the Text, verse 46. and said, It
was necessary that the Word of God should first have been spoken to you, but
seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life,
lo, we turn to the Gentiles. Thus you see that these Jews, who doubtless
were very knowing men in all points of their Religion, and also very holy and
righteous according to the Law, yet because they were proud of their own
knowledge, and put confidence in their own righteousness, and saw no need of
salvation by Christ, and so were not in a meet and suitable dispositian to
receive him; the Apostles counted them unworthy of him. So likewise we read in
the 22. Chapter of St. Matthews Gospel, that there were some that were invited
to a feast, which the King made at the marriage of his Son, and it is said
verse 5. That they made light of it, as if they had said (taking it in the
spiritual sense, as the meaning is) what tell you us of Christ, or of
Justification, or Sanctification, or eternal Salvation to be had by believing
on Christ's name, we are Abraham's children, we are the people of God, we are a
righteous Nation, and therefore sure of eternal life already, and have no need
of any such offer; whereupon the King said, verse 8. The wedding is ready, but
they that were bidden were not worthy; whereby you may also perceive that this
unmeet and unsuitable disposition in not seeing a want of Christ, and so not
desiring him did render them unworthy of him.


Sim. Well Sir, I see that you are still falling foul upon me, surely Sir, I
think it is strange that you should altogether discourage me, and altogether
encourage him.


Min. Why truly neighbor Simon, it appears to me that you have taken
occasion from those good gifts and parts which God has given you, to be puffed
up, and encouraged in your self; and it does (...) me that he has taken
occasion from those weaknesses and wants that are in him to be cast down, and
discouraged in himself, and therefore I have conceived it very needful that
you should know that Christ accepts none for greatness of parts, that you may
not continue lifted up as you have been, because of that which is of so little
esteem with him; and I also see it very needful to let him know that Christ
refuses none for weakness of parts, that he may not continue cast down and
dejected, for want of that which Christ does not so much regard; wherefore
neighbor Mathias, I beseech you to consider what has been said, and take it
home to your self for your comfort and encouragement.


Mat. But Sir, did not you say to our neighbor Alexander, that knowledge must
of necessity go before faith?


Min. Yea, I said so indeed.


Mat. Why then Sir, me thinks our neighbor Simon should have a great measure
of faith, because he has a great measure of knowledge; and me thinks I should
have little or no faith, because you know I have little or no knowledge; and
then me thinks he should be very fit to be admitted to the Sacrament, and I
very unfit; for I remember you said, That it is faith that ma^^s a man fit to
receive the Sacrament aright.


Min. I, but you must know that this rule holds not touching the measure of
knowledge only, except it be also true and sound, so that although our
neighbor Simon have never so great a measure of knowledge, yet if it be not
true and sound as I fear it is not, then has he no true faith, and therefore
is he not fit to be admitted to the Sacrament; and although you have but a very
small measure of knowledge, yet it being true and sound, as you know I have
proved, then have you a true faith, and therefore are fit to be admitted to the
Sacrament.


Mat. But yet Sir, me thinks so small a measure of faith, as the Lord knows I
have, if any at all, should not fit a man to receive the Sacrament aright.


Min. O but you are to Rogers on the Sacra. p. 48.
consider, that it is the kind of faith that makes a man fit for the
Sacrament, and not the measure, the truth of faith is rather required then any
certain measure; and thought you have not that measure of faith that you do
desire, yet have you that truth of faith which Christ does require.


Mat. But Sir, do you use to admit any to the Sacrament that are so weak as I?


Min. Yea indeed, for we do consider, that a ^^ spark of fire is fire as well
as the whole Element, even so is a spark of faith faith as well as the flame;
and we must look to faith in the spark as well as in the flame, knowing right
well that although all Believers have not the like strong faith, yet have they
all the like precious faith, whereby they lay hold, and put on the perfect
righteousness of Jesus Christ. And we are not ignorant that the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper was instituted and Rogers on the Sacrament, p. 107.
ordained to make weak Believers strong, and not only nor chiefly to make
strong Believers stronger.


Mat. Well Sir, I thank the Lord I do now begin to see more concerning the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper then hitherto I have done, for to say nothing of
former times, when I went unto it and received it hand over head, not knowing
any other reason why I should receive it, but because others did so; and I
thought I did God some service, and that he was as it were beholden to me for
doing so; even since I have known more then formerly, I have therein been much
mistaken, for I had thought that knowledge, faith, repentance, love, and
obedience had made a man worthy to receive the Sacrament, for I am sure I have
either heard some Minister Preach, or else read it in some Book, that the
wedding garment wherewith a man that comes to the Sacrament is to be clothed
is made up of all these, and that therefore it was for want of these that the
man in the Gospel was bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, and
therefore because I found a want of all these in my self I thought I was
altogether unworthy to come to the Sacrament, and durst not presume to come
unto it; but now I do perceive that it is rather an hungering, and thirsting
appetite after Christ and his Righteousness, arising from a true sight and
sense of the want thereof, that makes a man worthy, and I hope I may truly say,
That I do see and feel a want thereof in some small measure, and therefore
Sir, I do desire to come to the Sacrament if you be pleased to admit me.


Min. Neighbor Matthias, if you read the contents of the 22. Chapter of the
Gospel written by Sr. Matthew, where the wedding garment is mentioned, in the
Bible that contains Bezas notes in the Margent you shall find these words, The
wedding garment is faith, to the which I do assent, for though it is true, where
faith is truly planted in the heart all the other do proceed and grow from
thence as fruits, yet it is faith that is especially exercised in the act of
receiving the Sacrament, it being as I told you, the hand that receives
Christ, and the mouth that feeds on Christ; yea, and it is by faith that this
hungering and thirsting appetite is stirred up in the soul, therefore I said,
that your hungering and thirsting after Christ and his Righteousness is from
faith, or rather faith it self, and so you having the wedding garment, I do
pronounce you to be one of those guests which Christ inviteth to his Table; and
therefore I as a messenger sent from Christ, do in the name of my Lord and
Master Christ invite you to his Table, assuring you that he will bid you kindly
welcome; and therefore I beseech you fail not to be there the next time it
shall be administered, and in the mean time I would entreat you to come before
me and the Elders together, that you may also have their approbation, for I of
my self have not power to admit you.


Mat. But Sir, it may be, though you do think me fit to be admitted, yet it
may be they will not, and then I shall be turned back, and that will much
trouble me.


Min. Fear not man, I dare warrant you that they will be all of my mind in
that point concerning you.


Mat. Well then Sir, God willing I will come before you, and if they also give
their consent, if the Lord spare me life and health, I will come to the
Sacrament with my godly neighbors the next time it shall be administered, and
in the mean time I beseech you Sir pray for me, that the Lord would be pleased
to fit and prepare me to partake thereof.


Min. Yea, neighbor Mathias, as the LORD shall be pleased to enable me I will
pray for you, and I beseech you also in the mean time to pray for your self,
and use all other means to inform your judgment aright concerning the
nature, use, and end of the Sacrament, that so you may receive that fruit and
benefit which the Lord does thereby tender and offer to such as you are.


Mat. Sir, I do acknowledge that I am very ignorant in these points, and
therefore have great need to use all the means I can to be better informed,
and truly for the present I know no better means then to entreat you to give
me some further instruction concerning the same.


Min. God willing you shall not want the best instructions that I am able to
give you, and therefore I pray you understand that the Sacrament of the LORDS
Supper was by Christ himself instituted and ordained for three especial ends.

1 As first of all, to keep Believers in a continual remembrance of that
propitiatory Sacrifice which he once for all offered by his death upon the
Cross, Do this, says he, in remembrance Luke 22. 19.
of me; that is to say, Do this in remembrance that my Body was broken and my
Blood shed for the remission of your sins.

2 Secondly, Christ did institute and ordain it to be a seal of the
righteousness Romans 4. ^^
of faith to ratify and confirm the Covenant of promise made with all
believers; for indeed that Covenant is as a last Will and Testament, and the
Sacraments are as Seals set thereunto, whereby all the promises in the
Covenant of Grace or the Gospel are ratified and confirmed to every faithful
soul, that so they having both Christ's hand and seal, their faith may be the
better confirmed and strengthened.

3 Thirdly, Christ did institute and ordain it to be spiritual nourishment to
every hungry and thirsty soul; yea, and to be spiritual Physic to heal and
cure every sensible sick and diseased soul.

Now these being the ends for which Christ did institute and ordain the
Sacrament, I beseech you let your coming thereunto be to obtain these ends,
and do not you come for form and custom sake, neither yet for your credit
sake amongst your neighbors, neither yet out of a conceit that your very
presence there, and your very performance of the outward acts is well pleasing
and acceptable to the Lord, as I fear me many ignorant people have thought in
former times; neither yet do you conceive that for your so doing the Lord is
engaged to forgive you your sins, and give you eternal life; neither yet do
you imagine, that the bare outward actions and elements are able to sanctify
you; in a word, beware of conceiving too highly of the outward acts and outward
elements; but rather look to the inward invisible matter and virtue of the
Sacrament, which is, Jesus Christ; always remembering that he is all in all in
every action and in every element; and therefore when you are at the Lords
Table (as I hope you will be very shortly) and there see the Bread and Wine
separated by consecration unto this holy use, and these blessed ends, then
remember Christ, and think how he was foreordained and Pemble on the
Sacraments, p. 8
fore-appointed by his Father from everlasting unto the accomplishing of our
redemption, by his death and blood-sheding; and when you see the Bread broken
and the Wine poured forth, then remember Christ, and think how he was torn
and rent in his precious Body with stripes and wounds, and pained even to the
death in his most holy Soul, full of the wrath of God, and the indignation of
the Almighty, by whom he was smitten for your sins, and plagued for your
transgressions: and when the Minister offers unto you the Bread and Wine,
then remember Christ, and think how he is given to you of God freely, yea and
freely gives himself to you if you will receive him; and when you receive the
Bread and drink the Wine, then remember Christ that living Bread, and think
how he himself has said, Ioh. 6. 5. 5. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood
is drink indeed; and believe, that thereby he gives life unto your soul, and
will preserve it to all eternity; in a word, consider how God the Father did by
this death and bloodshed of his Son thus represented in the Sacrament, fully
answer and satisfy his own justice, to the end he might set open a door of
mercy to all humble penitent hearted sinners; yea, and do you thereupon
assuredly believe that you have thereby tendered unto the Justice of God a full
and perfect satisfaction for all your sins, and that therefore now it is a
meet and equal thing with God (he having received and accepted this full
satisfaction) to pardon and forgive you all your sins, according to his
promise, Mat. 26. 28. yea, do you believe, and assuredly persuade your heart,
that for this satisfaction sake you are reconciled unto God, according to his
promise, Col. 1. 21, 22. yea, do you believe, and assuredly persuade your own
soul, that for the obedience and satisfaction sake of Christ you are justified
in the sight of God, according to his promise, Romans 5. 9. yea, and do you then
believe and make no doubt of it, but that for this satisfaction sake of Jesus
Christ you shall be sanctified by his Spirit according to his promise, Hebr.
13. 12. and have your heart of stone taken out of your bowels, and a heart of
flesh given unto you, according as it is promised, Ezekiel. 36. 26. and have
strength and vigor to all holy performances, according to that promise, Heb.
13. 20, 21. yea, do you believe and make no question of it, but that for this
satisfaction sake of Christ you shall have eternal life, according to Christ's
own promise, Ioh. 6. 51.

This you see is the Covenant of promise; this is Christ's last Will and
Testament; these are the riches which he has left and bequeathed to all such
as you are; this is Christ's own hand and deed, and by the Sacrament duly
administered and rightly received he sets too his seal, and so confirms it
fully; wherefore I beseech you, when you are at the Sacrament, yea as often as
you shall be there present at any time hereafter, speak to your faith as
Deborah did to her self, Judge. 5. 12. and say, Awake, awake O my faith, and now
bestir and rouse thy self up to do thine office in receiving Christ now
offered, in whom all these ^ Cor. 1. ^0.
promises are Yea and Amen. Lift up thine eye to see Christ, reach forth thine
hand and lay hold on him and receive him, set thy mouth to him and feed on him,
eat and drink Christ by sucking these breasts of consolation; and thus would I
have you in the act of receiving the Sacrament by Faith, to knit your heart
unto Christ, and throw your self into his arms stretched out on the cross to
embrace you, and wash your soul in his Blood that you may be clean, and by
Faith apply his Blood to your soul for the healing of all your infirmities;
say in your heart, Has my Savior died for my sins, and shall not I die unto
sin? shall I live any longer therein? Romans 6. 2.
no, God forbid; and by this means ye shall find your sins weakened, and the
graces of Gods Spirit revived and strengthened; yea, you shall find the
Sacrament to become a good corasive to eat out your corruptions, and as
physic to heal and cure you of all your infirmities; yea, you shall find it
to be, by means of the acting of your faith as a Conduit pipe, which being set
to the Fountain of grace Christ Jesus, shall convey grace from that holy
Fountain Christ, into the cisterne of your soul, and like a sovereign
medicine you shall find it to become beneficial to all the parts of your
soul, making you apt and ready to every good work; and therefore I beseech
you to receive it often.


Mat. Truly Sir, by means of these your speeches my judgment is much better
informed touching the use and end of the Sacrament, and I am hereby much
encouraged to approach thereunto; but Sir, because you do exhort me to receive
it often, I would gladly know the reason why we must receive that Sacrament of
the Lords Supper often, seeing we are to receive the Sacrament of Baptism but
once in all our lives.


Min. The Reason is, because the sacrament of Rogers on the Sacrament, p. 360.
Baptism is the sacrament of our Regeneration or new birth; and the sacrament
of the Lords Supper is the sacrament of our spiritual nourishment and growth,
and therefore we are to be baptized but once, because we are borne but once;
but we are to receive the sacrament of the LORDS Supper often, because that
after we are borne we stand in need to be often nourished and fed, that so we
may grow in grace; for indeed, growth in grace is a maine end and fruit of that
Ordinance, God thereby giving to every faithful Receiver the Body and Blood of
his Son Christ, that by the Bread of his Flesh and the Wine of his Blood he
may cause them to grow.


Mat. Well Sir, this day has been a day of good tidings to me; and surely
Sir, if the LORD have been so merciful unto me as you have declared, then
have I cause to magnify and praise the name of the Lord as long as I live, for
bringing me hither this day to you; surely if the Lord do count me worthy to
come to his Table, and to receive Jesus Christ with all his rich endowments,
then may I truly say as I remember Hannah Samuels mother 1 Samuel 2. 8
said in her song, He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the
beggar from the dunghill, to set him among Princes, and to make him inherit the
throne of glory. I little thought when I came hither with my neighbor Simon
that I should be found to be more fit and more worthy to be admitted to the
Lords Table then he; surely Sir, if you had not proved it so plainly, I should
not have believed it.


Min. Assure your self neighbor Mathias that this day the words of the
Apostle James are fulfilled concerning you two, where he says, that God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble; and so are the words of
the Virgin Mary, where she says, that God fills the hungry with good things,
and the rich he has sent empty away.


Mat. Sir, I will now take my leave of you, and truly I cannot tell how to
express my thankfulness to you for the great pains you have taken with me
this day, the Lord in mercy make it profitable to me, and recompense your
pains to you an hundred fold, and I beseech you Sir pray for me.

Min. Now the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God that your
whole spirit, and soul, and 1 These. 5. 23, 24.
body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ;
faithful is he he that calls you who also will do it.


Mat. The Lord be with you, Sir. Come neighbor Simon, will not you go along
with me?


Sim. No, I pray you be going before, and I will come after you.


Mat. Well then, I will also take my leave of you, and I thank you for
suffering me to come along with you to this place, where I have, through the
mercy of God, received so much good.


Sim. Well, but do not you now go home and boast among our neighbors that
Master M. has found you fit to be admitted to the sacrament, and me unfit.


Mat. No neighbor Simon I shall not do so, for I know that if it be so, it is
the free mercy of the Lord toward me, and therefore I desire rather to speak
to my own soul, and say unto it in the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7. For
who makes thee to differ from another, and what have thou that thou have not
received. Now if thou have received it, why do thou glory as if thou had
not received it. And so the Lord be with you both.


Sim. Fare you well good neighbor Mathias.


Min. The Lord be with you, good neighbor.


Sim. Well Sir, I wish that I were fit to be admitted to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, for I see there is much good to be gotten by the right receiving
of it.


Min. Surely neighbor Simon, if men did but know what good is to be obtained
at the hands of the Lord by the right partaking thereof, and what hurt does
come to a man by not receiving it aright, they would not only desire to come
thereunto, as indeed many do, though it is to be feared hand over head, as we
use to say, not knowing what they do, but they would also endeavor to fit and
prepare themselves thereunto, and therefore no marvel though you do desire
that you were fit to receive it aright.


Sim. Sir, I do perceive that he who is not fit to partake thereof is a
miserable man, whether he do receive it or not.


Min. He is so indeed, for if he do receive it being not fit, he does thereby
commit the greatest sin that is unpardonable, and does expose himself to the
greatest misery that can befall a man, either here or hereafter, as you know I
told my neighbor Alexander; and if he receive it not, then he misseth and
comes short of all that good which you know I told our neighbor Mathias comes
to a man by means of the right receiving thereof.

O then, what great care and pains ought men to take to fit and prepare
themselves to partake of that Ordinance? and how often should they frequent it,
being duly fitted and prepared? And yet, alas, for want of so doing, how many
men and women by their absence do deprive themselves of these great benefits?

Some there are that are neither fit nor willing to come; others there are that
are willing to come, and yet not fit to come; and others there are that are fit
to come, and yet not willing; as for instance:

How many are there, who because they cannot receive the Sacrament kneeling, as
they have formerly done, are not willing to come? What said an old simple
ignorant man in my hearing not long since? Rather then I will receive it so
unreverently as they do now a days, by sitting at Table, as if they were
equal with Jesus Christ, I will never receive it while I live.

And are there not some others, who merely out of a superstitious conceit do
desire to come, and yet by reason of their unfitness, are justly upon
examination kept back by the Eldership.

And are there not some, who it may be are fit to come, and yet do not come;
either because they are ashamed to come before so many men to be examined, as
they are informed do sit upon that occasion, or else are fearful least they
should not be able to answer them to their content, and so be turned back to
their disgrace.

And are there not also some others who it may be are fit to come, and yet
either because they scorn to be examined at these years, or by such and such
a man, whom they do conceive is inferior to themselves, they will not come.

And are there not others also who are fit to come, and yet do not come,
because such are admitted to the Sacrament whom they conceive are not fit to
partake thereof?

Thus I say, either through superstitious ignorance, prophannesse, or through
foolish shame or fear, or else through the sin of pride, many are kept from
that great benefit which otherwise they might receive by the right partaking of
that Ordinance.


Sim. It is true indeed, Sir, I see it clearly, and therefore I beseech you
tell me what course you would advise me to take to fit and prepare my self
thereunto, that so I may come before you and the rest to be admitted.


Min. Why truly neighbor Simon, the best counsel that I can give you is to
labor to become truly poor in spirit; that is to say, labor to see in your
self a want of all good, as of your self, that so you may see your need or
Jesus Christ; and to this end I pray you consider that Shepherds ^ound
believer. p. 145.
as a godly writer says, Not only some sin, but some good that a man
thinks he has and rests in, without Christ, may as easily prove his ruin,
because a man's own righteousness rested in, does not only hide men's sins,
but strengthens them in some sin, by which men perish.

Trusting in a man's own righteousness, and committing iniquity being couples,
Ezekiel. 33. 13. and therefore though you have forsaken all other sins, yet if
you do still with the Scribes and Pharisees and with zealous Paul, before his
conversion, retain this sin, you undo your self.

Cast away therefore from you all your transgressions, and confidence in your
own righteousness amongst the rest, and with Paul after his conversion,
reckon it all but loss for Christ; yea, and Phil. 3. 8, 9
judge it to be dung that you may win Christ and be found in him, not having
your own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith; for God as a
Creator, Sincere Convert. p. 108.
says that godly writer in another place, having made a Law, will not forgive
one sin without the Blood of Christ; Nay, says he further, Christ's Blood will
not do it neither, if thou do join never so little that thou have or do
unto Jesus Christ, and make thy self or any of thy duties copartners in
that great work of saving thee; Cry out therefore as that blessed Martyr did,
None but Christ, None but Christ; yea, and as Richel cried out, Give me
children, or Genesis 30. 1.
else Idie; even so do you cry out, Give me Christ, or else I die: For as he
that has the Son has life; so he that has not the Son, has not life, 1 John 5. 12. But for as much as you of your self have no power to do this, I
beseech you be earnest with God in prayer, to make you see and feel your own
sinfulness and helplesnesse, and so your great need of Jesus Christ, who is
that mighty one upon whom the Lord has laid Act. 4. 12.
help, Psalm. 89. 19. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is no
other name under Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved: wherefore
says the holy Ghost, He Heb. 9. 25.
is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing
he ever lives to make intercession for them; so that you may assure your
self there is no need of any of your own righteousness or performances in the
case of Justification or Salvation, and therefore I pray you come empty handed
to Christ, who does not require you to bring any thing at all to him to enrich
him, but would have you come poor, and then will he enrich you, and so shall
you be fit to be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and then if you
come in to us when we meet together, and make it appear to us that your heart
is so qualified, we shall willingly set open the gate to you and let you in;
and so beseeching the LORD to work this in you by the power of his own
Spirit, I will for this time take my leave of you, commiting you to God, and to
the word of his grace.


Sim. Sir, I could willingly have tarried longer with you, but it may be your
occasions do now call you away from me, and therefore I will at this time
take my leave of you, giving you many thanks for the great pains you have taken
with me, and I beseech you, Sir, pray for me, and before long, God willing, I
will make bold to come to you again; for truly I am persuaded I shall never be
well till I have further conference with you, but no more at this time.


FINIS.

