Good news from NEW ENGLAND: WITH An exact relation of the first planting that
Country: A description of the profits accruing by the Work. Together with a
brief, but true discovery of their Order both in Church and Commonwealth, and
maintenance allowed the painful Laborers in that Vineyard of the LORD. WITH
The names of the several Towns, and who be Preachers to THEM.

LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1648.

A New Relation by Observation, and serious Cogitation touching the
Transplantation of our English Nation.
TO spend no time in complement honest John, cast not away these lines, because
the meeter and rusticall harmony rings but rudely without rhetoric, let me
lead thy affections to these following premises: suppose thou see thy face not
so amiable as thy fancy deemes it to be, fling not furiously to break the
glass, moderate thy anger, and I have my desire. Miss not my meaning, by
turning my discourse to personate any, but many: Its past my intention to
lessen or enlarge for favor or affection. Applause I look not for: some
Latin and Eloquent phrases I have picked from others, as commonly clowns use to
do, yet be sure I am not in jest: for the subject I write of requires in many
particulars the most solemn and serious meditation that ever any of like nature
have done. Favor my clown-ship if I prove too harsh, and I shall remain yours.

Of the reasons moving this people to transplant themselves and Families to
those remote parts.
THe great Jehova's working word effecting wondrously,
This earths vast globe, those parts unknown, to civil people by,
Columbus or Alkmerricus by providence direction,
Found out this Western world with store of mettels clear extraction.
The Spanish project working well, took sudden such impression
In minds of many Europe held, who fell to like progression.
It Is strange to see the Spanish fleet so many should provoke,
In English searching for like prize, they are vanished into smoke.
Yet these undaunted hearts stirred up a Colony to plant,
Hight Nova Anglia, for which they gained a patten grant.
Now all ancient seild and read in lands new population,
No parallel like this (I deem) you will find in any Nation.
These people now begin with care to vese and plot, each man
That hears of this new Colony, with diligence does scan.
Such motives as he has in Eye, one he desires land,
Quoth he I see here landed men in reputation stand.
Hundreds and thousands I have not to purchase, but I will
Through seas much wood-land to atchieve, and meadow ground my fill.
Up starts another from a sad and serious contemplation,
How he a Gentleman might be, good man is his vexation.
House implements being turned to coin, his cloth of fashion new,
To ship he hyes, much welcome Sir, for none his person knew.
New raised from sleep, another cries, my earnings are but small,
I Will venture to this newfound world, and make amends for all.
In have half breathless running, comes a man with longing sore
For novelties of newfound lands, the Seas he would leap over.
His kindreds letters looking in, ha ha here is news indeed,
From Brothers, Sisters, Uncles, Aunts, I Will ship my self with speed.
These but the straglers now remains the chiefest troops to eye,
Truth it is, their standard of resort was Christianity.
Courageous Captains leading on, their coins and lands 'way throwing,
Made many Soldiers follow fast, their bands in number growing.
When England by Elizabeth began a Reformation,
It was a joyful day to all, the godly of that Nation.
Proh Dolor, it did not go on, with joyful acclamation.
But hirarchy and lordly throne of Prelacy invading,
The government of Christ's dear flock, then godliness was fading,
Some men impute it to the pride of Bishops, others say,
The looseness of the Laity did carry most away.
But sure it is that godliness, and purities deriding,
Moved many godly ones to seek, a place of new abiding.
Proud Bishops skilled in policy of machivilian learning,
Foresaw their pomp would fall to ground by Scripture clear discerning,
New fangled fetches were devised for soon intrapping those
Who to the people faithfully truth wholly did disclose.
While things thus craftly were contrived, Preachers to prisons pack,
The Bishops Courts were filled with work, and consciences on rack.
Come sirrah quoth the Commissary, you will no Surplice wear,
Nor yet proclaim our Sunday sports, a Puritan I fear
You are, and shall no more preach forth to people stir to rear
Against my Lords grace, I know well, your preaching does him scare.
And to another: as for you, your faction is so much,
Whole towns run from their Parish Church to hear your word, are such.
As for to overthrow my Lord, and his commanding power,
If I live in this Diocese, you shall not stand one hour.
In midst of all these woeful stirs grave godly men sit musing,
How they their talents might improve, to honor God in using.
Nine hundred leagues of roaring seas dishearten feeble parts,
Till cruel handling hasten on, and God does strengthen hearts.
Come quoth the husband, my dear wife, can thou the seas endure,
With all our young and tender babes, let us put our faith in ure.
With watery eyes the wife replies, what remedy remains,
Forsaking all for Christ his sake, will prove the greatest gains.
From inland parts poor Christians pack to Seaports ships to enter,
A wonderment, in streets they pass, dividing their strange venture.
What mean these mad men soon says one, witless to run away,
From English beer, to water, where, no hoone companions stay,
But its the Surplice scares them hence, the Tippet and the Cross,
Nay more they fear, my Lords grace here, will bring again the mass.
Yea further I have heard of late our Puritans much wonder,
Because our Metropolitan intends to bring them under:
Thus pass the people to their ships, some grieve they should go free,
But make them swear, and search them bare, taking what coin they see.
Now Satan seeing God had crossed, his mind in making way,
For's people and his Pastors too, in wilderness to stay.
Fearing Christ's Kingdom would increase, and his to ground be falling,
Stirs up fresh instruments like sheep that wolfishly were haling.
Proud error brochers, these crowd in for liberty pretending,
The overthrow of Romish trash, their words against it bending.
Quoth one here none but Scholar may in pulpit be a Preacher,
Pleship my self, for sure I am, full gifted for a Teacher.
Up starts another from a crowd, of women, her admiring,
An able tongue in Scripture learned, to preach forsooth desiring.
With revelations strange, yet true, as Scripture them accounting,
Another comes to ship himself, in knowledge all surmounting.
Against Magistrates another cries, none such on earth should stand,
I Will venture over the broadest Seas for freedom from their hand.
Thus diver sly disposed do people pack up away,
To populate new Collonies, where none but Heathen stay.
Of the Transportation of people and goods to the Mattachusets bay, and other
adjacent Collonies.
When as this people thus resolved the Ocean Sea to venture,
As was their errant, so they did address the ships to enter.
Ship-owners seeing like it was their gain might helped be
And Undertakers with like hope, to hire ships were free.
Close Cabbins being now prepared with bread, biefe, beer and fish,
The passengers prepare themselves that they may have their wish.
With little goods, but many words, aboard comes one, and says,
I long to set my feet on shore, where cloudy pillar stays,
As high as clouds he darts his words, but it is earth he wants:
For having past the fishing banks, soon smells the gay ground plants,
In long boat with a scouring pace comes gentle-like attended,
New fashioned by the Tailors hand, one for his parts commended.
Master at last quoth he, I Am not with labor much inured,
Yet for to countenance good folk this toyl^ to be endured.
He Is loath to say, that men of parts to govern towns are wanting,
And therefore he will through the seas, amongst others to be planting.
His Cabin is too strait, his fare too mean for his degree,
Now good Sir be content a while, on shore youl' he more free.
Eftsoons comes clambring up the ropes one in his mind revived,
That he is no servant, quoth he, this was very well contrived,
Now I may go where I can close with people and with Preacher,
But its great wages makes him close, for there he needs no teacher.
Brief dancing on the decks does walk another boasting sore
Of godly kindred, and he longs to be with them on shore,
These and the like may England spare, but oh it is sad to say,
That privately for public work thy Worthies went away.
Sage, sober, grave and godly men, together counsel seeking
At the hand of God, they fast and pray for their approved liking:
And will not stir one foot, but by his word and will directing,
So on the seas most happily they found his hand directing.
Now large Revennewes hinder not, hoopt up in hogsheads they
Transport both lands and houses too, nine hundred leagues away.
Oh we^l away, now say the poor, our Benefactors going,
That filled our childrens mouths with bread, look yonder are they rowing
O woe is me another cries, my Minister, its he,
As sure as may be, yonder he from Pursevant does flee.
With trickling tears, scarce uttering speech, another sobbing says,
If our poor preacher shipped be, he will nere live half the way,
But one poor friend, another cries, my secret heart to plain,
And he and his are shipped, now I Will after him amain.
Amongst these does Satan get a fraught, Angels of light they seeming,
Were entertained among the rest, as holy Saints them deeming.
Hardly beset on every side, Gods people thus attended,
To troublous seas betake themselves, yet by their God befriended.
In straits to get their goods aboard, their wives and obildren small,
Hard to attain a clearing thought, clearly dismissed of all.
But God and godly friends, whom they find in their hard-ships free,
To send and lend them help in all, their great calamity.
The boisterous waves begin to hoyse their brittle barques on hye,
When suddenly the billows break, and dash their ships awry.
Unwonted to such wondrous works the little babes complain
For harbor in their Mothers arms, whom sickness does constrain
To sit as helpless, yea, for help of others they do cry,
But all sea-sicke for present, all do others help deny.
Each corner's filled with goods and folk, the ships large womb could bear,
That hot diseases breed among, this crowd, no room to spare
For any weak ones, nor for those, whose fruit was ripe for light,
On soundlesse depths their babes are borne amongst waves above ships hight.
Both aged, weak, and tender ones the seas now tumbling toss,
Till they I fore'd to harbor turned, with stormy winds being crossed.
In western Anglia, and the Isle Hibernia they bide,
With longing for Jehova's help, who only winds does guide.
As loft to lose the last long sight of their dear native soil,
Both back and forth the winds them drive, with mickle restless toil.
But being once in Ocean large, where depths the earth wide sever,
Return no more, though winds them cross, to end their course indere.
In unknown depths, and pathlesse Seas, there nights and days they spend,
Amongst stormy winds and mountain waves long time no land they kend.
At ships mast does Christ's Pastors preach, while waves like Prelates proud,
Would sling them from their pulpits place as not by them allowed.
The swelling surges raging come to stop their mouths with foam,
For publishing of every truth that by Gods word is known.
But Christ as once, so now says peace waves, and be still,
For all their height they fall down flat, obey they must his will.
And now the Seas like meadows green, whose ground and grass even are,
Does gently lead their ships as sheep from place to place afar.
Who would not wait on such a God, that heaven, earth, seas commands,
To serve his folk, then serve him folk, conducted by his hand.
For forty, fifty, sixty days and nights they safely swim,
Preparing often for fight, at sight of ships that pirates been.
Long looke'd for land at length the eye, unknown, yet own they will,
To plant therein new Collonies, wide wilderness to fill.
Of the arrival of our English Nation at the Mattachusets Bay, etc.
WIth hearts revived in conceit, new land and trees they eye,
Senting the Caedars and sweet fern from heats reflection dry.
Much like the bird from dolsome Romes enclosed in cage of wyre,
Set forth in fragrant fields, does skip in hope of her desire.
So leap the hearts of these mixed men by streights over seat inured,
To following hard ships wilderness, does force to be endured.
In clipping arms of ont-stretcht Capes, there ships now gliding enter,
In bay where many little Isles do stand in waters Center.
Where Sea-calves with their hairy heads gaze 'bove the waters brim,
Wondering to see such unconth sights their sporting place to swim.
The seas vast length makes welcome shores unto this wandering race,
Who now found footing freely for, Christ's Church his resting place.
This people landing, soonly showed diversity of minds,
As various heads, so actions did declare their diverse kinds.
Now patience, John, give ear a while unto a brief digression,
The better shall thou understand the following progression.
Diversity of censure have past on this people, why
Most judge the whole by lesser part, and parts run much awry.
By parts the giver, nor to part, and thou a part shall see,
To be partakers with the truth in hearts simplicity.
Yet further let me mind thee more from Satan's sullin fits,
Great rancour does against them rise, enlarged by diverse wits.
Yea malcontents none well content but discontentedly,
They breath out ill, being crossed in will to all lamentingly.
But now let us on my honest John, to land this people came,
Amongst trees and men that naked been, whom labor did not tame.
Small entrance did they make therein, for why diseases stay,
Their long unwonted legs to walk, in wilderness the way.
In booths and huts lamenting lie, both men and women eake,
Some breathing out their latest breath, and others faintly speak.
Unto their friends for succor soon that strength they might recover,
Which once attained, they search the land, tracing the Country over.
To raising Towns and Churches new, in wilderness they wander,
First Plymouth, and then Salem next, were placed far asunder.
Charles river where they nextly land, a Town like name they built
Poor Cottages them populate, with winters wet soon spilt.
Brave Boston such beginning had, Dorchester so began,
Roxbury rose as mean as they, Cambridge forth from them ran.
Lin likewise built, when Watertowne first houses up did rear,
Then large limbed Ipswich brought to eye amongst woods and waters clear.
Hartford, New Haven, situate, Sandwich and Dover all,
In wilderness amongst people wild, there Scituations fall,
Newbery, Weymouth, Hingham, Hall, have their first nomination,
Rude Island Providence brought forth by banished their station.
Springfield, Hamlton, Concord, eke Deddam and Rowly, (...)
New peopled in this Western world, where lands lie wast and free.
Salisbury, Sudbury, both began, to bore the Land, and plant,
Braintre, Gloucester, Exeter, placed where the wild beasts haunt.
Wooborn, Wickham, Redding built, with little silver mettle,
Andover, Haverhill, Berri's-banks, their habitations settle.
Southampton, Martins-vineyard, and some new named Towns beside,
All by this brood of travelers, were peopled far and wide.
With what they had stord'd up for time of scarcity, they live,
Till tubs were empty, and the Land, could them small succor give.
God never denies them fresh supplies, with joy often ships they eye,
That bring in bread and meat for food when in those straights they cry.
Till labor bless the earths increase, and food each Town does fill,
The land being sown with man and beast, great store retaining still.
A brief description of the Land, Beasts, Birds, Trees, and Fruits.
VNlevel'd lies this land new found with hills and valleys low,
With many mixtures of such mold where fruits do firtile grow.
Well watered with the pleasant springs that from the hills arise,
The waters run with warbling tunes, with stones that in them lies.
To welcome weary travelers, resting unneath the shade,
Of lofty banks, where lowly boughs, for them fresh harbor made.
The lesser Rivelets rent themselves into a wider way,
Where scouring torrents furious fall, through rocks their streams do stray.
SPRING.
AT end of March begins the Spring, by Sols new elivation,
Sealing away the earths white robe, dropping with sweats vexation.
The Codfish, Holybut, and Basse, do sport the rivers in,
And All wises with their crowding sholes, in every creek do swim.
Leaving their spawn in ponds to thrive amongst Pikes devouring jaws.
That swallow Trowts, Tench, Roach and Breme into their greedy mawes.
Pirch, Shad, and Eeles, there plenty full the panyard and the pan,
Smelts, Lobsters, Crab-fish, pranes and shrimps, with cockles mussels clams.
Plenty of oysters overgrow the flowed lands so thick,
That thousand loads to lime are turned, to lay fast stone and brick.
The Cormorants with greedy gut full fast the fishes follow,
And Eagles with their piercing sight look through the waters shallow.
Ducks, Hens, and Pheasants often row upon the waters brim,
With plenty of their fellow fowls to welcome in the Spring.
Devouring fires burning black the earths old rusty hew,
Like torch-bearers in gloomy night, their flames with wind sore flew.
Like Phoenix rare, from ashes old, of grass, does grass arise,
The earth casts off her mourning coat, gay clad like bride to eyes.
With herbs and diverse precious plants for physics operation,
Diversity of fragrant flowers for senses recreation.
SUMMER.
BEspread with Roses Summer 'gins take place with hasty speed,
Whose parching beat Strawberries cool does moderation breed.
Air darkening sholes of pigeons pick their berries sweet and good,
The lovely Cherries birds entice, to feast themselves in woods.
The Turkies, Partridge, Heath-hens and their young ones tracing pass,
The woods and meadows, Achorn eat, and hoppers in the grass.
Like Virgils knat musketo flies with buzzy humming dare
Assault the stoutest with long trunk, both blood and blisters rear.
When little lineaments the Sun, or wind does feeble make
Yea cooling dewes their swarms allay, and strength of stinging slake.
The little hum birds sucking sweet, from flowers draw their food,
Humilities in sommer-time only find livelihood.
AVTVMNE.
GOod wholesome and delightful food, variety and store,
The Husbandman rejoicing keeps, with fruit the earths womb boar.
Peace plenty, Barley, Oats and wheat, Rye richly stocking stands,
Such store the plough-man late has found, that they feed foreign lands.
Cucumbers, mellons, apples, pears, and plums do flourish fair,
Yea what delight and profit would, they still are adding there.
Six sorts of Oaks the land affords, Walnuts do differ so,
That diverse shapes their fruit retains, and food that in them grow.
Roots are not wanting, wild and tame, in gardens they increase,
Ground nuts, ground beans, not gathered till, warmth does the earth release.
Grapes wanting vintage, common grow, fit for the travelers hand,
With food from berries multitude, that grow throughout the land.
WINTER.
Sharp, sudden, yet with lightsome looks does winters cold come in,
With thick, large Coat does cloth the earth, both soft, smooth, white and
trim.
The large tempestuous surges are bound in with frozen band,
Where ship did anchor, men do walk, and carts as on the land.
The Geese fly prating night and day, to tell the approaching season,
Brought down by gun shot from their flight unto the Indians geson.
The tumbling bears intrapped are, among houses sudden enter,
O'rethrowne by eager hunters, who pursue them in this venture.
The tripping Deer with length of leaps, do burst through frozen snow,
Hunters pursue with bracket shoes, at length they weary grow.
Then down the dogs them sudden draw, exposed to hunters pleasure,
Their flesh well welcome, and their skins, are chief of Indian treasure.
Whole kennels of devouring wolves both Deer and Swine destroy,
Yet scared by weakest children, they them the less annoy.
The Suns bright presence most days does cheer man and beast with joy,
With hope of pleasant springs approach to free from colds annoy.
With mineralls the earth is fraught, though Alcumists are wanting,
Which makes current mettle prized amongst Merchants daily scanting.
Of their building, planting, and giving out of LANDS.
Delightful to the eye did lie the woods and meadows green,
The paths untrod by man and beast, both smooth and clenly seen.
Most men unlanded till this time, for large lands Eages sue,
Had not restraint knocked of their bands, too big their fermes had grew.
Give ear I pray unto the praise set on a new Plantation,
First for the meadow sirs says one, I have found such a station.
Where grass does grow as high as I, round stalks and very thick,
No hassocks but a bottom plain, Carts cannot therein stick.
Salt bay and fresh there thousands are of acres I do deem,
A gallant harbor there is for ships the best that yet is seen.
Boats may come up unto our doors, the Creeks convenient lie,
Fish plenty taken in them are, plains plowable hard by.
No bush nor roots to hinder them, yet stately timber is,
In every swamp, yea uplands too, most clobberd trees I wis.
Clay there for brick and tile, pot-earth with ease, and store,
Some men suppose black lead is there, silver and copper over.
Carry but guns, and wild foul will be brought unto our dishes,
Venison and Moose you there may catch according to your wishes.
All creatures thrive exceeding well, Goats, Swine, and sheep for meat,
Horse, Cows, and Calves increase as well, there is store of English wheat.
Five, seven, or nine old Planters do take up their station first,
Whose property is not to share unto themselves the worst.
Their Cottages like Crows nests built, new comers goods attain,
For men's accommodation sake, they truck their seats for gain.
Come buy my house, here may you have, much meadow at your door,
'Twill dearer be if you stay till, the land be planted over.
See you that garden plat enclosed, Pumkins there hundreds are,
Parsnips and Roots, with Cabiges, grow in great plenty there.
Lay out an hundred pound or two, you shall have such a seat,
When you have planted but one crop, you cannot want for meat.
This praise does make the purchaser his gold and silver throw,
Into his hand for house and land that yet he did not know.
Unseen, and yet sudden bought, when once the sale was ended,
His purchase makes him miss of more, with gifts he is not befriended.
One he has friends to praise his parts, his lot shall larger be,
For useful men are highly prized, such shall sell two or three.
Sure much mistaken, towns have been, for many have made prize,
Get all they can, sell often, than, and thus old Planters rise.
They build to sell, and sell to build, where they find towns are planting,
Till men no more the Sea pass over, and Customers are wanting.
Then those that boast their towns were full for company are longing,
Who lately feared land would fall short, when men to them came thronging.
Insatiate minds for meadow, and best land they could attain,
Has caused Towns, land lay by lot, I wish it were not vain.
Of their Civil Government
THe Transplantation of this people and patten inrevaded, (though rare yet)
honest advice in law was had by wise, sober, and godly Gentlemen's, foreseeing
the daily adding stones to such a work, would be more envyed then the Golden
fleece of Calchos. God giving favor, they attained a large patten under the
bro^d Seal of England, to set up government, not only for the orderly
execution of judgment and justice among themselves, but for the suppressing of
all malignant adversaries to the kingdom of Christ, that at any time should
invade or disturb this government: for proof ask their adversaries, who though
Doeg like will tell you both Magistrates and Ministers join heart and hand
herein, yet the latter meddle not with Civil Justice, as some would bear men
in hand: But lets on, this patten has proved corrasive to some, especially in
not admitting appeals: Some seeking to have it reca'd; others crying out it is
forfeit, yet hitherto held, and meet men yearly chose for Governor, Deputy,
and Assistants, (whose acts of justice have passed sundry censures) as also
from each Town two Deputies are sent in the name of the Freemen, who joining
together in one body or general Court, have according to their patten made
many Causes agreeable to the word of God, and their wilderness condition both
for English and Indian to follow. Quarter Session, or Goale-delivery are kept
by seven Magistrates, the Governor or Deputy being one: as also in the
several Shires for trials between man and man, are constant Courts kept, and
in every Town certain persons are yearly chosen to end causes of lesser virtue,
with free access for any persons that find themselves grieved, to appeal from
one Court to another, even to the highest, which is the general Court. Their
laws are of three sorts; 1. The laws of England, so far as the people and
place can be capable. 2. Laws wholly of their own. 3. When cases fall out,
that neither of these will reach, they are to follow such rules as are clearly
drawn from the word of God: and because many men take upon them to interpret
the Scriptures now adays: so that instead of one of a thousand, there appears a
thousand to one, which makes them endeavor (with the ablest gifted men God
has given them) to obtain positive laws: for all matters may come in
judgment, that Arbitrarinesse may be avoided. And now because the courage,
dexterity, and skill of Commanders appears most when they meet with their
enemy: know four sorts of persons have battered this government not only with
their greater Artillery, at 900. leagues distance, but with continual small
shot at 10. or 12. and sometimes at pistoll-shot, raising over-topping
batteries, brest-works, and outfacing Galleries, delving deep to undermine the
foundation (though built on the surest rock) casting forth fierce fireing
grenades, using all the stratagems such cunning Engineers could possibly
invent. The first onset was given by Bonasosias under the conduct of their host
of Merri-mount, who having some trials in the Courts of Justice, assaid to mend
his bad cause with bribes: but finding repulse in both, began to make use of an
Engine for battery called Pontifieatus (consulting with such as were best
skilled herein) to beat down this new erected government, yet did little
damage it, being of small force in these American parts: at length was
entreated to depart, which he refusing, was shipped with a takele for the fertile
Isle of great Britain, which those Gentlemen now ruling this Collony so lostly
left, where he arriving, made his complaint to those, whose lordly injunctions
enforced the greater part of this people to make choice of a banished condition
for them and theirs, enduring rather the wants of a wilderdesse, than a Prelates
prison his (complaint being heard) appeals to England, being of purpose left
out in the Mattachusets Patten, no Somner nor Pursevant was found to venture so
far: yet the Host to make a merriment of the departure of so many reverend,
learned, godly and judicious men (a sad Omen of some following tragedy) set
forth a Pamphlet in print, full fraught with loud lies to make his Bonasosia's
laugh. But prevailing little, ventured another voyage in these parts to find a
new place for storming this government afresh, tracing the Country to and fro,
was apprehended of Indian ammunition, arrow heads of a more mortal nature than
any yet used among them. The second onset was given by greater troops of Sexs,
not marshaled under the command of any one in chief: but those that could best
use their battering Engine, were leaders of the rest: and verily they handled
the matter so, that they came to handy gripes undiscovered: their new Engine
was called Populatri aure Captator, somewhat like the Trojan horse for rarity,
it was covered with women's aprons, and bolstered out with the judgment and
deep discerning of the godly and reverent: but to say truth, they foully belied
him; These Sectaries having made a breach in most Towns in the country,
publishing as through a trunk the great tyranny of those that rule over their
own species, persuading Authority is so far from maintaining liberty, that
they cannot stand together: insomuch that Governors and governed began to
wonder at the sudden alteration in Courts and country: so that it would have
put an able Politic to a nonplus. But the Lord graciously assisting, they
courageously go on, first unarming all suspected persons: and then to prevent
the spreading of this gangrin, they endeavor the dispersing of this red
Regiment. Some at loss of esteem voluntarily depart, others were banished,
and others withdrawing submitted again to the godly government of this Common
wealth.

The third storm this government felt was from the scum of the former under the
command of Samuel Gorton, who knowing some of his Sectaries were closely
lurking behind in this government; sent forth his blasphemies to thunder down
all government as diabolical, raging and railing against Magistrates and
general Courts, as murderers, absolving from their obedience all such as
would follow their opinion; had not the conceitednesse of their own elegancy
hindered, they might have done much hurt, their leader being a very dangerous,
bold-spoken fellow, and full of sawning; with which, having gained some 12. or
13. families to cide with him, enforcing land from the poor Indians by means
of the most potent Sachim of those parts, under whose friendship they bare
themselves bold against the united Colonies, building on the Indians land,
having outed themselves from all government, would not submit to any law or
common reason, desperately going on, threatening blood and death to any should
come to apprehend them; Yet at length were handsomely apprehended without one
drop of blood spilt, for all their great boaster, brought to a general Court,
and there proceeded against: yet so slenderly (their offense being very
destructive to all government: And of such an high nature) that their malice
increasing, their Censure did but exasperate, and not at all disinabled them to
prosecute as formerly the great disturbance, if not overthrow of this little
commonwealth; these persons yet remain, battering the united Colonies with all
the force they are able to make: and as they deny government among Christians,
so they endeavor to overthrow one government with another.

The 4th onset was made by a Doctor of physic, as Commander in chief, with
six other inferior Officers, who pretended they had thousands on their side:
and therefore to muster up all the force they could, proclaim (at a general
Court) themselves to be leaders to all discontented persons, who disliked any
thing this government had done (plausable to all the straggling Bonasosia's and
Prelaticall faction, that had hid themselves in holes since the former
bickering) and furnishing them with fresh weapons, teaching them to dissemble,
as if siding with Englands government, promising to themselves the procurement
of all the old Ceremonies and odds Holidayes. Next this black Regiment,
appeared a red Regiment of fiery contentious persons, who for want of their
wills against their adversaries in law, make many sad complaints; and now are
persuaded, could they but cast down this government, they should have such
laws, Lawyers, and Magistrates, that the case would go always on their side,
whether Plaintiff or defendant. In order followed a white Regiment, consisting
of sundry Sectaries, in hope of attaining liberty, or rather liscentiousnesse;
were this government but once suppressed to bring up the rear: under an Ensign
part, argent part, or color, lappeared two sorts of people: the one deeming it
a way for encreale of trade, not only to blindfold Justice, but stay her sword
from falling on the heads of such as could cover their crime with pretense of
conscience: The other possessed with strong conceits, that if this government
were not cast down, they should never come to govern. Thus furnished, they made
strong opposition, some of them boasting what a day they should get: but their
great numbers failing them, and in stead of thousands, there appeared not
thirty: and further being apprehended in midst of their project, were
imprisoned, and fined forther folly: yet but little in respect of their
offense. Only thus much some have learned, to show so much clemency to their
adversaries, that it proves cruelty to their friends. What faithfulness,
courage and justice in all these passages have been showed by those in
authority, cannot be waned by the reproachful words, and piercing looks of
palefac'd envy. And now my friend John, when thou hear any upbraiding,
deriding, condemning, and exclaiming against this government of this little
Commonwealth, for my sake examine them before thou believe them, and you shall
find them to have fled from one of these Regiments, or at least a wel-willer of
theirs that could have wished them the day: And now to end this slender touch of
their Civil government, eye this following meeter.

TO populate this howling desert Land,
The only work is of Jehovah's band.
Contemn no weakest means in hand of him:
See here his work by means that weakest been.
In thrice five years a Commonwealth complete,
For peace, for war, for actions small and great.
Five hundred Laws for peoples plain direction,
Englands addition as natural Connection.
Pressed to oppose haters of peace: with guide
Of Officers, three Regiments abide.
In Middlesex seven Ensigns are displaid,
There disciplined by Major Sedgwick's aid.
In Suffolk nine, by Major Gibbons led,
Essex and Norfolk in one are marshalled,
By Denison, their Major in the field,
Their General a yearly choice does yield.
Eight times a year each band instructed is,
And once to meet in one they may not miss.
Both Horse and Foot, force, forts and Castles are,
Prepared in peace for peace, yet fit for War.
To awe bruit men, Justice impartially,
Has hitherto with pale suspicious eye,
Dispersed the crimes common in many Lands,
Disgrace for vice, honor for virtue stands.
Now notice take, this is the grand complaint,
That English here from priviledg'd restraint,
Have: why I pray, you will privilege confound,
If common they with laurel all not crowned.
For trades, commerce, Merchants, Sea-affaires,
Great freedoms bad, large gains their loss repaires.
Monopolies is by their laws forbid,
Unless invention rare from others hid.
All handy-crafts have choice of work at will,
And ordered are, lest working praise they spill.
As shipping great, built up by timbers strength,
But iron mills their chains of greater length.
Salt, soap and glass, Tiles, lime and brick are made,
With orders for well-ordering each Trade.
So suited has his providence, that none.
Can contradict: envy of any one
Shall not prevail, Justice and peace shall still,
Perfect this work, govern for God they will.
For hutbandry, Corn, Cattle, wood and bay,
Good laws are made for all men to obey.
Listen a while, I must spend one word more,
Some rubs remain, are hardlier gotten over.
Bipartior in many Court and Cause,
Does dull the edge of Justice, Sword and Laws.
Discloseth Counsels, opens Breaches wide,
That adverse part steps in without a guide.
Makes causes good or bad, as men affect it,
Does what is opposed, and what is liked neglect it.
Tells liberty, authority will stop,
And clip her wings, quoth she, I Will sit on top.
Tells men their cause is good, but wanting
Laws: or Judges are in learned, in sight seanting.
More yet remains, swift speakers show but back,
So counsels lost words will not fill a sack.
And now say truth does not great skill appear,
Through such tempestuous seas and storms to steer.
So swiftly one grapling with Pirates often,
For England feigned, bearing their flag aloft.
To England yet, ungrateful they will not be,
That govern here, yet little help they see.
The more's to come, experience teaches sure,
You Will pity more, when you the like endure.
More yet you will find our enemies are yours,
You Will hurt your selves if you increase their powers.
Forgive, that they so much your good forget,
Lighter to truth, those they should harder hit.
If England one as truths but one embrace,
These took your name, and you will take their ease.
If England say more ways then one they wilt
Allow no more then helps reforming still.
Those that are skild in structures model, make,
A little moddel here is for you, take
What may serve turn for opposites to awe,
For Kings may rule without a Bishops law.
Could Bishops keep down all their Lordships spoil,
And cannot highest Court awe those Gods word defile.
With blasphemous horrid interpretation,
As only they knowing Gods explanation.
Ruin now men strive, with words contentious strength,
New-Englands acts shall speak, not words at length.
While fogs arise from error breaching brains,
Their justice clouded is, and what remains.
But unto God that they commit their way,
And judgment shall burst forth as sunny day.
Let England wait with patience for the same,
Not drawing back for cost, finish for shame.
Iast Prelates proud tollerating deride,
Ye know not truth without their guide.
Of the planting of the Gospel of our Lord Christ in the Mattachusets, and
other adjacent COLLONIES.
WHen these persecuted servants of Christ Jesus first set foot on these
American shores, having their tongues untied from the Prelates Injunctions,
they preach with all diligence to their Auditors, doubling their hours to
regain their lost time, being thoroughly warmed with the manifestation of the
love of their Lord Christ, in bearing them in his arms through the boystrous
waves, a depthless Ocean; these exiled Ministers of Christ soon began to gather
into Churches, as meet stones were offered; and now you shall see how they
hasted after fat Benefits, every one endeavoring to associate themselves with
plain honest-hearted Christians rich in grace, the Lord assisting: with full
purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord Christ, and submit to his kingdom
according to the rule of his word made known unto them: and also to exhort one
another while it is called to day, (and this is the substance of that
Church Covenant that so many are greived at;) this they do with solemn and
serious seeking of the Lord by prayer and fasting. And now I beseech you all
that rightly love the Lord Christ, forbear taking up any prejudice against
this poor people from the report of others. Could your eyes and ears see and
hear their comely order, and with what spiritual expressions the Lord assists
his servants in the Ministry, it would assuredly (God helping) cause your
bowels to yern toward them and the Churches to which they do belong: many of
whom hereafter are expressed by name, together with their annual maintenance
so near, as for the present I could gather. Only take notice New Englands
pounds in some things called current pay, will hardly hold out with old England
Angels, and yet will they not be gone from their flocks for thicker fleeces,
unless example prove prejudicial to others.

Salem: Mr. Hugh Peter's (in Engl.) Mr. Edw. Norris, 60. pound Charles Town: M.
Zach. Sims, 90. l. Mr. Tho. Allen 60. l. Boston: Mr. John Cotton, 90. l. M.
John Wilson 60 l. Roxbury: M Thomas Wells. (in England) 80. l. Dorchester: M.
Richard Mathers, 70. l. Watertown: M. Fran. Knowles, 80 l. Linne: M. Sam.
Whiting, 45. l. M. Tho. Cobbit, 45 l. Ipswich: M. Not. Rogers 70. l. M. John
Norton, 70. l. Hingham: M. P. Hubbert, 60. l. Waymouth: Mr. Tho. Thatcher, 50
l. Rowly: M. Ezekiel. Rogers, 80. l. M. Sam. Mathers, 30. l. Cambridge: M. Tho.
Sheppard, 70. l. Deddam: M. John Allen, 50. l. Concord: M. Buckly, 70. l.
Salisbury: M. Th. Woster, 45. l. Newberry M. Tho. Parker, 40. l. M. Jam. Noise,
60. l. Hampton: M. Boulton, 40. l. Sudbury: M. Edm. Brown, 40. l. Braintree:
M. Henry Flint, 30. l. M. Will. Tompson, 30. l. Dover: M. Dan. Maud, 40. l.
Gloucester: M. Richard Blindman, 40. l. Wooborn: M. Tho. Carter, 60. l. Redding:
M. Green, 30. l. Wenham: M. David Tisk, 20. l. Harerhill: Mr. John Ward.
Andover: Mr. Woodbridge.
These 26. Churches are in the government of the Mattachusets, besides these
Towns following: Manchester, (Mr. Smith:) Hull, (Mr. Matthews:) Exeter (Mr.
Norcraft:) Strawbery Banks (St. Batelie. New Meadows, (Mr. Knight,) who is gone
to England.

The Worthies of the other Colonies I omit, all men of esteem: These are men
chosen to office by the people, and ordained in presence of one or two
magistrates, together with the Elders and messengers of as many Churches as may
conveniently send, who are as so many faithful witnesses to the orthodox
judgment, and pious life of such as are to teach the people; which Elders and
messengers in the name of their Churches, hold out the communion and fellowship
they desire to have with them.

Since Englands troubles, these Churches have been very frequent in
extraordinary seeking of the Lord, with much affection, fasting and praying,
not without tears and strong cries for an happy Issue to the glory of God, and
the good of his people. In admitting persons to the sacramental union, they
endeavor to see the manifestation of Gods grace wrought upon their souls,
expressed by their godly lives and conversations, either by continued
observance, or honest testimony, they are admitted by the Elders, with consent
of the people; and all excommunications are by the same authority of the
Elders, and consent of the people, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ
administered to the terror of scandalous professors. As for prayer, singing of
Psalms, and the word preached, all are partakers of: and all children and
servants in public catechized, and verily the thirsting desires they have that
all may come to the truth, even as it is in Jesus, appears by the affable and
courteous carriage of all that preach the word, being instant in season and out
of season, etc. who are reputed both learned and judicious, and by Gods
blessing on their labors, have gained many a soul to Christ. The people of
these Colonies are generally labor ous after knowledge in religion, to which
end they have societies, or neighbourly invitatations each of other, for
edification; in which the industrious pains and care of their minister to
propagate the truth, appears, praying and opening the Scriptures thus
privately, besides all their public administrations. This truth may serve to
show the savourinesse of this salt: And now to take away the wonder how these
ministers and people should come by so many back friends, walking in measure so
inoffensively, you shall understand, holiness, righteousness, humility, and
learning in some called of Christ to be able ministers of his word and
doctrine; diverse, who love the pre-eminence of both sexes, having taken a trick
to preach to advance themselves, began to inveigh against learning, Scholars,
and Colleges, and in mean time stretching out what themselves had, till they
rent into nonsense, and verily these soon grew to a round company praising one
another parts when others would not; and to cause others to admire them, they
question the ancient truths taught by their ministers, and that before the
whole congregation, and tell you the meaning of the original Text. These were
abler to discern (as they apprehend) than their Elders, who were fit for the
Sacrament, delighting to show their skill that way. Again, all know nothing is
more opposite than damnable errors and saving truth. Now the unanimous
agreement of their teaching Elders in the truth, has caused those who are
contrary minded, to misreport their words and actions, cunningly casting false
glosses on their doctrines, slighting all those godly Christians who agree in
the fame truths, as weak punies, taking up all they have on trust. Further,
take notice that our English nation having been accustomed after 16 years of
age, to receive the Sacrament: now some here in these Colonies being upon good
ground denied, with bitter speeches, and taunting language, upbraid both
magistrates, ministers and people, pouring out their complaints into their
bosoms who are their good friends in England, telling they are abridged of the
liberties of English subjects, etc. Lastly, certain persons more affecting
trade than truth, prove discontented with such as are against the sufferi^g
gross errors. These are the rubs have been cast in the way to hinder the
through reformation; yet now, though with great difficulty, nearer accomplished
than ever, if lukewarm liberty hinder not the good work of our God. And as for
these instruments whom the Lord has made use of, you mar the work, if you
attribute ought unto them, and it will be very distasteful to their Christian
appetites; yet I will show their prosecuting the work in the following meeter.

What creature man that is so apt to take
His praise, who work and workman both did make,
In telling of these Worthies work then I
Own none but God, and yet his means I eye,
Who though nine hundred leagues at sea, has sent
These twenty Worthies, who their time have spent
In preaching Christ, his mind and will reveal
From Scripture light each servants portion deal.
One opens Prophesies as yet to come,
So ready is the Scripture in his tongue.
That word and sense his memory retains,
Clear Scripture light, all by great labor gains.
One hewes the cords of wicked works with ire-
Full Arguments as God does him require.
One precious Balm from Christ's dear sufferings fa^,
Wounded to heal; if heal to fast, then frets
Down the proud flesh from thought of knowledge rising,
Till Christ alone they know, him only prizing.
One Sheppard he takes restless pains that none
Themselves delude with happy state as one
Beloved of God in Christ, and therefore makes
Clear evidence from Gods word, whom he takes,
And wholly bent to save his flock from rearing,
With watchful eye 'way sheep slaying Wolves is scaring.
One labors faith may get assurance fast,
One he exhorts the anchor, hope to cast.
One follows peace, and bids all folk pursue it,
One's for fresh love, and when it is old renew it.
One puts in mind with patience to abide,
One cease from strife, take meekneesse on your side.
One to humility exhorts with care,
One wills their lives may pass in godly fear.
One cheerful bids in spirits joy to cheer.
One would men mourn with those are mourners here.
One bounty does by his example teach,
One zeal to God and's truth does daily preach.
One heavenly mindedness persuades still,
One Christian boldness seated in the will.
One purity and holiness commends,
One's for just dealing both with foes and friend.
One he exhorts all Christian watch to keep,
One prayer would with sighs and groans so deep.
One unto reading Scripture men persuades,
One labor bids for food that never fades.
One to redeem their time exhorts all,
One looking round, for wary walking calls.
One he persuades m^n buy the truth, not sell,
One would men should in moderatenesse excel.
One for renewed ^epentance daily strives,
One's for a conscience clear in all men's lives.
One he exhorts all men Gods word to hear,
One does beseech to lend obedient ear.
One he desires evils appearance shun,
One with diligence would all should be done.
One shows their woe that will not God believe;
One does beseech Gods Spirit they will not grieve.
One wishes none to deep despair do run,
One bids beware none to pesumption come.
One wills that all at murmuring take heed,
One shows that strife and envy should not breed.
One shows the hatred God to pride does bear,
One covetousness cries down with bellish fear.
One to luke-warmnesse wishes none do grow,
One none for fear forsake the truth they know.
One idle talk and foolish jesting shun,
One bids that none unto uncleanness run.
One says, none should self-seeking entertain,
One teaches all in anger should contain.
One idleness dehorts with meekle pain,
One bids beware of error-breaching brains.
One would all men surfets excess take heed,
One worlds joy and sorrow do not exceed.
One ignorance would not men's souls should stay,
One in known sins bids men they would not stay.
One wishes none of Faith do shipwreck make,
One their first love in Christ, that none forsake.
One in their breast would none two hearts should bear,
One woe of hypocrites does often declare.
One bids beware, hardness of heart will breed,
One, to add sin to sin that none proceed.
One lying tongues does tell God hates such,
One bids beware, for Satan's wiles are much.
One says against all, power from Christ is had,
One bids all be with his armor ever clad.
I name but one, 'cause all as one the same,
Exhort, dehort, in the Lord Christ his Name,
Minding all still it is Christ his will that all
Depart from ill, that on Gods Name do call.
And further they profess that Christ alone,
Works ^ll in his, and for his every one.
So grace is free, and nothing we to cause
The cords of love with which Gods Spirit draws.
Which Spirit plainly does appear in all
These preachings that from ear then lips do fall
Like d^aw on grass, however some deny it
As legal they: from Gods word do thou try it.
And neighbor John, yet one thing more now mind,
Their learned counsel helps the truth to find.
Coupling these men in Synods God has blessed.
By his word truth is found, error confessed.
As helpful unto godly learning they,
With Schools and College, find out learnings way.
These people, though much weakened in their estates, for the space of ten
years, yet have erected Schools in diverse Towns, and also a College in the
Town of Cambridge, called Harves College: The President being an able
Proficient in the Tongues, very studious to promote learning, witness the
young Audients both here and gone for England, hopeful instruments in the
hands of the Lord for future times: the President is Mr. Dunster.

Yet unto God this people feeling says,
Not unto us, but to thy name be praise.
Now must I mind what hindrances remain
To blast the fruit of all these Worthies pain.
Some would none should endeavor unity,
Tyrants (say they) do hinder liberty:
Why truth's but one, and Christ will make you free,
Come to the Word, let that your touch-stome be.
Some fear Presbytery has too great power,
If you are Christ's, then all they have is yours.
Some odd ones say they Independents are,
Therefore in others counsel they will noe share
But now I Will end, and tell you friend, what will
Persuade their way do^^^old with still.
Strong Arguments do papers fill each way
With words of heat: bu^ honest John now stay,
Unto experience let thy judgment bow,
Let actions speak, and not men's words to you.
For little time, some subtle Foxes will
Bridle their nature, and yet Foxes still.
Lord Bishops did some errors fend from sheep,
So beasts of prey others from preying keep.
Some new raisd errors Bishops power deny
To side with truth, and yet their error eye.
Near twenty years these Churches you may trace
In godly steps, no false way they will embrace.
Look in this glass that thus is slubberd over,
And you may see four things uneyd before.
No Prelate no King: that is not so, for see
Here Churches power and command agree,
Of civil power to which these Churches yield
Humble obedience, as their duty held.
Next note, some say, Opinions none must touch,
For fear they wrong the consciences of such,
With word of truth, God helping true endeavors,
Christ's Pastor here error and conscience severs.
Third, Law and Gospel at such odds have set,
That Rule of walking from it none may get.
But here experience from Gods word is found,
Gods folk with his word walk wary, looking round.
Last, humane learning is no mean, some say;
Blost by the Lord, to find his word and way,
But as a means this people found it have,
Yet trust not means, its only God must save.
But England now to thee I Will means commend,
Make use of these before their life they end.
The grave, godly, and judicious Mr. Hooker is laid in earth Mr. Philips, Mr.
Huet, Mr. Harver, and some others of like esteem yet remaining in the united
Colonies, of name and note: Only my friend John, see here a short observation
taken from the whole for thy own use.

Church Covenant Band brought in with liberty,
But causes men to walk licentiously.
Some buy the truth: for conscience liberty,
Error's brought in to blind men damningly.
And now before I end, let me tell thee who are like to reap benefit by
transporting themselves to those Colonies: First, Merchants who are skild in
commerce with foreign nations, lying near the Indies, and well stored with
ship provision cheaper than England.

Secondly, Seamen are well imploid, if skild in Navigation, shipping
increasing every day, and would be far more, had they Masters to manage the
work.

Thirdly, Has band-men are like to benefit themselves much all sorts of cattle
increasing exceedingly, and tillage prospering, that thousands of Acres are
broken up yearly.

Fourthly, all manual occupations are falling into their ranks and places
daily, (only Printers of Cards, and Dice-makers, I could wish to forbear,)
very few but have increased in the riches of this life; and further how now men
of estates may improve what they have to their great advantage. And this I dare
assure that one hundred pounds will do that which five hundred could not do
at first planting of this little Commonwealth, which was the reason so many
sunk in their estates; but now they see it too late, and some will not wait the
Lords leisure for repairing, but forsake their station, with others have gained
much, and carry it to other places to show, and so lose it again. But my John,
be thou more stable.

Last, let all those who desire to have themselves discovered to themselves,
resort to this place; where, if they seek not themselves they may find
themselves, if not already lost in selfe-conceitednesse of some strong opinion,
for which if they desire to be admired, let them leave this long voyage, and
keep at home.

FINIS.

