The GOLDEN FLEECE Defended; OR Reasons against the Company of Merchant
Adventurers; Humbly offered to the consideration of the Honorable HOUSE of
COMMONS.
1. IT takes away the NATIVE LIBERTY of every man; in the principal commodity
of the NATION: It being the birthright of every man to be alike free to
transport, that, or any other Comodity, into what parts beyond the seas seems
most advantageous unto him.

2. It abridgeth the FREEDOM, of every FREEMAN of the CITY of LONDON, every
Freeman by the Charter of the City being free to transport, or import any
Commodity, not prohibited by Law.

3. It tends to the discouragement of CLOTHIERS, whose markets and sale of
their clothes, are restrained to a few Merchants, (in comparison of what they
would be if trade were free) and who, by their orders, and times of shipping
(shipping together in one or two ships) have power to use the Clothiers
(especially the younger, and inferior traders) how they please to work them
into necessities, and so to what rates and conditions they will, and in
conclusion, quite weary them out of all trade.

4. It tends to the discouragement, and impoverishing of all WEAVERS,
CLOTHIERS and DYERS, in that the oppressions, and necessities of the Clothier,
fall upon the Weavers, Cloth-workers, and all whom they employ: also the
Mercharts being but few, employ few workmen, and use such as they do employ
at their pleasure; and wherein also the Wool-masters are not a little concerned.

5. It tends to the abatement of Merchants: (1) because they take but few
Apprentices: (2) because they take such only, whose friends give great sums
of money with them; and are provided of great stocks, who having served their
times, more like unto Gentlemen then according to the ancient, provident,
discipline of Apprentices of London, finding the Companies Orders to be scanty
in allowances of trade to young men, and their freedom in respect of Oaths,
and Stints, and Brokes, to be indeed but as a bondage, many of them engage not
at all in trade, but live upon usury, or spend their times in unprositable
ways.


6. It keeps down and oppresses the inferior Members of the Corporation:
(1) Because the old, and great traders, are allowed the largists Stints, or to
transport the greater number of clothes, whereby they have the greater command
over the Clothier, and all workmen. (2) Because a great part of the trade is
driven by cloth of known marks much desired beyond the seas; all which the
great traders get into their hands, and will sell them sometimes for loss
rather then an inferior trader shall sell them to profit, if at any time he get
them, which is almost a thing impossible. (3) The inferior trader with his
small portion, meanly qualified, is nevertheless constrained to pay the same
impositions to the Company, the same Custom to the State, to ship when the
great traders shippeth; to stay until the great traders great quantities are
up; if he happen to be the last (as having need to lengthen out the time upon
which he buyeth most of his goods) he is many times shut out, and then no
remedy till next shipping without incurring great brokes. (4) When his small
parcel is come to the Mart towns, he must show his goods, only when the great
ones show theirs; if they cannot give the same time upon sale, or at the same
rates (though they have little choice of known ware to invite) their goods will
be blown upon, and their time will eat them out; if they do sell at the same
rate of profit per cent. they sell so little, that it amounts to nothing;
whilst the other sells so much, so speedily, has so much command of moneys at
low rates (Chamber Money) that at low profit per cent. in a short time he gets
to an Aldermans estate, whilst the others are worn to nothing; and yet upon a
pretense, both of profit and honor, he must not carry his goods from the Mart
town, though indeed it be as bad in point of honor, whether the English
Nation, or the staple commodity, English cloth, or English Merchants be
considered, there being not more pelting, and abject fawning in Birching Lane
after Customers, then is commonly used by Merchants in humoring their buyers,
and grocers in Roterdam; and nothing but snarling, and backbiting,
circumvention, partiality and injustice, to be found in their judicial
proceedings, either there, at Hamborow, or London: By all which it follows,
the Company tends to make some few men extreme rich, to breed prodigal
servants, leading a dance of pride and prodigality, to all other tradesmens
servants, as their Masters do unto other tradesmen, striving who shall exceed
in fashions, diet, housing, and housholdstuffe, in so much as a common Citizen
is (in these times) more like a Noble man or Gentleman, and the ancient
moderation of the City quite lost, whereas were trade free there would be in
lieu of these few rich men, a multitude of plaineable traders, that upon
public occasions of State, would from a plentiful hand fill the public
treasury, and that freely too, their interest being common freedom, subsisting
by the lawful protection of the Commons of England; whilft the others, out of
their great estates, disburse sparingly, disputingly, if not grumblingly: And
no marvel, for their interest is Prerogative, subsisting by Arbitrary and
purchased grants, not by lawful authority, which is easily discerned by their
fines, for when by their wealth, and the folly of the choosers, they are any of
them, put into any Office of trust, or Magistracy, they ever favor those that
adhere all to Arbitrary Government, and discourage and discountenance such as
adhere to common freedom, and equal Government; and (if thoroughly sought
into) this will be found the principal spring and Original of the late
Rmonestrance, called by some The Cities Remonstrance; and of the perverse
disputing spirit that has lately appeared toward the House of Commons; such a
chain of mischiefs necessarily depend upon this one evil in trade.


7. It tends to the deshonour of God, and the wounding of conscience by the
commonnesse of unreasonable Oaths, and the too too lamentable and frequent
breach of them.

8. It tends to the destruction of Clothing in this Nation, (1) Because
through the discouragements aforesaid, many Clothiers and other workmen have
forsaken the Land, and set up Cloth-making in diverse parts beyond the seas. (2)
Because the trade of cloth being confined to one or two Mart towns only, and
not dispersed into every haven and creek (as it would be were it free) there is
an un^^served liberty taken to bring into the Netherlands great quantities of
our English wools, and Fullers earth; the great Merchants in their Mart towns
nothing at all regarding it, whereby cloth in these times, and of late is made
in abundance, and if not well looked unto, in time, will utterly exhaust the
woollen, or clothing trade quite from us; and it will nebe so well looked unto,
by any Law or provision, as by the dispersing of the Trade into every place
(which freedom will occasion) where every trader for his own profit, and
livelihood, will be necessitated to look to it, and by all means to restrain
it.


9. It tends to the discouragement of Seamen. (1) By restraining them from
dealing in any woollen commodities for their own accounts though never so
little. (2) In that they make very few voyages in the year, and make use of
none but such as will submit to their Orders.


10. It tends to the vexation of most of the good Towns beyond the seas, and
to alienate their hearts from the English, taking great offense and scorn,
that for the English cloth they must be compelled to fetch what they use, only
from one Town in their own Country, at great charge and trouble, which
otherwise would be brought home to them, and every town might have an equal
share of the benefit of the entertainment and expenses of English Merchants.
And for this cause also, they choose to make use of the cloth that is made in
their own Country, rather then to submit to such inconveniences.

11. It much alienateth the hearts of a numerous people, both in Cities and all
Countries from the PARLIAMENT, being much grieved that their known liberties
of trade wherein they are so universally concerned, should from time to time be
bought and sold for money, and that they could never yet obtain a complete
remedy therein, though often and earnestly Petitioned for; whereas were this
trade once set absolutely free, the joy of the people in general, both Seamen
and Land-men, would be excessive, and their thankfulness so great that they
would think nothing too precious to be spent in defense of that authority that
should show so much regard unto their welfare and happiness.

FINIS.

