THREE EXACT PIECES OF LEONARD PHIORAVANT Knight, and Doctor in PHYSIC, Viz.
His RATIONAL SECRETS, and SURGERY, Reviewed and Revived, Together with a
Book of Excellent EXPERIMENTS AND SECRETS, Collected out of the Practices of
several Expert men in both Faculties.

Whereunto is Annexed PARACELSUS his One hundred and fourteen EXPERIMENTS: With
certain Excellent Works of B. G. a Portu Aquitano. Also Isaac Hollandus his
SECRETS concerning his Vegetall and Animal Work. With Quercetanus his
Spagyrick Antidotary for GUNSHOT.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson, and are to be sold by William Nealand, at his
Shop at the Sign of the Crown in Duck-lane, 16^^.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Have carefully, though not curiously, disrobed that worthy Knight, and
excellent Doctor in Physic and Surgery, Leonard Phioravant out of his
Italian Vesture, and put him into our English habit, that such an excellent
Piece may not lie cloystered in the Precinct of one Principality, but that our
own Nation may participate of the Honey, this Laborious Be has brought to his
Hive: If all relish not at the first gust, the fault is not in the Work, but
their judgments that understand him not, nor the jewels presented unto them.
Avicen King of Arabia in the Arabic, Hippocrates and Galen in Greek, and
Pliny and Celsus in Latin; besides many English and French, have testified
their love to their native Countries, by publishing in their own Languages such
rare Treasures as these. Nor fear I detraction from any for these my Labors,
unless it be from some runnagate Varlets, that carry all their cunning in a
Chirurgians Box in their Pockets, and their learning in a Cap-case behind at
their backs; who through Ignorance, neither regarding the quantity, nor quality
of those excellent Medicines, abuse, and sophisticate them in making them up,
but this must be obtruded unto the Men, not the Medicines; for prevention
whereof hereafter, that honorable Society of London Physicians have chose out
a Chymick Artificer, whom they have placed in their own College, and over whom
they have set discreet, and learned overseers to oblige the public for their
care to their Medicines hereafter. So wishing you the happy fruition of health
is intended you by these labors; I rest,

J. H. W. J.


The Table of the First Book.
WHat thing Infirmity is, and whereof it proceeds 1 To heal the faling
sickness 2 To help certain gross scabs in the head 3 To help young children of
the R^pture 4 Of the small Pox that comes to children ibid To help the Measles
5 Of Kernels or Scrophule ibid Of diverse sorts of scabs 6 Against Worms in
children 7 Of certain Warts or Carvoli on the Yeard. 8 Of Gonorrhea Passio
ibid. Of a Botch caused of the Pox 9 Of Pellarella Ibid Of scabs that come
through the Pox 10 Of certain tumors or swellings in diverse parts of the body
11 Of Ach in diverse parts of the body ibid Of the Cough in the stomach 12 Of
the white scab in the head 13 Of Erisipela 14 Of the Squinancie 15 Of the
Emeroids and Piles 16 An easy way to help all sorts of Fevers ibid Another
cure of the said Fevers 18 Of the continual Fever 19 A great Secret against
the continual Fever 20 Of the Fever Tertian ibid Of the Fever of Repression 21
Of the Fever Hectic 22 A new Order wherewith thou may help most part of the
Fever Hectic 23 Of the Fever Quartane 24 To help the Quartain of all sorts 25
A great secret against the Quartain 26 A secret to help all Fevers in their
beginning 27 A secret of one simple that helps all Fevers 28 Of the Gent
ibid. A Note concerning the cure of the Gout 29 Another discourse of the Gout
30 What order must be had in the said cure 31 To preserve a man from the Gout
32 The cure of the Gout with pain in the side ibid A discourse of the Sciatica
33 Of pains of the Mother 34 Of pains in the head 35 Of diseases in the ears
36 Of the Infirmities in the eyes ibid Of the Toothache 37 Of a stinking breath
38 Of spitting blood 39 Of diseases of the Liver 40 Of diseases of the Dungs 41
Of the Spleen 42 Of the Flux of the body ibid Of costivenesse in the body 43
Of the Flux of Urine ibid A discourse of the retention of Urine 44 Another
discourse of the same 45 Of the retention through hear ibid Of the retention
through drienesse 46 Of the retention through cold ibid Of the retention
through moistness 47 Of the difficulty of Urine Ibid. Against burning of the
Urine 49 A discourse upon the carnosity of the yeard 50 Another cure for the
same ibid To stay the flux of Urine 51 To break the stone 52 Of the gravel in
the Reins 54 Against the Itch ibid
The Table of the Second Book.
WHat Surgery is 55 The order in curing Imposthumes 56 What Imposthumes are
58 Of Imposthumes in the groin ibid The second kind of Imposthumes in the groin
59 The third kind in the groin ibid Of Imposthumes under the arms 60 Of
Imposthumes in the throat ibid Of Imposthumes in the throat caused of
melancholy humors 61 Of Imposthumes in the throat caused of the Pox ibid
Imposthumes in the throat of hot humors 62 Imposthumes in the throat caused of
cold 63 Imposthumes in the throat of hot humors ibid Imposthumes in the eyes
64 Imposthumes in the ears ibid Imposthumes in the mouth 65 Imposthumes in the
joints ibid Of inward Imposthumes 66 Of Ulcers and what they are 67 To help
Ulcers of all sorts 68 Of Ulcers in the feet 69 Of Ulcers in the legs ibid Of
Ulcers in the knees 70 Of Ulcers in the groin ibid Of Ulcers in the arms 71 Of
Ulcers in the breast, back and belly ibid Of Ulcers outwardly 72 Of Ulcers in
the head ibid Of Ulcers in the mouth 73 Of Wounds, and their kinds ibid What
Medicines are fittest for wounds 74 Of wounds in the head with offense of the
brain 76 Of wounds in the head with fracture of the bone 77 Of wounds in the
head where the bone is not offended 78 Of Contusions or bruises in all places
ibid Of wounds in the neck 79 Of wounds in the arms 80 Of wounds in the breast
ibid Of wounds in the belly 81 Of wounds in the legs 83 Of wounds that pierce
into the body 84 A discourse upon old wounds 85 To heal wounds of Gunshot
ibid To heal a wound quickly ibid To help a wound quickly that is in danger 86
To stay the flux of blood in wounds ib. Another for the same 87 A defensive for
wounds ibid Our secret powder for wounds ibid
The Table of the third Book.
TO make our Petra Philosophale 88 To make our Balm 90 To make our Aromatico 92
To make our Electuario Angelica 93 Our Sirrupo Sclutivo 94 Our Sirrup
Magistrall 95 Our Sirrup against the Melancholy humor 96 Our Potion of Lignum
Sanctum ibid To make the water of Lignum Sanctum 98 An Electuary against the
Cough 100 Our Magistral Electuary of Sulphur ibid Our Electuarie of Consolida
majore 101 Unguentum magnum 102 Oil of Hypericon 103 Our Oleum Philosophorum
of Turpentine and Wax 104 Our Magno Liquore 105 Pillole Aquilone 106 Our Quinta
essentia solutiva ibid Pillole Magistrale 108 Aqua reale that makes the teeth
white 109 Of the secrets of Frankincense ibid To make oil of Honey 110 Our
great Cerot 111 A Magistrall Unguent that helps in manner all sores 112 A
Magistrall Cerot against the white Scall ibid A divine Cerot against diverse
infirmities 113 A miraculous plaster for Flegmon or Erisipella 114 A
resolutive plaster of great virtue 115 A maturative plaster of great virtue
ibid A composition against Ulcers and sores 116 A strange composition of great
virtue ibid An Unguent of great virtue against Ulcers ibid A Discourse upon
sundry sorts of Unguents 117 Medicines appropriate against all poisons 119 A
water that preserves the face and teeth fair 120 To take away spots out of
the face 121 To cause hair to grow ibid To make our Sirrup of Bays 122 To make
a Sirrup of Cinnamon and Ginger 123 Our Sirrup of a Capon 124 A magistrall
Sirrup of Quinces, the which is restorative 125 A Magistrall Sirrup of Lignum
Sanctum 126 A Sirrup of Juniper berries 127 A Sirrup of the Bran of wheat ibid
A Sirrup of Salsa Per^lia 128 To make a potion of China 129 A potion of
Alchachengie 130 A pectorall Potion of our invention ib. To make a Potion of
Camedrios and Iva Artetica, which dissolveth all Fevers that come of cold 131 A
potion that helps against all infirmitios 132 An Infusion of Wine that is
good against the Gout 133 Another artificial wine against the stitch in the
side and gravel 134 To make a Quintessence of great ^^rtue 135 To make
Diatartaro the which is soluble 136 A composition of great value to comfort the
stomach 137 A stomachall plaster to cause digestion ibid. A rare secret for
the eyes 138 A liquor that comfort the smelling, and preserves the head
ibid A decoction of the Vine 139 A composition of Mercury the Herb 140 A
Medicine of Lapaciole minore, against the Catarre 141 Of Pollipodie and his
virtues 142 Of the Olive, and his virtues 143 Of Ciperus and his virtues ibid
Of Rue or Hearb-grace, and his virtues 144 Of Wormwood, and his virtues 145 Of
Gratia Dei, and his virtues ibid Of Wallwort, and his virtues 146 Of
Millefollie or Yarrow and his virtues 147 Of Gentian and his virtues 148 Of
Imperatoria, and his virtues 149 Of Carduus sanctus, and his virtues ibid. Of
sweet Majoram, and his virtues 150 Of the herb Lutiola, and his virtues 151 Of
Hypericon, and his virtues ibid Of Nettles, and his virtues 152 Of Hysop of the
Mountain ibid A great secret of a kind of Betonie 153 Of the Effects of Wine,
and what comes thereof 154 Of Vinegar, and his qualities 156 Of the Faces of
wine, and his secrets 157 Of Verjuyce made of Grapes ibid Certain secrets of
Animals, and first of the Ox ibid Of the Goat, and his virtues 158 Of the
Horse, and his virtues 159 Of the Dog, and his virtues 160 Of the Cat, and his
secrets ibid Of the Hare, and his secrets ibid Of the Frog, and his secrets 161
A discourse upon certain stones, and their qualities, both in Physic and
Surgery, and first of the marble ibid Of the stone Lapis Ematites 162 Of the
Stone of Iron called L^ppa 163 Of Lapis Judaicus ibid Of Lapis Lazuli 164 Of
the Flintstone 165 Of Alumen scaleola or Gesso ibid Of Lapis Amiantis 166 Of
the Sapphire 167 Of Red Coral^ ibid Of the stone Salt 168 The ve^es^ certain
Minerals and mean Minerals, and first of Vitriol 169 Strange secrets of Roth
Alum 170 Of Orpimert and his nature ibid Of Cinaber Mineral 171 Of the
secrets of Salt, and his virtue ibid Of common Salt, and his virtues 172
Certain secrets of Saltpeter ibid Certain secrets of Alum du Fesse 173 Of Gold
ibid Of Silver 174 Of Lead ibid Of the secrets of Copper 175 Of Tin 176 Of Iron
ibid Of the secrets of Mercury 177
FINIS.
Short Amimadversions upon the Book lately Published by one who styles himself
NOAH BIGGS, Helmontii Psittacum.
Friend,
YOu set a bigg Sail to a little Vessel: I believe your Arc does not like
Noah's, contain all the vitality of Rationals, and Sensibles.

You write Page 205. concerning Mastication. Seeing all Aliment ought to pass
into a liquid Reduction, or tendance to Chilificative mutation, or Alimentall
conversion, therefore Mastification is to be highly commended.

You have like the great Fish, that swallowed Jonah, received in Van Helmont,
though not digested him; and the same tax may pass on you, which sometimes did
on a Noble Courtier, devorasti, non edisti. It was the judgment of Doctor
Charlton, a Learned Physician, a favourer of Van Helmont, that he had a better
Faculty, Evertere opiniones Veterum, quam extruere, and stabilire Novas.

When was ever Practice amongst the Physicians so narrowly confined, as they
kept themselves to one Author? Do not some of them follow Minfect, others
Hartman, others Grulingius, others will have their prescriptions made after
Quercetan, Faber, or Poterius, some after Begvinus, Millius, Billich,
Burgravius, Becherus, or other Authors; And some disgust all, which are not
Paracelsian, or accord with Basilius, Valentinus his Master, and are pleased to
practice after their Medicines, with the additions of their own Experiments,
out of their reading, and judegment on their several Authors. I would gladly
know who ties himself to Sennertus, Riverius, or any one Modern Author, as if
universal Learning were contained in the sphere of one Microcosme: Yet you are
so much for Helmont, as if he were the great Luminary of the World. I confess,
I honor Van Helmont, but if you do no cures out of the tract of his Method, I
believe you must study more knowledge in his Medicines then barely how to
Translate them, or otherwise you will fail in the honor you aspire unto, and
from teaching others, come your self to learn from those you unworthily
vilify.

You say Page 12. The Schools are ignorant of the Quiddities, and Dihoties of
things, do you your self understand either your own, or the essence of the
lowest inferior Animals? Page 15. Why did you not by the golden Trident of
Chymicall Theoremes, whom as a Lady of Honor you have courted, devoutly
kissed, and profess your strict observance to, becalm this Sea of distraction?
And as you say, Page 16. write in that, in which there is no beaten path, which
you think most honorable, because he that leads has this advantage above
others, if others follow him, he has the glory of the first undertaking, if
not the excuse of prejudice: But had not Van Helmont traced out this Path to
you, I could think you would have acquiesced to the ancient opinions, and not
have aspired to be reckoned amongst the public Benefactors of Civil and
Humane life.

Page 35. You have a jerke at Bartholomeus Carichterus, but I believe your own
learning and judgment will hardly bring you to be a Physician to so great an
Emperor as Maximillian the Second. For your threefold Character you give of a
good Purge, Page 80. I hardly believe your Patients will be so happy as to meet
with such from you. The London Dispensatory has variety of medicines, some
following one Author, and some another, for which purpose it was so enlarged,
as thought necessary in respect of the several variety of judgment, and
practices of our Modern Physicians.

You say, Page 11. reading is no way conducible to knowing: If you had never
read Van Helmont, you had never written in this style. You say, Page 11. The
disease known is not the half way to the cure, but if you know not the
disease, I conceive you would hardly, or blindly come to the cure of them. You
write, Page 15. The Physicians like to the self-conceited Laodiceans, while
they presume they keep the keys of the Science, they neither enter themselves
into the Closet, and inner Parlour of Nature, nor admit, willingly, others that
would. But observe your own incircumspection and levitie: For had you perused
their Pharmacopoea, published 1650. A Capite ad Calcem, you could not have
committed so gross an error, (nor did their former want prescriptions of
Chymick medicines) but if you please to cast your eye on it, from Page 187. ad
finem Libri, you may see many good Chymick preparations, besides the multitude
of other prescriptions, which are left to the judgment and choice of Ingenious
Practitioners, to fetch out of other Chymick Authors.

And had you but cast your eye on their careful expression, in fine
Pharmacopoeae, you would have been silent, or written more temperately, which I
must expose to your knowledge in their own words.

Ne nos (Amice Lector) in hac operis suscepti meta, simulque cum calamo nostro
curam deposuisse tui videamur, certior ut fias, cupimus, nos etiam saluti tuae,
publicaeque utilitati, nihilo segnius invigilare, adeoque officinam Chymicam,
seorsum in horto Collegii erigendam curasse, artificemque Idoneum accersivisse,
eidemque instruendo and corrigendo Collegarum peritissimos destinasse, ut
medicamenta, quanto efficaciora, tanto cautius, quanto difficilliora, tanto
diligentius, quanto pretiosiora, tanto sincerius componerentur. Denique eidem
suffragia nostra, locumque ac lucrum omne gratis dedisse, and concessisse, ut
ad tam singularem benevolentiam promerendam pari honestate impelleretur. Tu
Quisquis es, nobiscum fruere, vove and vale. Now judge of the condition you
stand in with knowing men.

Has not Rome, France, Augusta, Collen, Amsterdam, and other Nations their
several Pharmacopaeas? Must all be drowned, if Noah, your petty Arc hold them
not up. Page 107, and 108. Concerning Glisters, that they never reach to the
Ileon, or have any nourishing quality.

Bartholinus in his Physical exercitations, has a tract against that opinion;
where, by his authorities, experiments, and reasons, you might be somewhat
staggered, if you do not jurare in verba Magistri: against whom Doctor Heers,
in his tractate de Fontibus spadanis, casts forth bitterrer language then I
will throw upon you; yet I desire you to remember what Doctor Metcalfe of
Cambridge not long since said, on the censures of some nimble-tounged Scholars
on the grave Academians: You young men think us old men fools, but we old men
know you are so. And be not offended that I advise you, that would be held
Magistrum in Artibus, to study also to be Magistrum in Moribus. But I will
conclude with these two Grammar verses, Add quod ingenuas dedicisse fideliter
Arts
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse (...).
And must tell you, for your rash extravagant censures, you are worthy to be
transmitted back to the College Censors, or Deanes.

W. I.

FRIEND CULPEPR,
I Had thought the sober animadversions were given you lately upon the
publishing of the translation of Papius, would have reformed your insolent
Language you formerly used against your bettters; but I see Quo semel est
imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu. The Vessel cannot put off the first
foetid smell it received, for in your disponsatory Epistle, and in these of
your Midwifery with a great deal of railing, and nonsense, as if it were
Cuckow-moneth with you, you chatter still in one note, against Priests, and
Physicians, and cry out, We are Prisoners, and kept in darkness, and who are
our Jaylors but Scholars: Out of which by your selfe-conceited omniscience you
undertake to deliver them, from the unsufferable ignorance men and women are
now trained up in, and teach them a desperate unwarrantable practice. And this
is done, you say, to uphold a Company of Lazy Doctors, most of whose
covetuousnesse outweighes their wits, as a Millstone outweighes a feather, etc.
I cannot but smile at your nonsense similitudes; but I shall account you an
exact Mathematician, if you can tell me how many feathers would counterpoyse a
millstone, but that task would make your brain as light as your tongue. I
allwaies conceived men were bred up in callings, to enable them in future to
preserve themselves and their Families, and in their professions to be
serviceable to the Commonwealth, and might lawfully live by them. I pray, why
do you translate but to live by it not agere stultum, and Zoilum? I wonder
whether gain ^ut you not at first (when other Trades failed you) to write, or
rather translate Physic in your mother tongue: and it seems you rather know
how to translate Latin, then transfer it into a Sentence, as you do legere,
and non intelegere, neglegere est. But I will admit the excuse, it is the
Compositors oversight. You say, If any want wisdom, let him ask it of God,
not of the College of Physicians; and yet you undertake to teach them; for you
say, You intend to lay down some Rules, whereby a man may as well prevent a
sickness before it comes, as remedy it when it comes, and that you will write
of the preservation of man, even from his conception to his grave: a great
undertaking, and I believe too high Mr. Culpeper for your reading, and will
scarce be gained out of your translating some fragments of Galens, and some
pieces of modern Anatomy. You say, Physicians of our times keep our
understanding in as great bondage as Pharaoh kept the Hebrew Midwifes bodies, I
pray did the other Physicians before them walk in your tract? but why
transcend you the text with your foolish additions? what bondage do you read of
either the Egyptian Midwifes, or women suffered under Pharaoh themselves,
though the males were overcharged with rigor. You confess God has given you
some little sparks of Knowledge, and you will not wrap up your talent in a
napkin and bury it in the ground: Truly I think you need not hide any you
have; and for that of railing you will not. You desire others to judge
charitably of you, for Charity and Honesty you say always walk hand in hand
together, and think ill of no man: If your own rule be your judge, you are
neither Charitable nor Honest: you say in your Epistle to the Reader, The water
may be muddy in the stream, which is clear in the Fountain, but yours is clear
in neither: You say, The Translators have given us a Translation of the Bible
(such a one as it is) but have given all the proper names in Scripture in pure
Hebrew words in an English Character, and yet all the Scripture was written for
our instruction: Had you been as well versed in the Translations, as you are in
rash Censures, you might have found the Hebrew words exactly interpreted,
adjoined to many translations: not conceived so necessary to be joined to all;
because whosoever understood the language well (as God be praised many of our
Nation do) they needed not that key to open it to them: Besides you say, whole
Sentences in Scripture are so translated, that it would make a man sick to see
them, I believe you mean read them; but why quoate you not the places, as you
did before, the fourth or fifth first Chapters of the Book of Chronicles. If
you had said some sentences of Scripture are omitted, or perverted, you might
justly have taxed the lazy ignorant Printers, both here and beyond the Seas,
in these times, that have not had so much care of their Presses in putting
forth those sacred Books, as your Printer has had of yours. You say, The
first virtue a Child aims at so soon as it is born is knowledge. I would
gladly learn what Virtue is native; I conceive them dative, and that scientia
is rather acquisita, then nata, if it be true nemo nascitur artifex; or the
Platonic opinion hold, man is Tabala rasa, capeable of impressions, but has
none written in it. The desire to be as Gods was the cause of our Parents first
fall, knowledge of good and evil, but the knowledge of Good comes only from
God, the Fountain of goodness, in whose stream you must be dipped, before you
desert your pride, and self-love, and put on humility. You say, Had not the
Priests formerly absconded the mysteries of Truth from us, Sermons would have
been so cheap that they would have been cried about streets for three
halfpence a dozen; You might have done well to have expressed your self,
whether you meant our Priests, or the Roman, for I dare justify a few of the
Sermons of our late reverend Divines, as Andrews, Hierons, Holsworth, Adams,
and many others which I could name, are of far greater worth and esteem, then
your dispensatory, unless with some ignorants and women: Though you under
value Sermons at a less rate then sparrowes, when your learned labors are
prized at five or six shillings a piece. For Gardener, I think every good
Christian abhors his name and life; and I know no man desires to die his
death. Giant proportions have often Pigmy conceits, but our gentleman's fancy
far outstrips Bayards leap, who brings Dianas I mage from Ephesus to jumpe
to England at one leap, where silver shrines must be made for her still. It is
a Riddle to my understanding, where the Image and Shrines are; and I should be
glad to see you clear that passage, of the Image fell down from Jupiter, and
that of the silver shrines from impertinent nonsense, and show how you can make
them correspond with our Physicians. It Is true you put an effigies Image, or
sculpture before every book you write; I conceive you mean not your own, I
confess I have that in your Book at Amen Corner, but for your Silver smith and
shrines you write of, I hardly believe you will have one, unless the Midwifes
you flatter so, make you one. For Amen Corner, I persuade my self, it is a
formidable place to you, for fear of dissection, for you never durst hitherto
venture your approbation there before the Doctors for your sufficiency in your
trade you were bound to, and some-while brought up in: And for your judgment
in Physic, I know you dare not come thither to the test, though you rail
against them. Pray let me not trouble your weak brains with a relation of a
Gentleman and Scholars, censure upon your Book, who perusing some passages in
it in a Booksellers shop, asked whether Culpeper made that obsceane book or no,
and being answered he did, replied, truly Culpeper has made Cul-paper, paper
fit to wipe ones breech withal. Where you writ, You could have written deeper
notions in Physic then shall be found in this book: I must tell you, you would
seem to be a Physician, who have scarce aspired to the Apothecary. But the
College has wrapped up their Children in blankets of ignorance, have they not
shut them up in a Chamber, as it is related your Patron sometines did you: you
say, man may meddle with generals, but before he meddle with particulars, let
him look to himself: But you have Lynceus eyes in others affairs, sed non
vides manticae quod in tergo est. He is a saucy insolent Soldier speaks
irreverently against the Gerall under whose Colors he marches, you profess
your self studient in Physic, but want some Physic your self to purge away
the Malignant humor possesses you against the honorable Society of the
College of Physicians: A little Hellebor would do well to purge your brains
with, if you could but jump over as easily to Italy or Greece, where it grows,
as Dianas Image did hither. Were you asleep or awake when you saw it jumpe so
far, otherwise I shall think it like one of the stories in the Mirror of
Knighthood. Every bird thinks his own young one fairest suum cuique pulchrum,
you acknowledge the direction for Midwives to be your own child but whether you
are more properly a borrower or translator, then Father, Judicent Medici. It Is a
slovenly Bird bewres as his own uest, and though you seem to adhere to
Hypocrates you shall never be counted Harpocrates for he was borne with one
hand on his mouth, and the other on his members, but you will close yours upon
neither. But I will conclude with our Mercury with a story of Mercury out of
our Latin Emblems. Mercury having a good conceit of himself (as our Mercury
has) desirous to know what opinions mortals conceived of him, would needs
descend, and fixed on a Statuaries shop, where lighting and coming in, he
spies many Images of the Gods and Goddesses, and enquires the price of them,
but not seeing his own, enquires whether he had the Statue of Mercury or no,
he replied he had, and fetched him forth of a bye corner he had in his shop, of
whom Mercury demanded what price he would ask for it, the Statuary replied,
Sir, If you mean in good earnest to buy the other Statues you Cheapned, you
shall have him into the bargain, whereupon Mercury went away discontented, I
leave the Moral to your own application: and your self also; wishing you more
government in your tongue, and discression in your pen, hereafter, concluding
with that saying, His tongue is no slander, whose tongue is all slander,

From Amen Corner, Your wellwiller, and a wellwisher to the Substances not
shadows of Physic. W. J.

The Epistle to the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
THere having come to my hands three several Books; Phioravants Secrets, and
also his Chyrurgery, to which is added The Jewel of Practice: Published a good
while since by JOHN HESTER, a Spagyrick Professor, in his time of eminent note:
And knowing the Books very scarce, and out of Print, much desired by Ingenuous
Practitioners in Physic, I have for the Public good communicated those three
several Books to my Friend: assuring my self out of my knowledge of the
Books, that there are in them contained many Chymica arcana, which will be much
advantageous to Spagyrick Students, with the more confidence, because whosoever
desires to have, and make use of the choycest Secrets delivered in them, may
have them faithfully made up, and dispensed in Amen-Corner, by W. I. Chemist to
that honorable Society, and College of London Physicians, who has heretofore
made up the choicest of them, for sundry Physicians, who have earnestly desired
them, and with good success used them: And I doubt not, but they will receive
as good satisfaction in their compositions, as that worthy Spagyrick, (that
from an Italian Coat, put them into an English Vesture) formerly gave them:
Desiring you for your fuller approbation, to peruse his Epistle praefixed
before his translation, which I presume, will give you that content is desired
from your Friend,

W. I. M. B.


A SHORT DISCOURSE OF THE SECRETS OF THE Most Famous Knight and Excellent
Physician and Surgeon, Lord PHIORAVANTE.
CHAP. I. What thing infirmity is, and whereof it proceeds.
Sickness or Infirmity is no other thing then a distemperature of humors in
the bodies of creatures, as well reasonable as unreasonable, which are subject
to sickness and to death. And these do not proceed of any other thing, then of
the diverse and sundry disorders committed many ways, which disorders every man
might very well defend himself from, if he would. And these disorders which are
thus committed are very many, whereof I will name you a few, and will tell you
also of the infirmities which follow them.

There are many which disorder themselves in their eating, and in the variety
and superfluity of meats, and so corrupt themselves; and of such corruption
engenders ill disposition of the stomach, and loss of appetite, and thence
comes the Itch, and diseases of the legs, and other like matters, which
commonly proceed of much repletion. Others disorder themselves in the excess of
Lechery, of which disorder comes debilitie of the Reins, want of the sight,
weakness of the brains, and oftentimes diseases about the Yard, and other kind
of infirmities hanging upon the French sickness. Some disorder themselves in
fishing, standing much in the water; and of this access comes coldness of
the Nerves, pains of the legs and feet, and such other things which such
access causes. Other some disorder themselves in hunting, in such sort, as
they take heat, cold, weariness, hunger and thirst; of which disorder there
follows Agues, Opilations, Rheums, Numnesse, and such like things; which,
with such disorder and great travel, commonly are wont to be caused. And in
diverse other manners men may disorder themselves, which at this time I will
omit, because I will not be overtedious to the Reader. It suffices, so that I
show the substance of the thing, and to do it, that every one may understand
it. If then the causes are infinite, by which infirmities or sickness come, and
the remedies a great many more then enough to cure them: I mean therefore to
set down in the Chapters following the infirmities, together with the remedies,
with the which they may be healed, beginning with the infirmities which men
have from their birth unto their death, discoursing of them one after an other.
And first I will speak of Infants and children, which happen into the falling
sickness as soon as they are born.

CHAP. II. To help the falling sickness in young Children.
THe Falling Sickness is a disease, the which in young Children is caused of
great humiditie in the head, and the cure thereof according to our Order, is
with drying things which dissolveth that humiditie, and the Remedy is this:
Take our Cerot Magistrale, and spread it on a cloth the breadth of two fingers
square, and strew thereon the powder of Cantharides: the which of his own
quality and nature is attractive, and brings forth great quantity of water:
then lay this Cerot in the nuke of the neck, and there let it lie at the least
eight or ten days, taking it off every day, and making it clean, then lay it
on that place again. Likewise you shall anoint the head with Oleum Petroleum,
the which is very drying and penetrative; because it comes forth of a Mine
under the earth, the which continually does boil, and so comes forth with the
water, and then is separated. This Oil has a mavelous virtue in himself,
that it defends the fire, for if a man anoint his hands therewith, he may
wash his hands with molten Lead presently, and never hurt him: and that comes
through a certain bidden virtue in that Oil. Also you shall understand, that
this Oil will burn being set on fire, and yet it will not hurt or scald any
thing which it falls on, or touches it.

CHAP. III. To help young Children of certain gross Scabs, that come in the
head and face.
THese gross scabs that come in the head and face, are caused of abundance of
fatness, and moisture of the milk of the Nurse; for the child being tender and
weak of complexion, is not apt to digest that superfluous humor, and so Nature
drives it forth in that order, with great abundance of humiditie, And the best
remedy is, That you shall give the child every morning one scruple to drink,
of our Elixar vitae, because it is a friend to Nature, and nourishes the
body, and dries up superfluous moisture, and so the child shall be helped.
Also you shall anoint the child with our Magno liquore, the which is temperate
of nature, and does penetrate, and so causes solution of that humor.

CHAP. IV. To help young Children of the Rupture.
THe Rupture is caused two ways, the one through weakness of the place, and
the other through much crying, and the remedy is thus: You shall make a Trusse
fit for the child that shall come very close, and then let them use our
Electuarie of Consolida majore, the which is written in my discourse of
Chirurgerie, with diverse of my Medicines: And also you shall give the child to
drink the powder of Alkimilla in wine; and every night you shall anoint the
Rupture with our Oleum Philosophorum, made of Turpentine and Wax: the which is
so peircing, that it warmeth the place that is broke, and helps it to
siccatrize. And so using these three Medicines, thou shall help him quickly,
for this have I proved an infinite of times, and always have had good
success, thanks be to God.

CHAP. V. Of the small Pox that come to Children.
THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choler and phlegm, the which is mixed
with the blood, and so continuing a certain time it does increase so much, that
Nature cannot bear it, and so drives it forth with a great accident of a
Fever, the which commonly does continue four or five days together, and then
comes forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three
days will break and run forth, and many dry. You shall understand that there
are some so weak of Nature that they cannot come forth, but remain within, and
so having no evaporation outwardly, it does choke them, and so die, and that is
the cause why so many creatures from four years old to ten do die without
help. And therefore I considering the true cause of the disease, I have also
found out the true remedy to help them, and that is this. When the child
feels that Accident, give him presently one dram of our Aromatico to eat:
The which has such force and virtue attractive, that it joining unto the
stomach draws unto it all the humors that offend, and carries them forth
both by vomit and sege, and so leaves Nature eased, and the party out of
danger. Then after that anoint him four evenings with our Balsamo artificiato,
and lay him down to sweat, and so he shall be well.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fersa or Measels that come to young Children.
THe Measels that comes to Children, commonly comes after the small pox one
year or two, or three, and is caused of the aforesaid cause; and there is no
other difference between them, but that the person is of more age and strength,
and both come with an accident of a Fever, but in this cause they come forth
thicker, and they dry without breaking or running. Nevertheless, this many
times causes death, if it be not helped quickly, and with the remedies
appropriate. You shall understand that this does not come with so great
vehemency as the other does. You shall only defend the heart and preserve the
stomach from corruption, and putrefaction, and so you shall help them quickly.
The Remedies are these: You shall give them four or five mornings this drink:
Take Julep of Violets, ii. Rosewater, iiii. Oil of Vitriol four grains, mix
them and drink it cold: for this is a rare Medicine.

CHAP. VII. Of Waxing Kernels, which are called of some Scrophulae.
THese Kernels that commonly come in the throat of young Children, are caused
of superfluous melancholy humors corrupted, and are a kind of Ulcer, very
hard to be helped, and evil to have, for when they are broke they cause
excessive pain, because thereunto runs great abundance of humors, and are
so hot and corrupt, that it is impossible to help them with outward Medicines
only, because they proceed of an inward cause. Therefore if thou will help
them, first remove the Cause, and then cure the Effect.

First therefore thou shall give them our Sirrup against Melancholic humors,
written in our discourse of Chirurgerie, and then give him a Dose of our
Aromatico fasting, and that will evacuate the stomach of choler and phlegm, and
dry up those humors that run to the sores. The Medicines that you shall use
to the sore, are two: The first is our Costick, which being laid on the sore,
does mortify it in four and twenty hours, and takes away the corruption.
Note, that you may not take away the Askar, until such time as it falls out
of himself, then lay thereon the black Cerot of Godfredo de Medic. the which
Cerot is written also in Galen. And in short space it will be holp, as I have
proved diverse times.

CHAP. VIII. Of diverse sorts of Scabs, and their Remedies.
SCabs proceed of diverse and sundry causes; Nevertheless, they all are caused
of putrefied blood, as you may see by daily experience. But the said
putrefaction may be caused of diverse accidents, as by eating much moist and fat
meat. It may be caused of a corrupt humor of the French Pox, and of diverse
other causes, which I will leave at this time. Therefore if thou will help any
of the aforesaid causes, it would be necessary to use Purgations, and Unctions.
The Purgations are two, and the Unctions also two. The first Purgation is half
an ounce of our Electuario Angelico, which take in the morning fasting thereon
at the least four hours: then take for ten days together our Soluble Sirrup;
the dose is from. iiii. to. vi. And then if the Scabs come of the Pox, you
shall anoint them five or six nights with our Vnguento magno, and they shall
be helped. But if the scabs come of any other cause, you shall anoint them
with Vnguento de Lithargiro simple, after they are well purged. The Unguent is
made with Vinegar, with the Oil of Roses, and with Litarge.

CHAP. IX. Against Worms in Children.
THis is a rare secret against the Worms, the which I have used a long time,
and always have had good success. Take the seed of Levant, the which is
sweet, and is called in Italian Sementina, and the seeds of Carduus Benedictus,
and of a certain Herb growing on the Sea, called Corolina, ana: stamp it very
fine, and give thereof one dram in honey, and it will kill the Worms, also
thou shall understand that I have a great secret against the Worms, the which I
will show thee; for it may be used more safer then any of these Herbs above
named: You shall anoint all the body over (leaving no part) with our Balm
Artificial, and give the Patient thereof to drink.i. with Wine or Broth. Thou
shall understand, though the child have no Worms, yet the Medicine will do him
great good, because it helps against all manner of diseases that may happen
unto children, and also to other persons.

CHAP. X. Of certain Warts or Carvoli, that come on the Yard of a man.
When Children have passed the foresaid diseases, and that they come to the
age of fourteen years, or fifteen, or more, and that they begin to fall among
women, many times by some accidents, they get these Carvoli, or Warts on the
Yard. And they are of diverse kinds, for some come on the very skin, and some
come on the flesh or end of the Yeard. Some are as though they were burnt or
scorched, and other like Ulcers, and other like Warts. Those that come as
though they were scorched are of small importance, and may be easily helped,
for if you touch them once or twice with our Aqua reali, they will be whole.
Those which are Ulcerated are evil to heal, yet you shall use no strong
Medicines thereto, but only dress them with our Magno liquore, and in short
time they will be whole. Those that are like Warts are very evil to be helped,
for you must mortify them with our Costick, one after another. But if they be
not mortified at once, touch them again, and again, if need require; and when
they are mortified, help them only with our Magno liquore, until they be
whole: And with this Order I have cured a number.

CHAP. XI. Of the Running of the Reins.
THe running of the Reins most commonly comes of the much use of women, or
because those women are corrupted with a certain distemperature of heat, that
is able to corrupt a man using with her. And of this running there may grow
diverse diseases, as you may see by those that are troubled therewith, if they
be not helped as they ought to be. One of the diseases that may come of this,
is great pains in the back, because it does weaken the virtue of the Reins.
There may come also a great burning in the Yeard, and botches in the Groin, and
such like, all which are hard to be dissolved. The cure of this disease is,
You shall take three times our Pills called Pill^^ Aquilonae, every third day
once, that being done, he shall use this Electuarie seven or eight days
together.

Take a certain shell which is smooth, and is called of some Calcinelli, and of
some T^^inole, and of some Telline; Take them and burn them, make it into fine
powder, and take thereof i. the buds of Cankers or wild Eglantine that the Rose
comes of, it is called in Italian Rose canine,. di. Hysope of the Mountain.
ii. white honey crude. vi. Make thereof an Electuarie without fire. The dose
is,. i, in the morning fasting, and at night before meat. Note, that when you
use this Medicine, you shall eat no Pork, nor Fish, nor slimie things.

CHAP. XII. Of a Botch which is caused of a corrupt humor, which is a kind of
Pox.
I Would here show the cause more plainer, but that there are diverse which
have showed it plain enough: but I will show thee the true secret and remedy
to help them. First, Thou shall give them ten mornings together our Soluble
Sirrupe, and then take our Aromatico three times, that being done, and that the
botch is open, you shall dress it with our Magno liquore upon a tent, and lay
upon the sore our Magistrale Cerotte, and with these two medicines thou shall
help it from the beginning to the ending, as I have seen the experience diverse
times.

CHAP. XIII. Of Pellarella that causes the hair to fall off.
PEllarella, or Morphewe, is a kind of Pox, and is one of the first Presagia of
that disease, and is a corrupt humor, and so drying, that in short time it
mortifieth the hair of the head and beard, and eyebrows, and causes them to
fall off. You shall understand that this disease is such a thing, that it
cannot be helped by any means, except it be taken in time, before the hair be
mortified. Nevertheless I will show a secret unto the World, to know when a
man has that disease or no, and in what time he may help it that they shall
not fall. The secret is this, Thou shall understand, that the beginning of
Pellarella, is one Carvoli or more that comes upon the Yeard, the which
seems to be of little importance, because they are helped with ease, but
within ten, or fifteen days after they are whole, there will come a certain
alteration in the throat, which will not suffer him to swallow his meat, which
does endure commonly eight or ten days, and so go away by it self without
any medicine, and in that time the hair is mortified, and then within two or
three months the hair will fall: so that this is the cause why they cannot be
helped when they fall away, for the time was passed before, and the roots
mortified. Therefore if thou will keep thy self from running into such a great
danger, thou may do it easily if thou take it in time: and the remedy is
this. When you have had any of these Carvoli, and that after there comes an
alteration in the throat, then presently purge, and use a defensive unction
that the hair may not mortify. You shall purge him nine days every morning
with our Sirupo Magistrale, and fast thereon four hours. The dose is from iii.
to vi. that being done, you shall give him. di. of Electuario Angelica,
according to the recept, and in the mean time anoint all his face and head
with our Magno liquore, and doing thus, it is not possible that the hair
should fall off. This is a secret, the which few men have known, and never
written of any before this time, and is of so great importance, that it were
necessary to be known for an universal health, that every man might keep
himself from this disease.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Scabbes that come through the Pox.
THe Scabbes that come through the Pox, are of diverse sorts; as you may see by
experience: yet all may be helped with one order of medicine, because they
proceed of no other thing then of the evil disposition of that disease. And
these most commonly do proceed and come after Pellarella, and this is the cure.
You shall give him our Soluble Sirrup every morning warm, with two ounces of
Mel Rosarum, and lay him down to sweat, and cover him well, and then at night
anoint him with Vnguento di Lithargiro, and thus doing five, or six days, he
shall be helped. For with this order I have helped an infinite number, to my
great honor, and satisfaction of the Patient.

CHAP. XV. Of certain Tumors, or swellings in diverse parts of the body.
SWellings, which use to come to man, are called Tumors against nature, and
may come of diverse causes, as by cold, and they do cause inflammations without
pain, and most commonly they come in the articular parts: There are others
which are caused of hot humors, and those are called Risepelli: There are
other that come of the Pox, and these come in the head, and on the legs and
arms, and are of evil digestion, because they are engendered of corrupt,
viscous, and crude humors. You shall understand that these three kinds do
differ in quality, and are also helped with sundry medicines. Those that come
of cold, are windy humors, and may be helped with bathes of herbs, and hot
unctions that have virtue to dissolve the wind. The herbs to make the bath,
are these: Nettles, Mallows, Pelletory of the wall, Bran and Ashes, and make
thereof a bath; and then anoint them with our Oleum Philosophorum, made of
Turpentine and Wax. Those that come of hot humors, you shall wash with Aqua
Vitae, because it opens the pores, and dissolveth that heat. Those that are
come of the Pox, are evil to heal, and his cure must be with great purging:
and the chiefest thing that you can give him, is our potion of Lignum Vitae,
because it does make thin those gross humors, and dissolve the swellings, if
it be taken according to the order of the recept, the which is written in this
Book. And so with this order thou shall help them perfectly.

CHAP. XVI. Of Ache in diverse parts of the body.
AChes, that come to diverse parts of the Bodies, do spring of diverse causes, as
it is said before of the Swellings, or Tumors: but for the most part now in
this our time, they are caused of the Pox, and those kinds of Aches are evil
to be helped, because they are engendered of viscous humors, and putrefaction
of the blood, and of evil disposition of the Liver. And the cure of those
Aches, is to purge the body, and purify the Liver: and that thou shall do with
our Soluble Sirrupe, taking it ten days: and then take our Electuario
Angelica, or Pillole Aquilone, and then use your wine of Lignum sanctum, and
sweat therewith as much as thou can, for it is warm and dry, and apperative,
and provokes sweat, and so they shall be helped. But if it happen that this
will not help, then anoint them three or four times with our Vnguento magno,
and without all doubt by Gods grace, they shall be helped and sound of that
disease.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Cough in the stomock.
THe Cough comes diverse and sundry ways to the stomach, as by cold, and that
is one of the most common causes that may be, and is of small importance,
because it will go away of it self without medicine. There is another kind of
Cough that troubles much old folk, and that is of a Catarrhous humor. The
third kind of Cough written of by us, is that which comes to those that have
the Fever Hectic. Also there is another kind which is caused of the French
Pox. And these are the four kinds of Coughes that do commonly happen unto men
and women. The first kind of Cough that happens unto man through cold, is
easy to be helped, for nature of it self will help it without any other help:
but if thou will help nature thou may with ease, and that shall be with
eating dry and apperatiue meats, and drinking good wine, and so the Cough
will go away quickly. But the Cough which comes to old folk, is caused of a
Catarrhous humor, which is nothing else but debilitie of nature, for lack of
natural heat, the which causes the stomach that it cannot digest his meat in
such order as it should, but ingendreth those superfluous humors, that cause
the Cough. And this must be helped with keeping of diet; that is, to eat little
meat, and to use thing that warm the stomach and help digestion, and this thou
shall do in this order. Take. ii. of our Aromatico, which has virtue to
evacuate the stomach, and then use our Quintessence of Wine, and anoint the
stomach with our Balm artificial, and so shall thou help this kind of Cough.
The third kind of Cough, which is caused of the Fever Hectic, is of evil
nature, that I dare say nothing nor show a Medicine, because the most part that
are troubled therewith, go to Church and never return again to their houses, as
you may see by experience. The fourth kind of Cough is devilish and evil to
help, because it is caused of the Pox, and does not only hurt the stomach, but
causes great pains to the party beside. Nevertheless, thou shall understand
that this is easy to he helped by Gods grace, for them that know the true
secret, which is thus: You shall give him eight or ten days together our
Soluble Sirrup, then take two drachms of our Aromatico, and then perfume him
with Cinabar five or six mornings, or so long until that he feel pain in his
gums, and then he shall be whole. For this is a great secret, to help that
kind of Cough caused of the Pox, as I have proved a thousand times with good
success.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the white Scab that comes in the Head.
THis Scab is of an evil corruption in the superior parts, which is caused of
abundance of moisture, and heat of the Stomach, which sends these vapors up
to the head, and so goes out that way. This is of two kinds, the one is hot
and dry, and that is with a certain white crust, without any other kind of
putrefaction: the other kind is hot and moist, and that causes a certain
crust, which is full of matter under it; so that as they differ in quality,
they differ also in cure. Those that are hot and dry, must have Medicines that
cool the heat, and extinguish the dryness, and this thou shall do with Sirrup
of Citarch, and purge often with Cassia, and use cooling things, as Succorie,
Melons, Lettice, and such like. The other kind which is hot and moist, you
must first help the heat, and then dry the humiditie, which you shall do with
vomiting, and purging, and keeping diet, and eating of drying meats. The first
drying scab you shall anoint only with our Magno liquore, which without help
of any other thing, will cure it after they be purged, as is before said. The
second kind you shall help, after the body is purged with our Cerot
Magistrale, strewing thereon Cantharides in fine powder, which have virtue
attractive; by which means it mundifieth the head of that superfluous
humiditie, and then anoint him with our Vnguento magno, and in short space it
will be whole, because it is cold and dry. And so by this means thou may
heal these two kinds of Scabs, as I have done diverse times, having respect to
the cause. Ye shall understand that this disease is many times taken from the
Nurse, the which is infected with the Pox, and so her milk being corrupted, it
corrupts the child, and therefore there must be good consideration thereof in
the cure.

CHAP. XIX. Of Risipella.
THis Risipella is an inflammation with swelling and redness, the which
commonly comes in the face, arms and legs, and in no other places of the
body, and it is caused of alteration of the blood, as I will show you an
example by a pot that you sees your meat in: When it is set on the fire, and
is full of liquor, lacking one or two inches of the top, and when it begins
to boil through the great heat of the fire, it runs over the pot: and so by
the like example we may say, that Risipella is a great alteration of the blood,
through superfluous heat; and this occasion of heat proceeds of great
quantity of phlegm, that is in the stomach; for because as soon as they have
vomited the phlegm, they are helped of Risipella, for I have seen the experience
thereof diverse times. Therefore give them of the juice of Elder-Roots. iiii.
and of Honey of Roses. ii. in the morning fasting, for this purges the Stomach
of phlegm, and cools the blood, then hold the parts over the fume of hot
water, and bathe it with pure Aqua vitae, distilled without phlegm; for this is
one of the most excellent Medicines that can be found, because it is aperative
and attractive, and presently dissolveth that alteration, and takes away the
pain. Also it would be good to use five or six mornings to drink. i. of Julep
of Violets, with six grains of Vitriol, for this mundifieth the stomach, and
causes digestion, and of himself is most wholesome, for that it mortifieth all
hot diseases.

CHAP. XX. Of the Squinancie.
THe Squinancie is a certain alteration in the throat, which is caused of a
flatuous or windy humor, and this comes with such a vehemency, that if it be
not helped quickly, it will choke him, for it stops the conduites where the
breath comes through, and lets a man to swallow his meat, and the Remedy
is this: Take of our Electuario angelica,. di. and then touch the throat within
with our Aqua reale three or four times, and without anoint it with Oleum
Philosophorum of Turpentine and Wax, because it is very drying: And thus using
the aforefaid remedies, thou may help them without letting blood, or any
other thing in short space: for herewith I have cured a great number. You shall
understand, that oil of Linseed is very appropriate to that matter, if you give
the Patient four ounces. Also the tooth of a Bore made in powder, and drunk the
quantity of. ii. in Linseed oil helps the Squinancie. These I have proved
diverse times.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Emerodes that come in the Fundament.
THese in Naples be called Moricole, and in Venice, Maroelle, and in Spain,
Almorane; and are an alteration of blood in the Emorodiall veins, which many
times come forth in the lower parts with great pain, and these are caused of
putrified humors of the body, and corruption of the blood, which corruption
many times comes of the Pox, or such like diseases. There are also diverse
kinds, but principally two: The one sort is within the fundament, and causes
great pain when they go to stool: The other sort comes forth of the fundament,
and are not so painful as the other are. To cure them that are within the
Fundament, you shall give the Patient eight or ten mornings our Syrupo
Magistrale, and then let him take of our Aromatico,. ii. and use Glisters
wherein is put half an ounce of Aqua reale at a time, and so thou shall help
them. The best remedy for those that come forth is to make incision, or to
make a little hole in them, that the blood may come forth which is putrified,
and so by evacuation thou shall help them. Also thou shall understand, that
vomiting is necessary in the cure of them both, because it opens the veins.
Also oil of Eggs, and oil of Frankincense, and oil of Linseed are very
profitable to anoint them therewith to ease the pain.

CHAP. XXII. A goodly and easy way to help all sorts of Fevers according to
our Order.
THe Fever Quotidian or continual Fever, or any other kind whatsoever, do
proceed only of two principal causes, that is, of corruption and
putrefaction, as you may perceive how that when the Fever is entered, the
Patient is all corrupted, beginning at the stomach, the which is first
corrupted. For proof you may always see that as soon as a man is sick,
presently he loses his appetite and cannot eat; afterward it corrupts the
blood, for by experience, if you let them blood, it is always found corrupted,
and not as it is in a sound body. It corrupts also the senses, so that the
sick is not stable senced, nor cannot sleep, or rest by any means whilst he
has that accident. That it is caused also of Putrefaction you may see by them
that have the Fever. For always when the Fever comes, presently the stomach
does putrify, and spitteth forth filthy spittle: Also it does putrify the
body, because their Excrements that they void are putrified and stinking more
then others, and their Urine putrified and alterated from his natural course.
Then seeing the Fever is caused of corruption and putrefaction, there are four
things necessary to be done in the cure thereof. The first is, to evacuate the
stomach: The second, to purge by urine: The third, to evacuate the body: And
the fourth is, to purge by sweat: Which four operations may be done one after
another with great ease, and will restore the Patient to his health. But you
shall understand, that all cannot be holp, for that God almighty has made us
to die, and when that time comes, medicines will do no good, but if that time
be not yet come, by the help of God, with these Medicines he shall be restored
to his former health. The first thing, as I said, is to take a vomit, which
does evacuate the stomach of choler and phlegm, that does much offend the body
diseased: After that, evacuate the body with those things that the Physician
thinks most convenient for that purpose, for there be many purgations to
dissolve the body, and to evacuate malign humors: After that, make him purge
by urine. Fourthly, and last of all, give him medicines that open the pores,
and that provokes sweat. And thus with these four operations, the most part
shall be holp of that infirmity with great ease, and in short time: And as I
have said, this is a most true order that never fails, except (as I said
before) when the Lord will call them. And as for these medicines, you shall
find them written in this book severally with their uses and quantities.

CHAP. XXIII. Another cure of the said Fevers,
IF thou will help the said Fevers according to our order: when the Patient is
greatly alterated therewith, thou shall use five ways wherewith thou shall
easily help them, the which are these. The first as I said before is Vomit: the
second evacuation of the body: the third evacuation by urine: the fourth to
provoke sweat: and the fifth by unction. Nevertheless each of these alone is
sufficient to help the said Fever: but yet using them all five, there is no
doubt but thou may dissolve any evil sort of malign Fever, except as I
said before, God will call them out of this World: but to the purpose of the
cure First thou shall set on five or six boxing glasses, according to the
complexion and age of the infirmed: then the next morning give him one dose of
our Electuario angellica, with Sirrup of Sorrel, and water of Sorrel. Then
the next morning following give him some Sirrup appropriate for that disease,
and put thereto. ii. of Sirrupo Magistrale, with Rhabarbe: that being ended,
give him three or four times Julep of Violets with Oil of Sulphur, made per
Campana, the dose of the Julep is ii. and of the Oil of Sulphur four or five
grains mixed together, and this you shall take in stead of Sirrup betimes in
the morning, and it will make them sweat and purge by urine, which are most
necessary for the sick: and in the mean season you shall anoint them every
night with Mag no liquore, which will make them rest well, and take away all
their pains throughout the body, and so by this means the Fever shall be
perfectly taken away. Also take great heed that you take no more blood then is
necessary, neither let them keep any straight Diet, but let them keep a good
regiment of Life. But when this Fever does come through some other cause, then
it were necessary to remove the principal cause, if thou will cure them: For
if it be caused of a Catarre, of necessity you must dissolye the Catarre
first, and then help the Fever. Also if the Fever be caused of a wound, it were
necessary first to take away the pain of the Wound, and then the Fever will
depart. And thus in every kind of Fever, it is most necessary to know the
original from whence it is caused: And this is the true way to cure these
infirmities, which I have proved infinite times.

CAAP. XXIIII. Of the continual Fever.
THere are many kinds of Fevers, therefore I will mention of them that are
most known unto the world, and first of the continual Fever, that is of those
that are only hot, and continue in one order both day and night, the which is
caused of alteration and corruption of the humors in the body, which engender
so much corruption in the stomach, and in the blood, that they cause that
accident of Fever: And the very order to cure it is this. In the beginning of
the alteration let him keep a good diet, and drink no wine: and that is done
because that corruption is apt to corrupt all that enters into the body
during that alteration, and therefore meats of great substance or nourishment,
are sooner turned into greater putrefaction in the body: But when the third day
of the Fever is past, then take of our Aromatico. ii. which will evacuate the
stomach of that corruption: and that day that you take this Aromatico, drink as
much crude water as you will: which is done because the stomach shall remain
clear washed of that corruption, which being done, you shall give him three or
four mornings our Soluble Sirrup, and give him good meats, and let him drink
Wine, because it cannot hurt in any wise, for it cannot putrife in the body:
For the sirrup does evacuate every day the corruption: and when the blood is
alterated of that putrefaction, it goes to the veins, and so disperseth
through the whole body. It would be good to set on boxing glasses to take away
blood, and also to use drying unctions, as our Balsamo artificato, and Oil of
Turpentine and Wax, and thus doing (if the Patient be not called of God) tho^
shall help him within short space. And this is the true secret to use for that
Fever, which I have revealed unto the world, that every one might have it at
their pleasure.

CHAP. XXV. A great Secret that helps the continual Fever.
THese Fevers that are not accidental, that is, not caused of a wound or
imposthume, or other kind of infirmity apparent, are caused of a certain
humor between the skin and the flesh, which would have exhalation: as you may
see by experience in this kind of Fever, how that sweats and boxing is very
appropriate to their solution. And in this case I will show thee a great
remedy, with which after convenient purging thou may help in manner all
those kinds of Fevers. And this is the remedy: Take Oippa ofir, the which is
a simple well known to all the world, take of that herb a small quantity, and
stamp it a little, and lay it upon the wrist, and bind it hard, and there let
it lie until it have made a blister full of water, which you shall break, and
there will come forth great abundance of water, and by that place the Fever
shall be dissolved. And the reason is, because it evacuateth that humor which
engendereth the accident: then the cause being removed, the effect will cease,
and the Patient shall be whole.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Fever Tertian.
THe Fever Tertian does not continue in one manner, but comes and goes, and
is caused of chollerick humors: for as soon as the fit comes it moves
choler, and in many it provokes vomit. There are two sorts of those Fevers,
The one comes with an accident, first cold, and then hot: and the other sort
comes always hot, when the accident comes: and sometimes that accident
comes twice a day, and that is called a double Tertian, which is hard to
help, because letting blood, the diet, and purging of the body are all hurtful
and contrary to that disease, therefore I will open to thee a secret wherewith
thou shall help them. Thou shall give him three hours before the fit ss. of
Eleborus niger in powder, with. i. of Mel Rosarum: and after it drink. i. of
common water, and this you shall take twice, and then use this potion ten days
every morning. Take Julep of Violets. i. fine Aqua vitae. di. Oil of Sulphur,
that is perfect iiii. grains, and mix them together, this mundifieth the
stomach, and purges by urine, and provokes sweat, and warmeth the blood:
which effects are necessary to the solution of that Fever, giving you great
charge that you keep no straight diet in any wise, because it weakneth the
stomach, cools the blood, and hinders nature, so that the Patient can
scarce be helped. But with our order thou shall help the most part of that
Fever.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Fever of Repression.
THis Fever is an alteration of the blood, which is caused of being over hot,
and then cold and this is called a Fever propter accidens, and is not holp as
the other Fevers are: for thou shall help only the Repression, and the Fever
will go away without any other help. Thou shall give the Patient of our
Aromatico,. ii. that being done, give him two Sirrups every day, the one in the
morning, the other at night two hours after Supper, as hot as you may suffer
to drink, and these are the Sirrups. Take Sirrup of Quinces, Stecados, Mel
Rosarum, ana,. i. new Must boiled,. vi. and in the mean time while you take
this Sirrup, it were necessary to make a moist bath with herbs, as Nettles,
Mallows, Egrimonie, Carduus Benedictus, Rosemary, Origanum, and Calamint, ana
lb. iii. Commin, Anniseede, Coliander, Sileris montani, ana lb. i. then boil
all those in a great Kettle with water, and then let the Patient sit over the
fume, and cover him with clothes until he sweat. And thus you shall do three
times one day after another: and thou shall help him perfectly, as I have had
experience.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Fever Hectic.
THis Fever is a viscous and putrified humor in the stomach and lunges, the
which is caused of a debility and weakness of nature that cannot digest the
offensive humors. There are diverse sorts of this Fever, nevertheless they are
all evil to be holpt, and are counted uncurable. Nevertheless, I will show
thee some excellent remedy very wholesome, that may pleasure them, although they
are nigh their death. The first medicine that shall do them good, is our
Electuario angellica, of which you shall give half an ounce in the morning
fasting, for this presently joyneth unto the stomach, and draws to it all the
offensive humors, and carries them forth by vomit and seege, and so leaves
the stomach eased and clean, that the Patient thinks himself whole: But yet
the stomach begins again to fill with a great suffocation, that will not
let the Patient take rest, so that this medicine may well ease them, but not
help them quite. Also our Elixar vitae does much good in this disease, and
also our Balm artificial: if you anoint the stomach therewith at night when
you go to bed. Also use our distillation for the Hectic: these may all help a
little but not cure. The Fever Hectic may come also of a Catarre, of the Pox,
and such like causes, and then they require medicines according to the cause:
as if the Fever be caused of a Catarre, let them use our Magno liquore to
drink, the dose is one ounce at a time, with half an ounce of Mel Rosarum, and
these use for a month at the least. And if it be caused of the Pox, let him
take Sarsaparilla, or Lignum vitae, Pillole Aquilone, or such like that will
help the Pox: and thus doing, the cure will have good success: but when it is
caused of debility of Nature (as is said before) they spit blood until the end.

CHAP. XXIX. A new order wherewith thou may cure and help the most part of
the Fever Hectic.
MAny have thought that the Fever Heclick is altogether desperate and
uncurable, and that by no means it might be resolved: But because it is caused
of diverse and sundry accidents, I say that many kinds may be helped and cured:
For I find it may come of infinite causes, as aforesaid. There is one kind that
comes through the weakness of nature it self, and that begins to destroy
the Lunges, and that kind I find to be incurable, because it is caused of the
evil nature of the man, and not through any accident, and in that case I
believe it cannot be dissolved by any means. Also there are many other
Hecticks caused of the French Pox, of which I have seen and cured an infinite,
and they are easy to cure: For curing the Pox, the Fever will be dissolved.
There is another kind that depends of a salt humor, and some other of a
Catarre, and of many other things: Therefore if thou will help the said Fever,
it were necessary to know the true cause whereof it depends, the which in my
judgment is hard to be known, if that the Patient himself do not tell it: and
therefore it is necessary for the Physician to examine them well, and to enquire
whether they have had any kind or spice of the Mal Francese before, whereof the
said Fever might have his original: and so doing, he with his judgment may be
resolved of the nature of that infirmity: and if it chance that the said
Feverhad his original of the Pox, the Phisician may resolve it with medicines
appropriate for that disease, with purging him strongly, and giving him Lignum
Sanctum, or Salsa pariglia, and also perfume him with Olibanum Sinaber and
Mirrha, ana: and so by the help of God, and means of these medicines thou
shall help them all, or at least the most part of that kind of Fever Hectic.
But if the Phisician find that kind of Fever to be caused of a Catarre, then
use the medicines that help the Catarre, and so the Fever shall be whole. But
when he finds it to be of the weakness of Nature, in that case there is no
help that is sure. Nevertheless, I have cured some of them with great
difficulty, and with Medicines of great efficacy: And that was with giving
them every morning one dram of good Soap in tablets according to our
invention, and that they used for a month together: the which Soap has virtue
to dry that abundance of spittle, and to heal the Lungs ulcerated, and it also
strengthens the Stomach marvellously: After that I caused them to use our
distillation of a Hen for the Hectic, and this they did continually drink:
Also I caused them to use our Balfamo artificiato to anoint therewith every
night after Supper, the which is peircing, and comfort and augmenteth
natural strength, and comfort much the infirmed: Also I caused them to use
Aromatico Rosato, the which comfort the weak Stomach. And by this means I
have helped some of them as it is well known.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Fever Quartane.
THe Fever Quartane is a motion of a certain accident cold and hot, which is
caused of melancholy humors corrupted and putrified, the which every third
day does cause that accident to come, and begins with great cold and
continues a good while, and then comes hot. And this Quartane both the
ancient Doctors, and these in our time do count in a manner uncureable.
Nevertheless, I that have sought always to help those diseases which were
counted uncurable, amongst the rest have found the true and perfect cure for
the Quartane Ague, and to dissolve the melancholy humors, which is done with
three Medicines that are rare and mavelous to dissolve any Quartane. The
first is, Mercury Precipitate without corrosive, giving thereof ten grains,
with half an ounce of Sugar Rosate, and that day eat little meat; that being
done, take a pound of Iva Artetica, and boil it in eight pound of white wine,
and common Honey one pound, until a third part be consumed, and of that drink
morning and evening six ounces warm one hour after supper: And in the mean time
anoint every night his Reins with our Balsamum artificial. Thus doing thou
shall help any Quartane. I have also found other rare ways to cure this Fever
Quartane, as hereafter follows.

CHAP. XXXI. The Order to help the Fever Quartane of all sorts, in short time.
THe Fever Quartane is caused of a melancholy humor as aforesaid, with a
continual distillation of the head, descending to the stomach, and augmenting
the evil disposition of the body; and by reason of that distillation,
provokes much sweat when the accident of the Fever comes: And likewise that
distillation causes such cold in the Marrow of the Reins and Back, and an
infinite of other disorders which trouble the body greatly. But to avoid all
these inconveniences, and to dissolve wholly that accident of the Quartane
according to our order, because I have helped more then any Physician of our
time. I will show thee how with these Remedies following thou shall help them,
though not all, yet the greater part truly most miraculously, and the Order to
dissolve it is thus. You shall give the Patient a dose of our Aromatico in the
morning to eat, and drink thereon two or three ounces of good wine, and fast
thereon six hours, and this Medicine is most convenient the day of the fit,
because the infirmity removes great quantity of humors, and the medicine
evacuateth them; and thus giving it three times in the day of the fit, it will
work a great operation. But if the Fever be in a person of melancholy
complexion, then it is where it would be; for you may see that in a melancholy
person, the Fever has more force, then in any other complexion, which proves,
that that Fever, and that complexion are most like: But in that case you shall
cure them in this Order. You shall give him ten or fifteen days our Sirrup
against the melancholy humor, which is written in this Book, which you shall
take two hours before day hot, and then sleep one sleep thereon, and thus do
every morning, and every night anoint all the parts of the body with our
Balsamo artificiato, and he shall be helped. But if it happen that this does
not cure him, let not to give him this remedy, which most surely (God willing)
will help him, and that remedy is our Aqua Balsami, of which he shall take
every morning two Drachms fasting, and so continue until the Fever be gone
quite: so that of force using all the aforesaid remedies, the Fever must needs
depart. And the reason is this, that our Aromatico evacuateth the stomach of
all impediments by vomit, and lets the descension of the head, which causes
the accident. Our Syrrup evacuateth the melancholy humor, and dissolveth it
by his proper quality. Our Balsamo the which is subtle and penetravive dries
and comfort the place offended, in such order, that it casts forth all the
matter that may offend Nature. Our Aqua balsami also being drunk, does dry the
evil humors, and augment strength, in so much that it quite extinguisheth the
said Quartane. And this may be used in all manner of persons, and in all times
of the year without any doubt of inconvenience: and it is a new remedy that
never was set out before of the Ancients, which I have used to the great profit
of the Patients.

CHAP. XXXII. Another discourse of a mavelous secret against the said
Quartane.
THe Fever Quartan is caused of melancholy humors, which has his fit coming
every third day, first cold with great thirst, and then comes the heat, which
remains with some longer then with other some, and the cause, hereof is hard
to be known. Nevertheless, I seeking out continually natural things, and the
quality of the accidents, I do find that this Fever begins always in some
particular place, as in the head with a certain pain round about it, or in the
nose and ear, or in the Reins and Legs: And therefore he that can find out the
place where first begins the accident, may easily help them, because the
Fever is dissolved with two things only, that is, exhalation and exsication,
and herein consists the secret. The order to make the Exhalation shall be
thus: Make a Cerot of Frankincense, Pitch, Wax, Turpentine, Myrrh and Aloes,
upon the which Cerot you shall put the powder of Cantharides, and then lay it
upon the place where they feel the Fever come first, that is on the particular
part where the accident comes, and this you shall change twice, except the
first day of the Fever. And to make the exsication, give him every day in the
morning to drink,. di. of our Aquabalsami for twelve days, and with the
Balsamo artificiato anoint every night his Stomach and Reins, and so he shall
be helped, giving you charge also that before you use these Medicines, that he
take three times our Aromatico, and so he shall be quite helped.

CHAP. XXXIII. A secret to help all Fevers in their beginning.
When the Fevers are new begun or taken, and that the putrefaction is not yet
confirmed, then may it be helped with great ease, but after they have taken
their beginning, they are hardly helped. Therefore when the Fever is new begun,
you shall give them ii of our Aromatico fasting in the morning: and the next
day about the same hour you shall give them. i. of our Vegitabile Sirrup: and
the third day you shall give them four Drachms of our Electuario angelica with
broth, the which takes away the Fever altogether. And this operation intends
only to the continual Fever, Quotidian, Tertian, and putrified or
pestilentiall, but not to the accidental, or Hectic, nor Quartane: For these
three kinds are much differing from the rest, because the accidental is caused
of another infirmity anterior or going before. The Fever Hectic is caused of
weakness of nature, and the Quartane is caused of great quantity of
melancholicke humors, and they are cured by contrary means unto the first.
The accidental are cured with helping the principal infirmity: The Hectic
is cured by helping of Nature, and preserving the Liver and Lungs from
putrefaction: The Quartane is cured with Vomits, Unctions, Cerottes, and drying
drinks, and these are great secrets to be known: For in this Chapter consists
a great part of Physic, and Surgery if you consider well thereon.

CHAP. XXXIIII. A Secret of one Simple that helps in manner all Fevers.
THere are an infinite of medicines that dissolve the Fever, but above all
other this seems to me of great authority, because it helps it with such
ease, that it is to be wondered at. With this remedy through the Divine
goodness, I have cured a great number, and the Secret is this. You shall gather
in the Month of August a certain herb, which the Italians do call Oreula,
which you shall dry and make into powder, of the which you shall give the sick
as much as will lie upon a sixpence, with water or wine, and give it warm in
the morning, and fast thereon three or four hours, and thus doing, the Patient
shall be helped with great ease, and in short time: for this is a great secret
which may be used in all times and in every occasion, and always it works an
operation in one manner.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Gout.
THe Gout which comes to men, is a distemperature and alteration, which is
caused of corrupt and undigested humors, and also of feeding on meats that
nourish much, and then to use no exercise, as you may see by the most part of
them that be troubled with that disease. Also this disease, both of the old and
new Doctors has been counted uncurable, as it is known to every one: But yet
I, which have done nothing else but sought out the nature and quality of
things, have found diverse inventions in sundry Arts, as thou may read in my
Caprici Medicinali, and so amongst the rest, I have found (through the help of
God) the true and perfect Secret to help the Gout, so that it shall never come
again: Of which disease I have cured a great number in diverse Cities of the
world, as in Palermo, in Sicilia, in Messina, and in diverse places of Calabria,
in Naples, in Rome, and in Venice, as it is well known unto the most part of
the Inhabitants of those Cities.

CHAP. XXXVI. A Note concerning the Cure of the Gout, taken out of a Letter
which this Author wrote unto a certain noble Seigniour, the Duke of Vrbine.
FIrst you shall understand, that the Gout of what kind soever it be, either
hot or cold, or of any other temperature, they all come of one only cause,
although they work diverse Effects, which Effects come through the complexions
of them that have that infirmity: As for example, to show it more plainly, you
may see that in fat men, the Gout comes always with inflammation and redness
and great pain: In lean persons it comes always with pains, but with less
inflammation. In choleric and melancholy persons, it comes with tumors, and
that is Nodosa. And the cause of this infirmity is, of an evil quality
ingendered in the stomach, in the Liver, and in the blood: And the cure
thereof, is to ease the stomach of that evil, and to purge the Liver and the
blood, and to mittigate the pain: All which thou may do with these three
Remedies following, viz. our Pillole Magistrale, our Unction for the Cout, and
our Quinta essentia solutivo: for the Pills do discharge the stomach, and our
Quinta essentia solutivo purges the Liver and the blood, and our Unction
takes away the pain, for if you remedy the cause which is only one, the
effect will cease. As concerning the Gout you shall cure it in this Order:
First, when you feel the pain begin to come, you shall take two doses of those
Pills in the morning fasting, one day after another, or if you will, rest a day
or two according to your strength, that being done, you shall take every
morning. ii. of our Quinta essentia solutivo in half a Porringer full of the
broth of Veal, and a little Sugar, and this take five hours before meat; and
keep no straight Diet, but eat reasonably, and every night after Supper anoint
the grief with our Unction for the Gout, and thus through the help of God, and
the virtue of these Medicines, the Gout shall be cured.

CHAP. XXXVII. Another Discourse upon the same infirmity of the Gout, and the
Order to cure it, taken out of his Book called, Thesaurro della Vita Humana.
ALthough the wise and learned of the world, have always believed that the
Gout is of diverse kinds, yet they have all been deceived; for that infirmity
is one only, and comes of one only cause, although in some it come in manner
of Phlegmone, and in some other like Risipilla, and in other Nodosa, and in
other with pain without alteration, and in some other in diverse manners; all
which is caused through the diversity of complexions, for that one man is
phlegmatic, the other sanguine, the other choleric, and the other adust, and
thus by these means, many have thought the Gout to have been of diverse kinds,
whereas indeed it is only one, and is cured with one only order, and
dissolved altogether for ever; for that infirmity is caused of no other then
of rotten humors caused of indigestion, and to say truth, we see that the said
infirmity never comes in manner, but unto those persons that feed well on
meats of great nourishment, which for want of exercise, that Nature might
digest it, they wanting natural heat, cannot have their orderly digestion, and
for that cause the humors do ingrosse out of measure, and engender that
infirmity, and then Nature that always seeks to ease her self of that which
offends her, drives forth that humor unto the extreme parts, as the hands,
and feet, or other particular parts, and this is the Gout: And these humors
many times are cause of Mal francese, and this is all the secret. He therefore
that is advertised by me, shall be most cunning in curing of it.

CHAP. XXXVIII. What order must be used in curing of the said Gout.
SEeing the Gout (as I said before) are gross humors undigested coming of the
aforesaid cause, it were most necessary, if thou will cure them to do three
operations. The first of them is Phlebothomie, which must be done under the
tongue, cutting overthwart one of those two veins: For that Phlebothomie
evacuateth the stomocall humors that are cause of that corruption. The second
operation that is to be done, is to assubtiliate the gross and rotten humors,
and to evacuate them quite. The third operation that is to be done, is to
preserve nature in good temperature, and to help the digestion, and thus doing,
the said infirmity shall be extincted. If therefore thou will help the Gout,
and after they are helped, keep the Patient in good temperature and prosperity
of life, it were necessary to do these three operations. After the first is
done, as I have said, it were needful to come to the second, which is to
assubtiliate the gross humors, which will be done with four remedies. The
first of them is our Quinta essentia solutiva, which subtiliateth the humors,
and evacuateth them downwards. The second remedy is our Electuario angelica,
which evacuateth the humors hanging in all parts, and leaves nature so eased,
that it may well prevail. The third remedy is a Fomentation, which dries up
the humidity of the head and stomach, and by means of that operation the
disease shall remain extincted. The fourth and last remedy is our Balsamo
against the pains, with which you shall anoint upon the place grieved, for it
mittigateth the pains greatly. And thus with these four remedies thou shall
help the Gout perfectly, as I have often times done in Venice, and at Rome, and
in diverse other places of Italy, well known there unto all men.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Order to preserve a man from the Gout, when he is once helped.
AFter that a man through the divine goodness of God shall be helped of the
Gout, he may if he will preserve himself in health, with these three noble
Remedies. The first of them is our Vegitable Quintessence, the which does cause
good digestion, warmeth the stomach, and defends it from corruption, by which
Effects it will return Nature in manner as it was in youth, and it preserves
the sight and the hearing, and diverse good operations which are all necessary.
The second Remedy is our Oleo incompostibile, with which you shall anoint the
stomach, and that will cause digestion, comfort the heart, provoke sleep, and
keep the stomach, that therein shall breed no evil quality of humors. The
third Remedy is, our Pillolae aquilonae, which does evacuate the humor
hanging, always when it ingendereth in the stomach, they cleanse the head, and
are by their nature against all sorts of pains. And thus with these three
Medicines, every one may preserve himself from that infirmity, as it is daily
proved, and seen in Venice, and in diverse other places in Italy.

CHAP. XL. The cure of a certain Gentleman that was troubled with the Gout, and
a great Stitch in his side.
THe Cure of this man was with these five Remedies following, that is, with our
Aromatico, Quinta essentia solutiva, Pillolle angelica, Oleo incompostibile,
and Qintaessenti Vegitabile: For you shall understand, that our Aromatico
takes away the pains of the Stomach, so that the other Medicines may work
their operations the better. Our Quinta essentia solutiva, takes away the
cause of the infirmity, and the Pills take away the evil quality. The Unction
takes away the pain: And the Vegitabile Quintessence, preserves them that it
comes not again. The Dia Aromatico must be taken in the morning fasting, the
dose is. ii. at once. The Quintaessentia solutiva you shall take with broth of
a Capon and Sugar fasting, without any observations, the dose is two or three
drachms at a time. Our Pillole Angelica you shall take two hours before supper,
the dose is from. i. to. ii. The Unction you shall anoint after Supper upon
the sore places, so often until the pain be gone. Our Vegitabile Quintessence
you shall drink every morning half an ounce, and thus continuing thou shall be
perfectly whole by Gods help.

CHAP. XLI. A Discourse upon the Sciatica, and his remedy.
THe Sciatica is so called, because it is upon the bone which is called Scio,
and of that it takes the name Sciatica, the which is caused of an evil
quality in the Stomach and Liver, the which you may see by the cure; for if ye
cure the Stomach, and help the Liver, the Sciatica will cease, and by this
means thou may see whether I say the truth or no. Seeing then that the
Sciatica is caused as is said before, ye shall understand that it is so caused,
by reason that the stomach cannot well digest that which it should, and so it
causes crude and undigested humors, of the which Nature would be discharged,
he casts them forth of the stomach, and having no other way to come forth of
the Stomach but by the ordinary ways, they do pass, and of force they must
pass by those powers that pass by the Liver, and so the Liver which is able
both to resolve the good and the evil quality, remains still infected of
that indisposition, and not being able to digest them according unto the order
of Nature, they ingross and become malign, and then Nature the which with all
industry would discharge himself of that burden, sending them to the higher
parts, sends them downwards, and when they come unto Scio, where they must
pass with difficulty by certain small muscles, they ingrosse in that place,
and cause inflammation and pain, the which Inflammation or swelling, after the
body is well purged, is resolved with Vesicatores Ventosos, and attractive
Cerots and such like things. Also attractive Glisters are most wholesome because
they discharge the humor in the lower parts, and comfort the Sciatica.
Nevertheless, ye shall understand that there are certain and true appropriate
Medicines to resolve it with brevity, the which are these that follow. First,
when the Patient is in most extreme pain, let him blood under the tongue, the
which is such a singular remedy, that it causes the world to wonder thereat:
after that purge him with our Soluble Sirrup, six or seven days, that being
done, take away the water which causes the pain, then comfort the Patient with
the Oil that is separated from the flower of flowers, and distilled in a
Retort, then all this being done, the Patient shall remain helped to thy great
honor. And therefore he that will cure the Sciatica, it were necessary that
he consider well of the nature and quality of the infirmity, and when they
are satisfied to be the Sciatica, in that case cure them according to this our
Order, the which by the grace of God, and virtue of these Medicines, they shall
remain helped of that indisposition, for this is a great Secret.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Pains of the Mother.
THe Pains of the Mother which women are troubled withal, is an alteration in
the Matrix, that may come of diverse causes, as of cold, of moistness, of
dryness, of melancholic humors, of phlegmatic, and of choleric, the which is
to be proved diverse ways. Nevertheless, I will show thee the Secret to cure
it generally, and the order is thus. You shall give the Patient a dose of
Pillolae Aquilonae fasting, and sleeping thereon one sleep, for these Pills do
purge the Matrix, then take Electuario Angelica half an ounce, which purges
the blood and choler: That being done, take Cantharides in powder i.
Galingale, and the roots of Mercury, ana. di. mix them altogether, and put it
into a little piece of Sarcenet, and bind it like a button, and put it into
the Matrix as high as you can, and there let it remain four and twenty hours
without moving of it, for it purges divinely; and herewith thou may cure any
great impediment in the Matrix: That being done, they shall use our Sirrup
against the pains of the Mother, the which comfort and purges all humors
in the body that offend the Mother: And this is a great secret which was found
out by me. You shall understand, that whosoever would know the truth of this
disease, it were necessary for him to be expert in Philosophy, because it is
an operation of natural things, the which cannot be well understood without
great knowledge in natural Philosophy.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the pains in the head.
THe pain in the Head is a disease of the brains, which is caused of putrified
humors in the stomach, the which is like unto a pot that boileth, causing the
vapors to ascend, which if they be evil, the fume is evil to the taste and
smell; but if there boil any good thing therein, the fumes are pleasant both to
the smell and taste. And so likewise our stomach being filled with good juice,
fills the brain with good fumes; but being filled with evil corrupt humors,
it hurts the brain, and causes pains of the head. The like pains of the head
may come of alteration of the blood, and to help that accident, you must first
remove the cause principal, which is done with purging and evacuating of the
stomach of those putrified humors; which thou shall do with our Aromatico,
giving it to the Patient two or three times, every five days once. The dose is
ii. and then the pain will cease, of what cause soever it do come; this done,
take the juice of a Beet root one ounce, Oil of bitter Almonds one dram; mix
them well together, and snuff it up into the nose every morning until it come
into the mouth, for this does purge the head marvellously; this being done, it
would be good to take our Soluble Sirrup four or five mornings cold, and so
the Patient shall be helped.

CHAP. XLIV. Of deafness of the Ears.
Deafness in the Ears do proceed of diverse causes, as of a Catarre, cold, and
humiditie of the head. But of what cause soever it come, I will show thee a
true secret to cure them quickly. First purge them eight or ten days with our
Sirupo Magistrale, and then take our Pillole Aquilone, three times, and then
perfume them five mornings with this: Take Synabar. i. Olibanum, and Myrrh, ana
one scruple, mix them and divide it in five parts, the which you shall occupy
at five times, standing over them with your mouth open, that the fume may enter
in, for it dries and resolves the evil humors in the head that himder the
hearing; and thus doing thou shall be helped. Nevertheless, it would be good to
put the fat a of silver Eel into the ear, which has a principal virtue to
comfort the hearing. Also our Aqua balsami being put into the ear, comfort
the sight and hearing marvelloufly, and all impediments in the head, and evil
humors it destroys through his quality and nature, and augmenteth the good,
in such order that using of it thou shall see great marvells: for these are the
true secrets for that disease.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Infirmities of eyes, and their causes and cures.
THe Infirmities of the Eyes comes of diverse and sundry causes, of the which I
will make mention, especially of those that are of most importance, and most
dangerous to hurt the sight. There is one that is called in Italian Razoni, and
that is caused of the heat of the blood, and his effects are certain small
wheals that run round about the eyelids, and this Infirmity is of small
importance, for only with linament of Tutia they may be healed, anointing
them three or four times. There is another kind of infirmity in the eyes that
comes to many, and is caused of moisture and heat in the head, and that is a
redness with watering and great burning: And although this be troublesome, yet
it is not dangerous to heal. For with purging the head and body, and with
Boxing glasses, and with certain Unctions appropriate they shall remain whole.
There is another kind of infirmit^e in the eye, and that is when the ball of
the eye waxes out of measure in greatness, and this is called Dilatatio
pupillae, the which is very hard to heal. For my part I never saw but one
remedy that did preserve it, and that is our Balsamo Artificiato, of the which
you shall put every night one drop into the eye, and it will do thee great
pleasure, because it is temperate hot, and has a penetrative virtue and
resolutative, by the which means it does hinder the relaxation, and preserves
the eye. There is yet another sort of infirmity that causes the eye to be
full of pain, and comes all thick and filthy, and blinds it, and this
indisposition is caused of Morbo Gallico; and although it seem foul and
uncurable: Nevertheless, it is easy to be cured if you help the principal
cause, and fume the head with Cinabar, Myrrh, and Olibanum, they shall be
quickly helped, There is another infirmity that comes in the eye, the which
is a cloud that ingendereth in the point of the eye upon the ball, and
hinders the sight, and that is easy to be helped, for if you drop therein
one drop of our Balm twenty or thirty days together, it will resolve it
thoroughly. There are diverse other infirmities which do trouble the eyes, the
which I will let pass till another time.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the pains in the Teeth.
THe pain of the teeth is an accidental disease, which comes of diverse and
sundry causes, of the which causes, I will show the chiefest. It comes
sometimes of a Rheum in the head, or of a Catarr, or of humiditie in the head,
and diverse other ways. Nevertheless, let it come which way it will, it
proceeds of the head and stomach, the which sends up vapors, and then fall
down again, and cause that pain, and the remedy is this: First, give them our
Magistrale Syrupo five or six days, the which purges the blood, and
evacuateth the body; that being done, take our Electuario angelico, three
times according to the receipt, for this evacuateth the stomach and purges the
head; and then take our Aqua reale, and hold it in thy mouth a Paternoster
while, and then spit it forth again, and with this order thou shall help all
manner of pains in the teeth, except they be rotten stumps; and then the best
way is to take them forth with an Instrument: but if thou will not take them
forth and ease the pain, thou may touch them with Aqua fortis until the
marrow be mortified? that being done, you shall hold our Aqua balsami two or
three times in your mouth in a day, until the pain be gone, and so with this
order thou may keep them without pain. Also I will show thee another easy
way. Take Henbane seed, and mix it with white Wax, then cast it on the coals,
and hold thy mouth over it to receive the fume, and then thy pain will cease if
they be rotten teeth; and this it does by stupefaction. Also it will be good to
hold in thy mouth Mastick, Pellitorie, and Allom, after ye have purged, for
this draws down the matter.

CHAP. XLVII. Of a stinking breath.
THe stinking breath is a putrefaction the which is caused of the stomach,
being corrupted and foul, as you may see by experience of those that have that
infirmity, and the remedy is this. You shall give them of our Aromatico. ii.
fasting, every third day for three times, and then use our Quintessence for a
month continually; The dose is. i. every morning, and after supper two hours,
for this comfort the stomach and the heart, and takes away the stinking:
That being done, take five or six mornings together, every morning of oil of
Turpentine one scruple with white Wine, and so they shall remain helped.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of spitting of blood.
THe spitting of blood is an alteration of blood in the veins, which alteration
is so much, that Nature provokes it to the stomach, from whence it had his
Original, and does not come of a vein broken as many have said, as thou may
well see the truth; for if the vein were broke, the blood would come forth at
one time or instant without any tarrying, and they would die quickly, the which
comes not by spitting of blood, for they spit none until the alteration
comes: and this is caused of a kind of Fever that comes inwardly, that
ingendereth that alteration, and when his fit comes, the blood does alter, and
the veins swell, and the blood does come forth at the proper mouths of the
veins, and so they spit it forth; and when they spit blood, it is the beginning
of the Fever Hectic, the which when it is confirmed, is uncurable and mortal:
But if thou will take it at the beginning when they spit blood, it may be
helped with ease, and that thou shall do with giving them three or four times
of our Petra Philosophale twelve grains, with half an ounce of Sugar Rosate,
every third day once; that being done, let him take every morning Oil of
Vitriol iiii. grains, with Julep of Violets. i. because there is no better
medicine in the world that disposes the alteration of the blood, then our
Petra Philosophale, and the oil of Vitrial mittigateth the heat and
extinguisheth the accident. You shall note, that this which I have written is
not understood of many as I understand it. And likewise the Medicines to use in
that case has not been put in practice of any man, and the cause is this. That
since Physic has been in use until this time, the Physicians have not
understood of other then the Theorick, and none they cured of practice and
experience, and that is the cause that so few have found the truth. But I that
continually do travel in practice, have found rare things, as I will set
forth to the world hereafter.

CHAP. XLIX. Of diseases of the Liver.
THe sickness of the Liver is caused of diverse and sundry accidents of the
body, as you may see by experience, when a man is never so little sick, by and
by the Liver is alterated, and does no more work well, and that is because the
Liver is the receptacle of the blood and of the Gall, and the master which
rules and governs our bodies, and distributeth the blood into the veins, and
does purify it, separating the sharp and evil parts, and sending it to a
certain bladder, which we call the Gall; and when it is so full that it can
receive no more, it runs over, and so causes the body to become yellow, and
thereupon the Urine is yellow, and is so evil, that in short time it dries
that body, so that the Liver being dispensator both of the good and bad
qualities of the humors, it cannot be but through the infirmities of the
body. Also when the Liver is over hot and dry, it causes the Patient to be
lean and dry, and with great heat: and when the Liver is troubled with
humiditie and cold, it causes the Patient to become full of sores and scabbs,
and these are the effects that come of the Liver when it is distempered. But if
thou will help it from that indisposition, it were necessary to evacuate the
body and stomach of superfluous humors, which thou shall do with our Soluble
Sirrup, giving it eight or ten days together cold, and then purge the Stomach
with our Aromatico fasting in the morning; that being done, you shall use
remedies that help the Liver, which are many, as Citrake, Liverwort,
Scolopendria, Cycorie, and such like; and so observing this order thou shall
help them. For I have had an infinite of experience of it.

CHAP. L. Of diseases of the Lungs.
THe infirmities of the Lungs are of two kinds, that is cold and moist, and
hot and dry, the which infirmity is caused of evil temperature of the body.
You shall note, that when the Lungs is infected with cold and moist, it will
easily turn to that kind of Hectic that causes the Cough, and to spit matter
at the mouth. But when it is grieved with heat and dryness, it is in danger to
turn to a Tissick, the which discase causes a man to become lean and dry,
and keeps back his breath, and so the one with another they are mortal
diseases, so that there can scarce be found any remedy; and therefore I will
begin with the first kind, and then with the second, and then the third, and
then with the fourth and last, for the which there is no redemption or hope of
life. But for the first and second, there are a number of remedies that do
help, the which be these. First, give the Patient of the juice of the Roots of
blew Lillies,. ii. with Mel Rosarum,. i. in the morning fasting, and that use
three times, every third day once: That being done, let him use our Elixar
vitae for thirty or forty days together morning and evening; the dose is.
ii. at a time, and also put therein every time half an ounce of our Magno
liquore, and drink it a little warm, for this is a perfect remedy, with
which I have cured an infinite number in my days. And of all the Medicines
that ever I found, I never had any like this, because the juice of the
Lilly-root has virtue attractive that mundifieth the stomach, and the Elixar
vitae comfort and resolves all Ulcers in the Lungs, and the Magno liquore
dissolveth the Catarr, and heals the stomach, for I have proved it a number
of times, as is said before. I remember me that in the year of our Lord, 1557.
I being in Rome cured a young man which was a Painter, that was in the house of
the Cardinal de Medici, the which had his Lungs ulcerated, and did spit great
quantity of blood, and had a great Catarr and Cough, and did spit also matter,
in the which there was no hope of life. I caused him to use the aforesaid
remedies, and so in short time he was helped, and not only he, but a great
number more at sundry times.

CHAP. LI. Of the Spleen.
THe Spleen is never sick but through other diseases, as you may see by
experience, how that those that have the Fever Quartane, for the most part have
their Spleen alterated and hard, and this proceeds of evil temperature of
the body and Liver, that cannot digest the humors, and so Nature sends them
forth in the weakest parts that are most apt to receive them. So that the
Spleen is like a sponge, and very apt to receive that humiditie, that Nature
cannot dissolve otherwise, and so by this reason it is most apt to be sick or
diseased: therefore if thou will cure it, first cure the disease which causes
that alteration, for that being once helped, Nature of it self will help the
Spleen without any other Medicine, and therefore strive not to help the Spleen
with particular Medicines, for it is vain; but look what kind of disease the
Patient is troubled with, and cure that, and then the Spleen will heal well
enough. And this is the true way to cure the Spleen.

CHAP. LII. Of the Flux of the body.
THe Flux of the body is a distemperature of the guts and stomach, which is
caused also of an evil disposition in the Stomach, as well as of all other
interiours, and is very troublesome to the Patient, and hard to be helped.
Nevertheless, I will show thee a secret and that is this. Take of our Petra
Philosophale twelve grains, which does evacuate the humor hanging, and
dissolveth the Flux. But when it is a hot Flux with a Fever in the Summer, let
him stand two hours after supper in a bath of salt water of the Sea that is
cold: for it is of great effect. You shall understand, that our Petra
Philosophale must be taken with Sugar Rosote di.. Also when you have done the
aforesaid things, you shall take our Sirrup against the melancholy humors five
or six mornings. And so using this order, thou shall help any kind of cruel
Flux, as I have proved infinite times.

CHAP. LIII. Of Costivenesse in the body.
THis disease is caused of great dryness and adustion in the body, through the
which cause there comes many diseases: and that is, that our meat lies long
in the body: and of that comes indisposition of the stomach, pains in the
head, Flux of Urine, alteration of blood, augmenting of choler, and such like.
Therefore if thou will help these inconveniences, it were necessary to seek the
principal cause, and to cause the body to be loose: and that thou shall do
with our Sirrup Magistrale, using it according to reason every morning. For it
evacuateth the lower parts, and cools the Liver, and purges the blood, and
consumes choler, and helps digestion. And with this only shall thou help
them perfectly.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the Flux of Urine.
THe Flux of Urine is an alteration of the pores, and opening of the reins,
caused of indigestion in the body, as you may see by experience. This Flux
weakeneth the stomach, and the reins, and takes away the taste, and lets
sleep: so that many times of these effects come cruel diseases, as Gonorhea,
the Strangury, Ulcerations in the Yeard, and such like: and therefore if thou will help the aforesaid disease, use this Medicine. Let him take of our
Aromatico two drachmes, and drink thereon a little water, and then let him use
of this Sirrup every morning warm. iiii. Take Sage, Carduus Benedictus,
Egrimony, Betony, Citrake, Scolopendria, Cicorie, of each one handful, red
Saunders, Box, ana. iiii. Alloes, Epatick, Coloquintida, Sin, Turbit,
Hermodactiles, ana. i. course Sugar one pound and a half, common Honey one
pound: then lay all the aforesaid things to infuse in five and twenty pound of
White wine the space of twelve hours: then boil them close until half be
consumed: then strain it without expression, and put thereto a carrect of Musk
dissolved in, iiii. of Rosewater: and of this take every morning three or four
ounces, and fast thereon at the least four or five hours, and in the mean time
that you use this Sirrup, you shall not eat Hogs flesh, nor Fish, nor salt
things, nor Rapes, nor Raddish, nor Parsley, nor any other aperative thing: This
being done, take Hysop of the Mountain that is dried lb. ii. and boil it in
thirty pound of White wine, and put thereto one pound of Honey, letting them
boil till the fourth part be consumed, and then strain it, and drink it
continually for fourteen or fifteen days. And by this means thou shall have
help God willing.

CHAP. LV. A discourse upon the retention of Urine, and his cure.
THe causes of the retention of Urine are many, among the which, there are
three principally above the rest, and are so manifest, that every one may
understand them: and are these. Stones, as well great, as gravel, viscosity in
the Reins and Bladder, and alteration in the pores: And thus through those
three accidents, most commonly they cannot make water: the which if thou will
help, it will be somewhat hard, because you must understand the cause thereof,
the which is not easily done of every man: for he that knows not the cause,
can less help the effect, and he that knows not the effect, can less help
them. And therefore, I say, he that will help those that cannot make water,
because of the stone in the bladder, he must seringe them to take forth the
Urine: but if thou will help those that cannot make water through the gravel,
you shall give them our Pillole Aquilone: and then give them a Flintstone made
in fine powder, to drink with water of Saxifrage, and thou shall see thereof
miracles. And if thou will help them that cannot make water, because of
viscosity, give them our Aromatico, and anoint the reins with our Balsamo
Artificiato, and also his Testicles, and so by these means you shall help them
quickly of that accident: as I have proved diverse times.

CHAP. LVI. Another discourse upon the retention of Urine; and his remedies.
THe retention of Urine is caused diverse ways, as by overmuch heat, or
overmuch cold, or through too much dryness, or too much moistness. And
therefore he that will cure this infirmity, must first know the cause, and also
the virtue and quality of his Medicines wherewith he will cure them: for if he
do otherwise, he shall walk in the dark, and be as a Diviner: for many have
written receipts, wherewith they show to help many infirmities, without giving
any reason at all. But to the purpose of the retention of Urine, as as I have
said, that it may come through four principal causes. So will I show it in
four Chapters, and also their remedies wherewith they may be helped.

CHAP. LVII. Of the retention of Urine that comes through heat, and his
remedies.
THe retention of Urine which comes through heat, is that which ingendereth
the stone and gravel, for through that superfluous heat it ingendereth. And
this is one of the four causes of the retention of Urine, the which is helped
with Instruments and Medicines concerning the stone. The most certain Medicine
is, to be cut and take it forth. Nevertheless, there are many Medicines that
may pleasure them of our invention: As concerning the gravel, there are many
things that dissolve it, of the which I have spoken of in diverse places: As
concerning the remedy of the cause, that is easy: for by purging the stomach
and the body, the heat will be dissolved, and the body left in good
temperature. And the purging of the body shall be done with our Sirrup against
the melancholy humor, and to use our Aromatico, and Electuario Magistrale, de
Althea with Sulphur. And thus much concerning that heat.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the retention of Urine through cause of dryness, and his
Medicine.
THe retention of Urine through dryness, is, because the Reins and the
Conduits where it passes are to much dried, and that dryness is cause of
adustion of the Liver, the which must be helped with taking away a little
blood: and to purge the body with Cassia, Sirrup de Pomis, de Succuria, de
Lactutia, de Malvis, de Siterache, and such like, that cool and take away the
adustion of the Liver: then anoint the Reins, the Members, and Yeard with
Hogs grease, because that fat does mollify and moisten: and give him to drink
Sero lactis, because that inlargeth and moisteneth, and provokes Urine without
burning.

CHAP. LIX. Of the retention of Urine that comes through cold, and his
remedies.
THe alteration of Urine that comes through cold, is that kind which makes a
man that he cannot make water without the help of some warm thing laid upon the
body, and upon the bottom of the belly, and the cure thereof is to vomit those
cold humors out of the stomach, and to purge the body with solutives of warm
Nature, and with warm Decoctiens, with the Decoction of Lignum Sanctum, of
Carduus Benedictus, and of Rosemary, and annoint the back with our Oleum
Philosoph^rum, de Terebinthina, and Cera,, or Oil of Frankincence, or such
like things that warm the coldness. And so by these means the Patient shall be
helped of that retention of Urine.

CHAP. LX. Of the retention of Urine through cause of moistness, and his
remedy.
THe retention of Urine caused of humidity, is that which causes the pores to
swell through moistness, so that the Urine cannot pass, as those say, which
are troubled with the carnosity: which carnosity is not alteration of the pores
through cause of humidity. For the way to cure this kind of retention, is to
purge the body with drying Medicines, as Turbite, Scamonie, Euforbium,
Eleborus, and such like: and to use drying Unctions, as Vnguento de
Lithargirio, or Balsamo, water of Frankincence, Oleum Benedictum of our
invention, and such like things, and then eat dry meats, and drink good Wine;
and thus the humidity shall be dissolved: So that hereby every one may have the
understanding of the cause, and the effect of the same, and the Medicines.

CHAP. LXI. Of the difficulty of Urine, and of what it is caused, with the
order to cure it.
THere are diverse kinds of difficulty of Urine, and are also caused of diverse
causes, as aforesaid, of the which one is caused of a corrupt humor of the
French Pox, and this is one of the chiefest causes that may be in that matter.
For we see manifestly, that the said kind of infirmity corrupts the blood,
ingendereth evil qualities in the Liver, and distempereth all the body of
those that are troubled therewith. Also we may see, that those which are
infected with that kind of disease, most commonly have Warts, or Carvoli,
Pellaria, Botches, Scabs, Tumors, pains of the Stomach, in the Arms and
Legs, with a number of other more strange accidents that come through that
disease, But when that infirmity infecteth inwardly, it works these effects:
It brings Emeroides, pains in the Entrals, Fluxes of the body, continual
spitting, Gonorrea, or running of the Reins, and such like effects. All the
which cause difficulty of Urine, of the which difficulty, there uses to
engender the Stone, Gravel, Viscosity, Stitch in the side, and diverse other
mischiefs very hurtful unto the body. The difficulty of Urine may also be
caused of diverse other infirmities, as of a rotten Catarre, descention of the
head, of the evil quality of the Liver, and such like, as by excessive cold,
or heat of the Reins, but let it be as it will, I know these are hard matters
to be helped, because it behooveth certain manual practice in that faculty,
the which I cannot show in writing: although I have great and high secrets for
that indisposition, as concerning the Physic part, the which thou may find
in diverse places of my works. Nevertheless, because I will not leave this
Chapter unperfect, I will here name unto thee a most excellent rare man of that
Profession, the which is both Doctor and Knight, and is most excellent in
cutting out the Stone, and the Rupture, and can remedy the great difficulty of
Urine, and heal the Rupture, and heal the infirmities of the eyes, and such
like things most excellently, and his name is called Prastecio Stelin
Venetiano: the which is at this present dwelling in Venice. And this I have
written of that Doctor, because he is one of the most excellent that may be
found in that Art.

CHAP. LXII. To help those that have great burning of their Urine.
THis infirmity may come of diverse and sundry causes.

Nevertheless, I will treat of some of the principal, and of most importance;
and also will show the true order to help them with ease and brevitie. The
first cause assigned by me is the Stone in the Bladder, and this is in a manner
uncurable. The second cause is, the running of the Reins, the which is taken by
companying with women corrupted with the Pox. The third cause is, the proper
French Pox, the which is that kind that is called Gonorrea. The fourth kind is
a certain corruption that is called Stranguria, the which moves continually to
make water. The fifth cause is the Gravel: there are also other causes, as
scorching in the Yeard, carnositie, and such like things, the which I will
leave for troubling of the Reader. The first cause which is the Stone, is
helped by two remedies, the one is with cutting and taking it forth of the
bladder, the other remedy is written in this book. The remedy for that which
is caused by the running of the Reins, shall be to take three mornings our
Aromatieo, because it resolves that heat, and extinguisheth the burning. The
remedy for that which is caused of Gonorrea, is none other then to cure the
principal disease, and to anoint them with our Vnguento magno, and perfume
them, and so they shall remain whole. That which is caused of the Strangurie,
is cured by great purging, and by taking oftentimes our Aromatico. That which
is caused of the Gravel, is cured by taking oftentimes our Electuario
Angelica, and using to drink Wine distilled with Cherrie stones, and Medler
stones. That which comes through carnositie, is cured with an Unguent made of
oil of Sulphur, and Vitriol, Aqua reale, Oil of Frankincense, and new Wax, all
Medicines devised by us, giving you charge, that before you begin to cure them,
to seek out the right cause from whence it proceeds, and so thou shall help
it with brevitie and great ease.

CHAP. LXIII. A Discourse upon the carnositie in the Yeard, and the Order to
cure it.
ALthough we have something touched this Infirmity before in the Chapter of
the burning of the Urine. Nevertheless, in this place, I mean, something to
discourse thereof, because that Chirurgions may not be void of such a noble
Secret, to do them honor in their cure of the like disease, for there are
many troubled with that infirmity: You shall understand, that this carnositie
is an infirmity whose original depends of the corruption of the French Pox,
and to show it plainer, it is an Ulcer in the neck of the bladder where the
Urine enters into the Yeard. And therefore, if thou will help that infirmity,
cure the principal disease, and the carnositie will heal; but if thou will
cure them with the Candle, take that Unguent which is written for the
carnositie in the Chapter of the burning of the Urine; but if thou will cure
the principal disease, give him three times, Pillole aquilone, and then take
our Sirrupo Solutivo, ten or twelve days together; that being done, let him
take twenty days the Wine of Lignum Sanctum, written hereafter in this Book,
and those which understand not this Chapter well, let him look over this Book,
and he shall find those Medicines with their Uses.

CHAP. LXIIII. Another Cure for the said Carnositie.
THat Carnositie which hinders the Urine that it cannot come forth, is a
certain kind of matter that is ingendered in the mouth of the bladder as is
showed before, the which is like in all points unto the Emeroids, that come in
the neck of the Intestivall about the Fundament, and because it is a gross
matter and ulcerated, the Urine passes with great difficulty, and great
burning and pain unto those that are troubled therewith, the which
inconvenience if thou will help, it were necessary that the body were well
purged, and that they keep a diet, and drink the decoction of Hypericon, with
a little Honey, and use to eat dry meats, and then make certain small long
Candles with Wax, and Frankincense, like unto searing Candles, then make this
Unguent. Take red Lead, white Honey, of each an ounce, fresh Butter two ounces,
white Wine as much as will suffice to incorporate all the aforesaid together in
a liquid form, then boil it on a soft fire, and have ready ten or twelve
quills fresh pulled out of the wing of a fat Pigeon; and note that when ye take
them forth of the wing, that they may be full of blood in the ends, then take
one of the quills and stir the said Unguent upon the fire continually while it
boileth, and when one quill is dried take another, and so do until the wine
be consumed, then take it from the fire and keep it, and when ye will occupy
it, take one of those Candles, and upon the end put the said Unguent, and put
it into the Yeard until it touch the carnosity, and this do from time to time
until the Candle pass without pain, and then the Patient shall be whole; for
this is a great Secret and has been proved many times.

CHAP. LXV. A Discourse as concerning those that cannot hold their water, and
his Remedy.
THis Impediment comes of two principal causes, the one is, through heat and
moisture of the body, and this is commonly in young children, which commonly
do bepisse themselves, because they are by Nature hot and moist. The other
cause is through opening of the Pores where the Urine does pass; the which are
so stretched or opened, that they cannot retain the Urine, because the Urine is
a voluntary motion, and a natural motion together, they are hard to agree
together, because the natural motion makes his voluntary motion; so that
Nature first moves the man, and thereof comes the motion; for if a man would
make water, and that Nature does not move the motion, he cannot piss; for
sometime Nature does not give his natural motion because of some impediment,
for when a man cannot hold his water, it is a sign that Nature has no
retention; and to redress the same, it were necessary to reduce Nature into
good temperature, so that it may retain the Urine; the which thing thou shall
do with purging the body, and the stomach wherein is the matter that causes
that retention of Urine. And to purge the body you shall use our Sirrup
against the melancholy humor: And to purge the stomach, you shall take our
Electuario angelica, and to restrain the pores, you shall use the decoction of
wild Hysop, with the powder of Mastick, for you shall understand, that the
purging takes away the cause, and the decoction of Hysop with the Mastick,
does restrain the pores, and so by these means thou shall remedy quickly that
infirmity.

CHAP. LXVI. To break the Stone in the Bladder and also the Gravel, and to
cause it to avoid by Urine.
THere is found a certain bird called Solone, of Albertus Magnus in his Book of
Secrets; the which birds are very plenteous in Rome, and are called Palmum
bellae, and in Lumbardie, Sassarvoli, the which in English I suppose, is called
a Ring Dove, or Wood-colver, or the Stock Dove, which Birds are subject to the
Stone, that if you keep them in a Cage, and feed them with such meat as they
commonly use, being deprived of their medicine, within the space of four or six
months at the most, there will engender a Stone in the belly so great, that
their meat cannot pass through them, and so choaketh them, and they die, and
that is because the poor Bird cannot go and help himself with that Medicine
which Nature has taught her. For those that are at liberty in the field, fly
unto the Seaside, and there they find a certain kind of small stone very hard,
the which stone has virtue to dissolve the stone in the body of the Bird, and
this Bird knows it by the instinct of Nature, and eats great abundance of
them, and so dissolveth the stone in their bellies, and live a long time after
it without any trouble of the Stone. You shall understand, that this stone is
unpossible to be found in any other place, then in the belly of the said bird,
because they are very little, and man's reason cannot discern them from other
Stones, the which being beat in powder, with the flowers of Elders, and
Cinnamon, of each a like, and given to drink with broth, in short time it will
dissolve the Stone, and cause them to avoid it with their Urine most
miraculously: But if you ask me the reason, I know not what I shall answer, but
I hold it to be his proper hidden quality and virtue. For truly this I have
taught to many, and have seen the experience thereof sundry times, and it
cured the most part that did use it. For truly the virtue of Stones are very
great unto those that know them. I saw once two Stones in Rome of inestimable
virtue; The one was a round Coral like unto the Serpentine Purphire, but
therein was much green, and was of that virtue that being laid upon the flesh
of a man or woman, it causes them to piss great abundance, so that it were to
be wondered at. The other Stone was of Diasper, but bright and thorough shining
with certain white veins, and was of such virtue, that being laid on a wound,
presently the blood stenched, so that there fell not down one drop, The which
Stones were in the hand of an old Spaniard, who said, he brought them out of
India, from Nova Hispania. I have seen also diverse and sundry Stones of most
strange virtues. You shall understand, that those Stones of the Bird must be
gotten in this order. You shall get a number of the said Birds, and take the
stones out of their bellies, and wash them clean, and keep them to thy use. The
quantity is as much as you can hold upon a Sixpence, as well of the Stones as
of the other matters: You shall drink the said quantity seven or eight
mornings together, and let your Diet be according, and drink good wine, and so
in short time you shall be helped.

CHAP. LXVII. Of the Gravel in the Reins.
THe Gravel (as is said before, is a disease of the Urine undigested, which is
caused of superfluous heat of the reins and blood, the which sometimes does
stay it self in the Conduites, and causes great pains; and sometimes it does
ingrosse so in the Bladder, that it lets the Urine, and this is an evil
disease to be troubled with, and the remedy is to purge often, and use that
water against the Gravel that is written in my discourse of Chirurgerie, for
it is one of the most excellent remedies that can be found for that disease;
and the order to use it is also written after the Receipt, and the best
Purgation that you can use for that purpose is our Pillole Aquilone.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of a certain Scab or Itch that comes over all the body.
THis Disease comes in all places of the body, and in Naples it is called
Prurito, and in Rome, Rosura; in Venice, Pizza; and in Spain, Lomezon: And it
is a salt humor that comes forth of the veins, and so disperseth through the
whole body between the flesh and the skin, and has in it such an heat, that
they cannot abide it, and is caused of alteration of the blood, the which is
corrupted and distempered; and the remedy is, to purge the stomach, and to
purify the blood, which thou shall do with giving them three times our
Pillole aquilone every third day once; that being done, make this Bath: Take
Nettles, Mallows, Pellitorie of the wall, Agrimonie, Sage, and Coleworts, ana.
lb. iiii. the Bran of Wheat almost a peck, common Ashes half as much: Mix them
altogether in a great kettle of water, and let it boil an hour, and then take
it from the fire and sit over it, and cover thee with clothes, that thou may
sweat an hour, then dry thee with warm clothes, and then wash all thy body
with pure Aqua vitae, and this thou shall use three times at the least, for the
oftener the better, and so thou shall be perfectly whole.

The Second Book of the Secrets of PHIORAVANTE.
CHAP. I. What Surgery is.
Surgery is a manual Art, with the which the Chirurgian does cure Wounds,
Ulcers, and Imposthumes: And this was found of Husbandmen, and Experimenters of
natural things. For there is no Art in the world, that has more need of the
knowledge of diverse things then this Art. It is also necessary to the knowledge
of natural things belonging to Surgery, to have skill in Husbandry. It is
also necessary to understand the Art of Painting, whereby you may set broken
bones in their places, and to join or close wounds well. It were needful also
to have skill in the Art of Joining, whereby he may make Instruments for broken
bones in the Arms, or Legs, or Hands, or other parts. It would be also
necessary to have the Art of a Smith, whereby he may make his Instruments. It
is chiefly needful to be expert in the Art of an Apothecary, to make his
Unguents. And last of all, it is most necessary to know the Art of Alchimie,
whereby he may distill his Oils and Waters appertaining unto Surgery. Also
it is necessary to have a good judgment, and to help in all causes of
Surgery, and to have a light hand in working. And when the Chirugian is
expert in all the aforesaid things, he may help without any suspicion of any
thing. And hereafter I will show thee what Wounds, Ulcers, and Imposthumes are,
and all other things appertaining to Surgery, and the order to cure them: a
discourse grounded on true reason and approved by experience, showing to all
men, which are the true and perfectest Medicines, and which are false and
naught: writing and opening the true secrets of Surgery, with a new order
found out by me, to exercise the same Surgery with more ease and brevity, so
that every one may be satisfied: For they are true, and are Medicines, with the
which thou may do much good to the sick: and great honor will redound to
the Chirurgian, if he use it according to our order: for they are Medicines
proved of us infinite times in diverse places of the world, as well in the
Feilds as in the Cities, or on the waters in the wars, where we healed
Wounds, Gunshot, Ulcers, Imposthumes, and other diseases appertaining unto
Surgery: and always (thanks be unto God) I have had good success, as it is
well known in most parts of Christendom. And so I make an end.

CHAP. II. The order to be used in curing Imposthumes of diverse sorts, taken
forth of the short discourse of Chirugery of this Author.
THere are diverse kinds of Imposthumes that come unto man's body, and are caused
of diverse and sundry accidents, and therefore they must be cured in diverse
orders, and with sundry Medicines, according to his nature: for some
Imposthumes are caused of contutions or bruised flesh: Some are certain
humors, of which Nature would discharge her self, and so sends them forth:
some are caused of cold; othersome are melancholy humors, and others are
caused of the Pox: And these are the kinds of Imposthumes that most commonly
do come, and I will show thee the order to cure them one by one, and then
after I will show them particularly more at large by themselves. First, I will
speak of that sort which is caused of contutions, because it is bruised flesh:
for every contution does putrify and turn into matter, unto which it were
necessary to lay Maturatives, and bring it to suppuration, and as soon as thou
perceivest there to be any matter, then presently lance it: and his Medicine
shall be the yeolk of an Egg mixed with our Magno licore, and with that dress
it as well within as without, without any other thing, for it will help any
great Tumor: but you must make your Unguent fresh every day, and with new
Eggs. Furthermore, as concerning those Imposthumes that come through the
indisposition of Nature, and are certain Sborine (a word so called in Italian)
by which Nature would prevail: and those would be left unto Nature, until such
time as they break alone, and then thou shall dress them with this Unguent.
Take Oil of Roses. vi. Litarge of gold finely ground, Turpentine, ana. ii.
Storax liquida. i. New Wax. iii. boil them on a soft fire until it be black,
which if it be too hard, you may put thereto oil of Roses, and make it in form
of an Unguent, and therewith dress those kinds of Imposthumes: and say thereon
the Cerotte of dia Palma, and so with these Medicines thou shall work miracles.
As concerning these Imposthumes that are caused of cold, you shall use hot
Medicines and attractive, as the Cerotte called Oxicroxi, which is a perfect
Medicine in these kinds of Imposthumes: also our Balsamo artificiato, and Aqua
balfamo, and such like things which are by nature temperate hot, are very
convenient. But those Imposthumes that have their original of the French Pox,
are evil and malign, because their original is malign and evil. The cure
of these is with great pnrging, and to let the Imposthume increase of it self,
and when it is ready to lance, then lance it, and make this Medicine. Take
Vuguento magno. ii. Magno locore. i. Precipitate di. mix them well together,
and therewith dress the Imposthume, and lay thereon our Magistrale Cerotte,
and it will be perfect whole in short time: Letting you to understand, that in
all the aforesaid cures, if you will cure them perfectly, it were necessary
that the body were well purged of those corrupt humors that hinder the cure,
and to use defensives appropriate to that kind of Imposthume: as the oil of
Frankincense, of Turpentine, of Wax, of Honey, Aqua vitae, and such like, which
every one is a sufficient defensive, anointing it round about the Imposthume:
And hereafter I will show thee the cure of these Imposthumes particularly by
themselves.

CHAP. III. What Imposthumes are.
IMposthumes are certain Tumors or swellings, that come in diverse parts of the
body: the which are caused of blood and choler putrified, which cannot pass
through the pores, and therefore ingrosse in that place, and so comes to
putrefaction, and that is an Imposthume: which thou shall help in this order.
First purge the body to take away the humors which would go to the
Imposthume: which thou shall do with our Magistrale Sirupe, taking it eight
days together: that being done, give him our Aromatico: this being done, thou
shall quickly help the Imposthume, as I will show thee hereafter, with their
perfect cure.

CHAP. IV. Of Imposthumes that come in the Groine.
THe Imposthumes that come in the Groin are of three kinds, of which one is
called in Venice, Pannochi, and at Rome, Tinconie, and at Naples, Dragonello,
and in Spain, Incordio. To these after the body is purged, as is aforesaid, you
shall lay a Maturative plaster, the which is made thus. Take Marsh Mallows,
common Mallows, the mother of Violets, the leaves of Coleworts, Wheat flower,
Auxungia, Oil of Lillies, of each alike, and boil them together, and then
stamp them in form of an Ointment, and lay it on the Imposthume until it look
red and is soft, for then it is apt to be launced: Giving you charge, that when
you lance them you go not to deep, but only that the matter may come forth,
and then put therein a little tent, and anoint it with our Magno liquore, for
because it is the best Medicine that can be found for wounds: for it
mundifieth, incarnateth, and si^catrizeth without any other help, and lay upon
the Imposthume our Magistrale Cerot, and never change your Medicines until you
be whole; for this is the true secret found out by me to help these
Imposthumes, which I have proved infinite times.

CHAP. V. The second kind of Imposthume that comes in the Groin.
THe second kind of Imposthume in the Groin is called Glandulae, both this and
the aforesaid are caused of humors infected with the Pox, and these
Imposthumes seldom come to maturation; but if it do, it will be long first,
and it is evil to heal, because it requires great cure and terrible medicines.
But if thou will cure them perfectly, it were necessary to cure the principal
cause, and that is the Pox. But when these Imposthumes are broke, the best
remedy will be this. Take Wax, Litarge of gold, Oil of Frankincense, ana. and
boil them together until it become black: and therewith dress these
Imposthumes, for this is a perfect remedy, and a great Secret.

CHAP. VI. The third kind of Imposthume that comes in the Groin.
THe third kind of Imposthume that comes in the Groin, is caused of much
travel or heat of the blood, and these are called Anguinaglie, and they use to
come with a great accident of a Fever, cold and then hot, and in seven or eight
days at the most, they come to maturation, and then lance them, and his
medicine shall be this: Take Turpentine well washed, the yolk of an Egg, and
oil of Roses, as much of the one, as of the other, and mix them well together,
and with this only thou shall help them, because it digesteth the Imposthume,
and mundifieth and incarnateth with great speed; giving you great charge that
the body be well purged first with our Magistrale Sirupe.

CHAP. VII. Of Impostumes under the arms.
THese Impostumes are caused of gross and viscous humors, the which Nature
cannot digest by any other part, and these commonly are called Topinaria,
because they are like to a Molehill. And although this seem to be a great
matter, yet it causes little pain, and may be helped with ease. First purge
the body with Soluble Medicines, and then lay on this plaster until it be
ripe. Take grated bread, leaven of bread, Cow Milk, Oil of Lillies, ana, and
boil them together and lay it on; for this has virtue attractive and
putrifactive, by means whereof it will bring it quickly to maturation; and
when it is ripe, open it with a lance, and dress it the first time with the
white of an Egg and Salt beaten together with a tent, and lay on a stopine wet
with the white of an Egg, the which thou shall let lie at the least four and
twenty hours, and then dress it with digestive until it be incarnated, and
then lay thereon a plaster of Di aquilone magno di mesue, and so thou shall
help them quickly.

CHAP. VIII. Of Impostumes in the throat.
THese Impostumes are of diverse and sundry kinds, as you may see by
experience; for some are Scrophule, others are melancholy humors, others are
caused of the Pox, and others are caused of heat, or of cold; the which are
all cured sundry ways, as I will show thee hereafter

CHAP. IX. Of Impostumes in the throat caused of melancholy humors.
THese Impostumes in throat caused of melancholy humors are hard and crude,
and are long before they come to maturation, and you may not in any wise cut
them, because the place is full of Muskles, Arteries, Vene capillari,
Cartilagines, Sinnews, and such like; the which although there come an
Impostume there, it shall not hurt them; but if ye cut them with an Instrument
you may offend them greatly, and for that cause you may not cut them by any
means, but leave it unto Nature, the which will cause it to break, and then use
this remedy. First, you shall take our Sirrup against the melancholy humor
for twelve days, continually in the morning fasting; that done, you shall give
him our Pillole Aquilone, and help the Impostumes with Vnguento negro di
Godfredo di medi, written in the Antidotary of Galen, Cap. 45. for that is
miraculous to help those kinds of Impostumes, as I have proved it diverse times.

CHAP. X. Of Impostumes in the throat coming of the Pox.
THe Impostumes that come in the Throat which are caused of the Pox, are
commonly of evil quality, because they are much alterated, and cause great
pain, and these likewise are dangerous to be cut for the aforesaid causes: but
when they are broken, they go creeping over the body, healing in one place,
and breaking out in another, and these are evil to be helped, for them that
know not the perfect secret, and the order to cure them is this. You shall give
them eight or nine mornings our Soluble Sirrup; that being done, you shall give
them our Aromatico twice, and then let them use Sarsa Parilia, or our wine of
Lignum vitae, and let them sweat ten or twelve days together, and then perfume
them with Sinabar, Myrrh, and Olibanum, the which fume you shall use only at
the mouth, and so thou shall help any crude kind of Imposthume coming in the
throat: for this Secret never fails, as I have proved diverse times.

CHAP. XI. Of Imposthumes in the throat coming of hot humors.
THese Imposthumes in the throat coming of superfluous heat, are caused of the
blood being alterated with heat, and because of that alteration, it ingendereth
gross vapors and viscous in Vena Capillari, the which through their grossnesse
and want of digestion cannot dissolve, and so engender that kind of Imposthume
in the throat, because in that place there is much blood, and less flesh then
in any other place, but yet these be not troublesome to help, and his cure is
thus: You shall purge him with aperative things, and refriscative that purge
the blood; and when the Imposthume is open, you shall dress it with a
digestive until it be mundified, and then dress it with Vnguentum de Tutia
until it be siccatrized: Also you shall cause them to keep diet ordinary, and
to drink no wine but only this drink: Take Citrake, Liver-wort, and
Scolopendria, ana a handful, Annifeed. i. common white-Honey one pound, then
put them all to infuse in four and twenty pound of fair water, and let it boil
until a third be consumed, and then strein it without expression, and keep it
in a glass close shut, and this shall be his common drink: but let him eat no
salt, nor slimie meats in any wise, neither Hogs flesh, nor other hot meats
that may alter the blood: And this doing you shall be quickly helped, for the
drink cools the blood, and purges it, and helps the Liver of all
infirmities, as I have proved diverse times.

CHAP. XII. Of Imposthumes in the threat caused of cold.
IMposthumes in the throat caused of cold humors are small and without pain,
and this goes creeping by little and little until such time as it breaks of
it self, and are an evil kind to help, because all Unguents are an enemy unto
them, and all cold meats. Therefore if thou will help them, let the Patient use
twenty days together our Quinta essentia solutiva, which purges all cold
humors, and warmeth the blood, and causes the Imposthume to heal with ease;
and when they are broken, you shall help them with our Balm artificial, which
does subtiliate the humors, and mundifie the Imposthume, and incarnate and
heal: And this Order of curing is effectual and of great profit for them that
shall use them. And of this opinion are many excellent Physicians, and chiefly
M. Decio an ancient man, who has been an experimenter a long time both in
Physic and Chirurgerie, with a number of others, which I will leave to name
until another time.

CHAP. XIII. Of Imposthumes in the throat coming of hot humors.
THese Imposthumes coming in the throat of hot humors, is a kind that comes
with redness, and causes great pain, with an accident of a Fever, and in
short time they come to maturation, and break, and then the matter will come
forth, and the pain will cease; and these kinds are not evil to heal, and the
remedies are these. As Soon as they are broke thou must press it out with thy
hand, that being done, you shall have Oleum Benedictum of our invention,
anointing the Imposthume within, and lay thereon our Magistrale Cerot, and so
thou shall help those kinds of Imposthumes. For this is our Secret never
written before of any man.

CHAP. XIV. Of Imposthumes in the Eyes.
IMposthumes in the eyes are like certain white bladders that come about the
nose, and the matter that is within them is like the white of an Egg, and these
are caused of humiditie and moistness of the head, and because they have a
conference with the head, they are evil to heal, for they turn to watering
Fistula's, which, when they come to Fistula's, continue for ever. But if thou will cure them perfectly that they never come again, you must first purge the
head with our Aromatico, and that you shall do every five days once for three
or four times; that being done, thou shall anoint the head with Oil of
Frankincense the space of a month, and into the eye where the Imposthume is,
thou shall put once a day one drop of our Balm artificial, which will help it
and dry the Imposthume, and so in short time thou shall be helped. For this is
the true Secret wherewith thou may help those Imposthumes, never known
before of any man, and they are much contrary to the Medicines of Mesue, by
which our Physicians now adays make their Medicines.

CHAP. XV. Of Imposthumes in the Ears.
IMposthumes in the ears are caused of cold and viscous humors, which
ingrosse in that part of the body, and cause great pain until such time as
they are broken, and these Imposthumes are evil to heal. Nevertheless, I will
show thee a Secret to take away the pains, and to help it quickly, and that is
thus. There is found a certain kind of shell in the Sea, the which is of the
length of an hand, and somewhat more, the which, in Venice, and in Istria, in
Dalmatia, in Puglia, and in diverse other places of the Adriatic Sea, are
called Asture, which is like unto a pair of bellows, the which has a certain
beard, like the hair of a man's head, and it has a certain attractive virtue,
that if they put it into the ear, presently they take away the pain, though it
be never so great or extreme: the which virtue comes through the saltness of
it. For this I have proved diverse times, and did learn it of our old Fishermen,
which knew it by experience. But if it chance that one be troubled and cannot
get that thing, they shall take Cantharides in powder, and put it into the
ear, the which will work the same effect, because they be attractive and
mundificative: And these are two natural remedies, found out by true
experience, and does more good then any other that I could find.

CHAP. XVI. Of Imposthumes in the Mouth.
THese Imposthumes are of diverse kinds, and may breed of diverse causes: but let
them come of what cause soever they will, they cause great pain to them that
have them, for that they cannot swallow their meat without pain. And therefore
I will show thee a general cure for all Imposthumes in the mouth, and that is
thus. You shall take our Pillole Aquilone twice: that being done, take our Aqua
balsami, and hold it in your mouth as long as you can, and this do three times
in a day: then take the juice of Beet roots. i. oil of bitter Almonds. i. then
snuff it up at the nose until it come into the throat: And thus doing, thou
shall help any Imposthume in the mouth, as I have proved diverse times. For the
Pills cleanse the head, and evacuate the stomach, and hinders the alteration,
the water of Balm does cure and mittigateth the pain, and the juice with the
Oil mundifieth those secret places at the nose and mouth.

CHAP. XVII. Of Imposthumes in the Joints.
THese Imposthumes in the Joints are evil, and of hard and crude digestion,
because they are caused of great abundance of gross and viscous humors, the
which through their grossness cannot pass the Joints, and there remain and
come to Imposthume, and these cause extreme pain, because thereunto comes
great abundance of matter, and the remedy is thus. First give him a general
purgation, and let him blood on the common vein, and then lay on this plaster.
Take Marsh Mallows, common Mallows, Pellitory, and the Mother of Violets, and
boil them in water till it be consumed, then stamp them, and put thereto
Leaven of bread, Barley flower, Hens grease, and Hogs grease, according to thy
discretion, and set them on a small fire until they be incorporated, then lay
this on once a day until it be ripe, and when it is red and soft open it, and
dress it with our Magno liquore, and lay thereon our Magistrale Cerotte: and
so with these two thou shall help them, except the Imposthume be of the Pox,
for then it will do small good.

CHAP. XVIII. Of inward Imposthumes.
THese Imposthumes inwardly are evil to know, and uncertain to cure, because
the Patient himself cannot tell in what place they be, though he feel the pain:
and therefore all that we reason of in that matter, may be to the contrary. For
where a man cannot see with the eye, nor touch with the hand, the matter is
doubtful whether it be, or no: and therefore it is best to say little. For
these Imposthumes may come of diverse causes, and yet cannot tell of what
certain cause, and therefore you cannot know which is the true Medicine to help
them: but by experience you may do them some good: For (as I said before)
Imposthumes never come but through distemperance of Nature, and alteration of
the blood. Therefore if thou will help them, help first the principal cause,
then give them eight or ten mornings our Magistrale Sirrup, and then take twice
our Aromatico: that being done, use morning and evening our Vegitabile Sirrup,
and herewith thou shall help them.

CHAP. XIX. Of Ulcers, and what they are.
Ulcers are of diverse and sundry kinds, and are ingendered of many causes, as
hereafter I will show. But first I will write of those kinds of Ulcers that are
caused of Wounds. You shall understand, that wounds in what part of the body
soever they be, being imposthumated or cancrenated, they change their names,
and are no more called wounds, although their original was a wound. For when
it is cancrenated, it is called Vlcera corrosiva, because it goes eating and
creeping on the flesh: but when the wound is imposthumated and full of matter,
it is called Vlcera putrida, that is putrified, and it is because it is filthy
and stinketh. But when it is neither cancrenated, nor yet aposthumated, but
that through some evil disposition the wound is closed, and that there comes
in it evil qualities without alteration, then is it called Vlcera sordida,
because therein is evil quality, and it appears but little, but it is evil
to heal. There be other sorts of Ulcers also, which are caused of diverse and
sundry kinds of Tumors: and the most evil and mischeivious are those that are
of Tumors caused of the Pox: for unto those there run abundance of evil
humors that augment the Ulcer, and they be the worst sort, for they cannot be
healed by themselves, except the body be well purged and evacuated of all the
humors that are oftensive. There is another kind of Ulcer that comes of an
Imposthume as well hot as cold, and those are more gentle and easy to be
helped, if you know the Medicines that are apt to help and dissolve those kinds
of Ulcers. These are the three kinds of Ulcers that commonly happen unto men
and women through diverse causes, as before is said, so that these are the
principal causes of those malign Ulcers.

CHAP. XX. To help Ulcers of all sorts.
SEeing that Ulcers are of diverse and sundry kinds, it were necessary to know
of what kind and quality they are, so that thou may help them in form and
order convenient. And first I will write of the corrosive Ulcers, as of a wound
cancrenated, of Mal di formica, and of other sorts of Ulcers that go creeping
upon the flesh. The cure of these kinds of Ulcers is, to apply quickly our
Caustic to mortify the evil, which thou shall do thus. Wet a little Bumbast
in our Caustic, and therewith wash all the sore, and then leave it so open
four and twenty hours without binding it fast, and when four and twenty hours
are past, wash the sore with strong Vinegar, and water of a like quantity, with
charge that there remain none of the Caustic in the sore: then lay thereon
Butter washed with a Colewort leaf, until the asker or dead flesh fall: then
take our Cerot Magistrale, with a little Precipitate strewed thereon, and then
anoint it with Magno liquore, and lay it upon the sore: for this Cerot helps
all manner of corosive Ulcers without any other help, and every plaster will
serve three or four days, taking them off every four and twenty hours, and
making them clean, and then lay them on again. And as for the filthy Ulcer that
I have showed of in this Chapter, you shall dress it only with our Vnguento
magno, the which, without any other help, will heal them quickly: But you must
every four days touch them with Aqua fortis drawn from Precipitate, which
water draws forth the offensive matter, and leaves it purified and clean.
And in all other sorts of Ulcers, our Balm artificial, our Magno liquore, Oil
of Wax, and Turpentine, the black Cerot of Godfredo di medi, our Cerot
Magistrale with Precipitate, are able to help, be they never so evil. And
hereafter I will write of Ulcers particularly with their cures.

CHAP. XXI. Of Ulcers, that come in the feet, of corns, or of chaps.
ULcers that come in the feet may come of diverse causes, and are also of diverse
kinds, as of chaps, of corns, and such like. When they are chaps they come of
an hot matter and fiery, as you may see by experience: For the Patient feels
great heat in his feet, and is always thirsty, the which gives manifest
signs that the humor is hot: and their cure is with cooling purgations, as
our Sirrup against melancholy humors, taking it ten days together: then take
our Pillole Aquilone twice, and so thou shall take away the heat in the feet:
and to help the crepature or chaps, make this Unguent. Take oil of Rofes,
Vinegar, and liquid Pitch, ana, and boil them until the Vinegar be consumed,
and so being warm, wet a cloth therein, and lay it thereupon, and in short time
it will be whole: but if they be corns, you shall cut them unto the quick, and
then lay thereon a cloth wet in O leum benedictum, which does comfort and dry,
and quickly take away the pain. But when they are scratching, or as it were
scorched, you shall lay thereon Vnguento de Lithargiro crudo, and so thou shall
help them, as I have seen the experience.

CHAP. XXII. Of Ulcers in the Legs
THese Ulcers in the Legs are of two kinds, that is, filthy, and corrosive. The
filthy Ulcers are caused of cold and moist humors: The corrosive are caused of
humors hot and dry: and these are those Ulcers that go creeping in the flesh,
healing in one place, and breaking out in another. The filthy Ulcer is stinking
and full of matter, and causes little pain, and their cure is with our Balm
artificial, which has virtue to penetrate, digest, mundifie, and incarnate,
and heal, when that the body is first well purged: but those that are caused of
heat and dryness, you shall cure with the remedy written in the Chapter next
abovesaid, and then dress them with our Magistrale Cerot, and put thereon a
little Precipitate, and anoint it with Magno liquore, and so thou shall help
them. But if so be it chance the said Medicine do not heal it, you shall
perfume them five times with Sinabar, Incense, and Myrrh, and without all
doubt thou shall heal them.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Ulcers that come in the Knees.
THese Ulcers in the Knees are gross humors that cannot pass by the Joints
downwards, and so remain in those places, and cause a fastidious Ulcer, which
puts the Patient to great pains, by reason of abundance of humors that
comes there. And the cure of this Imposthume ulcerated is thus, purge the body
with our Soluble Sirrup, seven or eight mornings warm: and then give him di..
of Electuaria Angelica, and so thou shall help them quickly: then dress the
Ulcer with Vnguento magno, putting therein a little Precipitate and Magno
liquore, and so in short time it will heal.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Ulcers in the Groin.
THese Ulcers for the most part are Tumors, or Botches, the which through the
evil disposition of Nature, and evil Medicines are ulcerated. And of that may
come many infirmities, which I will leave to treat of at this time, and I will
show thee a remedy. Give the Patient seven or eight mornings our Scluble Sirrup
cold, and then give him our Aromatico, and after let him use Lignum Sanctum
according to our order, and dress the Ulcer with this Unguent. Take Vnguento
magno. ii. Magno liquore di.. and common Precipitate. ii. Mix them well
together, for this is the true secret of our invention, never made before of
any man, the which I have proved infinite times.

CHAP. XXV. Of Ulcers in the Arms.
THese Ulcers are not of so evil nature as those in the Legs, because
thereunto come not so many humors, and these are commonly caused of the Pox,
the Cure is this. Purge them well with our Magistrale Sirrup, seven or eight
mornings together, then take Pillole Aquilone, and then anoint them with
Vrguento magno every night until the Ulcers remain whole and without pain. Thus
have I used diverse times.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Ulcers that come in the Breast and Shoulders, and in the Back
and Belly.
ULcers that come in the foresaid parts, are all caused of Imposthumes of evil
qualities, that have not been well healed of the Chirurgians, which knew not
how to remove the cause, and by that means the Imposthumes are become malign
Ulcers. He therefore that will cure these Ulcers, it shall be necessary for
him to do that which was not done; that is, to remove the cause first, and then
the cure will follow with more ease and speed, so there be good regard and
consideration had thereof. And yet amongst Ulcers there is one kind that will
receive no curation, and they are called Cancri, that are crude and of evil
digestion, and go creeping along the flesh, and have a root as it were a Plant:
And for those kinds there is found no better remedy to mittigate them, then is
our Quinta essentia Vegitabile, for if you put it therein, and lay a cloth wet
in the same thereon, it takes away the pain, in such sort, that it is to be
wondered at, and will not suffer it to putrify; it takes away the stinking,
and comfort the place very much. As concerning the other kind of Ulcer, you
must first find out the cause before you can help it, and the cause being
found, the cure is easy to find and sure. He therefore that will be diligent,
shall not only heal those kinds of Ulcers, but also all other Ulcers.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Ulcers that come outwardly in all the body.
THese Ulcers are a kind of fat sore that causes abundance of matter, which
comes through superfluous humiditie of the body and blood, and these are
evil to heal, because their Original comes of the inward parts, and the cure
is thus: Give the Patient fourteen days our Potion of Lignum Sanctum, the
which is soluble and drying, and purges the blood, that being done, anoint
the Ulcer with Vnguentum de Lethargiro simple, and so they shall be helped
perfectly.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Ulcers in the Head.
ULcers in the Head are of diverse kinds, as of Wounds, Contusions, Swellings,
Scabs and white Skalls, and such like, which come of sundry causes, and are
helped diverse ways. For the Wounds Ulcerated, are mortified with our Castick,
laying it on four and twenty hours, and then wash it with strong Vinegar,
until all the Castick be come forth, and after help it with our Magno liquore:
The like cure is done in Contusions ulcerated, but the Swellings do differ
much, for that they are caused of the Pox, and thou shall cure them with
Soluble Medicines: Viz. Take Sarsa-Parilia, and then perfume him five or six
times with Sinaber. The Scabs or Crusts are helped with taking three times our
Electuari^ angelica, and then anoint them every night with Magno liquore. The
white Scab is helped with our Magistrale Cerot laying on Cantharides, and so
let it lie three days, then take it off, and lay on another like the first,
and let it lie other three days, and then anoint the head with Oleum
Benedictum continually.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Ulcers in the mouth, their Kinds and Remedies.
ULcers that come in the mouth are of diverse and sundry kinds, for some proceed
of heat in the head, others of cold, others are humors Gallico. Those that
come of heat in the head, are as it were scorched with great burning within
them, and the cure thereof is in letting blood in the veins under the tongue,
and the next day give him one dose of our Electuario angelica, and let him wash
his mouth with Planten water, wherein is boiled Tutia prepared, Roch Alum, and
Honey of Roses, and this is the true order to cure those kind of Ulcers with
speed. Those Ulcers which are caused of cold, are a certain hardness
alterated, which cause little pain; and the cure of these is to drink our
Vegitabile Quinta essentia, with Mel Rosarum: and dress the Ulcer with Oil of
Sulphur and Tartur mixed: And herein consists a great Secret worthy to be
known, and is of our invention. Ulcers that are caused of Morbo Gallico, if you
will cure them, you must first remove the cause, as I have said diverse times,
and touch them with our Castick. and let the Patient hold his mouth open a good
while after, that the Water may run out: And then make a Lavatory of Aqua
vitae, Honey, and Oil of Vitriol, aad therewith wash the mouth, for these are
great Secrets which bring both health to the Patient, and honor to the
Professor of this Art.

CHAP. XXX. Of Wounds and their kinds, and of their secret Remedies.
VVOunds are of diverse and sundry kinds. Nevertheless, they consist in two,
that is Simple, and Compound. The Simple wounds are those, where the flesh is
only offended. The Compound are those, where there is offense of flesh,
sinews, veins, and bones, and the cure of either of them is in three manners.
The first is a cure pertaining to Nature and not to Art, and that is it which
Dogs and other Animals do use, who being wounded, use no other Medicine then
to keep the wound clean with their proper tongues, and keep a Diet, and the
rest is left unto Nature which works well without pains of Medicine, and this
is the first. The second is that which is called Canonico, in which there be
four operations. The first is, Digestion. The second, Mundification. The third,
Incarnation. The fourth, Siccatrisation. The third order is of our invention,
and is done in this order, that is; Whenever a man has a wound either simple
or compound, the first thing that is to be done therein is, to join the parts
close together, and stitch them, and dress them with diverse sorts of drying
Medicines, as I will show thee hereafter in the cure of Wounds, in sundry parts
of the body.

CHAP. XXXI. What Medicines are fittest to heal Wounds outwardly with ease, and
in short time.
HAving declared already what wounds are outwardly, it is necessary also to
show the true order to cure them with as much ease, and brevitie, as is
possible to be done: And first, I will begin with simple wounds that are only
in the flesh, without offense of vein, sinew or bone. Although these sorts of
wounds are not to be helped with artifice, but only to join the parts
together, and if it be necessary also to stitch them, and so leave it unto
Nature, the which in short time will heal it, nevertheless if thou will help
it with artifice the faster, you shall anoint it once a day with oil of
Frankincense made by Distillation, as is showed in this Book. But those wounds
where there are veins cut, have need to be succored presently with ingenious
artifice, and perfect Remedies to ease and heal them with the most speed that
can be, because the veins may join together, without greater offense of the
wound, and this Mystery thou shall do in this order: The first is to join the
wound together quickly, and stitch it close as they use to sow bags, and not to
leave great wide stitches as they most commonly do; that being done, dress it
upon the wound with our Magno liquore, wetting therein a cloth, and laying it
on as hot as you may suffer it, then strew thereupon our secret powder, and
also round about it, for that subtiliateth the matter that runs to the
wound, and takes it forth with great ease, and without pain of the wound, and
therefore this is one of the most safest Remedies in that case, that Nature
with Art can make, and has been proved an infinite of times by me, and always
have had goodly experiences thereof. Also understand that these wounds, where
the bones and sinews are cut, have need of great artifice, for they are of
great importance. But when there is offense only of the sinews, you shall
stitch them presently, and do as I have said before of veins that were cut,
but dress them not with Magno liquore, but in stead of that take Oleum
Benedictum, and oil of Frankincense, of each alike, because these Oiles do
comfort marvellously those sinews that are cut. If it chance so, that a sinew
had a puncture, or cut half away, in that case it is necessary to cut it
overthwart, lest it should bring a Spasm in the wound. But in case afterward
that the bone be offended, and that there be some part to come forth, it were
necessary to leave the wound open until the bone be come forth, and then
incarnate it; and this thou shall do with our Balsamo Artificiato, and lay
thereon the Cerot of Godfredo di medi, the which helps with great speed. And
this is the order wherewith thou may help all those sorts of wounds before
named, and the defensive to use in these wounds is this. Take perfect Aqua
vitae made of good Wine, and put therein Hypericon, Millefolly, Viticella,
Betonie, and with that Infusion wet clothes, and lay them for a defensive round
about the wound, and thou shall have good success. Wounds in the head are
helped in the order, as those in whom the Sinews are offended. There are diverse
other sorts of wounds, which may be healed with the aforesaid remedies, as
hereafter shall be showed particularly.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Wounds in the Head, with offense of the brain, and how to cure
them.
VVOunds in the head, where there is offense of the brain, are mortal: and
there is no Physician that will take them in cure, but he counts them dead
men without any hope. But I by the grace of God and gift of Nature, have found
the order to cure and heal them in short time. I remember that when one was
wounded in the head in the famous City of Naples, yea, although the brain were
not hurt, but that the skin were cut unto the bone, they counted him mortal,
but I dressed them, and closed their wounds, and helped them in short space, so
that they wondered thereat; and that order I used for the space of seven years
that I tarried there, and caused them to walk in the streets, as it is well
known unto all those that dwell there. And among a number of other, I cured a
Portingall that was called, Il Seignior Diego di mena, of whom I took away all
the bone of the forehead, and every day he came to my lodging to be cured,
which I did with great speed, so that it caused every one to marvel thereat.
Afterward I went to Rome in the time of Pope Paulus the iiii. Carafa, and
always I cured in the same order, and did miracles, of which I call to
testimony the Romans. And among the rest, I cured a certain Gentleman called
M. Alessandor (I cannot remember his Surname) who was wounded in diverse places,
and I cured him quickly. After that I cured, and that in short time, a young
man that was in manner cut in pieces, and of that M. Jacomo da Perugia, M.
Alessandro da Civita, M. Daltilo Hebraeo, all learned Doctors can testify, for
they were present. And such like cures I have always done in Venice: But among
the rest I will not leave to write of a great chance, the which is true, and is
thus: There is in Venice a rare Poet and Orator and Historiographer, well known
unto the world called M. Dienigio Antanagi, who through his evil destiny was
wounded in the head, so that it penetrated the flesh and the bone, and entered
half a finger breadth into the brain, and there that virtuous man fell to the
ground as a dead man, and he lifted himself up to rise, but he could not, but
fell down again, and there came a dimness over his eyes, with a vomiting and
and a Fever, and the blood would not stint, and he lay in extreme pains, which
were all mortal signs: then I being called unto that cure, because he and I
were of great familiarity, and presently I shut the wound, and put therein our
Aqua balsami, and I anointed all his head with our Balsamo artificiato; that
being done, presently the blood stenched, and the pain went away, and the night
after he took his rest, and in the morning the Fever was also gone: After that,
I dressed him with Magno liquore, wetting clothes therein, and upon the cloth I
strewed the powder of Hypericon: And this Medicine I used eight days, in the
which time he came forth of his bed; and shortly after he was perfectly whole,
and before six months were past, it was so siccatrized, that no man could
perceive any wound. And of this I have to testimony Venice, Rome, Vrbine,
Caglie, and all Italy. To conclude this Chapter, I say, that wite the aforesaid
order, thou may cure any such sort of wound.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Wounds in the Head, with Fracture of the Bone.
VVOunds in the Head, with Fracture of the bone, of the common Physicians and
Chirurgians, are counted difficile to be healed, because thereunto belongs
great art or cunning, for they open the flesh and raspe the bone, with many
other things, of which here I account it superfluous to treat of, because that
many be helped without them. For always when the Physician or Chirurgian, does
defend the wound from alteration and corruption, nature it self will work very
well, and heal it without any other aid; but with our Medicines they may be
helped with much more speed, because they let the alteration, and defends
them from Putrefaction, and mittigateth the pain, and the order to cure those
kinds of wounds is thus: The first thing that is to be done in those wounds is,
to join the parts close together, and dress them upon the wound with our Oleum
Benedictum, and upon the oil lay clothes wet in our Magno liquore, as hot as
you may suffer it, and so with these Remedies thou shall help them quickly,
because our Oleum Benedictum takes away the pains, and keeps it from
putrefaction, and repercusseth: Our Magno liquore digesteth, mundifieth, and
incarnateth, and heals. And therefore this is the best Medicine that can be
used in these kinds of wounds. For hereof I have had an infinite of
experiences, the which have been counted Miracles, and therefore I have let the
world to understand thereof, that they may help themselves, if occasion shall
serve; therefore he that will follow this our order in curing, shall work
Miracles on the earth.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Wounds in the Head, where the bone is not offended.
VVOunds in the head where the bone is not hurt, are not of so great
Importance, but are easy to be helped; for you shall need to do nothing, but
to keep it from putrefaction, and defend it from inflammation, which are easy
to be done, and so Nature will work well with great speed. To keep the wound
from putrefaction, you shall anoint it round about with our Oleum
Philosophorum de Terebinthina and Cera. And to keep it from Inflammation, you
shall wash it with our Quintessence, and upon the wound dress it with our
Magno liquore. Thus doing thy cure shall prosper happily, and you shall not
need to take away any blood, nor yet to keep any diet, nor yet to keep the
house, but to go where you think good, without any peril or danger. And this
Order I have used a long time, as diverse Cities can testify.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Contusions, or bruises, as well in the head, as other places.
COntusions, or bruises in the head, or any other place of the body, of the
ancient Physicians has been counted dangerous to heal. For, they say, that
Contusions must be brought to putrefaction, and turned into matter: which
opinion I do not allow: For by me those Contusions or bruises, are very easy
to be dissolved without maturation: And that I do with our Oleo benedicto, and
Magno liquore, as much of the one as of the other mixed together, and made very
hot as you may suffer it, and then wet clothes therein twice a day, and in
three or four days at the most, they shall be resolved: and this it does,
because this remedy assubtiliateth the humors, and opens the pores, and
draws forth the matter that is run unto the place offended, and so by those
means they shall be helped. With this remedy I have cured hundreds when I was
in the wars in Africa, in Anuo 1551. when the said City was taken and
destroyed by the Camp of Charles the fifth Emperor.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Wounds in the neck, and the order to be used in curing them.
VVOunds in the neck are very perilous, and hard to be cured, and long before
they will heal: and this comes because in it are all the ligaments of the
head, as bones, sinews, veins, flesh, and skin, all instruments that hold the
head and the body together, without the which a man cannot live: and therefore
those wounds are so perilous to be healed, seeing thereunto runs so great
quantity of humors, that they will not suffer the wound to be healed. The true
way therefore to help these wounds, is to stitch them well in his place, and
dress it upon the wound with clothes wet in Oleum benedictum one part, and
Magno liquore three parts mixed together, as hot as you can suffer it: and upon
the cloth lay the powder of Mill folly: and this thou shall do once in four
and twenty hours, and so thou shall help them quickly; giving you great
charge, that you change not your Medicine, for this mundifieth, incarnateth,
and heals the wound without any further help: For I have proved it an
infinite of times.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Wounds in the arms, and their importance, and Medicines.
VVOunds in the arms are dangerous, for that there also are a great number of
Sinews, Cartilagines, Veins, Muskles, and other dangerous things, as it is
well seen in wounds of the arms, how that many times thereunto runs
abundance of humors, and there comes alteration, inflammation, and
imposthumation, which hurts the Patient much. Therefore in this case, I will
show thee a rare secret, wherewith thou shall help any sort of wound in the
arm, without any alteration, and with little pain, and the secret is this:
Dress the wound up on the upper parts with our Magn^ liquore very warm,
without any tenting at all: and this do once a day and no more, and in any
wise change not your Medicine: For with this thou may help all wounds in the
arms with great speed: and it is one of the greatest secrets that can be used
for wounds in the arms, and proved by me infinite times.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Wounds in the breast, as well peircing through, as other.
ALl wounds in the breast are troublesome, and very dangerous, as well they
that pierce into the body, as others. And the cause is, for that the parts of
the breast are compounded of Skin, Cartilages, Sinews, Flesh, and Bones. So
that it cannot be but troublesome and perilous. For where the sinew parts be
hurt, there arises ever great pain, which for the most part brings Fevers,
and other accidents, and therefore is evil to cure. The cure of them is with
our Balsamo and Quinta essentia. For the one takes away the pain, and the
other keeps from alteration. But when they are peircing into the body, they
are most dangerous, because the Chirurgian cannot tell certainly what part
within the body is offended or hurt. Either the Liver, or the Lungs, or the
Milt, or any other particulars. Moreover, there is another matter which makes
it dangerous, which is, when they are penetrating, the matter that proceeds
from the Wound falls into the body, as well as out. And remaining in the body
causes putrefaction, then Fevers follow, and commonly death. Wherefore in this
case, cause the Patient to vomit, and to keep slender diet, because the humor
should not alter to the damage of the wounded. And to preserve him from
putrefaction, you shall anoint all his body over with our Balsamo, and let him
drink our Quintessence morning and evening. And this done the cure shall
prosper, or else there is no hope by any other means.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Wounds in the belly, and in the reins, and their affects and
Medicines.
VVOunds in the belly are doubtful, and very uncertain to cure, because it is
unpossible to know how they are, or of what importance they be: for although
ye may see the Orifice where the Weapon went in, yet ye cannot know what
offense it has done in the interior parts, and therefore they are hard to be
helped, and worse to judge of, and for that cause I will not stand long in
reasoning thereof: for I have determined not to speak of things uncertain and
doubtful, but only of things that may be proved by reason and experience. And
because those wounds be uncertain, I will write nothing of them, for fear of
hiding the truth: but I will write of those in the reins or back, and first I
will show what the reins are, because every one may comprehend my reason. It
is to be understood, that our bodies are made all of sensible things: as
inwardly, the Stomach, the Heart, the Liver, the Lungs, the Belly, the Milt,
the Guts, with a number of other things which are not common, or known to all
men, as those which I have spoken of. The rest of the man is made of
Cartilagines, of Veins, of Muskles, of Flesh, of Skin, and other particulars
of small importance to know, because the wise, learned, and reverend, my Lord
Canan Ferrarese, has writ thereof better then ever any in the world has done,
and therefore if you believe not me, believe his writing set forth in print.
But to return to our purpose, I say, that God has compounded the man naturally
of all these things that I have spoken of: and because they are soft and
tender, he has placed the bones in the midst of them to strengthen them, and
to keep them straight, etc. And from the shoulder to the thigh, he has made a
great pillar, of many pieces of bones joined together: On the one part whereof
grows the ribs, which holds the flesh, skin, and other particulars far
from the interiours: and upon that bone on the outward side, are the magistrall
sinews that descend from the head, and bind all the back together, and
reaches down unto the feet. Therefore (this being true that I have said)
wounds in the head are very dangerous in all his actions, and their cure very
hard, because all those senses that give nourishment, pass by the reins
downward to the lower parts: and most commonly when a man is wounded in those
places, he remains lame on the leg that is on that part, and being, as it is,
hard and dangerous, the cure of it, according to the Canons of the Ancients, is
also perilous; because in those places where so many particulars do meet and
communicate, there ought not in any wise to be putrefaction, or digestion, but
to preserve: You may not bring it to maturation, but to keep it from it; you
may not incarnate, but with speed heal it up: and so in this order the cure
shall succeed well, and without danger. And this I will show unto every one,
because he shall profit by our doctrine to the glory of God, and health of the
wounded. When one is wounded in those parts, I counsel that the Chirurgian
presently shall close the wound with all his diligence, putting thereupon of
our Quinta essentia, and instead of a defensive our Balsamo, and upon the wound
lay a cloth wet in our Magno liquore, and upon the cloth strew our secret
powder for wounds, and following this order, he shall be reputed for an
excellent Chirurgian above all other: and this is the mere truth as by most
evident proof thou shall more largely find.

CHAP. XL. Of Wounds in the Legs, and those parts.
VVOunds in the Legs are in manner of the same quality as those in the arms,
because the Legs are of their proper quality and Nature compounded of the like
substance that the Arms are, that is, skin, flesh, muskles, veins, sinews, and
bones. And these when they are offended, or wounded, are very perilous, because
unto them runs great quantity of humors. And in the Legs are certain
deadly places as a man may say: As the hinder part of the Caulf of the Leg: And
the middle of the inner side of the thigh: The Ancle and the foot are all
places troublesome and curious to heal, when they are wounded. And therefore to
heal them according to the manner of the Ancients, it were great trouble to the
Chirurgian, and pity to see the pain of the Patient. Wherefore in no wise use
not the Medicines of the Ancients, but when thou have occasion, join unto the
skills of thy Art, the use of these Medicines, our Quinta essentia, Balsamo,
Magno Liquore, Oleo Benedicto, Oleo di Rasa, Oleo Philosophorum, any of these,
or such like, which are incorruptible, which by their proper quality
assubtiliateth contusions, pierces to the bottom of Wounds, keeps the flesh
in his natural caliditie and humiditie, preserves from putrefaction, and
naturally makes the flesh to join and grow together, and that in short space.
Therefore consider well which works better effect, ours or the Ancients: And
use them at thy discretion.

CHAP. XLI. Of wounds that pierce into the body, and of their danger.
VVOunds that pierce into the body are very perilous and mortal, because the
most part of them cannot be cured by ordinary means, and especially when the
interiours are ulcerated: In that case the Physician not seeing it, nor knowing
the truth of the wound, cannot apply convenient Medicines, therefore he shall
be much less apt to heal them, and therefore you must stand to the benefit of
Fortune. And of this I will discourse nothing, for that it will be hard for me
to show that thing, that I cannot see with mine eyes, nor touch with my hands:
And because this discourse cannot be approved of the truth, and of experience,
I will not meddle therewith in any wise: Nevertheless, I will write of those
sorts of wounds that are penetrative, and yet not offend the Intrals, for those
may be helped with ease, as I have cured a great number, and among the rest in
Anno 1551. in the month of June (as I remember) the 17 day, being in the Army
of Naples to, go to Africa, there happened a great chance which was thus: The
Captain General of the Galleys of Fiorenza, named Il Seignior Giordano Orsino
sitting at the Table with diverse Captains and Gentlemen, among the rest there
was one Captain falling in talk with another, sitting at the same Table, took a
loaf of bread, and flang it at his face, then Seignior Giordano seeing that
little respect of the Captain, rose from the Table and took him by the collar,
and gave him five Stockadoes in the breast to have slain him, and left him
lying: That being done, the said Seignior Giordano repented him, and seeing
that he was not yet dead, called for me being in the Galley with Don Garsia de
Toledo my General, and when I came, I found the poor Captain almost dead; whom
I dressed with our Balsamo artificiato, and twice a day I gave him to drink of
our Quinta essentia, and gave him meats of good nourishment, and I never put
tent into the wound, and in three days he was helped, and of this the whole
company, that was in the Gallie can testify, and especially the said Seignior
Giordano who did the fact. Then afterward in Africa I cured an infinite number
that were wounded in diverse manners. And of these Experiences I have done and
do yet daily, in so much that if I should write of them, it would be redious,
and therefore I will stand no longer about matters concerning wounds, because I
have written a Discourse upon Surgery, and Il Capricio Medicinale, in the
which I have declared many things most profitable in the same.

CHAP. XLII. A Discourse upon old wounds which are not yet healed, with their
Remedies.
WHen that wounds are evil healed, and that therein comes Imposthumation, and
that the part wounded be indurated and full of pain. Then use this Secret of
our Invention, which was never yet seen or heard of by the Ancients, nor yet in
our time but of us. When thou find such a case, wash the wound well, and
make it clean round about, and then wash it with our Qvinta essentia
Vegitabile, and bath it well through, for that the said Quintessence does open
the pores, and assubtiliateth the matter, and causes the humor to come forth.
This being done, anoint all over with our Magno liquore, and this doing,
within three days the Patient shall feel great ease, and in short time after
he shall be whole. This is one of the noblest Medicines that can be made, for
it takes away the hardness, heals the wound, and comfort the place
offended.

CHAP. XLIII. A rare Secret to heal wounds of Gunshot, Arrows or such like in
the wars, when they require haste.
IF thou will cure those wounds, presently join the parts together, and wash it
with our Aqua Celestis and Oleum Balsami of our invention, and lay a cloth wet
in the same thereon.

CHAP. XLIV. To heal a Wound quickly.
VVAsh the wound well with our Aqua Balsami, and close it up, and thereupon lay
a cloth wet in the Oil of Frankincense, and so by this means thou shall help
any great wound quickly, for I have proved it infinite times, to my great
honor.

CHAP. XLV. To help a Wound quickly, that is in danger of any accident.
VVOunds in some parts of the body, are very dangerous of life, and specially
where the sinews be cut or pierced, or veins or muskles hurt, or bones broken,
and by an infinite of other particulars, which being open, or evil healed, the
Patient may be in danger of life, because the wind enters in, and they cause
pains and inflammation, and therefore to avoid all these aforesaid matters, so
that the wound shall have no detriment, use this remedy. First, join the parts
close together, and put therein our Quintessence, and lay thereon a cloth, wet
in our Balm, and bind it fast that the air get not in, for it is very hurtful.
Ye shall understand that these are two of the excellentest Medicines that may
be found, because our Quintessence does assubtiliate the blood, and takes it
forth, and takes away the pain, and the Balm does warm and comfort the place
offended, and will not suffer any matter to run thereunto by any means, for
this is most true, as I have proved diverse and sundry times, and always have
had good success.

CHAP. XLVI. To stay the Flux of Blood in Wounds.
When there is a Flux of Blood in any wound, by reason of some vein that is
cut, and that the Chirurgian would stop it. It is necessary that he put into it
our Quintessence, and then to stitch it up very close and hard, and upon the
wound strew the blood of a man dried, made in powder, and lay upon the blood a
cloth wet in our Balm artificial very warm, and upon that bind the wound very
straight with ligaments. And every day twice wash it with our Quintessence, and
round about it anoint it with our Balm, and also cast thereon our secret
Powder for wounds; and that do Morning and Evening every day, without opening
the wound. And in short time it will remain well. Giving you charge that the
wounded person do keep no straight diet, because Nature being weak, relaxeth
the veins, and that causes the flux of blood.

CHAP. XLVII. Another for the same.
FIrst, stitch the wound close, then cast thereon man's blood, and bind it
somewhat hard, so let it remain 24. hours, and when you unbinde it, take heed
you remove nothing, and cast thereon more dried blood, and anoint it round
about with Oleum Philosophorum de Terebinthina and Cera, and bind it up again
other four and twenty hours, and then bind it gently, and anoint the wound
with Oil of Frankincense, and in short time it will be perfectly whole.

CHAP. XLVIII. A Defense to be laid upon wounds.
TAke perfect Aqua vitae, of good wine, what quantity you will, and put
therein Hypericon, Millefolie, Viticella, and and Betonie, ana, then let it
stand certain days close stopped, and when ye will use it, wet a cloth
therein, and lay it round about the wound. And thou shall have thy intent, to
the great satisfaction of the Patient.

CHAP. XLIX. Our Secret Powder for Wounds.
TAke Hypericon flowers and leaves, Millefolie, and Viticella, ana, stamp them
well together, and strew it upon the wound, and round about the wound when it
is dressed, for it does defend it from accidents.

The Third Book of the Secrets of LEONARDO PHIORAVANTE.
CHAP. I. In this third book is showed the order to make diverse Compositions,
appertaining both to Physic and Chirargery, with the hidden virtues of sundry
Vegetables, Antmals, and Minerals, well approved by this Author, and first of
his Petra Philosophale, the which helps against all diseases that happens
unto man and woman.
THere has always been a great questioning among the Philosophers, whether
that one Med cine might help against all diseases or no. The which I affirm,
and will approve with sufficient reason, that the Petra Philosophale, made of
our invention, may help against all the infirmities that comes unto man's body,
and two only reasons I will show thee with brevity: The first of them is this,
that all sorts of infirmities have their original and beginning of the
Stomach, and to know the truth, ye may see manifestly, that if the body be
never so little infirmed, the stomach is also grieved: For ye may see how the
Animals terestriall, never help themselves of other infirmity then of the
stomach, and when they will help themselves, they eat herbs, the which causes
them to vomit, and this does signify that they have no other infirmity, then
the aforesaid; so by the experience of the Animals, I approve that the
infirmity is caused of the stomach, and this is the first reason. The second
is, that all the Medicine, wherein our Petra Philosophale is put, as soon as
they are come into the stomach, it draws unto it all the evil humors of the
stomach, and also of the whole body, and mixeth with them, and so nature
sends them forth by vomit, or by seege, or both, and so the stomach shall be
evacuated of that matter, and the body remain free from all impediments of
infirmities, so that by this reason I affirm, that our Petra Philosophale may
help against all sorts of infirmities. And to know the truth, I have proved it
by experience in all manner of infirmities, and always have found it to do
much good unto all men, and hurt none unto my knowledge, and the order to make
this Petra Philosophale, is thus.

Take Sal Niter, roche Allome, Vitrioll Romain, of each two pound.

First, dry the Vitrioll in an earthen pan, and then beat it to powder, and mix
it with the other matters, and put thereunto four ounces of Sal Gemmae, then
put it in a Coord with his head, and a Receiver well luted, and distill it in a
wind furnace, so that ye may make fire with wood, and at the first make small
fire, and so increase it according to Art, and always lay wet clothes on the
Head and Receiver, and that thou shall do, because the spirits of the water
shall not she away. Ye shall understand, that in the beginning of your
distillation, the Receiver will wax red like blood, and then turn white, and at
the last, when ye give it strong fire, it will turn red again, and those are
the pure spirits of the Aqua fortis, and then at the end, the Receiver will
turn white again, and then it is ended: then let it wax cold, and then keep it
in a glass close shut, to make our Petra Philosophale.

Then take Mercury one pound, quick Lime. vi. Soap. iiii. common Ashes. iii.
Mix them together in a Mortar of stone, and then put them into a Retort, and
distill it with a strong fire until all the Mercury be come forth into the
Receiver, then take it forth, and keep it in a glass to make thy Composition,
the which is made thus.

Take the water that thou made first, and put it into a Goord of glass being
well luted, and then put in the Mercury that thou did distill before. After
that take Steel in thin plates i. Iron also in thin plates. ii. Fine gold in
leaves, the weight of. ii. and put them altogether in the glass, and presently
set on the Head, for it will begin to boil, and cause red fumes like blood, the
which thou shall receive in a Receiver, and presently set thy glass in the
Furnace, and give it fire until all the water be come forth with the fume.
Then let it cool, and keep that close in a glass, then break that other glass
that stood in the fire, and in the bottom thou shall find our Petra
Philosophale, the which thou shall grind fine, and searce it into most fine
powder, and then wash it well with Vinegar distilled, and dry it again, and at
the last wash it with Rosewater, and dry it very well, stirring it continually
over the fire, then keep it as a precious Jewel close in a Glass.

For the order to use it, I will write hereafter in sundry places: Ye shall
understand, that the water which ye distilled away from the stone, will serve
for the same purpose again: But ye must take but half the quantity of the
aforesaid matters; and when ye have distilled it again from the stone, ye
shall preserve it for an infinite number of purposes, as I will show thee
hereafter.

CHAP. II. To make our Balm artificial, with the order to use it, and
wherefore it serves.
THis Balsamum has all the virtues of the natural Balm, although not in
quality, yet in virtue, and the order to make it is thus.

Take Venice Turpentine one pound, Oil of Bays that is perfect without
mixture. iiii. Galbanum. iii. Gum Arabie. iiii. Olibanum, Mirrba elect, Gum
Hedera, of each. iii. Lignum Alloes, Galingall, Cloves, Consolida minore,
Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Zedoaria, Ginger, Diptamum album, of each. i. Musk of Levant,
Ambergriece, of each. i. Beat all those aforesaid things together, and put
them into a Retort of glass well luted, and put thereto six pound of rectified
Aqua vitae without phlegm, and so let it stand eight days, and then distill it
by Sand, and there will come forth a white water mixed with Oil, and so keep
thy fire small, until there come forth a blackish Oil, then change thy
Receiver, and set thereto another, and increase thy fire until all the spirits
be come forth, then separate the Oil from the black water, and keep them by
themselves, and the like shall ye do by the first water. The first water that
is white, is called Aqua del Balsamo, and the Oil separated from that, is
called Oleum del Balsamo. The second water that is black, is called Matter
Balsami, and the Oil separated from that water, is called Balsamo artificiato,
the which would be kept as a precious Jewel.

The first water is most excellent to clear and preserve the sight of the eyes,
also the face being washed therewith, it makes it very fair, and preserves it
youthfully, it keeps back age, it breaks the gravel in the reins, and
provokes Urine, the which is stopped through carnositie, it helps all manner
of wounds, in what place of the body soever they be, if ye wash them with the
said water, and wet therein clouts and lay thereon, for his operation is so
strange, that it seems rather divine then humane. It helps much against the
Etisie, and against all sorts of Catarres, and Cough. If ye wash a Sciatica
therewith, and lay thereon a cloth wet in the same, it takes away the pain
presently.

The other water called the Mother of Balm, helps Scabs in short time, if ye
wash them therewith: so does it help the white Scall, Lepra, and all sorts of
Ulcers that are not corrosive, most miraculously to see, and without any
trouble. It serves also against a number of other infirmities, the which I
will let pass at this time.

The Oil of Balm does serve for an infinite number of things, and especially
for wounds in the head, where the bone and pannicle is hurt, putting it
therein. It preserves the face if ye anoint it therewith. It is most
excellent against the Plurisie, giving thereof. i. at a time with the water of
Balm.

The Balm artificial is a miraculous liquour, for if any have the stitch in
the side, and take. ii. thereof, it presently will help him. It is also good
against the Cough, and Catarre, and coldness in the head and stomach, and for
wounds in the head. It is a most Sovereign remedy, if ye anoint all the head
therewith once a day, because it pierces into the brain, and also unto the
stomach beneath. It resolves a Quartan in short time, if ye anoint all the
body therewith, leaving no part. And to be short, I know no disease, neither
hot, nor yet cold, but that this Bulsamum does good unto, as well the hot
diseases as the cold, because it cools the hot and heateth the cold, and this
it does by his quality and hidden virtue, so that I have found in this
precious liquor, such great virtues, that I am not able to declare them all; so
that every one, the which is furnished with this precious Balm, may be kept
from infirmities, and shall not need to seek the natural Balm, with so much
expenses, and danger of the life, as has been many times seen.

CHAP. III. To make our Aromatico, the which helps against all manner of
infirmities, of what quality soever they be.
ARomatico Leonardo, is so called, because it was compounded and made by his
invention, and is a miraculous Medicine, that serves against all manner of
diseases, of what quality soever they be, for it works this operation, that
is, as soon as it joyneth to the stomach, it draws to it all the evil humors
of the body, and imbraceth them, and carries them forth by vomit and seege,
and so leaves Nature unburdened, the which may prevail to his pleasure,
because it has no impediment, and by this reason I approve that our Aromatico
helps against all diseases; as is said before, and the order to make it is
thus.

Take fine Sugar. iiii. pure Pearls, Musk, Saffron, Lignum Aloes, Cinnamon,
ana.. i. Petra Philosophale,. iiii. mix them together, and make thereof
Lozanges with Rosewater according to Art, the which ye shall keep in a box of
wood close shut, and the order to use it is thus, that when the Physician does
go to visit any sick person, and that he will prepare him some Medicine to take
inward, the best and most perfect Medicine that he can ordain is our Aromatico,
because it evacuateth the stomach by vomit, and the body downward, and his
operation is such, that it does in manner help any crude sort of infirmity,
and the quantity is from i.. to ii. and may he taken in broth, in wine, in
water, or mix it with any Pills, or Potion, giving you charge, that when ye put
it in any Potion, that ye leave none in the bottom of the cup where ye drink
it out, because the Petra Philosophale, is heavy, and will remain in the
bottom, for if that remain it will not work at all, giving you also charge,
that the said day that ye give this Medicine, that ye let the Patients drink
as much crude water as they will, and give them little meat to eat that day,
and this is the order to use this Medicine.

CHAP. IIII. To make our Electuario Angelico, and the order to use it, and in
what diseases.
ELectuario, Angelico Romano is so called, because it was compounded of me in
the City of Rome, in the time of the Pope Paulo quarto, and because this
composition works divinely, I called it Angelico, and is most excellent
against many diseases, it is good against all sorts of Fevers, giving it
Per-minorativo, and for the ^titch in the side it is most rare, because it
takes away the viscositie in the Stomach, and opens the Pores, and is good
against the Gout; for if they take it every third day once, in ten days they
shall be helped. It is also good against the Cough, Catarr, and for the Milt,
and for those that have the Pox, or the running Cout, and such like
influences, and the order to make it is thus:

Take Saffron, Lignum alves, Cinnamon, red Coral, ana. iii. Ell^borus niger,
without preparation,. ii. Electuario d^ succo resarum Mesue, that is not too
much boiled. vi. Sugar Rosate. viii. Musk of Levant. i. Petra Philosophale,.
iii. our Quintessence of wine. ii. purified Honey as much as will suffice to
make it in form of an Electuarie, m^xe them on a small fire in an earthen pan,
and when it is made, keep it in a of glass, for any other vessel will not be
good. This Electuarie ye may mix with any soluble Medicine, but ye must take
it fasting, the quantity is from ii. to. iiii. Ye shall understand, that this
in a manner reviveth the dead by his great virtue, as has been seen many
thousand times in Venice, and in Rome, most worthy of memory: And therefore if
any Physician desire to get fame in the world, let him use our Electuario
Angelica, the which works miracles on the earth.

CHAP. V. Our Sirrup Solutivo, with the Order to use it.
Soluble Sirrups made in decoction are very wholesome and of great faculty, and
specially in the crudity of humors, and the reason is this, because it
disperseth the matter, and evacuateth it with great ease, and without danger or
trouble of the Patient, and the order to make it is thus.

Take Sage, Rue, Rosemary, Wormwood, Cicorie, Carduus Sanctus, Nettles,
Organie, of each a handful; Figs, Raisons, Dates, sweet Almonds, Sal gem. ana.
iiii. Coloquintida, Aloes hepatica, Cinnamon, Mirabolani citrini, ana. ii.
common Honey two pound, stamp them all grossly, and put them to infuse in
eighteen pound of fair water, then boil it till half be consumed, then strain
it, and distill it by a filter, and aromatise it with two carets of Musk, and a
pint of Rosewater, and then it is made, the which ye shall keep in a bottle of
glass close stopped, the quantity is from. iiii. to. vi. In Winter you shall
take it very warm, and in the Spring and Autumn, ye shall take it but warm. In
Summer ye shall take it cold, for this purges the gross humors of the body,
and hurts not the stomach, you may use it in a Fever four or five days
together, and it will help it. In cruditie of humors, as the French Pox,
Gouts, Catarrs, Doglie Artetich, and such like matters, where there is no
accident of Fever, ye may take it ten or fifteen days together, and cannot
hurt by any means, for it purges most excellent; it is given against the
Cough, against Flux of of the Urine, and pains in the head, and carnositie in
the Yeard, for the Emeroids; and in sum, it is good against all diseases caused
of corrupt humors, for it has such virtue, that it draws from all parts,
and evacuateth the humors intestinall, for of this Sirrup I have had great
experience, in such persons as were in manner banished and had lost their
taste, and presently using this, they came to their good temperature, and I
have used it an infinite number of times in persons that were ulcerated, and
full of sores, evil handled of Fortune, and of the infirmity, and finding no
means to cure them as they should be: I gave them this Sirrup fourteen or
fifteen days, and then they were cured, with a number of other things, the
which would be too long to write, and therefore I would wish every one to use
this, not only in the aforesad matters, but in all other diseases.

CHAP. VI. Our Sirrupo magistrale Leonardo, the which serves against an
infinite number of Diseases.
THis Sirrup is solutive, and very pleasant to use, and cannot hurt in any
wise, the which is seldom seen in other Medicines, and the order to make it is
thus.

Take the leaves of Sine,. ii. Fumitorie, Maidenhair, Hartstongue, Liverwort,
Epitimum, Ellemo, Pollipedie of the Oak, the flowers of Burrage, of Buglosse,
Liquorice, of each. iii. Coloquintida, Elleborus niger, Aloes Hepatica,
Mirabolani Indi, ana. i. Prunes xiiii. Sebestien xii. Tamarise. i. Stamp them
grossly, and infuse them in ten pound of Fumitorie water, then boil it until
the consumption of the third part, and then strain it, and in that which is
streined put these things: Sirrup of Staecados one pound, Saffron. i. Mel
Rosarum,. vi. rectified Aqua vitae,. iiii. Musk. i. The Muslege of Marsh
Mallows. iiii. Benzoin,. i. Rosewater,. iii. and then it is made, the which ye
shall keep in a glass close stopped, and keep it in a temperate place, and this
you must take warm; the quantity is from. ii. to. iiii. and it is a most safe
Medicine to be used without keeping of any diet. It helps those much that
have Pellaria, Scabs, Emeroids, and such like diseases, and may be given unto a
woman with child, without any danger, when she shall have occasion to use any.

CHAP. VII. Our Sirrup against the melancholy humor, and specially where there
is ventositie in the Stomach.
IT were necessary for those that will make this Sirrup, to be expert in the
Art, for it would be made with great diligence, and the order to make is thus:

Take water of Fumitorie, of Hops, of Wormwood, of Maidenhair, of each five
pound. Then with this water thou shall make a decoction with these things that
follow.

Take Pollipodium of the Oak, one pound, Sine leaves, Epitimum, ana. iiii.
Cordial flowers two handfulls, Maidenhair one handful, Liquorice, Raisons,
Cinnamon, of each. ii. The four Cold seeds,. ii. Make thereof a decoction
according to Art, and strein it, then take four pound of that Decoction, and
put thereto the juice of Bourage, of Buglosse, of Hops, of each. ii. common
Honey,. vi. then with white Sugar make a Sirrup in good form, and aromatise it
with Musk and Amber, putting thereto i.. of Plyris with out Musk, and then it
is made. The dose is from, iii. to. iiii. in the morning warm, and fast thereon
at least three or four hours, for this purges marvellously the melancholy
humors, and all other gross humors, and dissolveth wind, and comfort the
heart, etc.

CHAP. VIII. Our Potion of Lignum Sanctum, the which is miraculous to dissolve
crude, and malign humors, with the order to use it, in the French Pox, and
such like diseases.
BEcause the Pox is a disease contagious, putrified, and corrupt, and works
many evil Effects, as I have written in my Caprici Medicinali. Therefore it
were necessary to prepare most excellent and rare Remedies to dissolve the
same, which Medicines are infinite.

But in this Chapter I will write one, that purges the crude and viscous
humors downwards, and does assubtiliate the gross humors, and dries all
sorts of subtle humors that offend Nature, and sends them forth by sweat:
It dries the melancholy humor, and dissolveth choler, and is most wholesome
for those that are troubled with that disease, because it dries much and
dissolveth the disease, with many other good effects, as by experience thou
may see, and the order to make it is thus.

Take the Bark of Lignum Sanctum grossly beaten one pound, and lay it in steep
in fourteen pound of fair water, 24 hours, then boil it until four pound be
consumed, then put thereto Pollipodie of the Oak,. ii Cicory one handful,
Aloes hepatica,. iiii. and let them boil for an hour, and put thereunto the
leaves of Sine, Epitimum, ana. i. Coloquintida,. vi. Sugar. viii. then let it
boil till half be boiled away, and that there remain vii. pound, then strein
it, and put it in a glass with xii. grains of Musk, and keep it very close
stopped, and this is the Sirrup, the which ye shall take twice a day, that is
morning and evening; then make this drink following, the which shall be the
common drink at all times to your meat.

Take a pound of Lignum Sanctum, Raspead, and steep it in ten pound of white
wine that is ripe, and let it boil an hour, then put thereto fifteen pound of
fair water, and let it boil a little more, and then strein it, and keep it in a
glass bottle, for this is to be used all the day time, and the order to use
these is thus.

First, when any feels himself grieved with the Pox, or any such like
disease, he must keep his bed at least twenty days, and use to take of the
first Sirrup or Potion every morning a good draught, being as warm as he may
suffer it, then cover him well with clothes that he may sweat as much as he
can, then take off the clothes by little and little, and dry him with warm
clothes, and so let him repose for two hours, and then let him eat, and his
meat must be dry, as Biscuit, Rostmeat, Raisins of the Sun, Almonds, and
sometime a rere Egg, and his drink at meals, and all the day beside, shall be
the last made with wine and water: then at night give him of the first Sirrup
as ye did in the morning, and cause him to sweat, and then dry him: and this
order thou shall use twenty days together, not coming forth of thy Chamber,
and by the grace of God thou shall be helped of any such grievous infirmity, as
I have seen the experienee thereof an infinite of times, to my great houour,
for it may be occupied in all complexions with safety, as by the Ingredients
thou may see.

CHAP. IX. To make the water of Lignum Sanctum, most wholesome against the Pox,
with a new order.
COmmonly they use to take the water of Lignum Sanctum against the Pox, the
which surely is most wholesome, but it must be taken in good order and form,
and must be made with great discretion, and not as they use it now adays, for
they give it some three or four times, and never the better, although the wood
be sufficient enough to help them, and therefore I would wish every one that
will use this water, to take it in such order as it ought to be, the which I
will show thee hereafter.

Take Lignum Sanctum, Raspead small one pound, the bark being beaten. iii.
infuse them in twelve pound of fair water one night, and the next morning put
therein one pound of Honey, the which is put in, because it is aperative and
warm, and helps to provoke sweat, and causes it to have a good taste: then
boil it till half be consumed, then put thereto Carduus sanctus. iiii. strong
Wine three pound, then boil it until a third part be consumed, and then it is
made; then strain it, and take forth the Carduus sanctus, and put therein
twenty pound of fair water, and one pound of Honey, and let it boil until four
pounds be consumed, then strein it and keep it in a glass bottle, for this is
the common drink to drink all the day long, and the order to take it is thus.
First before ye will take this water, it were necessary to take our Sirrupo
Sclutivo seven or eight days, after that take of our Electuario Angelica. ss.
That being done, in the name of God take this potion of Lignum sanctum in this
order. Take in the morning at the appearing of the day. viii. very warm as he
may suffer, and presently lay clothes on him, and cause him to sweat two hours,
and then dry him with warm clothes, and so let him remain two hours, and then
give him to eat, and his meat shall be Biscuit, Raisins, Almonds, and sometime a
little roast meat, and no other: then in the evening about the 22. hour, ye
shall give him the said Sirrup as ye did in the morning, neither more nor
less, and cause him to sweat, and about the 24. hour give him only Biscuit and
Raisins, and the other common drink that was made last, giving you warning that
ye make this drink fresh every third day, because it shall not hurt the
stomach, and every week once, ye shall take a pill of Mart millitare, and
that day thou shall eat Birds flesh because of weakening: Also ye shall take
very great heed to one thing, and that is this. If it happen, that at the
beginning of this cure there comes a Fever, or other accident unto the
Patient, that in any wise ye leave not the cure, but follow the order, for
that is a certain sign of health: for many times I have given this water, and
unto some in the fourth or fifth day the Fever came, and tarried many times ten
or twelve days, and then the Fever went away with the corrupt disease, and all
for company, and so in short time they were cured, so that, as I have said
before, when that sign appears and is delivered, it is a certain sign of
health: Also I will advise thee of another thing, and that is this: If the
Patient cannot sweat ye shall anoint him all over with the Oil of Quinces,
the which shall cause him to sweat apace; for without sweat the cure will not
be perfect, and this order thou shall keep, at the least forty days together
within thy Chamber, so that there come no air in, for it will hinder the cure.

CHAP. X. An Electuary that helps the Cough with great speed and ^ease.
THe Cough is caused of a Catarrous humor, and coldness of the stomach, and
therefore if ye will help it, it were necessary to have a remedy that does
ripen the Catarre, and mollify the stomach, and the order to make it is thus.

Take Enula Campana. iiii. Marsh Mallows. xii. Quinces. xvi. But if ye cannot
get Quinces, ye may take Marmalade ready made, and boil it in fair water with
the said roots until they be dry, then stamp them in a mortar, and strein them
through a streiner, then take for every pound of that matter two pound of white
Honey, and boil them together, but boil them not too much: then take it from the
fire, and put thereunto for every pound of the aforesaid matter. i. of Saffron,
and.i. of Cinnamon, and. ii. of Sulphur, and. i. of Licorice, and then
incorporate them well together, and aromatise it with musk and Rosewater, and
this ye shall use morning and evening, for this is of so great virtue, that it
is to be wondered at, because the Mallows do mollify, the Enula Compana does
warm, and causes digestion, and comfort the Stomach: the Quinces are
cordial and warm, the Sulphur is a great drier, the which destroys the evil
humors of the body, the Saffron comfort the heart, the Cinnamon is
stomackall, the Licorice is mollificative, and digesteth the matter: so that of
force this Electuary must help any kind of Cough, except it come of the Pox,
for then it will do small pleasure. as I have proved.

CHAP. XI. Our Magistrall Electuary of Sulphur, the which serves against
diverse sorts of infirmities.
AS the fire has virtue to heat and dry material things: so has the Sulphur
virtue to warm and to dry the humidity and coldness of our bodies, for I have
occupied it diverse and sundry times, and always have seen diverse and sundry
good effects, but for the better commodity, and more ease to use it, I have
compounded this Electuary, the which thou may use with ease and benefit unto
a number, and the order to make it is thus.

Take very fine Sulphur that is without earth, and make it into fine powder one
pound, Cinnamon. ss. Saffron. i. Ginger. ii. Musk dissolved in Rosewater two
Carets, white Honey crude, as much as will suffice to make it into an Electuary
without fire, then keep it in a dry place; and this ye shall use in the morning
fasting, and his quantity from four drachms to seven, This dries up Scabs,
provokes Urine, breaks the stone in the Reins, it helps the Cough, dries
up the watering of the eyes, causes a good appetite, with diverse other things,
the which I will leave to the Experimentors.

CHAP. XII. Our electuary of Consolida majore, that serves for many diseases
inwardly.
THis Consolida majore, is a herb so called, because of his effect that it
does in healing of wounds, and other places of the flesh separated, for if ye
eat thereof it will help the Rupture, and all sorts of Wounds penetrating, and
Ulcers of the Lungs, it dries the Milt, and such like effects: but because
thou may use it more commodious, I have compounded an Electuary, the which
is excellent and rare, and is made thus.

Take the root of Consclida majore one pound, and boil it in water until the
water be consumed, then stamp them in a Mortar, and pass them through a
Streiner, then put thereto as much white Honey as the matter weighs, and boil
them on a small fire, until it be come to the form of an Electuary, and when
it is boiled, put thereto these things.

Take the Rindes of Pomgranates in fine powder. i. Lignum alloes. vi. Mirrh,
Mastick, Sarcocolla, Sanguis dracon is in grain, ana.. ii. Cinnamon,. i. Musk
of Levant dissolved in Rosewater, one Carret, then incorporate them well while
it be warm: You must note, that the body must first be well purged, ere ye
take this Electuarie, and ye must also keep a diet, that the Medicine may work
the better, for this helps all the aforesaid disease inwardly, as is said
before: You may use it emplaister wise upon the wounds, and on broken bones,
and use it inwardly, and so the Patient shall remain helped. With this I have
seen men of great age helped, that were burst below, and wounded from one part
to the other, and also broken bones and bruises, the which if I should write
them, it would not be credited.

CHAP. XIII. Vnguento magno Leonardo.
THis Vnguento magno is so called, by reason of his great virtue and operation,
for it works so strange in some diseases, that it in manner reviveth the
Patient, and the order to make it is thus.

Take Otnegra oviv.. vi. Oximel Squilliticum,. ss. mix them together in an
earthen dish, until the Otnegra oviv. be become like ashes, then it is
deisitrom, then put therein. ii. of Vinegar, and wash it well, until it remain
pure and clear, then take Olibanum. ss. Cerusae. i. Beat them fine, and mix it
in a stone Mortar, with as much Magno liquore, as will serve to incorporate
them well, then put thereto the Otnegra oviv. and mix them very well together,
that being done, put thereto Auxungia porcina,. viii. And mix them very well
together, and then it is made, the which keep in a vessel well glased, for it
will keep a long time without corruption, and is apt to help those that are
lame, full of pains, and sores and swellings, pains of the eyes, the stone in
the reins, and such like matters, it helps all man's of French Pox, if ye
anoint them therewith, until the Gums be sore and then leave. But ye shall
note, that the body must first be well purged before ye anoint them. This
Unguent cools all corrosive Ulcers, and helps them in short time, it
helps all pains in the eyes, if ye put it therein; and takes away all
burning with speed. And to be short, it helps those diseases in most short
time, so that it is to be wondered at.

CHAP. XIV. Oil of Hypericon, the which is most miraculous, for Wounds and
bruises.
THis Oil of Hypericon compounded by us, is of great virtue in diverse and
sundry accidents, and specially in wounds, for it helps them without any
pain, although the veins, sinews, or bones were hurt or cut, and that in very
short time: It preserves the wound from corruption, and takes away the pain,
and incarnateth and cicatrizeth, as by experience thou may plainly see. It
dissolveth Contusions, and is most mavelous against poison. It helps against
any crude sort of venomous Fever, if you anoint all the body therewith,
leaving no part; and the order to make it is thus.

Take the flowers, leaves, and seed, of Saint John's Wort, as many as ye will,
and stamp them together, and put them in a Glass, with as much strong white
wine as will cover it well, then set it in the Sun ten days together, then put
thereto as much pure Sallet oil, as the herbs and the wine does weigh, then
let it stand in the Sun other ten days, giving you warning that you weigh your
oil before you mix them; that being done, put thereunto for every pound of
oil. ii. of Turpentine, and. i. of Saffron, of Nutmegs, Cloves, Myrrha elect.
of each. ss. Frankincense. i. Viticella. ii. for every pound, stamp them
altogether, and put them into a great glass, and set it to boil in Balneo
Mariae, with a head and Receiver close shut, and to know when it is boiled
enough, is, that there will ascend no more vapors into the head, and that will
be within 24. hours or thereabout, then take forth the Glass being yet hot,
and strain it, and keep it in a Glass close shut as a precious Jewel Ye shall
note that this Oil must always be occupied very warm, and in any wise tent no
wound, but wet clothes therein, and lay it thereon, and thy cure shall prosper
well, for this I have proved a thousand times in diverse places.

CHAP. XV. To make our Oleum Benedictum, the which heals wounds divinely.
THis Oleum Benedictum serves chiefly for wounds in all parts of the body,
and especially for wounds in the head: If there were fracture of bone, and
offenses of the Pannicle, and in other places where sinews were hurt, or
muskles, or veins, or in any other noble place of the body, with this Ol^um
Benedictum, and with our Vegitable Quintessence, thou may help them easily,
and in short time, without any danger or detriment of the wounded person, as is
said before, and the order to make it is thus.

Take the whites of Eggs being hard sod in water,. xii. Clear Turpentine.
xiiii. Pure Mirth. iii. Mix them, and put it into a Retort of glass, and give
it gentle fire at the first, and then increase it according to Art, until all
the substance be come forth of the Retort, the which will be both water and
oil, the which separate, and keep the Oil by it self in a Glass as a
precious Jewel, for this works miracles in wounds of what sort soever they
be. Moreover, it causes hair to grow on the head or beard, the which were
fallen away, and that it does in short time by the only anointing the place
therewith. Also if any have a stitch in his side, and retention of Urine, let
him take a Glister, wherein he shall put a little of this Oil, and he shall be
helped; and this effect it does, because it dries mightily that alteration
made in the secret parts of the Reins inwardly, where no local Medicine can be
applied.

CHAP. XVI. Oleum Philosophorum de Terementina and Cera.
THis Oil of Turpentine and Wax, is a most precious Balm, and his virtues are
infinite, because it is made of simples in manner uncorruptible, and is most
miraculous for those that are corrupted, or stricken with the Pestilence,
because it is most penetrative, and of nature drying, and comfort all weak
parts in man's body, of what infirmity so ever they be, and the order to make
it is thus.

Take new yellow wax,. xii. clear Turpentine,. xviii. Benjamine,. ii. Fine
rectified Aqua vitae,. xxx. common ashes,. vi. mix them, and put them into a
Retort of glass well luted, and then distill it in a wind Furnace, until the
sustance be come forth, and in the Receiver thou shall find three things: The
first is Water, the second Oil, the third phlegm, the which thou shall separate
one from another, and keep them close stopped in a glass, the which is most
excellent in time of the Pestilence, as well for unction, as for to help the
sores, for if you put it into a sore or botch that is broke, presently it
takes away the pain, and being mixed with other of our Medicines, as I have
showed in my Regiment of the Pestilence, it helps them with great speed. If
any anoint all his body with this Oil twice a month, it will preserve him
youthful, and in health a long time, it preserves also dead flesh or fish,
that is put therein from corruption. Also if any be wounded in any part of the
body, let him anoint it with this Oil four or five times, and it shall be
whole: Also if any cannot make water, give unto him. ii. of this oil to
drink, and presently he shall make water. It is also good against the Stitch
in the side and Plurisie, and Worms, and the Cough and Catarre, and against the
Pestilent Fever, and such like indispositions, if ye drink a little thereof;
it has a number of other virtues, the which I will leave unto the
Experimentors.

CHAP. XVII. Our Magno liquore, the which is of great virtue.
THis is of my invention, and the order to make it, is thus Take sweet Sallet
oil twenty pound, white wine two pound, boil them together until the wine be
consumed, then put it in a vessel of stone, and put thereunto these things
following:

Take the flours of Rosemary three pounds, Lignum aloes,. vi. Olibanum,
Bdellium, ana.. x. then stop it very close, and bury it in the ground four foot
deep, and this would be buried in the beginning of August, and there remain
until the month of March, then take it forth of the ground, and set it in the
Sun, and put thereto these matters following, Sage, Rosemary, Rue, Betonie,
Millefolie, Comferie roots, Tamaro, Viticella ana, one handful: Galingal,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Spikenard, Saffron, ana. i. Sarcocolla, Sunguis Draconis in
grain, Mastick, ana. ii. Aloes Epatica, Frankincense, ana. viii. yellow Wax,
Auxungia ana. xviii. Colophonie one pound, Hypericon with the seed and all two
pound. Musk. i. mix these all well together, and boil them in Balneo, until
the herbs become dry, and have no more substance, then take it forth, and
strain it, and put thereunto for every pound,. vi. of our Balm artificial, and
when the month of September comes, put thereunto two pound of the fruit of
the herb called Balsamina, the which are red, and then it is ended, the which
thou shall keep in a glass close shut, for the older it is, the better it is,
and is of such virtue, that it helps the Etici, and Hidropsie, if ye give
them every morning. ss. with. i. of Sirrup of Roses warm, the space of forty
days, as I have proved: And this is the true and perfect Unction, that helps
Petecchie, a disease so called in the Italian: If any were wounded, and had cut
veins, sinews, and bones, let him join the parts close together, and dress it
with this Oil very hot upon the upper parts, and in short time it shall be
whole, without any alteration. It helps also the white Scall if ye anoint it
therewith: It helps coldness in the head, and Catarrs, if ye anoint it
within the nostrils at night when ye go to bed: If ye anoint the Stomach
therewith it causes perfect digestion of the meat, it provokes Urine where it
is let through carnositie or Gonorrea, or such like matter; It causes hair to
grow, it preserves the beard black, and it is good against Worms, and all
these Experiments are true, and proved of me diverse and sundry times, in the
aforesaid infirmities, and also in diverse others, the which I leave until
another time: Ye shall note, that if ye anoint any all over that is greived
with the Pox with this Oil, it will increase his pain, and so by that means
ye may know whether he be infected or no.

CHAP. XVIII. Pillole Aquilone of our invention.
THese Pills are above all other in operation, as the Eagle is above all other
Birds, and therefore I thought good to call them Pillole Aquilone, and the
order to make them is thus.

Take conserve of Damask Roses made with Honey iii. Lignum Aloes. i. Oil of
Vitriol twelve grains, Cinnamon elect ii scruples. Petra philosophalis of our
invention. ss. Sugar-candie ii. Mix them, and make thereof a paste with Syrupo
Acetoso and keep them in a glass. The Virtue of these Pills I will not at this
time write: but only I say they help against all sorts of infirmities, and
hurts none in any wise. The Dose is from. i. to. ii. in the morning fasting,
but ye may not gild them in any wise, but drink after them a cup of water or
wine, to carry them down, then sleep thereon, and that day eat little meat,
and light of digestion.

CHAP. XIX. Our Quinta essentia solutiva, the which is of mavelous operation
in diverse matters.
THis Quinta essentia solutiva evacuateth the body with great ease, and without
any detriment, and it purges all parts of the body that are troubled with
gross and viscous humors, it resolves swellings, and takes away the pains,
it preserves the sight, and kills worms, and causes a good appetite, with
many other good qualities, the which I will leave at this time, and the order
to make it is thus.

Take Aloes, Cinnamon, Turbite, Aloes Epatica, ana. i Coloquintida. ii. Cloves,
Saffron, of each. i. Musk of Lovant. i. Julep of Violets one pound. Mix all the
aforesaid matters together in a glass, and put therein two pound of our
Quintessence, and so let it stand twelve days, and then strain it, and put it
into a vessel of glass close shut, this may be taken with broth, wine, or
with what sirrup or potion ye will, the quantity is from. ii. to. ss. in the
morning fasting, without keeping of any diet at all, and it shall work well
without any tronble.

CHAP. XX. Pillole Magistrale, the which is good against diverse infirmities.
THese Pills are of great virtue, and specially against all kind of pains
coming of corrupt humors, for they purge the putrified humors, and preserve
the body from corruption: and the order to make them is thus.

Take Olibanum, Mastick, Mirrh, Sarcocolla, Aloes Epatice, Elleborus niger,
Saffron, Turbith, Colloquintida, ana q. v. Stamp them finely, and for every
ounce of the aforesaid matters, put thereunto two Carets of Musk, and then
incorporate it with Honey of Roses, and Aqua vitae, of each alike, and this
paste thou may keep for six months in a vessel of Lead, the quantity is
from. ii. to. iii. in the morning fasting, and drink thereon a little wine.
These pills are most excellent to take away the pains of the Gout, and to
preserve a man from it, they are also good for those that have the French Pox,
because they evacuate the gross and viscous humors, and maintain the body in
good temperature, and using them in those diseases, it preserves the body in
good state. They are also good for women that are troubled with pains of the
Mother, and retention of their Terms, for these are aperative, and provoke
them, and purges the Matrix of all impediments contained therein: They serve
against the Megrem, and all pains of the head, and also against all kind of
putrified Fevers, as I have seen the experience thereof sundry times.

CHAP. XXI. To make Aqua reale, vel Imperiale, the which makes the teeth white
presently, incarnateth the Gums, and causes a good breath.
THe teeth being black and rustie, and full of filth, and the Gums putrified or
corrupt, are the worst things that may be seen in man or woman, and are also
very unwholesome; and the Remedy to make the teeth white, and to help the
gumms, is thus: Make this water, and use it in this order as I will show thee.

Take Sal Gemmae, Roch Alum, Brimstone of each two pound, Borax. x. Pearl beat
fine, Coral, each. ii. Pure distilled Vinegar. iiii. Put all the aforesaid
matters in a Goord, with his head and receiver, and give it fire according to
Art, and at the last there will come forth a white water like Milk, the which
after it has stood a while, will wax clear. You shall understand, that this
water is above all other waters in the world, to help Ulcers in the mouth, and
to incarnate the gums, and to make the teeth white, and causes a good breath
in those which are troubled with the aforesaid matters. For of this water I
have made great quantity, and it has been carried into Spain, into Almain,
into Poland, into Constantinople, and in diverse other Countries, as though it
had been a Divine thing, and not material.

For truly this experience does cause the world to wonder at it, the use hereof
I have written in this Book, and hereafter I will write it again in some of my
Books, where occasion shall serve to use it in cures.

CHAP. XXII. Of the hidden Secrets of Frankincense.
THe Pine is a tree, the which by nature is uncorruptible, and the gum that
runs from it is of great virtue and strength, because it preserves those
things wherein it is put, and when his Elements are separated out of that Gum,
the Physician may work strange things therewith, against most part of
infirmities that happen unto man's body, if he apply them where they are
convenient: For the water being drunk helps wind in the stomach: Also it
helps the white ^kall, and all such like scabs, if ye wash them therewith
morning and evening. It dries up Ulcers, also it is of mavelous virtue
against chilblains and kibed heels, and chapps, and such like, in the hands or
feet that come through cold, being used thus. You shall first perfume the parts
that are sore over the fume of hot water, so that they may sweat, then dry
them and wash them with the aforesaid water, and anoint them with the Oil, and
put on a pair of gloves or such like, and in very short time they shall be
whole. The air helps much in wounds in any part of the body, because it
preserves the flesh from putrefaction, and keeps it from alteration, and
takes away the pain and heals the sore: Also it preserves the face if it
be anointed therewith. Moreover, it is mavelous in old diseases inwardly, if
ye give them thereof every morning i. with ss. of our Sirupo Vegetabile. The
fire cures sores and such like, and the earth remains in his state. Ye shall
understand, that these are great secrets of importance, the which I have
revealed of this Gum, and happy shall he be that uses them in the time of
need: And the order to make this Oil is thus.

Take as much Frankincense as thou will, and put it into a Retort of glass,
with the fourth part of common Ashes, and set it to distill, and give it first
a small fire until the Oil change color, then presently change the Receiver,
and augment the fire until all the substance be come forth. Ye shall
understand that this Oil is best fresh, for when it is old, it will wax
thick, and cannot pierce so well.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Oil of Honey, and the order to make it.
THat which most men call Oil of Honey, is not an Unctous Oil like unto other
Oils, but rather a certain Element, the which is neither oil nor water,
although it be clear, and this serves not much in Surgery, because it is
not convenient in sores, but much rather it is a perfect remedy in things
appertaining to Physic, because it comfort the Stomach, and fortifieth the
virtue, and extinguisheth all sorts of Fevers. It helps the Colic, it
dissolveth the Stone in the Reins, and provokes Urine, and also makes the
hair yellow as gold, if ye wash it therewith, and the order to make it is thus.

Take pure Honey two pound, and put it into a Retort of glass, that holds at
the least fifteen or twenty pounds, and set it in a Furnace, and give it a
fire of the second degree, and first there will come forth a clear white water,
and when it changes color, change the receiver, and give it strong fire
until all the fumes be come forth, the which is the Oil, and that keep by it
self as a precious Balm against malign Infirmities that are cured with Physic.

CHAP. XXIV. To make our great Cerot, the which is of mavelous virtue.
TAke Galbanum, Armoniacum, Oppoponax, ana. ii. Olibanum, Verdigrease, ana. i.
Bdellium, Gum Arabi, Lapis ematites minerale, ana. ii. Turpentine,
Frankincense, ana. iiii. Oleum Philosophorum of Turpentine and Wax,. iii.
common Oil four lb. new wax. vii. beat all those that are to be beat, and
searce them, then dissolve the Gums in distilled Vinegar according to Art, then
vapor away the Vinegar until it come thick, then take thy Oil and Wax, and
melt them together, then put in the rest, and stir them until it be boiled,
and to know when it is boiled, is this. First, in the beginning it will begin
to rise marvellously, and then fall down; then let it boil until it begin to
fume or smoke, then strein it into a vessel of Copper, and presently put
therein. iiii. of Precipitate, and stir them well together until it be cold,
then make it in rowls, and keep it as a precious Jewel in Chirurgerie, because
it mundifieth, incarnateth, and heals all sorts of Ulcers, better then any
other Cerot that ever I could find.

CHAP. XXV. A Magistrall Unguent that heals all manner of sores.
THis Unguent is most rare in the cure of Ulcers when they are already
mundified, because it incarnateth, dries, and siccatrizeth, and the order to
make it is thus.

Take common Oil one pound, Litarge ii. new Wax,. iii. Turpentine,. vi. boil
them as the aforesaid Cerot, and when it is boiled, put thereto iii. of the
dead cope of Aqua fortis, the which is made of Vitriol Romain, Roche Allom, and
Saltpeter, and stir them well together, and keep it to thy use. Ye shall
understand, that the maker must be expert in the Art, least he overboil it, or
boil it too little, for if it be not in order as it should be, it will not work
his effect.

CHAP. XXVI. A Magistrall Cerot of our Invention against the white Scall.
THis Cerot is of great virtue, and of mavelous experience, to resolve the
white Scall, because it is penetrative, mundificative, and resolutive, and
causes the hair to grow that is fallen away, to the great content of the
Patient and honor of the Physician, and it is made in this order. Take
Frankincense that is strained from his filth, what quantity you will, and
distill it in a Retort, and give it fire at the least forty hours, then let it
cool and break the glass, and in the bottom thou shall find a black mase,
the which make into powder, then for every pound of the said powder, put
thereto one ounce of Wax, and four ounces of the said oil that ye distilled,
and half an ounce of the heads of Bees, the which are easy to be had in
Summer: Mix all the aforesaid things in a Vessel of Copper, and with a small
fire make them in form of a liquid Unguent, and when thou will use it, shave
the head, and wash it, and lay thereon this Cerot upon a fair cloth warm, and
every two days change it, and so in short time thou shall see strange effects
of his virtue, as I have done diverse and sundry times to my great honor. This
serves also against breaking of bones, dislocations, and for Scabs ulcerated,
because it dries, and comfort, and resolves all the evil qualities;
giving you charge in the distilling, because the fire many times consumes it
so, that in the bottom there remains nothing that good is, and therefore
beware in the making.

CHAP. XXVII. To make a divine and blessed Cerot against diverse infirmities.
ULcers are of diverse sorts, and are caused of sundry causes, as of Choler,
Blood, Phlegm, Melancholy, and for that cause the Medicines would be agreeable;
nevertheless, I will show thee a Cerot of such a temperature, that it will
serve to help any sore in any place of the body, of what quality soever it be,
except it be Scirro, or Noli me tangere, the which are in a manner counted
uncurable, of the common Practitioners: but not by me, for I have cured them,
and the order to make it is thus.

Take oil of Frankincense one pound, oil of Sulphur. i. Vitrioll rubified. iii.
Precipate. i. fresh Butter. iii. and as much Wax as will suffice to make it in
form of a Cerot, the which will have all the aforesaid intentions: because the
Precipitate does mundifie the Ulcer; the oil of Frankincense takes away the
pain, and incarnateth; the oil of Sulphur cleanses; the Vitrioll dries; the
Butter mundifieth; and the Wax consolidateth, in such sort, that any one may
perceive his virtue.

CHAP. XXVIII. To make a miraculous Emplaister for Flegmon, or Erisro pella.
THis Flegmon or inflammation, called Saint Anthonies fire, is a tumor caused
of the alteration of the blood, by reason of superfluous heat, and this most
commonly comes unto Choleric and Sanguine bodies, that are full of flesh, and
have much blood: And the Erisipella is caused of a windy humidity, and of a hot
humor, and to show it, ye may see how that Flegmon is no other then blood
that runs to the place offended: And when it cannot find way to resolve, it
putrifieth and turns into Sanius matter, so that by this ye may see that to
be true which I have said. Also Erisipella is a wind hot and moist, for when it
comes to suppuration, then comes forth nothing but wind and water, and this
is the true proof by demonstration, and therefore seeing that these two
infirmities are in a manner alike, or little differing: this Medicine shall be
appropriate as well to the one as to the other, because it resolves and
cools, and the order to make it is thus.

Take fine Clay that has no stones nor gravel in it, and searce it very fine,
and put it in a pot, and for every pound thereof put thereto. iii. of Oil of
Frankincense, that comes forth last in the distillation, and as much of our
Quintessence as will serve to make it in form of a liquid Unguent, and this ye
must mix without fire, and then lay it upon a cloth, and warm it over the fire
a little, and lay it upon the Flegmon, or Erisipella, but first ere ye use
this remedy unto those that have Flegmon, ye shall give them a dose of our
Electuario Angelica, and in Erisipella give them a dose of our Aromatico, and
so thou shall help them perfectly, as I have proved diverse times, and may be
used although ye take no blood; but if ye take blood, let it be in augmentu,
and not in statu, nor in declinatione, because it would so weaken Nature, that
afterward it cannot defend it self to drive forth the humor peccant, that is
cause of the disease.

CHAP. XXIX. To make a resolutive Plaster of great virtue.
THis Plaster is to resolve tumors and hardness, if it be laid thereon very
hot, and when it is cold to lay on another: and this ye shall do until the
hardness be resolved, and it is made in this order.

Take common Ashes that are well burnt and white, and finely searced one pound,
Clay beat into fine powder half a pound, Carabe. iii. mix all these in an
earthen dish on a small fire, with Oil of Roses in form of a liquid Unguent,
and that ye shall lay upon the place greived as hot as ye may suffer it, and
change it morning and evening, and thou shall see it work a mavelous effect.
Moreover, when that Petecchi comes forth of a diseased, let him be folded in
the same remedy very hot, and in 24 hours he shall be helped, if he be first
well purged, for this is a great secret that I have revealed. This word
Petecchi is, as it were, certain spots like those which we call Gods Tokens,
the which commonly come unto those that have the Pestilent Fever.

CHAP. XXX. To make a maturative Plaster of great virtue.
THis Maturative does open an Imposthume without Instrument and pain, and the
order to make it is thus

Take the yolks of Eggs. ii. white Salt finely ground. i. Snails with their
Shells stamped. ss Hens dung that is liquid, and red like Honv. i. Mix all
these well to gether without fire, and when you will bring an Imposthume to
suppuration and break it, lay on this plaster morning and evening a little
warm, and in short time it will draw forth the Imposthume, and break it, and
heal it, without any other help. Keep this as a secret.

CHAP. XXXI. A composition of great virtue, against all Ulcers and Sores.
TAke Oil of Vitrioll that is perfect, as much as you will, and put it in a
glass, with as much oil of Tartar made by dissolution, and so let it stand ten
days. Then take. i. of that and. i. of pure Aqva vitae, and mix them
together, and therewith wash the hollow Ulcers, and they will heal in short
time. It helps any crude kind of scab or sore that is caused of the evil
quality of Nature.

CHAP. XXXII. A strange composition of great virtue.
THis Composition is divine in his operation, because it heals many
indispositions in our bodies, when it is applied rightly, and the order to make
it is thus.

Take water of Carduus Sanctus one pound, Oil of Honnie, one ounce, oil of
Sulphur,. ss. Mix them together, and let it settle till it be clear: for this
helps Ulcers in the mouth, and makes the teeth fair and white, if ye wash
them therewith. It causes a sweet breath, and preserves the Gums, and makes
the hair and beard fair, if ye wash them therewith. And this it does because
the water of Carduus Sanctus preserves where it is applied: Also the oil of
Honey has a virtue preservative and retentive of the hair, and the oil of
Sulphur mundifieth, and cleanses, and incarnateth, so that by these means the
said water has these virtues aforesaid.

CHAP. XXXIII. To make an Vuguent of great Virtue against Ulcers.
THis Unguent has a great virtue in healing all sores that are putrified and
corrosive, except they be Cankers or Noli me tangere, the which are counted
among the uncurable cures: But when they are other sores, this will heal them
quickly, and the order to make it is thus.

Take a good quantity of Calex vivae, and put it into a great Tub, and cover it
with water four fingers high, and stir it well together, then let it settle,
and thereon will come a thin scum the which ye shall gather together with a
Scummer, and keep it until ye have sufficient quantity, then take oil of
Linseed, oil of Nuts, oil of Almonds, and of the said soum that is gathered,
of each one pound, then distill it in a Retort, until all the substance be
come forth, then separate the oil from the water, and then make this
composition.

Take of the said oil distilled one pound, Tallow such as they make candles
of, Hogs grease, new Wax, Mercury precipitate of each two ounces, fine Aqua
vitae iii. ounces, mix them all together in a Copper pan on a soft fire, until
the Aqua vitae be consumed, and that it remain a liquid Unguent, then take it
forth, and keep it in a close vessel, that it take no air: and this ye shall
apply cold unto Ulcers, upon a fine linen cloth, for first it does mundifie,
and then incarnate, and last siccatrize, it helps sores, scabs, scrophule,
mall de Formica Setole on the Nipples of women's breasts, Emeroids, pains in the
privy members, and such like, for it is temperate.

CHAP. XXXIV. A Discourse upon sundry sorts of Unguents, and their qualities.
THere are many sorts of Unguents that are found out, of which I believe that
many Chirurgians are greatly abused of their operation, but for that which I
do find, that some sorts of Unguents are occupied for one effect, and they
work another; as for example, Vnguento Camphorato which many do occupy to
cool hot sores, in stead of cooling heateth them more then they were before,
which comes by means of the Camphire which is a hot substance, as I will prove
by sufficient reason that it cannot be denied. For you shall understand, that
into Vnguento Camphorato, is put Camphire and oil, both hot materials, as for
experience: Take Camphire and lay it by the fire, or set it nigh a candle, and
thou shall perceive, that as soon as it feels the heat, it will fly into the
fire and burn fiercely; and the like will the Oil do; for if you wet a cloth
therein and hold it over the fire, presently it will burn, which are manifest
signs that they be both hot, becuse they are friends unto the fire; whereas if
they were cold and moist, the fire would not burn them with such force. As for
example, take water, earth, stones, and metals that are cold and moist, and
lay them on the fire, and you shall see that the flame of a candle shall not be
able to kindle the fire with such ease as it does with the Camphire and oil.
So that you may see that Camphire and Oil are hot and friends unto the fire
which is most hot, and earth, stones, and mettalls, are moist and cold, and are
enemies unto the fire, and therefore I conclude, that Vnguento Camphorato is
very hot, and cannot by any means cool hot Ulcers. Also Vnguentum Apostolorum
is a composition in which there is put Verdigriece, a material which is most
enemy unto the sore, for laying it thereto causes great pain, as you may
understand of those that have proved it, and in my judgment this is no Unguent
to be laid on a sore, because they cannot suffer it, neither is it possible to
heal the sore with that Unguent, for that it corrodeth the fleshand will not
let it heal. Also Vnguento de minio is a mixture not very profitable for
Ulcers, because it is too much drying; for applying it unto a sore that is not
mundified, it dries it in Superficie, so that if Nature send humors unto
those parts, and they find no exhalation or vent by reason of that drying, it
will cause the gathering of abundance of humors, and be a means of greater
mischief: But if the sore be well mundified and cleansed, you shall have little
need of that Unguent, because Nature will do it alone without any other help,
so that this Unguent is of small profit to be used of any. But to the contrary,
there are many sorts of Unguents which are most necessary to dress sores, as
Vnguento di Rasino, which by his Nature is friendly to the sore, because it
mundifieth and heals, helping Nature that it may work with greater speed. The
Diachilone commune is also an Unguent very profitable to mundi fie or purge
sores, and likewise to siccatrize them. The Unguent of Litarge is refriscative
and drying, and heals scabs, and cools the heat of the flesh alterated.
Vnguento Rosato does mittigate the pains of foul Scabs. And thus discoursing
from time to time, there are many sorts of Unguents very hurtful, and not to
be used, and also there are many sorts that are wholesome and good, without
which in a manner they cannot work. Nevertheless, it were necessary to know
how and where to apply them rightly.

CHAP. XXXV. Medicines appropriate against all kinds of Poisons, as well
Vegetables as Minerals.
THere are an infinite number of Poisons, and they are differing in their
operation, but yet they work in manner one effect, as you may see by experience
in those that are poisoned, for after that they be dead, they are swollen and
become black, and in their Stomach is abundance of aquositie: And the cause is
this, that if a poison have power to kill or strangle a man or woman, of
necessity it must be corrosive, and being corrosive, it will work this effect,
that is, as soon as it arriveth at the stomach, it begins to make alteration
and quickly congealeth the blood, and enflameth the parts round about it, it
draws unto it great quantity of water; and it causes the congelation of the
blood on the one part, and the inflammation of the stomach on the other part,
and the gathering of the water on the other part. And in a manner all poisons
work one effect, and there are great number of these Poisons, of which I would
show their qualities, but that I fear I should cause such as are ignorant to
know them, and therefore I leave them. But I will write the order wherewith
thou shall help all those poisons that are curable, with as much facility as
is possible. Poisons, as I said before, do work three evil Effects, they
inflame the stomach, congeal the blood, and draw unto them great quantity of
water, which three things being in a man kills him out of hand; and the
necessariest cure in that matter of poison is this. First cause the poisoned
person to vomit so much as he can, and as soon as he can, and that thou shall
do with. ss. of our Electuario Angelica, which provokes vomit, and evacuateth
the stomach of the poison, and of the matter drawn by the poison into the
stomach, and it is excellent against all kind of poisons; that being done,
anoint all his body with our Balsamo artificiato, the which will keep the
blood liquid, and will not suffer it to congeal by any means: after that let
him take every morning. iii, of our Pills against poison, which are written in
my discourse upon Surgery; and when he has taken those Pills, let him drink
thereon a little good wine: and after let him drink the decoction of Diptamo
bianco, and dress his meat with herbs that are good against poison, as there
are a great number: And this doing, by the help of God thou shall help all
those that are curable, for it is a rational Medicine and experimented, which
works incredible operations.

CHAP. XXXVI. A water that preserves the Face and Teeth.
THis water is miraculous, for if ye wash the face therewith, and rub the
teeth, it will make the face shining and bright, and the teeth like fine Ivory,
and the order to make it is thus.

Take Mother of Pearl in powder one pound, the juice of Lemmons pressed with
their pills and all three pound, put them in a glass, and let it stand fifteen
days, then put thereto so much strong distilled Vinegar as there was of the
juice, and distill it in a Retort of glass, with a small fire, until the
spirits do appear, then presently change thy Receiver, and keep it, wherewith
thou shall wash thy face and rub thy teeth: Note, that when ye will occupy
that water, it were necessary that the face were washed so clean as is
possible, and to rub the teeth with a clean cloth, for with this I have seen
many goodly experiences in those matters.

CHAP. XXXVII. To Clarify and take away spots out of the Face.
TAke Lac virginis two parts, pure Oil of Tartar one part, fine Aqua vitae six
parts, mix them, and when thou go to bed anoint thy face therewith, and in
the morning wash thy face with the decoction of Bran, and dry it well, then
anoint it with the Oil of Almonds, and so using this order, in short time thy
face will be bright and clear without any spot. For this Composition is of
mavelous virtue to preserve the flesh, and to defend it from all impediments
of Nature, and preserves the head from many infirmities.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The order to make a goodly Remedy, to cause the hair to grow.
THe beard and hair commonly do fall through two causes, the one is, when the
Patient has a Pestilent Fever, that is, Mal di Mazzueco, for when they are
cured, all their hair will fall away, and many times most of them do change
that subtle skin, called of the Doctors Epiderma, and this is one of the
causes: The other cause is, when they accompany with unclean women, and that
they get those Carvoli on the Yeard, the which as soon as they are cured, there
comes an alteration in the throat, so that they cannot well eat their meat,
then after that in short time the hair will begin to fall, and these are the
two causes of falling of the hair. In that which comes after Mal di Mazzucco,
ye shall need nothing else but to anoint the head when ye go to bed, with
our Oleum Philosophorum a little warm, and that will cause the hair to grow,
restore the sight and hearing, the which those commonly do lose when they are
sick, through their long sickness. But when the hair does fall through the
other cause, ye must use forcible Medicines to cause it to come again, and
that thou shall do with this Cerot. Take Turpent^ne, Sh^p-pitch, Rosin of the
Pine tree, and new Wax, and make thereof a Cerot, the which spread upon a
cloth, and strew thereon Cantharides in powder, then lay it upon the head, and
there let it remain five days without moving it, and when ye take it away,
take Magno liquore, and our Oleum Philosophorum, of each alike, and therewith
anoint the head once a day very hot. And while ye use this Unction, take
Sinaber. i. Olibanum, Mirrh, and Colles, of each two scruples, and grind them
together, and divide them in six parts, and every night when ye go to bed,
perfume the bed with one of these parts, the which thou shall do in this
order: Take Coals in a Chafingdish, and cast it therein by little and little,
and then cover thy head with a cloth, and receive the fume, and then go to bed
with the said cloth about thy head, and this thou shall do six evenings, and
continually use the Unction until it be helped, the which will be in short
time.

CHAP. XXXIX. To make our Sirrup of Bays.
THis Sirrup being well made, is of mavelous virtue for those women that are
troubled with pains of the Mother, and pains caused of wind and cold, because
the Bays of their nature are hot and drying, and resolves the wind, and
warmeth the cold, and dries the humidity, so that whosoever does use this
Sirrup oftentimes, shall be free from the stitch in the side, and gravel in
the Reins, because it does mundifie the Reins, and resolve the humor hanging,
and therefore this would be used in Polonia, and Almaign with great profit,
because those Countries are cold, and they feed on most meats which are
contrary to those aforesaid infirmities, and the order to make it is thus. Take
a branch of Bays weighing one pound, and put it in a glass with eight pound
of white Wine, and two pound of purified Honey, and distill it in Balneo three
hours, then take it from the fire, and keep that by it self, then take that
which remained in the glass, and distill it by a filter three or four times
until it be clear, then take two pound of Sugar, and clarify it with the
white of an Egg, and then mix it with that which ye distilled by a filter,
and give it a little walme or two, but not too much, then when it is boiled,
before it be cold, put therein the said water that ye distilled in Balneo, and
aromatise it with six grains of Musk, and. i. of Cloves, and another of
Saffron, and. ss. of Cinnamon, and. iii. of Rosewater, and then keep it in a
glass close stopped, and it will preserve a long time: The dose of this Sirrup
is from. i. to. ii. and no more. And therefore if any will sweat for any
indisposition in the body, let them take four ounces as warm as they may
suffer, and lay them down to sweat, and it will resolve great infirmities.

CHAP. XL. The order to make a Sirrup of Cinnamon and Ginger.
THis Sirrup is exceeding hot, and preserves a weak stomach through cold,
resolves the Cough, and the Catarre caused through want of natural heat: but
ye shall note, that if the indisposition were of a hot and dry cause, in any
wise ye shall not use this. It causes digestion, and provokes venereous acts,
and kills many that oppress themselves therewith, for they will do more
then Nature is able to carry, and so fall into a disease called Apoplexia, and
die, or else live with great pain; and therefore I would wish those that have
no great need thereof, not to use it for Lechery sake, for better it were to
leave it in Vase spermatico, but as for those that have need thereof, it will
revive them if they were in a manner dead, and the order to make it is thus.

Take Ginger, Cinnamon, of each one pound, beat them in powder, and infuse it
in half a pound of Rosewater, and there let it remain four or five days, and
then put thereon. iiii. of the water of a Herb called Mortella, in the Italian
tongue, and six pound of the best white wine, and distill them altogether
until all the substance be come forth; then take as much white Honey as the
matter purified weighs, and while it is yet hot on the fire, put therein the
said Water which you distilled, and six grains of Musk powdered with Sugar, and
incorporate them well together, and keep it in a glass close shut, and when ye
will use this, ye shall take it in the morning warn, fasting thereon four or
five hours, because it may pierce the better, and do his operation; the
quantity that you shall take ordinary is. i. but if it do not work his
operation well, augment the quantity, and take somewhat more or less
according to thy Stomach, and the time shall be two or three weeks, or more or
less, according as thou feel thy self, for it is of so much virtue that it
will not be credited, except it be of those that have seen the experience
thereof, therefore keep it as a thing of value.

CHAP. XLI. Our Sirrup of a Capon, that is made with Consumato.
THis Sirrup is a restorative of great virtue, never seen or heard of before,
and is of such virtue that it is able to sustain a sick person many days
without taking any other meat, because it is of flesh and blood, for the flesh
sustaineth the flesh, and the blood sustaineth the blood, and the order to make
it is thus.

Take a great fat Capon that is well-fleshed, and pull it while it is alive,
and take forth only the gutts and the belly, and when he is dead, stamp it in
a Mortar grossly, and put it in a distilling glass with twenty pound of good
white wine, and. ss. of Salt, and four ounces of Sugar, and. ss. of Cinnamon,
then distill it in Balneo until the two thirds be consumed, then keep that
which is distilled, and that which remained in the glass strain through a
cloth, and press out all the juice of the flesh with a Press, then pass all
that through a filter, and then with Sugar make it in form of a Sirrup, but
boil it not too much, then put therein that which ye distilled from the Capon,
and aromatise it with Cinnamon half a dram, Saffron one scruple, Musk four
grains, Rosewater. ii. then keep it in a glass close stopped, and this has no
dose, because it is taken only to sustain a weak nature; you may p^t it in
broth, or in any other meats, or by it self, and always it will work his
operation, in strengthening those that are weak.

CHAP. XLII. A Magistrall Sirrup of Quinces, the which is Restorative.
THis Sirrup of Quinces is of great virtue, because it restores strength,
helps digestion, comfort the Stomach, and makes the heart merry, as you
may see by the Ingredients; it comfort also the sight, and quickens the
memory: And the order to make it is thus.

Take of the best Quinces you can find, and cut them in small pieces, with feed
and all three pound, Cinnamon half an ounce, Cloves, Saffron, of each a
scruple, Lignum Aloes, i. ss. Bengewine. i. stamp all these and infuse them in
seven pound of strong white wine, then distill it in Balneo, until all the
liquor be come forth, and when it is in manner done, take it from the fire, and
put it into an earthen vessel well glazed, and put therein that which ye
distilled, and mix them well together, then strain it hard through a Canvas,
and pass it by a filter, or a linen cloth, and make it as clear as you can
possible, then take that, and with refined Sugar, make a Sirrup according to
Art, and when it is made, aromatise it with Musk, and Rosewater, and keep it in
a glass close stopped, that it take no air, giving your charge that it be not
over-boyled. And this thou shall give unto those that cannot digest their meat,
because it warmeth the stomach, with a temperate heat, the which resolves the
cruditie of humors, that are in the stomach, and disposes Nature to
digestion, for because the Quinces by nature are hot, and helps it to digest,
the Cloves and Saffron make the heart merry, and the Lignum Aloes, preserves
from Corruption, in such sort, that all these being together, works
wonderful effects in the body of many, the quantity thereof is. i. in the
morning, and two hours after supper cold.

CHAP. XLIII. A Magistrall Sirrup of Lignum Sanctum.
THis Magistrall Sirrup is of such virtue in his operation, that it will help
the Mal' Francese, if it be made according to the order, and taken as it should
be: And the order to make it is thus.

Take Lignum Sanctum rasped. vi. the Bark of the same. iiii. and lay it to
infuse in twelve pound of good white wine, with one pound of white honey, then
distill it until ye have received three pound, then take it from the fire, and
keep the water by it self; then take that which remained in the glass, and
distill it by a filter until it be clear, then put thereto the water that ye
distilled away, and for every pound of that water put thereunto. iii. of Julep
simple, and mix them well together, and keep it in a Bottle of glass well
stopped, for this is mavelous in the cure where Sweatings is needful: For if
ye give five or six ounces of this, as hot as he may suffer it, and cover him
in the bed, he shall sweat marvellously, the which sweating resolves cold
tumors, pains, and diverse other indispositions, that are to be resolved by
sweat. And as for the cure of the Pox, this is a most sovereign remedy, when
there are tumors, or pains, or inflations. But when there are Ulcers, Scabbs,
or Inflammations, in that case you may not use it by any means, because it is
very hot, and will cause greater inflammation. And therefore if any will use
this Sirrup to cure pains, swellings, or inflammations, it were necessary
first to take our Aromatico, written in this Book, with diverse other Medicines
of our Invention, that being done, let him take seven or eight times our
Sirrupo solutivo,, and then begin to take this Sirrup, and sweat thereon
morning and evening: His meat shall be roast Mutton, or a Bird, Raisins, Dates,
Almonds, and such like, but he must not eat too much. His bread shall be
Biscuit, and his drink good wine at meals, and if it do happen that he be bound
in the body, ye shall give him every week once our Sirrupo Solutivo, and so
continue with his sweating until he be helped.

CHAP. XLIV. A Sirrup of Juniper Berries.
THis Sirrup of Juniper Berries is of great virtue, because it is one of those
fruits that continues green all the year: of the which herbs I have written a
discourse in my book called La Physica del Phioravante, and the order to make
it is thus.

Take Juniper Berries when they begin to wax black four pound, and stamp them,
and infuse them in twelve pound of strong white Wine six days, then distill it
with two pound of white Honey, and. i. of Cinnamon, until ye have received two
pound, then take it from the fire, and strain out the Fesses that remained with
a press, then strain it by a filter again, then with Sugar make a Sirrup in
good form, and when it is boiled, put therein the said water distilled from the
berries, and so without fire incorporate them well together, and keep it in a
glass close shut that it take no air: the dose is an ounce and a half to be
taken warm. This is excellent for those that are troubled with wind, or
coldness of the stomach, because it warmeth, dries, and helps digestion,
and therefore this would work miraculous effects in Almaign, because it is a
cold Region, and that they eat many moist meats, the which Nature cannot well
digest: It is also appropriate against pains of the Mother, because it
provokes menstrua, and purges the Matrix, and helps digestion, and causes
sleep, with diverse other virtues.

CHAP. XLV. To make a Sirrup of the Bran of Wheat.
THis Sirrup is of mavelous virtue against diverse infirmities, for by nature
it is hot, and provokes sweat, and urine, and serves very much against the I
rench diseases, if you can use it in his time and place, and it is made in this
order.

Take Bran one pound, and infuse it in twelve pound of white Wine, and so let
it remain two days, then boil it in a glass with a Head and Receiver, until
the third part be consumed, the which ye shall reserve to mix with it
afterward, then strein that in the glass, and pass it by a filter, and when
it is clear, put thereunto the aforesaid which ye reserved: Then take Honey and
Sugar, of each alike, and therewith make a Sirrup according to art, and when it
is made, aromatise it with a little Cinnamon, Cloves, Saffron, Lignum Aloes,
and Musk, according to thy discretion, and for every pound of the said matter,
ye shall put thereto half an ounce of our Vegitable Quintessence, and it shall
be finished, the which keep close shut, for it is of such virtue, that it will
not corrupt, the dose is from. ii. to three, to be taken warm, and then lie
down to sweat, for this will resolve all infirmities that may be resolved by
sweat. It is very profitable for those that are troubled with any old
indisposition, as the Cough, the Catarre, indisposition of the Stomach, and
such like: Ye shall note, that this would not be used in the Summer, for
because it is too hot for that time.

CHAP. XLVI. To make a Sirrup of Sarsa parilla, of our invention.
THe Sarsa parilla is a Root that comes from the Indies, the which is hot and
drying, of the which Physicians make Sirrups and Potions for diverse
infirmities, wherein it is needful of drying by sweat: but until this time
they have all abused themselves in the order, because all hot and dry things
are spiritual, and so in making their decoction the spirits go away in fume,
and the decoction remains senza anima, and virtue, in respect: ye shall
understand, that the Sarsa parilla is a root miraculous in his operation,
because it warmeth the cold, and dries the humidity, and resolves tumors,
and heals sores, and helps pains, when it is made according to our order,
and because it is a Medicine in so common use, I will show thee the order to
make this Sirrup, that shall have both anima, and virtue, in so much that the
world shall wonder at it: and the order to make it is thus.

Take one pound of the best Sarsa parilla that ye can find, and cut it very
small, and put it in a glass with one pound and a half of Honey, and. i. of
Cinnamon, and. ii. of Lignum Aloes, and put them in twelve pound of white Wine,
and so let it stand four and twenty hours, and then distill it, until ye
have received three pound of water, giving you charge, that the Receiver be
great, and lute not the mouth but stop it with Tow least it break, then take it
from the fire, and let it wax cold, and when it is cold, pour forth that which
is clear, and put it unto the water that ye distilled first, and keep it
close, for it is a blessed Sirrup: this being done, put upon the Fesses twenty
pound of white Wine, and one pound of fine Sugar, and let it boil half an hour,
and then strein it, and when the Physician will give it, he may give. viii. at
a time as hot as he may suffer it, and then lay him down to sweat as much as he
can. And with his meat let him drink the last decoction, and thus the Physician
shall reap honor, and the Patient health, and therefore if any will have his
intent, let him not break this our order in any respect.

CHAP. XLVII. To make a Potion of China as it ought to be.
THis China is a root like unto the root of Canna, the which is brought unto us
out of India, from an Isle called China, from whence it took his name China,
and there are of two sorts: the one is white and heavy, the other is great, and
red, and light, and of this I have made no experience at all: But of the other
I have had great experience, and by the help of God have resolved great and
terrible diseases, and the order to condite them after our order is this.

Take. vi. of China, and. iii. of Lignum Aloes of the best that ye can find,
and. iii. of Pollipodie, and. i. of Coloquintida, beat all these grossly, and
put them into a distilling glass, with twenty pound of good Wine, then give it
fire until ye have received three pound of water, then let it cool, and strain
it, then put therein the water that ye distilled first, and incorporate them
well together, and of this give. iiii. at a time warm, then cast away the
^esses, for they are unprofitable. But the Sirrup is of such virtue, that it
resolves tumors, sores, pains, and all other indispositions caused of the
Pox. It serves also for Doglie Artetich, for pains of the Gout, and for many
other indispositions caused of cruditie, and coldness of the humors, because
it is of nature hot and drying, and his virtues are to dry: I have seen of
this Sirrup great experience in diverse and sundry causes.

CHAP. XLVIII. A Potion of Alchachengie, and wherefore it serves.
THis Herb Alchachengie with his fruit is aperative, and most profitable for
those that cannot make water, by reason of alteration of the pores that are
altered through cold, for this is hot and drying, by the which means, it
resolves the alterationof the aforesaid cause, and causes the Urine to pass
with ease; It helps the digestion, and comfort the stomach, when it is
grieved through wind or cold: And the order to make it is thus.

Take that Herb, with Root, Leaves, fruit and all, and lay it to infuse in the
water of Mallows, with the Herb Pelitorie, and there let them remain five or
six days, then put thereunto course Sugar, and let it boil one hour and no
more, and then strain it, and put thereunto a little Cinnamon, and then it is
finished: and when you will occupy it against difficulty of Urine, give them
thereof. iiii. and keep them warm in bed, and they shall feel great ease.

CHAP. XLIX. A Pectorall Potion, of our new Invention.
THis Potion is appropriate against the indisposition of the Breast and
Stomach, and is of a mavelous operation, because it is aperative, softning
the stomach, and mundifieth the breast, and makes the heart merry: And this
is most sovereign for the Cough, Catarr, and all the other indispositions, that
come unto the breast through cruditie, and viscositie of humors, and the order
to make it is thus.

Take Pomi Calimani, and Pomi Apiae, of each one pound, Quinces half a pound,
common Honey,. iiii. fine Sugar one pound, sweet white wine ten pound, water of
Bugloss four pound, boil all these together in a Copper Vessel, that is well
tinned within, until the Apples do begin to fall in pieces, then take it from
the fire, and strain them through a strainer, without pressing of the Fesses,
then put into that two drachms of Cinnamon, and then strain it by a filter four
or five times, until it be clear, then keep it in a vessel of a glass close
stopped, that it take no air. The quantity is. iiii. as warm as ye may, take
it in the morning, fasting at least five or six hours after it, and if it be
possible sleep thereon in your bed, for it is a thing of great virtue, in
resolving the indisposition of the breast and stomach.

CHAP. L. To make a Potion of Camedrios, and Iva Artetica, which dissolveth all
Fevers that come with cold.
THe Herb Iva Artetica, as I have showed in another place, is of mavelous
virtue, also the Camedrios is of great virtue, and is hot and dry by nature.
The Iva is good against the accident of the Fever, and the Camedrios dissolveth
the melancholy humor; and therefore when a decoction is made of these two
Herbs, it will work a mavelous effect in the cure of the said Fever, because
it provokes sweat, and assubtiliateth the grossness of the humor, and
ex^inguisheth the accident of the Fever in such sort, that the Fever shall
resolve with good success, and the order to make that Potion is thus.

Take Camedrios, and Iva Artetica, of each one pound, and dry them in the
shadow, Lignum Aloes. i. the seed of Walwort. iiii. common Honey. vi. fine
Sugar one pound, strong white wine xvii. pound: Mix all these together in a
distilling glass, and so let it stand three days, then distill forth three
pound, and let it cool, and strain it through a Searce, and put thereunto the
water that ye distilled out before, then pass it by a filter three or four
times until it be clear, then keep it in a Glass close shut that it take no
air, and it will last a long time without corruption, and when any will take
it against the said Fever coming with cold, give him every morning fasting. v.
warm, and let him lie down to sweat as much as he may, and fast thereron at the
least four hours, and take heed ye eat no things that are cold, and moist, for
they will hinder the cure very much, and at night when he goes to bed, give
him.iii. warm, and if it hap that in his sleep he sweat, dry him well with warm
clothes, and thus doing, in short time he shall be delivered of that
infirmity, for this I have used diverse and sundry times to my great honor,
and profit of the Patient.

CHAP. LI. To make a Potion that is good against all Infirmities.
THis is a Magistrall Potion, the which helps against all Infirmities, by
reason that it destroys all the evil qualities in our bodies, it comfort
Nature, helps digestion, provokes Urine, and loses the body, the which
things are most comfortable to our bodies, and the order to make it is thus.

Take the seed of Quinces,. x. the Pills of Citrons,. vi. Balm, Nettles, of
each,. iiii. beat all these grossly, and infuse them in twelve pound of strong
white wine, and there let it remain six days, then distill it with. vi. of
Honey, and. xv. of Sugar, until ye have received two pound of water, then take
it from the fire and let it cool, and strain it by a filter, and then put
therein the first water, and eight grains of Musk, dissolved with a little
Rosewater about. ii. and then for every pound of the said matter, put
thereunto. i. of Oil of Vitrioll, and incorporate them well together, then
keep it in a glass close stopped that it take no air, and of this ye shall
take. i. in the morning cold, and fast thereon; for whosoever does use this in
his health shall seldom be sick, but live in health. For in this composition
there enters the seed of Quinces, that resolve the evil quality of the
Stomach, and make the heart merry: The Pomcitrone pills preserve and help
digestion: The Balm purifieth the blood, heals the Liver, causes good
digestion, and comfort the ^eart: The Nettles warmeth, provokes Urine, and
mundifieth the Reins, and resolves the malignity of the Sinews: The Wine
comfort Nature, strengthens the Head, and sustaineth the strength: The
Musk is warm by Nature, and resolves the windiness, and purges the blood:
The Oil of Vitrioll heals all the Scoriaciones of the Mouth, the Breast, and
Stomach, and preserves the body from all corruption: So by this ye may see of
what importance this Composition is, through the virtue of the Simples that are
therein: so to conclude, I say, that this is one of the best Compositions that
can be made, because of his nature: It lets alteration in our bodies, and
helps against all diseases or infirmities, and prolongeth life.

CHAP. LII. An Infusion with Wine most precious against the Gout.
THe Gout is a putrified and rotten disease, as I have written of in diverse
places, and the cure thereof is hard, because it were needful to help many
inconveniences before ye come to the cure. Nevertheless, it is a strange
thing to see diverse, that after they are cured they have no care to preserve
them: so that look which way they got it, that way it will come again, but if
they would use defensives and preservatives, they may remain well, and
therefore I have devised this Wine, the which they shall continually drink: for
as long as they use this Wine, the Gout shall never trouble them, and the order
to ma^e it is thus.

Take Vino negro that is sweet and pleasant, about twelve gallons, and put it
in a vessel that is well seasoned, and in that Wine put fine Lignum Aloes in
powder. iii. Pollipodie of the Oa^. iiii. Sena of Levant. ii. Musk dissolved in
Rosewater ten grains, common Honey two pound, then let it repose until it be
clear, and then begin to drink thereof; for this Wine purges, the which if it
purge too much, ye shall refrain it now and then, according as ye find your
body: This does not only help the Gout, but all kinds of pains caused of
corruption of humors, because it dries, resolves, and preserves, the which
are convenient to preserve the body.

CHAP. LIII. Another artificial Wine, against the stitch in the side, and
gravel.
THe stitch in the side, and the gravel in the Reins, are somewhat of kin
together, because they are caused of one cause, that is, of vapors corrupt and
rotten, and of grossness, and evil qualities of the humors, the which, one
with the other, engender that infirmity, which in some men is no other then an
evil indisposition inwardly, the which is very hard to be helped, for if thou will resolve it, it were necessary, first to remove the evil quality, and then
cure it, and after they are cured to preserve them, that the said indisposition
return not again, and in so doing thy cure shall have good success, and
therefore I have made this Wine to preserve thee from that indisposition, and
the order to make it is thus.

Take as it were a Hogshead or a Barrel of good white Wine, that contains
about eighteen gallons of Wine, in the which ye shall put Carduus Benedictus.
ii. Saxifrage. vi. Walwort. iiii. Pollipodie iiii. Cinnamon. i. Spikenard half
an ounce, Lignum Aloes. ii. fine Sugar three pound, then let it repose three or
four days, and then begin to drink it, for ye may use it with small wine, or
water, or in what order ye will. And in the mean time that ye take this
drink, ye shall not eat fat Pork, nor any other fat meat, nor Butter, Milk,
Cheese, or Pie-crusts, or such like things, that are of gross and hard
digestion, because they will let the operation of this wine. For whose ever
does use this wine, shall never be troubled with those kinds of infirmities,
because it does losen the belly, mundifie, cleanse, and preserve from all evil
qualities. I call to remembrance that in the City of Naples, where I dwelled
six years, I caused diverse and sundry persons to use this Wine, and they found
such profit thereby, that it was to be wondered at, for in that City there were
many troubled with the said indisposition, in respect of Hogs flesh, fish, and
such other moist things as they commonly eat in that City, and therefore
whosoever uses this Wine shall not be troubled with the said infirmities.

CHAP. LIVE. To make a Quintessence of mavelous virtue.
THe Quintessence is so called, because it is an essence taken from the
Elements without corrupting the said Elements; and therefore it is called
Quinta essentia: for it is an essence above the four Elements, the which has a
mavelous virtue in preserving, and conserving all things from putrefaction,
and is of so much virtue, that drinking thereof every morning half an ounce
when they rise out of their bed, it preserves them for ever in health. It
heals wounds and all sores, washing them therewith. It preserves all flesh,
fish, and fruits, that is put therein, and the order to make it is thus.

Take good strong Wine fourteen pound, common Honey one pound, Anniseed,
Coriander, Lignem Aloes, Calamus Aromaticus, of each. iii. Rosewater. iiii.
Beat all the aforesaid things grossly, and infuse them in the said Wine two
days, and then put them in a Goord of glass, and distill it by Balneo, so
long until the water that comes forth do burn, and when it will not burn,
distill no more, then keep that which is distilled in a glass close stopped
that it take no air, and so keep it until thou have occasion to use it, for it
is a most rare liquor, because, as I have said before, it resolves all the
indispotions that happen unto man's body. For of this Composition the ancient
Doctors had small knowledge, nor of many things more written in this book. If
any man desire to have this Quintessence more perfecter, let him take a tenth
part of good Honey, with a little fine Cinnamon, and distill it again by Balneo,
and the Hegm will remain all in the bottom of the vessel, and the
Quintessence will be so fine, that the air will take it away, and therefore he
that can make this well, shall work strange cures therewith, so that the world
will wonder thereat:

CHAP. LV. To make Diatartaro, the which is mavelous in diverse infirmities.
THis Diatartaro is good against pain of the stomach, of the body, and for
those that are slipticke of body, that cannot go to stool, and such like
matters, because it is of nature temperate and lenitive, and has virtue to
heat and dissolve the evil quality, and it is made in this order.

Take Pears of what sort ye will, and cut them in four pieces, then boil them
in water till they be soft, and that the water be almost consumed, then pass
it through a strainer, and put thereunto as much white Honey purified as it
weighs, and thereof make an Electuary in good form, and when it is made,
aromatise it with Musk, then for every pound of the said Electuary, put
thereunto. i. of perfect oil of Tartar, made by dissolution after it is
calcined white: But ye shall note, that the Oil must be put in when the
Electuary is cold, and so mix it together, then keep it in a glazen vessel.
The dose is from ss. to an ounce in the morning fasting, and eat no meat in
four hours after: for this, as I have said, will cure the indisposition of the
Stomach, pains of the Milt, pains of the Body that have continued long, pains
of the Mother, and such like things that are caused of cold and most humors.

CHAP. LVI. A Composition of great value to comfort the Stomach.
AMong all the compositions that the Apothecaries have, this is one of the best
and most perfectest, because it comfort the stomach that is weak, and
spoiled through a long and fastidious infirmity, for it is of a temperate
heat, and helps to digest, causes sleep, and comfort the breast, and the
composition is this.

Take the best Honey that ye can get, and clarify it with Rosewater and the
white of an Egg, as ye would do Sugar, and scum it very well, then take as
much fine Sugar as ye have of Honey, and incorporate them together on a small
fire, and when it is come to the thickness of an Electuarie or thereabout, for
every pound of the said matter, ye shall put. i. of our Quinteslence
Vegitable, and. ii. of Oil of Almonds newly made, and stir them well together
being cold, then put thereto a little Musk and Cinnamon to give it a pleasant
smell, then keep it close: The quantity is. i. more or less according to the
strength of the stomach; ye may temper it with good broth if ye will, and fast
thereon four hours at the least, and thou shall see strange effects of this
composition.

CHAP. LVII. To make a stomachall Emplaister to cause digestion where it
wants.
THere are many causes that hinder digestion, as through coldness of the
Stomach, through heat, through moistness or dryness, or through superfluous
choler, or phlegm, or melancholy, of the which things the Physician cannot
certify himself which it is, so by that means many proved diverse Remedies for
that indisposition, and cannot find the way to help it. And therefore I will
show thee a plaster that has all these four principal intentions; that is,
to help digestion, strengthen the stomach, make the heart merry, which things
are all necessary to preserve a man within good temperature and health, and
the Remedy is this.

Take these Herbs gathered in their times and dried, that is, Sage, Rosemary,
Wormwood, Balm, Saint John's Wort, Nettles, of each as much you will, beat them
finely, and searce them: then take for every pound of that powder of Cinnamon,.
i. half an ounce of Cloves, and as much Lignum Aloes, and ten grains of Musk
dissolved in Rosewater; then take for every pound, of good Honey. ii. and as
much Vinegar, and make them into the form of a liquid Plaster, and when thou will occupy it, spread it upon a cloth warm, and lay it to the stomach, and in
the mean while eat restorative meats, and drink small wine.

CHAP. LVIII. A rare Secret to help the Eyes.
THis is a great Secret for those that have lost the sight of their Eyes, and
was never written of before of any man, but of me, and the order to make it is
thus.

Take Swallows and stamp them feathers and all in a Mortar, then take for every
pound of that,. iiii. of bread, and four pound of white wine, and so let it
stand six days to infuse, then distill it by Balneo until all the substance
be come forth, then keep that water in a glass close stopped, and set it in
the Sun twenty days, and then use morning and evening to drop it in the eyes,
and thou shall see strange operations of the same Experiment, for it takes
away the dimnesse of the eye, quickneth the sight, and comfort the brain,
that it cannot be hurt by any means.

CHAP. LIX. To make a Liquer to comfort the Smelling, and to preserve the Head.
THe Smelling is one of the five Senses of our Body, of the which four-footed
beasts have great use; for they will not receive any thing into the body
before they have smelled unto it, and then if it be against their nature, they
will not eat it, and therefore this smelling is that which preserves the
hearing, the seeing and the taste; for if the nose take an evil smell, all the
other senses have part: For if ye smell to Onions or Scallions, the taste will
be troubled, the eyes will weep, the ears will also be troubled: And to the
contrary, when a man smells a good smell, it comfort the eyes, the
hearing, and taste, and for that cause I have made this liquor, to comfort the
Smelling, for by that the whole body is comforted, and the order to make it is
thus.

Take Lignum Aloes. ii. Annise seed,. iiii. Calamus Aromaticus. i. Calaminte
dried, three ounces, common Honey two pound, strong white wine twelve pound,
let all these be infused for four days, and then distill it in Balneo, and
when ye distill it, put into the Receiver six grains of Musk dissolved in two
ounces of Rosewater, and distill away but three pound, the which keep in a
glass close stopped, and when ye will comfort the smelling, wash the face and
beard therewith, and thou shall smell a savor of mavelous effect, the which
comfort Nature marvellously: It comfort the Stomach, and helps a
stinking breath: It helps the mouth being ulcerated, and those that have the
Rupture in short time, if ye wash it twice a day therewith. It helps also
women that are troubled with dissension of the Matrix, if ye wet a cloth
therein and lay it upon the Mother, in short space it shall receive great
health. Also it helps those that are troubled with the Meagrum, or pains in
the Head coming of cold or wind, if ye wash the Head with the said Liquor,
presently they shall feel ease, with diverse other virtues, the which I will
leave until another time.

CHAP. LX. A Decoction of the Vine, and wherefore it serves.
THis Decoction is a composition of our Inveution, and may be made in the same
order as ye do with Lignum vitae, or Sarsaparilla, and has no less virtue
against contagious diseases, and has so great virtue in drying and resolving,
that it is to be wondered at, and may be used in all causes in stead of
Sarsaparilla, or Lignum vitae, or China, and this I have found out by great
travel and experience, and the order to make it is thus.

Take the Roots of the Vine, or the stalks, and cut them small, then take
thereof two pound, and infuse them in strong Vinegar until they be covered,
then put thereunto xii. pound of common water, and one pound of white Honey,
and boil them until the consumption of the third part, so that there remain
eight pound, then strain it, and put thereunto lb ss. of Julep simple, then
keep it in a glass close shut to thy use, for it serves against many diseases
or infirmities, and for those that have lost their appetite, if they take
thereof four ounces morning and evening warm, and fast thereon four or five
hours, in short time they shall recover it again. It is also good for those
that are troubled with the Colic: It also ingendereth Milk in women's breasts;
it cease pains of the Matrix, and also the Cough, Catarr, and pains of the
Reins, and such like, the which I will not speak of at this time. Also of the
seed of the Grape I have made an oil by Expression, as they make oil of
Linseed and other seed, the which is of so much virtue, that it helps in
manner against all indispositions, and especially against Ulcers and Wounds by
his proper quality, for unto this oil ye can neither attribute heat, not
dryness, moistness nor cold, but only a temperate thing, the which thou
may know by his experience. If ye use to eat of this oil, it mittigateth
and heals all the indispositions of the body, for it is of so much
sustenance and virtue, that it preserves the body in temperature: And these
have I found out by experience.

CHAP. LXI. To make a composition of the Herb Mercury.
THis Herb Mercury is of so much virtue that the tongue cannot expresle it,
and many Philosophers have assigned unto it Celestial virtue, because it
preserves a man in a youthful state a long time, and from infirmities: It
makes the heart merry, the which it does by his secret and hidden virtues,
and the order to make the said composition is thus.

Take the Juice of this Herb in May when it is with flour, and strain it
through a filter until it be clear, then take of that juice i. pound, Julip
simple half a pound, fine rectified Aqua vitae without phlegm. vi. Pure Oil of
Vitriol,. ii. fine Musk two Carrets; Mix these together in a glass, and stop
it very well, and set it in the Sun forty days together, and look that ye
take it in every night: that time being expired, you may use it when ye will,
and the order to use it is thus. Ye shall take in the morning. i. with two or
three ounces of the broth of a Capon, or other flesh, and fast thereon four or
five hours at the least, and thus using it two months together, it will be
unpossible to have any infirmity a long time after, by the virtue of the said
composition. Among the rest I saw once a Gentleman that had the Palsy one and
twenty months, the which by using of this composition the space of ten
months was perfectly whole. Another Composition also I have made, the which is
of mavelous virtue, and is in this order.

Take the Herb Mercury when it is floured, and accompany it with Wine and
Honey, then distill it, and separate the Elements according to Art, and thou
shall have a most rare Medicine, wherewith thou may help many infirmities.
But first I would counsel you, ere you use this, to prepare the body with
taking once our Aromatico, the which cleanses both the stomach and body, and
thus doing thou shall reap fame.

CHAP. LXII. A Medicine of Lappaciole Minor, the which is mavelous in curing
any sort of Catarre.
THere are four kinds of these, according to the writing of Dioscorides, but
that which the Author does write of in this place, is that which Dioscorides
calls Xanthium, and in the Shops it is called Lappa Minor, and Lappa Inversa,
and in the Italian Lappaciole Minore, and in English it is called the Ditch-Bur
and Louse-Bur. Take that herb with the root and all, what quantity ye will,
and distill thereof a water, the which keep unto thy use, and when ye will use
it against the Catarre, take of that water four ounces, with white crude Honey
half an ounce, mix them well together, and drink it in the morning warm as soon
as ye rise, and fast thereon four or five hours, and use a reasonable diet in
your meat and drink, and eat nothing that may offend the Catarre, and so using
this remedy for a month together, thou shall help any sort of Catarre
perfectly, by virtue of that herb. For this I have experimented diverse and
sundry times in poor and simple Catarres. But if they come of the Pox, or
Hectic, in that case it may pleasure them much, but yet not cure them. Ye
shall note, that it would be necessary for the Patient to take a dose of our
Aromatico before he take the said Medicine, because our Aromatico disposes the
Catarre to solution, whereby it may be the sooner cured.

CHAP. LIII. Of Pollipodie, and his virtues.
THis herb is well known to most men, and has great virtue against old
greifs, and opilations, and all indispositions that come through distemperment
of humors, because it evacuateth the body, cleanses the head, and purges the
blood: and the order to make it is thus.

Take Pollipodie two ounces, Seen one ounce, Lignum Aloes half an ounce, mix
these well together in a stone mortar, then take white Wine as much as ye
will, and for every pound of Wine put thereto. i. of that mixture, and so let
it stand four and twenty hours, and then drink it, for it will purge without
any pain, those that have any indisposition of the stomach, weakness of the
legs, and faintness of the body, and such like. For ye shall understand, the
Pollipodie purges Phlegm, and the Seen purges Choler, as by the viscosity is
known: The Lignum Aloes preserves nature, so that by the ingredients ye may
know the virtue of this composition. Ye shall understand, that this root would
be gathered when the Sun is afar off; and that the cold time of the year
does begin to draw on, for then they are of most force.

CHAP. LXIV. Of the Olive, and his virtues.
TAke common Oil, the which is made of the Olive, two pound, Frankincense one
pound, Turpentine one pound, distill them together in a Retort two days long,
then separate the oil from the water, and keep each alone, then take forth the
Fesses out of the Retort, the which is a miracle of Nature, because it serves
against all Infirmities, where it is applied. It helps broaken bones
wonderfully, and these secrets I have found out by experience. There is also
drawn out of the wood a liquour by discention, the which is black of color,
and is of mavelous virtue against pains. A little of this Oil being mixed
with Oil of Sulphur, helps all putrified and corrosive Ulcers that are caused
of putrefaction of humors. The Lie made of the Ashes of Olives, preserves the
beard and hair in their natural color, if ye wash the head often therewith.
Of this Oil I have made a great discourse in my Surgery.

CHAP. LXV. Of Ciperous, and his virtues.
THis herb being put into new Wine, when it works in the Hogshead, gives it
a pleasant savor, and whosoever uses to drink of that Wine, it will defend
him from all interior passions that are caused of ventosity, and helps those
that are troubled with the Rupture, because it resolves the wind, and has a
restrictive virtue. It purges the blood marvellously, and causes digestion,
and of this I have seen the experience. Also I saw one, that in the months of
April, May, and June, took the roots of Ciperous and beat them to powder, and
made thereof a plaster, and laid it upon the Rupture, changing it every day
once: and also he eat of the said roots, and so in short time he was helped;
and that experiment I have seen diverse times. Also if ye take those nodes or
knots that are on the roots, and stamp them, and boil them with common Oil,
Frankincense, and yellow Wax, until it become black of color, it will cure
wounds marvellously, it mittigateth the pains in all old sores, it cures all
pains coming of humidity and wind: Moreover, if ye anoint the body with the
said Oil, and drink the Wine wherein has lien infused the said root, it will
preserve it marvellously. And among all other things that I saw of this
Ciperous; there was a Merchant called Nicolo Carbolo, the which was of the age
of thirty years, and was troubled with a kind of scab like a Leper, and had
carried it long, the which I caused to make this Oil, and he did not only
anoint him therewith, but also drunk thereof every morning. ss. with wine, so
that in short time he became so whole and sound, that it was to be wondered at.

CHAP. LXVI. Of Rue, and his virtues.
TAke Rue when it is seeded, but yet not dry, and stamp it in a Mortar, and for
every pound of Rue, put thereto. vi. of Turpentine, and as much of the yolks of
Eggs hard sod, and incorporate them well together; then put it in a glass
close stopped, and set it to putrify in warm dung five and twenty days, then
distill it by a Retort according unto art, until all the substance be come
forth, the which will be both Oil and water, the which ye shall separate. The
water serves against all pains of the belly that are caused of cold and
moistness; the dose is. ss. in some warm broth, and may be taken at any time.
Also giving it to any that has a I ever coming with cold, it will help him in
short time: yea, some have been cured at once or twice taking the same.
Moreover, the Oil is most sovereign against cold greifs, as well inward as
outward, it preserves those greatly, that take every morning a dram with
sweet wine, and fast thereon four or five hours. Also for outward griefs it is
most excellent, if ye anoint them therewith cold, because it resolves and
dries all evil qualities of our bodies: besides these experiences, I have
made an Oil of the seed of Rue by expression, the which is of so much virtue,
that if ye anoint the head therewith, it causes a good memory unto those
that have lost it, or are weak by reason of humidity, or cold.

CHAP. LXVII. Of Wormwood, and his virtues.
THis herb Wormwood is of great virtue, if ye can use it well: for if any
lean persons or evil colored use the same, it will bring them to their
perfect health and color, and the order to make it is thus.

Take Wormwood and distill it in Balneo, then put thereunto Oil of Vitriol, as
much as will suffice to make it tart, and thereof use every morning one
spoonful fasting, and in short time it will restore thee to perfecter health
than ever thou wast before, and bring thy color again.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of Gratia Dei, and his virtues and operation in diverse
infirmities.
THis Gratia Dei is an herb well known unto most men, and is like unto
Germander, and bitter in taste, and it ought to be gathered in July and August,
and must be dried in the shadow, hanging so that it may touch nothing, and then
i. of this powder will provoke vomit, and ease Nature. It helps also
putrified Ulcers, if ye make a decoction thereof with Lie, and then wet clothes
therein, and lay them upon the sore; for as it causes to vomit and evacuateth
the stomach, so neither more nor less it causes the Ulcer to vomit, or purge,
and heals it with great speed: It helps much those that are Phrenzie, by
reason that it mundifieth the stomach and body from such putrefaction.

A most excellent composition of this Herb. Take thereof in fine powder,.i.
Cinnamon,.i. Cloves,. i. Wheat flower one pound, Zucche compost condit.. iii.
Oranges condited, one ounce, beat them altogether, and make thereof a past with
Honey, and form it like a loaf, and set it in an Oven to bake, but take heed it
do not burn, and when thou will use it, give thereof one ounce, and it will
purge gallantly, and is very delectable to be eaten. This Purgation is divine
in many infirmities, but above all other against Scrophule, the white Scall,
and Scabs, because it evacuateth only the superfluous humiditie, and dries,
and is appropriate for these infirmities: For ye shall note, that all Soluble
Medicines do not serve in one infirmity, because one is. Choleric, the other
Sanguine, one Phlegmatic, and the other Melancholy, and for that cause it is
necessary to find the proper Medicine for the infirmity. The Rhabarb purges
Choler: The Eleborus Melancholy; the Ebulus or Wallwort Phlegm, and the Gratia
dei the blood, so that every one has his property.

CHAP. LXIX. Of Wallwort and his Virtues and Operations.
VVAllwort is an Herb well known, and grows in a fat ground, and has leaves,
flouers, and seed like Elder, and is of such virtue that it is to be wondered
at, for if it were brought unto us from far Countries, it would be accounted
above all other herbs, but being so familiar among us, we make no account
thereof. This Herb called Wallwort or Dainwort, by his property and nature
provokes vomit and dissolveth the body, if ye drink the juice thereof, or
eat the Herb green: The water distilled of this Root being drunk, and applied
outwardly with wet clothes unto the Gout, it takes away the pain. If ye give
the juice of this Herb with Sirrup-of-Acetose to drink, it will help frantic
Fevers. The pounder of his leaves has great operation in all sorts of
putrified Ulcers, because it takes away the pain, mundifieth, and incarnateth,
with diverse other virtues, the which if I should write them they would not be
credited, and therefore I leave it to the Experimentor.

CHAP. LXX. Of Millefolie or Yarrow, and his great virtue.
THis Herb Millefolie, is well known unto most men; and of many is little
esteemed, because it grows so commonly amongst us. This Herb being green, is
a miraculous and divine remedy, to help any sorts of fresh and bleeding
wounds, if ye stamp a handful thereof, and lay it thereupon the lips being
close joined together, within the space of four and twenty hours it shall be
perfectly whole. If ye drink three ounces of the juice of this Herb with new
Milk, morning and evening, it will help Gonorrea in short time. It is also an
excellent remedy for those that have their Liver and Lungs ulcerated, for this
I have proved diverse and sundry times in Goats, the which are troubled with a
certain infirmity, the which is called Bissole of the Goat-keepers, for they
are certain Imposthumes that do engender in the Liver and the Lungs, and
causes them to die. I then seeing that in the interior parts of the Goats,
made this experience, I took Millefolie made in powder, and gave it unto the
Goats with Salt, and for the most part they were helped; and after that I cured
a number of men and women of that disease, for of that infirmity there die a
great number in the world. And with the said order aforesaid, thou may save
a number, but it must be mixed with Sal artificiato Leonardo. Those that are
Ettici and Tesici die commonly through Imposthumes and Ulcers that are caused
in the Liver, for of this I have seen above an hundred. For after they were
dead, I have caused them to be opened to see the experience. You shall
understand, that this Herb Millefolie has a great property to heal those
Ulcers. And therefore the Chirurgian that understands not Physic, can ill
help those Ulcers inwardly, because he cannot apply his Unguents and Plasters,
as he does outwardly. And those kind of Ulcers cannot be known, but of those
which have seen them, and have seen the success of their diseases, and
therefore I may well discourse thereof, because of them have passed a great
number through my hands, and I have seen them with mine eyes. So that I
conclude, that all which I have said is two things, the one is, to see the
thing in fact, the other, to have approved Medicines to help them. A most
excellent composition of this Herb, the which helps wounds in very short
time.

Take this Herb when it is floured, and ready to seed, and put thereunto
Bdellium, Frankincense, and common oil, and make thereof as it were Mustard,
then distill it with a gentle fire, with great diligence, as ye distill our
Oleum Benedictum, and thou shall have a rare Secret against all manner of
wounds, so that it causes the world to wonder at his operation.

CHAP. LXXI. Of Gentian and his Experiments, approved by me many times.
THis Herb is well known, and his virtue is most in the Root, and is a
miraculous and divine remedy for those that have pains within the body caused
of wind, and also for those that have the Stitch in the side, if ye give the
powder thereof in sweet white wine, for presently it takes away the pain,
because his nature is to dissolve wind, the which is caused of oppilations of
the Pores through abundance of humiditie, and the Gentian has virtue to dry
and dissolve wind, and so Nature does evaporate the ventositie: And this is the
reason why the Gentian does that effect.

CHAP. LXXII. Of Imperatoria and his great experience that it does against
pains of the Mother.
THis Herb is of great virtue in his operation, if his Root be made in powder,
and given to eat with Honey unto a woman that is troubled with the Mother,
either through cold or heat. For if they be grieved through cold, the
Imperatoria which is hot, does dissolve it, and they shall be delivered. If it
be through heat, the heat is always windy, because the heat is none other
thing, then a humor retained in those parts, the which this herb by his
proper virtue and quality does resolve. So that whether it be cold or hot,
this virtuous herb helps them with great speed, for this I have proved an
infinite number of times. Moreover this herb has great virtue to comfort the
stomach, and causes digestion, and to preserve all the body, and for that
cause the Ancients have called it Imperatoria.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of Cardo Sancto and his virtues particular, the which I have
proved.
THere are many kind of herbs, the which are called Cardi, but unto that which
they call Cardo Sancto; they have added Sancto, because the people should know,
that it is an herb of great value in certain diseases, so that it is to be
wondered at for his operation. And that which have seen, thereof will I write in
this place, that is, if ye stamp this herb when it is green, and lay it upon
the wound, it will heal it miraculously, and with great speed. Also the juvce
or powder of the said herb being given to drink unto those that have worms;
presently it helps them. This Herb being deied and infused in Aqua vitae, and
given to drink to any that is grieved with any grievous pains, in short time he
shall be whole. This Herb is also good for the sight of the eyes: If ye make
a past thereof with Bread and Honey, and distill it with white wine, it is most
excellent. It has also two great Virtues to preserve humane bodies, the which
I have proved, the one is outwardly, and the other inwardly, and they are made
in this order.

Take Carduus Benedictus when it begins to flour, and stamp it grossly, and
infuse it in common oil and Aqua vitae, with a little Frankincense, and there
let them remain, until they be macerated, then boil them and strain it, then
take thereof a third part, and put thereto a little Virgin wax, and let it
boil, until it begin to fume, and turn to a black color, then strain it, and
keep it in a glass close shut, that it take no air, then if ye take one
dram of the oil with sweet wine cold, it will resolve any infirmity, and
preserve them that use it in health; with the black liquor ye shall anoint
all the body when ye go to bed, cold, the which does not only resolve the
evil quality, but preserves a man in good state. It maintains the hair
black, so that it shall not wax white: It kills worms in the body, with
diverse other things, that I will leave until another time.

CHAP. LXXIV. Of sweet Marjoram, and of his Secrets the which I have proved.
MArjoram has great and rare virtues, the which I have proved, because others
might know them and use them, when occasion shall serve. And first I will write
of the juice, the which is of such strength and virtue, that one ounce thereof
being mixed with one dram of Oil of bitter Almonds, and one scruple of Mastick
in powder, being sunffed up at the nose, until it come unto the mouth, it
purges the head of all pains, dissolveth tumors, quickneth the sight, and
canseth sleep, and helps the head of all infirmities: Also Marjoram put into
Vinegar, with Cloves and Cinnamon, and make thereof an Epithema, it dissolveth
the evil disposition of the stomach, and quickens the appetite, and
provokes sleep, and being eaten in Sallets, it comfort the Stomach
marvellously, with diverse other virtues, the which I have not seen.

CHAP. LXXV. Of the Herb called Laciola, or Ophio Glossen, of some Adders
tongue, or Lancea Christi.
THis Herb is of mavelous virtue, for if it be laid upon a wound, either
green or dry, it heals it marvellously, and with speed, and that it does by
his hidden and secret virtue. The decoction of this Herb heals wounds
inwardly, and also other offenses, it helps the Rupture in young children,
being new done, if ye lay it thereon, and bind it hard with a Trusse, these
Virtues I have seen of this Herb.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of Hypericon or Saint John's Wort.
THere is an Oil made of the Seed of this Herb by expression, the which being
anointed upon a wound, it does heal it with great speed. It is also excellent
for those which have the Pitechie that is, a certain disease so called in the
Italian tongue, it is also most excellent against all Poisons. This Herb is
also good against scabbs, if ye anoint them with the juice, and drink his
decoction, because it quenches and cools the superfluous heat. And this it
does by his proper quality, and hidden virtue.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of Nettles, and his virtue in many operations.
THis herb is commonly known among us, and is of mavelous virtue, and his
effects are uncredible. Nevertheless, I will not let to show one experiment of
it, the which is mavelous, and is this: Take a Capon, and pull away all his
feathers from his breast, and beat him with Nettles, and he will call in the
young Chickens, and govern them like the Hen. Nettles being dried and made into
powder, and given to eat unto a man, it will provoke venereous acts, being used
to be eaten in meats, it purges the Matrix, it helps scabs, if you wash them
with his decoction, and mittigateth all pains coming of cold, making a bath
thereof; his decoction helps the toothache, with many other virtues that I
have not proved. But truly I believe, that if any would give himself to seek
experience in this herb, he should see strange things. For I have always seen
that in these kind of herbs, that naturally will not be touched, God and
Nature has given great virtue.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Of Hysop of the Mountain.
THis herb has great virtue, for if his decoction be given to drink unto
those that have the flux of Urine, in short time it will help them: The like
does his decoction in wounds imposthumated, for if ye wash them therewith, it
will mundifie, and restrain, and bring it presently to be whole. Also if ye
make powder thereof, and lay it upon a fresh wound, it will help it presently,
and that it does by his great estranged virtue. It helps the Cough, being
infufed in Wine and drunk.

CHAP. LXXIX. A great seeret of a kind of Betonie.
THere is found in the field a certain kind of Betonie, the which is the length
of an arm or more, and as big in the stalk as a Goose quill, and it is four
square, and the leaf is much like unto the Oaken leaf, and his flour is much
like the color of a Violet, and his seed is black, and much lik unto the
grains of Gunpowder, and this herb in Lumbardie is called Betonica, and in the
Realm of Naples it is called Centra galla, and of this herb I have seen great
virtues and experience, and especially when it begins to flour until it be
seeded: for if ye distill it with sweet Wine, and receive thereof only the
fourth part, it will restore the sight unto those that are almost blind: It
comfort a weak stomach very much, if ye drink thereof every morning three
or four drachms. The Fesses which remain in the glass being mixed with Honey
and a little Zedoaria, belpeth women that are troubled with the Mother, if they
drink thereof every morning. viii. warm. This herb being bruiesd with Wine and
Salt, and laid upon a fresh wound every three days once, helps the same with
speed: Also if ye put one of his seeds into the eyes, and there let it remain
so long as ye may suffer it, it will clear the sight marvellously, for it has
been proved many times. It helps those kind of Scabs the which are most evil
to be helped, being mixed in this order.

Take the juice of this herb, although it be somewhat dry and hard to get
forth, and for every ounce of that juice, put thereunto. iiii. of the Oil of
Frankincense that comes forth last in the distillation, and boil them a little
together until it begin to fume, then take it from the fire and strain it
through a cloth, and when ye go to bed anoint all the scabs therewith cold,
and thou shall see a most strange cure, never written of before by any man, the
which I have proved diverse and sundry times, and is a secret to be used on
noble personages, because it does his effect without letting of blood, and:
purging, most wonderful to behold: So that it is to be accounted rather a
divine Medicine then humane; for truly I have done more cures with this herb
then with any other that ever I used.

CHAP. LXXX. Of the effects of Wine, and what comes thereof.
FIrst I will speak of Wine and his qualities. You shall understand, that Wine
is a liquour the which changes into diverse kinds differing from his own
nature: And first it changes into Vinegar of it self without any artifice, the
which can never be turned into Wine again. Also they separate from Wine Aqua
vitae, the which being separated cannot be turned into Wine again. Also Wine
makes, by settling it self, a certain stone called Tartar, the which can never
be turned into Wine again, nor yet into Vinegar. And thus when the workman does
transmute or change it, it cannot be turned again into his first quality. Wine
is very apt to corrupt, and to change into other kinds, but after that it
changes or transmuteth, it is uncorruptible: for when it is turned into
Vinegar, it is apt to conserve all things Vegetable and Animal that is put
therein, but not the Minerals, for by nature it is enemy unto them. There is
also separated from. Wine Aqua vitae, the which is conservatrix of all
Medicines; for when it is circulated and made into a Quintessence it becomes
celestial, as I have showed in my other books, and therewith thou may help
many infirmities, because it mittigateth all pains, and dissolveth in a manner
all infirmities, and especially when it is compounded in this manner.

Take of that Quintessence four parts, Oil of Sulphur and Vitrioll of each one
part, Julep of Violets sixty parts: Mix them all together, and it will be of
such virtue, that if ye give. i. thereof to drink to one that lay at the point
of death, it would recover him, because it breaks choler, preserves the
stomach, causes an appetite, and helps any sort of Fever, and preserves
both men and women in lusty state, if they use it oftentimes; for these
experiences I have seen diverse times. Also of the Tartar ye may may make Oil,
the which is of mavelous virtue, both in Physic, Chirurgerie, and Alchimie.
There is also drawn forth of Tartar, his spirit and oil in this order, as
Andernacus writes, the which is most profitable against sundry infirmities,
and the order to make it is thus.

Take white Tartar and beat it to powder four pound, and put it into a stone
pot or glass well luted, and set it in a furnace to distill with a great
Receiver close luted, least all the fumes come forth or break the glass, then
give it first a small fire, and so increase it as though thou would draw a
strong water, and so continue it until there come forth no more spirits, then
let it wax cold, and take forth the liquor, and put it into an upright glass
with his head and receiver, and distill away the water in Balneo, then take
that oil which is in the bottom, and distill it in Sand or Ashes, and there
will come forth at the first a yellowish oil, and so by little and little it
will change color, and become blacker and blacker, and thick like unto a
Balm, or a Sirrup. You shall understand, that the first Liquor separated in
Balneo, is called Liquor fecularum vini, or Spiritus Tartari, the oil which
ye rectified in Sand, is called Oleum fecularum vini, sive Mumia fecularum
vini the which is most effectual and profitable in curing all running Ulcers
that goes creeping upon the flesh, and especially those that come Ex lue
venerea, for this Mumia does so cure those malign Ulcers, that their malice can
hurt no more, but shall be quite extincted: Being drunk with wine, it does
break and expel the Stone in the Reins and Bladder, it provokes Urine and
purges Ulcers. Furthermore,. i. of the liquor or spirit of Tartar, being
drunk with water of Fumitorie or Hirundinariae or such like, as is most
convenient for Pustulas gallicas ex anthemate ericipelas, the Dropsy, Water
betwixt the skin and the flesh, Fevers, Menstrua, and all obstructions of those
parts; it will work all those effects more effectual if it be taken with water
of Triacle, the which is made as hereafter follows. Also ye shall understand
that this spirit of Tartar must be rectified four or five times from the calces
of his Fesses in Balneo, to take away his stinking smell, and then it will be
the purer and more effectual, and this is the making of Aqua Theriacalis.

Take Triacle of Alexander that is perfect good,. v. red Myrrh,. ii. Saffron,.
ss. mix them together in a glass, and pour thereon,. x. of the spirit of Wine,
and then set them close stopped to digest, then distill it according unto art;
sometime they put into this water. ii. of Camphire especially when it is used
in hot burning Fevers and Infla^mations, and and then it is called Aqua
theriacalis camforata, this Composition following being drunk, has a singular
piercing virtue. Take Spiritus calcanthi,. i. Liquoris fecularum vini
correcti,. iii. Aqua Theriacalis. v. give thereof. i. in strong wine or other
convenient liquor both for the aforesaid defects, and also to prevent and cure
infinite other diseases.

CHAP. LXXXI. Of the quality of Vinegar, and his Secrets.
VInegar is made of wine, and of water. Whereas there is wine, they make it of
wine, but in those Countries where there grows no wine, they make it of beer
and ale, in stead of wine, the which Vinegar is very strong. Nevertheless, it
has not the virtue and quality of that which is made of wine, because his
nature is to preserve those things which are put therein, as is said before. If
ye do distill Vinegar in Balneo until it remain dry, and then burn those
Fesses until they come white, and then lay them in a moist place, it will turn
into Oil, the which is of such virtue for man's body, that it is not to be
credited, for if ye give thereof a small quantity to drink, it will dissolve
the Gravel, and Stone in the Bladder. And therefore this is a worthy secret to
be known, the which was never revealed before to any man: As for his other
virtues, they are known to all men. Distilled Vinegar being mixed with a little
oil of Tartar and Aqua vitae, preserves the face, and makes it fair, but if
it were not a sin to offend God, I could say such great and strange things of
distilled Vinegar, that it would cause the world to wonder at it, but for
troubling my conscience, I will hold my peace for this time, and leave this to
be sufficient, which I have written already.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of the Fesses of Wine, and of his Secrets that I have foundout.
THat which is called Alum du Fesse, is the Fesses of Wine burnt, the which I
have spoken of in other places, but here I will show thee a great and rare
Secret, never written before by any man, the which shall be to the honor of
the Physician, and this is the Secret.

Take the Fesses of Aqua fortis, made with Roch Allom, Sal Niter, and Vitriol
two pound, Alum du Fesse two pound, mix them well together, and put them into
a Furnace to calcine, until it become to a hard stone: and when it is
calcined, make it presently into powder, and set it four or five nights in the
air, and it will turn moist, then take six pound of pure Aqua vitae without
phlegm, and put therein the same powder, and so let it remain eight days, every
day stirring it once, then pour of that part which is clear, and keep it as a
precious Jewel, then take the Fesses and calcine them again, as ye did at the
first, and make them in powder again: And this powder mundifieth all filthy
and stinking sores, and with this water thou may help them, if that the
workman can apply it with reason. Also with this water may be done great cures
in Physic, if it be given as it ought to be. Also of the said powder there may
be made Pills and Potions, that works miracles in the world, as I have seen
diverse times.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Of Verjuyce made of Grapes, and his Secrets.
VErjuyce is the Juice of unripe Grapes, the which is kept to dress and season
meats, to give them a better taste, and it is of great virtue, and appropriate
for many things. But when it shall be distilled with Honey, and Alum du Fesse
in a Limbeck of glass, it will be a miraculous remedy for Imposthumes that
are very hot. It makes women fair and shining, if they wash them therewith.
But if this be mixed with oil of Talk, it will restore the sight unto those
that are almost blind. Also two drachms of distilled Verjuyce, with two drachms
of the juice of Betonie, and four ounces of Milk being used, will make a man
very luxurious, and help a weak back. Also Verjuyce being distilled, will bring
an appetite unto those that have lost it. And all these are with great reason,
for ye shall understand that the Verjuyce without any other Artifice, does
mundifie the stomach, and loose the body, and purify the blood: The Honey is
Cordial, and is hot by nature, and dissolveth wind, the Alum du Fesse dries,
and destroys all the evil humors: The Talk is bright and shining, and his
whiteness does penetrate very much: The Betonie comfort the stomach, and is
windy: The Milk is aperative and nutritive, and therefore consider well
thereon, and thou shall find it reason and experience that I have said.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Certain Secrets of Animals, and first of the Ox.
THe fat of the Ox is very appropriate to Unguents, to help all manner of
sores, because it comfort the place offended, and mittigateth the pain; but
when this grease or fat shall be distilled with Turpentine and Wax, it will
work Miracles in diverse operations, of the which I will not speak in this
place. There is in the throat of diverse old Oxen certain knots or kernels as a
man may term them, the which are of the bigness of an Olive, some are bigger
and some lesser, according to the age of the Ox. Take of those kernells, and
hang them up to dry in the shadow, and make thereof powder, and of that powder
give every morning, ss.. unto those that have the Dropsy, and in short time
they shall be helped. Also the sinnews of an Ox being dried, and made lint to
make tents or stoppings, is most excellent, and will work great effects, and
this is one of the Secrets, the which I never meant to reveal until death. The
blood of a young Bull that is not gelded, being drunken as it is warm, is most
strong poison, there are also diverse other things, the which I would write of
this Beast but for tediousness sake.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of the Goat.
THe fat of the Male Goat before he is gelded is of much virtue, because it
comfort all members that are offended, as well inwardly as outwardly: If ye
anoint any that has the Flux with the said grease, it will do him great
pleasure. Also the dung of the Goat is most excellent to mollify sinnews that
are indurated in any place, and therefore this dung being put into Unguents
appropriate, of force must work great Effects.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Of the Horse and his Virtues.
THe Dung of the Horse is of great virtue, for if a man were lame, and
indurated through gross and viscous humors, let him be buried in fresh warm
Horse dung two hours, and in ten or twelve days he shall be helped. The fat of
the Horse is very hot and penetrative, and especially that in the neck, where
the Main grows. Also the fat being distilled with the rosin of the Pine tree
and Myrrh, is miraculons against shrunk sinnews.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Of the Dog and his Secrets.
THe Dog is an amiable Animal above all other unto man, for he understands
in a manner what a man does say; and from the Dog is taken many wholesome things
for man, for of the skin they make Gloves, and such like, the which are
wholesome for them that wear them. The fat of the Dog is very hot and piercing,
and dissolveth all pains that come of cold. The dung of a Dog is profitable to
dress Leather withal, also his blood mixed with Hogs grease, and the Ashes of
a Vine, dissolveth all manner of swellings, that come in diverse parts of the
body.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Of the Cat and his Virtues.
THe Cat is very hot, above all other animals, that appertain unto the house,
and his fat is of such heat, that it is uncredible to be spoken of, and he is
never in love, or goes a catterwalling, but in the coldest weather. The Brain
of the Cat is of such a heat, that if any do eat thereof, it will make him
mad; if ye anoint certain places of the house with the fat, it will cause the
Mice to run away, fearing least the Cat were there, and that is by a hidden
property. There ingendereth in the flesh of a dead Cat certain putrified
Worms, the which afterward become a kind of Fly, that are called Taphaeni,
the which is a very great enemy to the Ox, and all other Cattle, for they
will run away from them, for if they be bitten therewith, they will in a manner
be mad.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Of the Hare and his Secrets.
THe blood of the Hare being dried in the Furnace, and made into powder,
helps those much, which are troubled with the stone and gravel, giving it to
drink with the juice of Pelitory. The hair of the Hare serves to stench blood
in wounds. The Testicles of the Hare dried in a Furnace, and made into powder,
and being drunk, provokes venercous acts. The Gaul of the Hare being distilled
with Honey and Aqua vitae, is a miraculous remedy for the sight of the eyes,
putting therein every night one drop when ye go to bed. There is yet a great
virtue in the Hare, that if I should reveal it, the world would wonder at it,
and therefore I omit it unto the ingenious.

CHAP. XC. Of the Frog and his secrets.
THese Frogs are of great virtue in diverse operations; for their fat helps
the Leprosy if ye anoint them therewith, and is a most miraculous thing for
those that are burnt, or scalded with water; for if ye anoint them therewith,
it will help them quickly, and leave no scar. But if this fat be distilled with
Mirrh, and Aqua vitae, and accompanied with Aloes, and the juice of Brassica
Marina, called Soldanella, and thereof made Pills, they will be of so much
virtue, that one scruple or two of those Pills being given oftentimes unto one
that has the Dropsy, they shall be helped quickly, and hereof I have had
great experience, to my great honor and profit of the Patient.

CHAP. XCI. A discourse upon certain stones, and their qualities in Physic and
Surgery: and first of the Marble stone.
THere are a great number of stones that the Majesty of God has created in the
world, of the which I will make mention of some, as well Mineral as
Artificial, because the Physician as well as the Chirurgian, may be served
thereof in their affairs, although it be hard to have knowledge of those things,
because they are much differing one from another, and grow in diverse parts of
the world: yea, and although they be brought unto us, yet they are so unknown,
that we cannot know the thousand part of their virtues and qualities. And to
begin, I will write of the Marble, the which is a white stone, like unto Sugar
when it is broken, and it is of great virtue in Surgery, for when it is
brought into calkes, thereof may be made an Unguent of great virtue in this
order. Take of that calkes, and lay it to steep in fair water, so that it may
be covered four fingers, then stir it eight or ten times a day, and then let it
wax clear and settle, then pour it off, and put on more, and do as ye did
before, and when the water is settled clear pour it off again, then take of
that calkes what quantity you will, and with Oil of Roses make it into an
Unguent, the which is mavelous for such as are troubled with heat, for it
dries, and cools, and sets it in good disposition, so that with case it
may be healed.

CHAP. XCII. A Discourse upon Lapis Ematites, and his virtues in Surgery.
THis Lapis Ematites is a stone like unto the Mine of Iron, the which if it be
ground into powder will be red like unto Sinaper, and thereof thou shall make
an Unguent in this manner. Take Oil of Roses four ounces, Auxungia two ounces,
new Wax half an ounce, Turpentine one ounce, Lapis Ematites in most fine powder
three ounces, mix them well together in a Copper pan with a small fire, until
it begin to give certain fumes, or smell, and it will be black, then take it
from the fire, and always stir it until it be cold; and then it will be hard
like a Cerot, the which is miraculous in healing corrosive Ulcers. Also this
stone being in fine powder, and made into a Lineament with Vinegar, Oil of
Roses, and a little Litarge, helps Scabs, and quenches their heat, and
cools the blood. Also two drachms of this powder being eaten with Sugar
rosate, helps those which have inflammations in their stomach with speed.
This stone has also diverse other virtues, the which I will leave at this time.

CHAP. XCIII. Of the stone of Iron, which some call Loppa.
THese stones which the workmen take from the Forge, that are called Loppa
diferro, are of great importance, if we may believe the Alchimists, because
they say, that this stone is the beginning of their Stone, etc. Ye shall
understand, that this stone is most necessary both in Physic and Surgery,
when it shall be well prepared as it ought to be: and his preparation is in
this order. Take that mass of matter and stamp it, and searce it very fine,
and then put it into a vessel that is apt to resist the fire, and set it in a
glass Furnace for twenty or thirty days, and then it will be a red mass, the
which ye shall beat into an impalpable powder, the which if thou will use in
Physic thou may dissolve in Vinegar, and when it is dissolved keep it for
inflammations of the Liver and Stomach, the which thou may give with any
kind of Sirrup appropriate, for this is a miraculous Medicine against the flux
of the body. Also if ye make an Unguent of the said powder with Oil of Wax, of
Frankincense, and Eggs, it will work strange operations in Contusions and
Dislocations of bones, laying it thereon very warm, because it resolves all
alteration, mittigateth the pain, and comfort the place offended. Ye shall
understand, that it was never made of none but of us, which ever seek new
Medicines and goodly experiences, to pleasure the world with that Art.

CHAP. XCIV. Of Lapis Judaicus and his form, and wherefore it serves in
Physic and Surgery.
THis Lapis Judaicus is a certain stone, the which is like unto the similitude
of the Cuckows Egg, and is of a grayish color and rough, and within it is
another stone like unto a Nut, and this stone is of a great virtue in his
operation; for if it be beaten into powder, and dissolved in distilled Vinegar,
and then mixed with Sirrup of Saxifrage, and given to drink to those that are
troubled with gravel, it will cause them to avoid it in their Urine: and to
break the stone, they shall mix the powder with Honey, and lay it on
plaister-wise upon the Reins, and it will break the gravel with speed.
Moreover, this Stone has two rare virtues, the which I will not write of in
this place, but I would counsel those that carry them upon their bodies to
have two, a Male and a Female, and look upon them every day once, for of this
stone I have seen great experience.

CHAP. XCV. Of Lapis Lazuli and his operation.
CErtain wise men in the world that have made great consideration of this
stone, say, that this is the stone of gold, because it is mixed with Azure,
white and yellow, and also other colors; but I find that in many places of the
world, they have the Mine of gold, and yet they find no Lapis Lazuli; and
therefore it is a sign that it grows in places where Nature does produce it
in that form. And for that which I have seen of Lapis Lazuli is, that if ye
give it inwardly it provokes vomit, and helps the Quartain Ague: And I have
proved to calcine it in the Furnace where they bake Bricks, and when it was
calcined to dissolve it in Aqua vitae: the solution helps many infirmities,
giving it inwardly, and especially malign Fevers. Also being put in malign
sores, it brings them to so good a temperature, that it is miraculous, and
not credited, except of those that see the experience. And at this time I am
seeking to bring it to a certain perfection, the which shall work miracles, and
hitherto I have had good success, for thereof I have seen great miracles that
causes the world to wonder: And yet of late I have found an Oil made of the
same Stone, that provokes sleep, and causes quiet rest, and is mavelous for
the sight of the eyes, anointing the head, the eyes, and the stomach therewith
when ye go to bed: For of this I have seen an infinite of experiments, and I
swear by that I am, that with all the travel that I have had, I never found a
better thing then this Oil; for if ye anoint the Gout therewith, presently it
takes away the pain, and inflammation, or alteration, but the reason thereof I
know not, because as yet I had no leisure to consider thereof: But by the grace
of God, at the next impression I will set forth some notes of their experience
that I have seen in the Art.

CHAP. XCVI. Of the Flint-stones and their virtues.
THe flint is a stone, the which if it be stricken with Iron or Steel it will
give fire, and his virtues are great both in Physic and Chrirurgery, and also
in diverse other Arts. First in Physic it has virtue to dissolve the gravel
in the Reins and Bladder, if ye give thereof two drachms with unriped Wine, and
this it does by his proper quality and hidden virtue. In Surgery it has
great virtue, for being ground into most fine powder, and made into an ointment
with Oil of Roses, and Wax, it mittigateth all inflammations, and takes away
the pain of the sore, because it cools and dries. Moreover, this stone is
used of those that make Glass, to make their composition with their Ashes and
Maganese. There are yet a great number of virtues, the which I leave unto the
Experimentour.

CHAP. XCVII. Of the white stone which some call Alum, Scaleola, or Gesso.
THis Alum, Scaleola, or Gesso is used much in Italy to make Lime of, I
suppose it to be that which is called Muskovie Glass, or Lapis Speculuris;
this is very necessary both in Physic and Chirurgerie, because it is by virtue
attractive and drying, and helps much against burning Fevers, tempering it
when it is burnt like flower with Vinegar, and when it is tempered, lay it
presently upon the Reins, and lay it just the length and largeness, and so let
it remain three or four hours, because it draws like Boxing Glasses, and so
leaves the Reins cold and eased: and so by that effect it does great pleasure
in those kind of Fevers. It helps also in Ulcers if ye make a paste thereof
with common lie, and lay it thereon eight or ten hours, and then change it,
for of this I have seen strange effects.

CHAP. XCVIII. Of the Stone called Lapis Amiante.
THis Stone called Amiante, as all they which have written thereof say, is a
stone like unto Cycile, or Alum du plum, but not so white, of the which stone
there is found great quantity in Cyprus, and there they spin it like as it
were Flax, and do make thereof Napkins and such like, and when they are foul,
in stead of washing them, they make a great fire, and lay them thereon, and so
make them clean and white, for the experience thereof I have seen, and that
which I have said, is in the Lapidarie of Dioscorides and Pliny, and Petro
Andrea, Mathiolus Sanesie. And hereof I will show thee a mavelous strange
secret, the which I have proved, and is this. Take of the said stone and make
it in powder, and mix it with crude Lead being in powder, as I have showed in
my Caprici Medicinale, with Tutia prepared, the composition thereof is this.
Take of the stone. iiii. Lead,. xii. Tutia. ii. Mix them and calcine them in
the fire, and when they are calcined, beat them to powder, and lay them to
steep in strong Vinegar in a glass, and so let it stand a month stirring it
every day once, and then at the months end let it boil on the fire a quarter
of an hour, and then let it settle until it come clear, then take of that
Vinegar as much as ye will, and mix it with as much oil of Roses, stirring it
until it come to a body, the which is a precious linament and rare, for if ye
anoint the white scall or such like scabs on the heads of young children, it
will heal them with great speed. Also for Scabs and Itch in the legs it is
excellent, if ye anoint them therewith every night when you go to bed. This
Stone serves also when it is dissolved by it self in Aqua vitae and Sugar, for
those women that are troubled with the whites; for if they drink thereof every
morning a little, it helps them quickly. I believe this Stone has many other
virtues which I know not.

CHAP. XCIX. Of the Sapphire, and his virtues in Physic.
SAphires are certain stones, like unto Azures, small, and are transparent, the
which if thou will use, it were necessary to be cunning in the knowledge of
them, for otherwise ye may be deceived. And furthermore, above that which many
Philosophers have written thereof, I have found two goodly experiences never
known before, and are these. First to make the heart merry, and to help the
passions of the same, the which ye shall use thus.

Take thy Sapphire, and stamp it very finely, and dissolve it in Vinegar, or
with the juice of Limons, and when they are dissolved, take thereof i. with as
much of our Elixar vitae, and of Oil of Honey i. and a little of the Julep of
Violets, and give it to drink unto those that have the aforesaid infirmities,
and thou shall see miracles of their operation. I hope ere it be long, to set
forth a great and strange secret of these Stones.

CHAP. C. Of Red Coral.
REd Coral is a stone, the which most commonly does grow upon baked stones or
bricks, and to approve it to be so, there is a certain Island of Barbary, the
which is called Tobacco, the which was sometimes inhabited, but sithence the
Sea has overrun a great part thereof, and so the stones of the houses, and
the Bricks were scattered in the bottom of that Sea, and at this time the
Genoes gathered a great quantity of Red Coral; the fairest in all the world.
I call to remembrance that in the year 1549. I being in Messina, a famous City
in the Realm of Cicilia, I saw a Fisherman cast his Net in the gate hard by the
tower called Salvatore; and he took up a branch of red Coral that was grown
upon a Brick, and was of such greatness and beauty, as had not been seen in
two hundred years before. So that by this I have proved, that the Coral does
grow upon Bricks, or baked stones, and these have great virtue in Physic and
Chirurgerie, when they be dissolved in the juice of Limons, or distilled
Vinegar. For howsoever it be taken inwardly, it comfort the stomach, and
makes the heart merry, dissolveth the Fever, and not without great cause. For
it is so good of nature, that our nature does desire it. Coral being calcined
and dissolved with Aqua vitae, or with our Quintessence of Wine, helps very
much against Ulcers, because it takes away the pain presently, and mundifieth,
and incarnateth, and cicatrizeth. Of this Coral ye may make Lozenges, or such
like, the which are very Restorative.

CHAP. CI. A Discourse upon the Stone Salt.
THere is found a Salt in the Realm of Naples, in the Province of Calabria, in
the state of the Prince of Besignano, in certain Mountains that are of the Mine
of Salt: I do verily believe that this Salt is a fifth Element, because Salt
would be called no other then wisdom, as a man may say, taste. And to prove
that which I have said, ye may see that the world cannot live without it.
Moreover this Salt serves much in Physic and Surgery, for they put it into
Clisters, and lay it also upon wounds. But I have found a way to prepare this
Salt sweet like Sugar, but yet Salt, and is of such a pleasant taste, that it
comfort them that use it, and this is called Sal conditum Leonardo, the
which Salt is good against Worms, and comfort the stomach, causes an
appetite, purges the Urine, with a number of other virtues. And the order to
take it is thus. Ye shall take thereof half a spoonful in the morning at one
time, and also use it in stead of Salt to your meat, and season your meat
therewith. Also if any have pains in any part of their body, anoint it with
this Salt, and bind a cloth thereon, and it will be helped.

Hereafter follows the Virtues of certain Mineralls, and mean Mineralls. And
first of Vitrioll.

CHAP. CII. Certain Secrets of Vitriol.
IN Vitriol are many Secrets which until this time have been hidden, by means
of which there may be done many strange and great matters in diverse operations,
not only in Physic and Surgery, but in many other things. Ye shall
therefore take Vitriol and put it in a pot, and make him sweat until ye see
him weep; the which sweat being taken from him, is a mortal enemy unto sharp
Fevers, when it is drunk with sodden or distilled waters. Also if those that
have the Etica or Tissick do drink it with Mel Rosarum, it will do them
great pleasure, it serves also to make the hair of the head or beard black.
Then if that by force of fire ye cause him to vomit a black liquor, it will be
a thing very apt to dissolve any humor, the which in short time will dissolve
any pain. For if ye put it into Gangrena, or other putrified Ulcer, it does
mundifie it with great speed: It mortifieth Warts Chaps, Fistulaes, and any
kind of those humors. If it be drunken with Wine or other liquor, it is good
against Fevers of any quality. Then his Feces being reduced into water with
Vinegar, and his Salt being taken out, it is of such virtue, that in a manner
it will make men immortal. And above the aforesaid matters, in Alchymie it
works strange things, for by the means thereof they may make the great
Amalgam of Mercury and Mars, wherewith may be done great matters, and happy
shall he be that goes to work that way. For with Vitriol, Mercury and Mars is
made full glad the Master of the Art.

CHAP. CIII. Strange secrets of Roch Alum.
IN Alum are great virtues, and especially in Roch Alum; for the water being
separated from the Feces, and accompanied with our Quintessence, works most
strange cures, and especially in desperate diseases: And the Feces which cannot
dissolve, when with fire they shall be brought to perfection, and accompanied
with Mars, they shall be apt to heal any sort of Ulcer inwardly, and with speed
take away the pain, and not without great reason: for the Roch Alum is Anima
Terrae, a firm Element, and that which dissolveth and turns all things into
his nature. Mars also is Anima Terrae, and is that, in which is found all
virtue and richness: But he that is not expert, let him not settle himself to
this enterprise, least it fall not out right; for he that cannot prepare,
calcine, dissolve, and congeale, shall never do any thing that is ought worth,
therefore it were better to leave then meddle.

CHAP. CIV. Of Orpiment and his nature.
THis Orpiment is a stone, as it were, made of scales, and is of diverse
colors; there is white, and yellow, and red like blood; nevertheless, they
are all of Sulphurous matter, the which burns visibly like Sulphur, of the
which I know no use, neither in Physic nor Surgery, although that some
Chirurgians do lay it upon sores to dry them, the which they do for want of
reason or knowledge: With this Orpiment, being mixed with Calx viva, and strong
Lie, and so made into an Unguent, they use to take away hair: It serves also
for Painters to make a yellow color like Gold, the which if it be burned, it
changes into another color. This serves for infinite uses in Alchimie; for
his sublimation being made with Sal niter, and Tartar, when it is white, and
Amalgamed with Quicksilver and fine Silver, and given in projection upon Venus
purged, it will make it very fair and white, and much like Lime. Orpiment is
dissolved, by way of calcination with strong Vinegar, until such time as his
substance be taken away; then let it settle and wax clear, and vapor away that
clear part, and in the bottom ye shall find the whiteness of Sulphur, the
which being fixed with sufficient order, it does blanch all metals, and this is
called the Quintessence of Sulphur Mineral: This serves for many other uses
in Alchimie, the which I will leave until another time: But this which I have
written is most true.

CHAP. CV. Of Cinaber Mineral, and wherefore it serves.
THis Cinaber is of two kinds, Mineral and Artificial; the Mineral is a stone
of the color of Iron, the which being ground into powder it will be red like
blood, the which is of a great drying nature, by the reason that it contains
in it Sulphur, it dries malign Sores, and being made in a Perfume, it helps
the mouth being ulcerated, and being made into an Unguent, it cools greatly;
also being dissolved in Vinegar, it mittigateth the pain in malign Ulcers, and
heals them in short time; his sublimation being made with Salt and Tartar,
blancheth Copper and Lattin like to Silver.

This stone serves also to burnish Metal or Silver therewith. The artificial
Cinaber is made of Sulphur and Mercury by way of sublimation, the which serves
for diverse uses; as for the Painters, or to write with; also to make drying
Unguents, and for fumes against the Pox, with diverse other uses, the which I
leave at this time.

CHAP. CVI. Of the secrets of Salt, and his royal virtue.
THere is in Salt a great virtue, and his secrets are of great force, for if
Salt be dissolved in the mighty water of Vitriol, together with Mars, and then
caused to vomit with great heat, until it remain in a dry powder, and then
circulate it with our Quintessence of Wine and Honey the space of a month, the
which if the workman can do, he shall make a miraculous Medicine, which by his
virtue and hidden quality, will serve against diverse great infirmities, because
his nature is to preserve the body in his strength, and to discharge all evil
humors that may offend Nature. But to speak of some particular thing, I say,
that this glorious Medicine does help the Fever Hectic when they are new
begun, giving there of a little quantity with water of Vervane, Agrimonie, and
Betonie; with the water of Fennel and Sclandine, it restores the sight unto
those that are obscure; it helps also the flux of the body, with diverse other
things, the which I will not utter in this place.

CHAP. CVII. Of the secrets of common Salt, and his virtues.
THere are three sorts, or kinds, found of common Salt, the one is natural, the
which is found in Mountains, as in Naples in the Province of Calabria, where
are great Mountains of it, and also in Spain in the Isle of Anvisa, and this
is the Mineral Salt. The second kind is Artificial, as is made in Germany in
their Cauldrons. The third kind is also natural of the Sea, which is made upon
dry sands in pits, by force of the Sun; but the most sweet and savourest is
that which is made with fire, because it is purified and clean: The Salt of the
Mountain is of more virtue then all the rest in Physic; for when it shall be
calcined forty days together in a Furnace, and then dissolved with our
Quintessence of Honey, so that there remain no Feces, it will be of such
virtue, that in manner it will revive the dead, if you give them thereof a
spoonful. With this the antientest Doctors did mavelous things, and they
called it the Salt of Wisdom, for he that knew well his virtues would marvel
thereat. This Salt serves also against the infirmities of Oxen.

CHAP. CVIII. Certain secrets of Saltpeter.
Saltpeter is a certain kind of salt of Urine, the which is taken out of the
earth by art, and is most wholesome against diverse infirmities; for when it
shall be calcined thirty days together in a Furnace, with as much Tartar, and
then dissolved with our Quintessence, accompanied with the spirits of Cinnamon,
Ginger, and Cloves, it will be a most wholesome Medicine, and will cause the
Professors of the Art to be amazed at his operation, for it helps the
Hectic, and Dropsy, and diverse such like infirmities, the which I will not
speak of in this place, fearing that they will not be credited: Nevertheless,
those that are disposed to travel on that matter shall find their desire, and
reap great fame in the world.

CHAP. CIX. Certain secrets of Alum du Fece.
THis Alum is made with the Feces of Wine, in this manner. You shall
understand, that in those Countries where they make Wine, they put it in
vessels, and lay them toward the East, and then in certain space there
settleth great quantity of Feces, the which being put into certain bags, and
hanged up to dry, the humor runs out, and the Fesses remain in a hard
mass, the which afterward is dried and burned, and the ashes thereof is called
Alum du Fece, in the which are found great secrets; for without this certain
colors cannot be dyed: It makes also women's hair yellow, and takes away all
spots or stains, and the like virtue it has in our Physic, if that the
workman were able to prepare it as it should be, for it will transmute one
complexion into another.

CHAA. CX. A great secret of Gold.
GOld, which Alchimists do call Sol, is a metal of such importance, that it is
superior of all the rest in virtue, weight, and prise, and of brightness and
fairness, and is that, with the which may be made a Medicine, that in manner
gives life unto the dead, when it is prepared with the fire, and accompanied
with Mercury: Then with our two Quintessences it may be dissolved by and by,
and by way of circulation it may be separated from all company, and when it
shall be dissolved, you may give it to help against any great infirmity, if
thou know how to apply it conveniently.

CHAP. CXI. A great Secret of Silver.
SIlver, which we call Luna, is a Metal very bright in whiteness and next unto
gold, for of it may be made mavelous things, especially in dangerous
infirmities that are of importance. For being prepared and reduced into his
first matter, it may be accompanied with our Quintessence, and make thereof a
drink that will be very profitable against the Leprosy, and this composition
shall be given in the broth of a Chicken unto those that are Asmatick, for it
will do them great pleasure, and cure all those that are troubled with the
Leprosy. It makes also women's faces shining and mavelous fair. But when it
shall be further prepared, it will restore the sight unto those that are almost
blind through debilitie. Also if it be used in Alchymie, it will work strange
effects.

CHAP. CXII. Certain Secrets of Saturn.
SAturn is that metal which we call Lead, in the which is found great secrets
both in Physic and Surgery. For when it shall be brought into powder
without fire or other mixture, but only grinding it in a brazen mortar with
the spittle of a man, until it become into fine powder, it comfort much
against all corrosive and malign Ulcers, because it cools and dries
miraculously, but when Saturn shall be calcined and dissolved in Vinegar, and
his Salt taken forth, and then that Salt dissolved in our Quintessence, will
help many infirmities, and especially those that are caused of humiditie, and
caliditie, because it dries and cools by his Nature. Also an Unguent made of
the calx of Lead, serves against diverse sorts of Sores. Also if the Workmaster
were diligent, with Lead, Feretto of Spain, Vitriol, and Tutia, he might make a
metal like unto Gold of the Ducket, of the which he might receive a great
benefit.

CHAP. CXIII. Of the secrets of Copper.
WHen Venus shall be well prepared, and with art of fire shall be well
calcined, and done thereunto what is convenient, it will be valiant in his
operation. For of it is made an unguent, that mundifieth sores with great
speed. Also therewith is made a water, that helps all kind of crude
infirmities in the eyes: It helps Scabbes, and is of great profit against the
white scall, warts on the privy parts, and sores in the secret parts. For it
resolves them very vell. Moreover if the workman be his crafts master, he may
bring it into such an extreme whiteness, that it shall appear like Luna. Also
if he can amalgam it with Mars and Mercury, and give him his cocture, he may
draw forth a great quantity of Sol.

A great Secret of Copper, as concerning Chirurgerie.

Take Sal Niter lb ii. Roch Allom half a pound, Sal Gem. four ounces, Vitriol
Roman one pound, Soot of the Chimney three ounces, mix these together, and
distill thereof a strong water according to art, that being done, put the water
into a Retort, and for every pound of water, put thereto four ounces of
Verdegriese finely cearsed, then set thereunto a Receiver, and give it fire
according to art, until all the fumes be come forth, then let it cool, and
break the glass, and take forth that which remained in the bottom, and beat
it to powder, then put that into another Retort, and put thereon as much
distilled Vinegar as the powder weighed, and distill it again, until there
come no more fumes, then let it cool, and break the glass, and take forth the
matter, and grind it to powder, and keep it in a glass that it take no air.
For this is most mavelous in ulcerated and putrified sores, because it
mundifieth, cleanses, and incarnateth, and with great speed brings them to
be whole with small pain, or none at all: If ye make an unguent thereof with
oil of Roses. Wax, and Frankincense, it helps all manner of sores with speed.

CHAP. CXIV. Of the Secrets of Jupiter or Tin.
IVpiter is a shining Metal, by the means of which all the other Metals become
shining, and are preserved, and in this is found great virtue and experience,
both in Physic and Chirurgerie, and also in Alchimie. For when it is well
prepared, and reduced into a potable water, it will be a glorious Medicine for
the solution of the Hectic, Tissick, and Dropsy. But if it be brought into a
Quintessence, and accompanied with our Quintessence, and the Quintessence of
Honey, it will be a precious Medicine to restore the sight of the eyes. Also if
the Chirurgians could well prepare it, after it is calcined, and make thereof
an Unguent with things appropriate, they might do strange cures therewith.
Moreover if the Alchymists could reduce him to his perfection, it would be a
Medicine of great price. For if they could join it with Venus purged and well
prepared, it would be as white as Luna, and then he that had a Medicine
appropriate, might bring it to a perfect body.

CHAP. CXV. Certain Secrets of Iron.
IRon, which the Alchymists do call Mars is a Mineral, the which is
appropriate against diverse and sundry infirmities when it is well prepared and
dissolved, the which is done in this manner.

Take Iron filed in powder, and dissolve it in strong water, the which solution
will be red like blood, then vapor away that water until it remain in a red
stone that has no moisture left in it, then break the glass, and grind it to
fine powder, and wash it with fair water, until the water remain sweet, then
dry it on a great fire, and grind it again, then put it into a glass with a
long neck, and put thereon Vinegar distilled likewise, and set it in warm
horse-dung thirty or forty days, and the powder shall be dissolved into
clear clear water, of the color of blood. And when that thou see it all
dissolved into water, vapor away the Vinegar, and there will remain a stone
blackish of color, which take forth of the glass, and grind it to powder,
then dissolve it in ^^ctified Aqua vitae, and then shall be finished the
solution of Iron Physically, the which thou may give safely when need shall
require, and chiefly against Fluxes of the body, against spitting of blood, the
Emeroids, Scabs, and also for the Leprosy, and Tissick, and Hectic. And this
is the true solution of Iron devised by me, and I promise thee, that this is
one of the greatest Secrets that may be found in the world: and his virtues are
such and so many, that I cannot express them. And therefore I would wish all
Physicians and Chirurgians, to follow this glorious enterprise worthy of
praise, by the which means men may come to great perfection in Physic and
Chirurgerie, if they can use it when time and place shall serve.

CHAP. CXVI. Of the Secrets of Mercury.
QUicksilver is a liquid Mineral and Volatile, the which the Alchymists call
Sulphur volatilis, and will accompany with all other Metals, but with small
fire they may be separated again, and will fly away in Fume, and for that
cause the Philosophers call it Servus fugitivus, as a man would say, it can
hold friendship with none, but so soon as he has done his service he flies
away, as it is seen by Goldsmiths that gild Plate. For when they have laid him
on with the Gold, they put it to the fire, and he flies away, and the like it
should do when any man does occupy him in any sort of infirmity, and the
order to calcine it is thus.

Take a long pot of stone that is very well glazed, and that has a neck of a
foot and a half long, and that has a very narrow mouth as is possible, and put
therein two or three pound of Quicksilver, then set the same pot in a Sallet
of Iron, and lute them close together, and set it upon a Furnace, and give them
fire according to Art, until the Quicksilver remain calcined; giving you
charge, that your head and receiver be very well luted, least you loose some
part of the Quicksilver; and thus in eight days it shall be finished, the
which shall be apt unto solution: Also this calcination serves to diverse and
sundry Medicines: It mortifieth corrosive Ulcers without any pain; the solution
is made in this order.

Take the said Calx, and put it into a glass with a long neck, and put thereon
distilled Vinegar, and set it in warm sand four and twenty hours, and then
give it one walm, and when it has boiled, pour out the Vinegar, and then if
there remain any Feces in the bottom, put thereon fresh Vinegar, and do as
thou did before; and this thou shall do so often, till it be dissolved
into water, and when all is dissolved, evaporate away the Vinegar, that there
remain but little in the bottom; then put thereto water of Honey made by
distillation according to our order; and so the solution of Mercury shall be
finished, the which is miraculous in many infirmities: It serves against the
Cough, Catarhe, and for those that have their stomachs putrified with the Pox,
causing them to use it with other Sirrups or Potions: It helps those whose
Milt is indurated; and also for those, that have any sort of Fistula in any
part of the body: It is also good for diverse other things, the which I will not
write in this place, because I would have other men to exercise themselves in
the practice thereof, whereby they may find out diverse other secrets as I have
done.

The virtue of this Balm.
IT preserves all things from putrefaction that is put therein, or anointed
therewith, as the natural Balm does in all respects.

If any be touched with the Pestilence, so that the heart or brain be not yet
infected, give them. ii. thereof to drink, and anoint his stomach with the
same, and lay him down to sweat, and in once or twice using it, by the grace of
God they shall be helped, for it will suffer no venom to remain within the
body: Being taken in the aforesaid order, it helps those that have surfeited
by any means.

Being anointed on the stomach morning and evening, it causes an appetite,
and consumes cold humors: Also if ye drink thereof every morning. i.
fasting, it will purge the head and stomach of all superfluous moisture, and
sharpeneth the sight, if ye drop now and then one drop into the eye.

Being drunk as is aforesaid, it helps those that are troubled with the
Rheum, Catarhe, and Cough, and Stitch of the side caused of wind.

Being put into the eat, it comfort the sight and hearing marvellously, and
all impediments in the head, and consumes all evil humors by his proper
quality and nature, so that if ye use it, ye shall wonder at the operation.

It helps all manner of Wounds, in what place of the body soever they be, if
ye wash them therewith, and lay thereon a cloth wet in the same.

If ye wash the Sciatica therewith, and lay thereon a cloth wet in the same,
it takes away the pain presently.

It expels gravel in the Reins, being drunk with Parsley water.

It is good against the Fever quartain, if ye drink thereof ten or twelve
days together every morning. i. or ii. after that the stomach has been
evacuated.

It resolves aches and swellings coming of cold, if ye bath them therewith.

It helps the toothache, if ye hold it in your mouth so long as ye may
suffer it.

It helps those that are troubled with the Cramp, or that have their mouths
drawn awry by that means, if ye drink a small quantity, and hold the same in
your mouth, and then anoint the parts therewith.

FINIS.

