THE ARMY, HARMLESS: OR, A dispassionat and sober discussion of the late and
present proceedings of the Army, under the Command of His Excellency, Sir
THOMAS FAIRFAX.

Wherein the equity and unblamableness of the said proceedings are
demonstratively asserted, upon undeniable principles and maxims, as well of
Reason, as Religion.

Matthew. 12. 3. 4. 5. But he said unto them, have ye not read what David did
when he was an hungry, and they that were with him; how he entered into the
house of God, and did eat the Shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat
(viz. in ordinary cases) neither for them that were with him, but only for the
Priests? Or have ye not read in the Law, how that on the Sabbath-daies the
Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath, and are blameless.

Plus Togae laesere Rempublicam, quam Loricae.
Tertul. Proteus non reddit Oracula, nisi alligatus.
LONDON, Printed for John Pounset, and are to be sold at his shop, at the Sign
of the Hand and Bible, at the lower end of Budge-row near Dowgate. 1647.

THE Army, Harmless. OR The equity and unblamablenesse of the Army under the
Command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, clearly and briefly
demonstrated and asserted, as well upon grounds of Reason, as Religion; with
all material objections Answered.
Upon the first greeting between me and this saying, That may seem manifestly
true to one man, Eadem poss^^t alteri manifest vera, quae alteri videntur,
manifest falsa.
which to another appears manifestly false. I was for a while, under some
demurre, what I should make of it, Treasure or Coals; the face, and first
interview of it, promised (me thought) somewhat more then ordinary; so that I
presently apprehended, there was either some weight and worth of truth in it,
or else some deluding notion of error, of dangerous consequence. But upon a
little recollection, and consideration had; partly, of many serious, (I wish
there were no ground to say sad) doings in the world; partly, of some things
which I had learned both from God and men, effectually persuading the truth of
it; I soon subscribed, and received it into the society of those
unquestionable principles and maxims, which are in many cases of difficulty
and obscurity unto others, the sweet, lightsome, and stable supports of my
soul. I could not (nor yet can) imagine how it should be possible for the
party of Presbyterian engagement amongst us (at least for many of them) to act
with that (...) and truculencie of spirit for their way, did they not conceive
it to be manifestly the best and most agreeable to the word of God. Nor can I,
on the other hand, judge, but that the persons, who suffer in that extremity,
which many do, and are like to do further, for their non-comportment with that
way, conceive, and judge the same to be manifestly sinful, and altogether
(taking the whole contexture and model of it) repugnant to that Word. And so
again, when I consider, what the Spirit of the most and only wise-God
affirms, saying, that Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
A gift does blind the eyes [even] of the wise, and perverteth the words [even]
of the righteous, (with much more of like import) and what knowing and
considering men frequently teach, in such sentences as these. (...). Plato
There is nothing sound in a servile soul, nor is it worthy a man of wisdom
to believe what such shall say. And again, (...). Hom.
Jupiter deprives men of half their wits or understandings, when he subjects
them in a servile way, to the will and power of others; with many other sayings
of like tendencie with these; when I consider (I say) the native and clear
consequences and issues of such assertions as these, wherein both God and men
agree, I fully and convincingly apprehend, how, and in what cases, it is very
possible, that men servile to their affections, and under the Command of
sinister and ignoble ends, may judge both such doctrines to be manifestly
false, and such practices manifestly unjust, which unto men, who know no
Interests, but those that are honorable, and of a fair and full consistency
with the public good of men, seem (and are, according to truth) the one
manifestly Sound, Orthodox, and True; the other, as manifestly righteous, and
no ways trenching upon the due rights, or regular Interests of any man.

. II.
Though unto me, and many thousands more in the Kingdom, the tenor of the
present and late proceedings of the Army is, not only unquestionably just, but
emphatically honorable also, and worthy men whose Sovereign engagements are,
to bless the world with whatsoever is theirs, with all they are able to do,
or suffer. Yet is it no offense unto me (nor I trust unto many others, though
sorrow and sadness of heart in abundance it be unto us) to hear and see, both
the persons and actions of these deserving men persecuted, with the the tongues
and pens of some others, as if the Heavens had declared against them and
written the iniquity both of the one, and the other, with a Sun-beame. The
knowledge of the cause causes as well the offense, as admiration, of the
effect to cease. Say we not well (said the unbeleeving Jews unto Christ) that
thou art a Samaritan and have a Devil? Ich. 8. 48.
Doubtless these Jews were as confident of Truth in these horrid Imputations,
which they cast upon the Lord Christ, as any Anti-Armists amongst us, of what
gown soever whether Sacred or Civil, can be of any such injustice or impiety
in the Army or proceedings thereof, whereof they accuse them both before God
and men, and that after the restless and importune manner of the Grand Accuser
of the Brethren, night and day, Rev. 12. 10*
yea and presumed they had as sufficient grounds for the averrement of their
charge, in the respective branches of it, as these can have to found any, or
all their fiery pleas against the Army upon. And yet as the Disciples of Christ
had sufficient grounds to judge their Lord and Master neither a Samaritan, nor
a man having a Devil, notwithstanding the confident charge of the Jews
against him in both, and by virtue of those grounds, were no ways troubled
hereat, or shaken in their faith: so may the Friends of the Army have (yea and
have, de facto) grounds and reasons in abundance, in the strength and pregnancy
whereof to triumph, not only over the importune See the eight Queries, and the
nine, and nine more added to them, lately published.
confidence of him, who in his heat seems to threaten the Kingdom, that as
many as will not be resolved by his Queries, that there is rebellion, treason,
repugnancy, as well to the Laws of the Land, as Privileges of Parliament, and
what not in the proceedings of the Army, shall be stigmatized as men unworthy
of their Nation; but likewise over all other colors, pretenses, semblances,
pleas, Counter-pleas, charges, challenges, arguments, insinuations,
accusations, adjurations, conjurations whatsoever, whereby the said proceedings
as hitherto they have bin tempered and carried on, either have bin, or can be,
impeached or defamed. And as the Disciples of Christ had so much the less
cause to suspect their master for any thing charged upon him by the Jews,
because his great Interest (which he prosecured home, and with all
faithfulness) was to oppose them in their ways of ignorance, pride, and
blood; so have the well-affected to the Army, far less cause to be jealous of
the innocence or integrity thereof, notwithstanding the many criminations, and
sore accusations levied against it, considering the principal Interest which
the Army drives, is to separate between those men, who now rise up so full of
indignation to oppose it, and their beloved lusts of oppression, tyranny and
domination, and that in such a (...) or juncture of time, when they were rising
up to take possession, and their hand stretched out to lay hold on the prey,
making no other account but that the bitterness of all opposition and prevention
had bin now past. It would be no marvel to hear an hungry Lion roar, in case
the prey were taken away from between his teeth. As the same son was a Ben-oni,
a son of sorrow to his mother (his birth threatening and soon after effecting
her death) who was a Benjamin, a son of the right hand unto his Father, Genesis
35. 18.
who expected strength and support by him; so is it no marvel if the same men,
be sons of deepest offense unto those who are like to suffer the loss of their
hopes by means of them, (no less happily then a constructive death unto them)
and yet sons of uprightness unto others, who have cause to expect (through the
blessing of God) light, and life, and strength, both for themselves and their
Nation, from their hand. And as the Name Ben-oni, which the mother in the
bitterness of her soul, gave unto the child we spoke of, soon vanished, the
child (as it seems) being called by this Name only by his mother; and this but
for a short season neither, whereas the Name of Benjamin which his Father gave
him, continued, and was the Name by which he was generally called and known,
whilst he lived, and is to this day: in like manner, it is not to be doubted,
but that also those Names of dishonor, unjust, unrighteous, disobedient,
rebellious, etc. by which the Army is called by the party agrieved at their
proceedings, will soon vanish and be forgotten; and that those appellations of
honor, valiant, wise, just, faithful, religious, denyers of themselves,
lovers of their Country, etc. by which they are known and called by their
Friends, will stand by them, and be a memorial to them and their proceedings,
throughout all Generations.

. III.
But that we may not seem only to cross affections with their adversaries, and
setup our love in terms of honor, against their hatred of them which utters
it self in words of disparagement, we shall be willing to close and join issue
with them in a sedate serious examination and debate of the cause it self, not
doubting but to make it more then to appear, that those who justify their
proceedings, do it not so much out of interest, or affection, or out of light
colorable pretenses, or passionate exclamations (such as are seldom wanting
wheresoever Interest and affection go, whatsoever the cause be, especially, if
reason be not at hand to protect it) but out of clear and solid grounds, and
such considerations which have no communion with any interest, passion, or
affection whatsoever, except it be with the love of evidence and truth,
together with all those pleasant and desirable things, which naturally flow
from these unto the world.

. IV.
First then, from that great and Sovereign Law, or ma^me of State, the
equity, or Authority whereof (I presume) was never yet questioned, or opposed
by any, I reason thus: Salus populi suprema lex.


If the safety of the people, be the saveraign and supreme Law, whereunto all
Laws, Customs, Privileges, Politic constitutions, interests of Princes and
Rulers whatsoever, ought to give place, then have the Army done nothing but
what is justifiable, yea, and what was their duty to do, in the things for
which they were accused by many.

But the safety of the people is the Sovereign and supreme Law, where^^^^ all
Laws, etc. Ergo. The Minor though for the (...) of the (...) of the earth deny
plainly enough in works, and many of their Parasites, in the consequentials of
many unsound Doctrines and positions which they assert: yet because I never
heard of any man that denied it face to face, we shall (for the present)
supersede the proof of it. The consequence in the Major Proposition, I argue
and debate thus. The Army in all they have done (I mean, in the matter under
contest) have no ways violated or transgressed that supreme Law, and
consequently have not transgressed any other Law subordinate to it, or
depending on it; and so are blameless. For in every combination or
subordination, whether of persons, or of things, no inferiors, or subordinate,
whether person or thing, can be injured, but that which is supreme or first in
either, must needs partake thereof, and suffer wrong also; yea, the truth is,
that the whole subordination, and that in every part or member of it suffers
wrong, whenever any one part or member of it so suffers: The meanest Subject
in a Kingdom or State cannot be injured, without injury and wrong done to the
Prince, or supreme Ruler of this State, so that if the Prince be not injured,
certain it is, that no subject under him suffered wrong. Thus then evident it
is, that if the Army have done nothing in way of violation of that supreme Law,
the Safety of the people, neither have they transgressed any other.

. 5.
That they have not transgressed that great Law we speak of, is evident,
because in what they did, they observed it and yielded obedience to it, they
acted for the safety of the people, what they did had a full and a clear
concurrence herewith* and tendency hereunto; The safety and well being of the
people of their Land, was now laid upon the Altar, ready to be offered up in
Sacrifice upon the service of some few men's lusts and interests; upon the sight
whereof they put their lives into their hand, and engaged themselves for the
rescue, what is, or reasonably may be objected against this Argument, the
Sequel will answer.

Secondly, From that great Law of Nature, which obliges 6*
every part or member of the body, to sympathize in taking the same care one of
another, and to act according 1 Cer. 12. 25.
to their best interests, division, and conjunction, for the preservation and
well-being of the whole, I reason thus.

If the Army were obliged to take care of, and to act according to their best
interests for the preservation and wellbeing of the body of the Kingdom, then
are they not at all culpable for acting according to the tenor of their late
and present proceedings.

But certain it is that the Army, as every other person and society of men in
the Kingdom, both were and are obliged to take care of, and to act according to
their best interests, for the preservation and well-being of the body of the
Kingdom.

Therefore they are not at all culpable for acting according to the tenor of
their late and present proceedings.

The minor Proposition in this Argument also is unquestionable; That which lies
as a duty upon every particular member, Corporation, or Society of men in the
Kingdom besides, doubtless rests upon the same terms, and after the same
manner on the Army also. For what can be imagined should make the difference?

The connection in the former Proposition, this consideration avoucheth for
Truth. The best Interest they had and that which was most, if not only,
probable to contribute any thing considerable toward the Preservation of the
Nation, from those devouring evilis of oppression, slavery, and blood, which
were now coming upon it like an armed man; was to keep themselves in a Body
and Posture of strength and power; the common interest of Petitioning, which
was wont to operate effectually toward the healing of grievances of People
with those upon whom they had cast the honor of making them their Physicians,
being now trodden and trampled under foot, yea cast into the fire and consumed
by the Physicians themselves. So that had the Army bowed down their backs to a
dissolution, they had divested themselves of that opportunity which both God
and men had put into their hand to save their Nation in a day of danger and
extremity; their disbanding (the present (...) and constitution of things in
the Kingdom considered) had been a constructive surrender and delivering up of
this Nation into the hand of a more cruel servitude and vassalage then ever it
served since it was a Nation, to this day. Never did a red and lowering morning
with more emphaticalness of presage, portend a tempestuous day; than the
burning of the humble addresses and requests of the people, coming from their
aggrieved and sorrowful souls, presage a season of tyranny and blood, coming
apace upon the Land, yea even at the doors. When petitions are burnt, the
Petitioners are no less then threatened with the fire. The heathen Poet said,
Offendunt nunquam thuro, precesque Iovem*
With Incense Jove was never incensed known,
Nor with the prayers of men bowing down.


Qui duro ducit vivos e Marmore vultus,
Non facit ille De^s: qui rogat, ille facit.
Who out of Marble living faces makes,
Makes yet no Gods; but he that supplicateth.

When great men are highly offended with poor people, only for making or
acknowledging them for Gods (I mean for presenting their petitions unto them)
does it not argue a most precipitate and unnatural inclination and disposition
in them unto a micanthropie, cruelty, and blood? If our A stronorners should
descry the jovial and pleasant luster of JUPITER, exchanged into the fiery and
menacing aspect of MARS

were it not enough to make them all turn Astrologers and Prophets of some
portentuous and formidable disaster coming upon the world: It is the demand of
an Heathen, (...). It water choaks men what can they drink with safety. If
petitioning, which is of all applications and actions the cleerest and most
innocent, and that by men to whom the petitioned, yea, and the whose Kingdom
also, under God, owe themselves, their lives, and beings; yea and unto men
whose present investiture and authority being interpreted, is (in one of the
main and primitive intentions of it) to receive petitions, and gra^^e
Petitioners; yea moreover, if petitioning to such men by such men, not for half
their Kingdoms, nor for any thing likely to strain either their (...), or their
bounty in point of condefcention, but only for their regular and known hire,
for that bread which they had dearly bought with their sweat and blood, and
such things as the petitioned themselves acknowledged to be due unto them: I
say, if petitioning on such terms, under such circumstances as these, did so
far work upon the brow of the petitioned, cast them into such an ecstasy of
indignation, as to declare to the whole world that they should look upon the
Petitioners as enemies to the State, unless they desisted; what innocence, what
moderation, what peaceableness, what subjection to laws, yea what tenor of
actions, lives, or conversations, could either the Petitioners, but especially
the rest of the people of the Kingdom, imagine should be able to protect them
against the unnatural, inhumane, and prodigious insolences of such men. When
innocence in conjunction with sovereignty and height of merit, shall be trampled
upon as clay and mire in the street, by men in power* what does it portend, but
the preparing of a yoke of iron for the neck of the Nation? Elian reports that
in one of the States of Greece, when the sheep of one Nicippus brought forth a
lion, it was Justly concluded that it portended a tyranny, and change of the
State, from a peaceable to a bloody government: so when fair, just, and
peaceable actions in inferiors, shall produce fierce, violent, and mennacing
oppressions and deportments in superiors, it is a sign fully demonstrative
that they are in travel with oppression, cruelty, and blood: yea and begin to
cry out to be delivered.

So then, there being these and many other most apparent symptoms upon the
Nation of a death of their liberties, and all their just rights and comforts,
approaching; and withal, there being no visible, no nor probable means to
prevent the coming and prevailing of this great destruction over it, but only
that interest of power and strength which yet remained in the Body of the Army;
in case the Army had divested themselves of this interest at the instance and
demand of those who demanded it, what had this (in due construction) bin, but
the delivering of that sword out of their hands, for the smiting of the Nation
with violence and oppression, which both God and the Nation it self (by their
Trustees) put into their hand, for the preservation and protection of it from,
and against these evils? Qui non vetat, peccare, cumpossit, jubet.

Thirdly, from one principal branch in that Covenant, which they solemnly swear
and covenanted both with God and men: I further argue,

If the Army promised, vowed, and protested in the presence of God (promising,
vovving, and protesting herein nothing but what was lavvful) to maintain and
defend, as far as lawfully they might, with their lives, powers, and estates,
the lavvful rights and liberties of the Subject, etc. then are they not to be
blamed, but honored rather as Covenant-keepers in their proceedings.

But this is the case, the Army did thus promise, vovv, and protest, and
therein promised, vowed, and protested nothing but what was lawful.

Therefore not to be blamed, but rather honored as Covenant-keepers in their
proceedings.

The former part of the Assumption is evident from the tenor of the first
branch of the Covenant, together with the known Act of the Army (at least of
the chief and greatest part of them] in taking it. The latter part is granted
by the Parliament themselves, and all those, who having taken the said
Covenant, do not repent thereof.

The Consequence in the Proposition is evident also upon this supposition, that
the Army in what they have done, have gone no further then lawfully they may,
to maintain and defend the lawful rights and liberties of the Subject.

The truth of this supposition is fairly demonstrable thus. That is lawful for
men to do: which upon good and warrantable grounds they judge necessary to be
done, for the procuring and effecting of that which by duty they stand bound
and obliged to do. That the Army stood bound in duty, and by the band of their
Covenant, to maintain and defend the lawful rights and Liberties of the
Subject, is evident, and above all contradiction. The grounds upon which they
judged it necessary to steer the course which they have hitherto held; partly
in not disbanding; partly in impeaching some members of Parliament in pursuance
of their Covenant, in the particulars mentioned, are these [with their fellows]
First, they clearly saw, and the world round about clearly sees, that the
lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, were not only threatened, or
assaulted, but sorely wounded and endangered also, [and consequently stood in
eminent need of maintenance and defence] havoc and spoil being made of them
from day to day; in burning their Petitions, and declaring those Enemies to the
State, who only petitioned, and that in a peaceable way, for what the
Parliament it self acknowledged to be just and equal to be granted unto them:
besides the numerous Arbytrarie and illegal, yea causless and reasonlesse
imprisonments of the persons, sequestrations of the estates, and many grievous
and unjust molestations otherwise, of the freeborn subjects of the Nation. The
Civil Law says (and not without ground) That he which has hurt one, has
threatened many: and by the rule of proportion it may be as truly said, that
they who have hurt many, have threatened all.

Secondly, They clearly saw and understood, that there was no visible, nor in
any degree probable means now left unto the Nation, for the maintenance and
defense of the said lawful RIGHTS and LIBERTIES of the Subject, but only that
Interest which was vested in them, being yet an Army, and an united body. The
prevailing party of those men, who EX OFFICIO and according to the ducture and
engagement of the great Trust reposed in them, should have asserted these
RIGHTS and LIBERTIES, had turned head upon their Trust, and judgment into
WORMWOOD; and had not only laid their foundations; but being active in their
way, made no small progress in building up themselves and their own exorbitant
Greatness, in the ruins of the RIGHTS and LIBERTIES of the people, (as has
been showed) Yea, by the lawless Law of Prerogative and Privilege conspiring
together, had now the see-simple of those places, and that power settled upon
them; by the advantage of which, they might have done not only what they
pleased (and what this is, and was like to be, they have resolved us without
putting it to the Question, by their actions) but whilst they pleased also;
and this without any bridle of fear in their lips of being countable unto any
for whatsoever they should do. So that now the Army was the only SPES GREGIS,
the sole hope of recovery, under God, to the drooping and dying freedoms of
this Nation.

The Army could not but apprehend, that had they willingly walked after the
Commandment of those, who required their disbanding, and not stood fast by
their Interest of union and power (at least for a season) they had been like
water spilt upon the ground; or (in the Prophets comparison) like unto a
Potters Vessel, so broken in pieces, that there would not have been found in
the bursting of it, a sheard to take fire from the harth, or to take water
withal out Isa. 30. 14.
of the pit. * they had been wholly unusefull and unserviceable to that great
Interest of the Nation, the maintenance and defense of the lavvful Rights and
Liberties of the Inhabitants thereof: and so had deprived the Kingdom of all
hope (yea and possibility in an ordinary way) of receiving their dead
(Liberties) raised to life again; * the soft breathing of which Heb. 11.
hope, is now of more value and refreshing to the Nation, then all the silver
and gold that is in it, and all the Treasure besides.

Fourthly, It is no whit less then evident, that they who made trial of a
pretended or imaginary right to dissolve and scatter a real power, in the
disbanding of the Army, (for no person nor persons of what capacity soever,
have any power, either to act, or to enjoin any thing destructive to the lawful
Rights of any man, much less of a Kingdom) no ways intended to ease the Nation
of the burden of an Army; but only to cast down and make a plain of that
mountain of men which stood in their way, and obstructed their passage to that
Lordly paradise of a perpetual and unaccountable domination, the figure whereof
they had taken up and committed folly with in their imaginations. As for the
Nation, the case is plain enough, that their intent was, to take off the weight
of the little finger of the Army, that they might gain an opportunity instead
thereof, to lay the weight of their own Loins upon it.

Fifthly, (and lastly for the impeaching of the members) supposing their
guiltiness, or be it but a strong presumption of Truth, in those high
mis-demeanours, which are now charged upon them (beneath which their greatest
Friends (I presume) and Confederates cannot favor* them) the Army had reason
in abundance to lift up their hand to this expedient also. Because first, Had
not this salt been cast into the Parliamentary fountain, the bitter waters
thereof could not have been healed; nor reduced to any such sweetness, that the
Families of the Kingdom might with comfort and safety drink of them. It was no
ways likely that ever this fountain would have purged or clarified it self,
as natural Fountains being royled and muddy, sometimes do: because the mudde
and filth that was in it, was in so great a quantity, and so compacted withal,
that the vent or issue, through which, being open, the fresh waters
successively springing and rising up, should have wrought the cure, was hereby
obdurated, damm'd, and quite stopped up. Secondly* There was none other hand in
the Kingdom, but only the valiant and dreadlesse hand of the Army, that
probably durst, or however, could with that Authority or hopefulnesse of
success, lift up it self to so great and honorable an attempt as this. He had
need of the strength and courage of Sampson, that shall take a Lion by the
beard. And to say to a Junto of Parliamentary Grandees, ye are wicked; requires
an Army at least in the Reere.

Now whether the grounds mentioned be not fully warrantable and sufficient for
the Army, to judge that course which they have steered, necessary for the
performance of that great duty, the maintenance and defense of the LAWFVLL
RIGHTS and LIBERTIES of the SVBJECT, which by solemn VOW and COVENANT, they
stood bound to perform* and consequently whether justifiable and lawful, I
leave to the Judgments and Consciences of their greatest Adversaries to
consider; and upon consideration, either to build them up by an ingenuous and
free subscription, or by a clear and solid refutation, to cast them down.

That which is, or indeed can be objected against the premises is of little
value, and very opportune for satisfaction.

1. The Army with their proceedings, are burdened with disobedience to
authority, and resistance against the higher powers, in refusing to disband,
upon an Ordinance of Parliament, I answer.

1. The Army did not, neither yet does absolutely refuse to disband, and that
in submission to Parliamentary Authority. They only desired, that their
disbanding might be respited for a time; and have humbly offered their grounds
and reasons of this their request, unto the Parliament. A Servant is not
therefore unfaithful or disobedient to his Mr. if now and then upon occasion,
and due consideration had of the nature, or consequence of some command which
he shall receive from him, he shall for a while suspend his obedience, and
submissively debate with his Mr. either the equity or expediency of his
command, especially in order to his own affairs. Ioab was never charged by any
man with dissobedience unto David, though a King, and that of divine
designation, and this in an extraordinary way too, because he did not presently
upon his Command, and without dispute, go and number Israel and Judah, the
Scripture is plain, that Ioab did argue and reason the case with his Lord and
Mr. the King, before he would submit to his Command: and how happy a thing it
had been both for the King himself, and his Kingdom, if this Command of his
had never been obeyed, the sequel of the story sufficiently manifests.

2. Neither is all disobedience to superiors, or men in authority, a
disobedience to authority, or to that higher power, wherewith such persons are
lawfully invested, the lusts or arbitrary desires or wills of men in authority,
are no part of their authority; for certain it is, that neither God, nor men
ever gave unto rulers, or men in authority, any authority or power to do
whatever they list; but only that which upon good grounds they judge to be
just, and expedient for the weal and safety of the people under them, so that
it no way follows that because the Army has not obeyed the persons of men
sitting in Parliament, and invested with Parliamentary power, therefore they
have not obeyed Parliamentary authority. Though, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abe
dnego, changed the Kings word, or command, Dan. 3. 18. 28.
refused to obey it, yet did not they resist his authority, or if they did, the
King himself soon after blessed God for it.

3. There are many Commandments of God himself though unquestionably lawful
and good (for such are all his Commands) a nonperformance whereof
notwithstanding in some cases is very lawful, and free from offense. It was a
just and righteous Command of God that Aaron and his Sons only, and not
strangers should eat of the holy things Exodus 29. 32. 33. Levit. 24. 29 Mat.
12. 4.
and particularly of the Shewbread; yet David and his men, though they were
none of Aarons Sons, in a case of necessity, eating of this bread, are
acquitted by our Savior himself, from sin in so doing, In like manner the
Command or law concerning the strict observation of the Sabbath, was a just and
holy and good Law: Yet Christ himself out of the Law, pronounces the Priests
blameless, though prophaining the Sabbath, though they did that which was
contrary to the letter of the Command concerning the Sabbath, as it related
unto, and obliged the generality of men. So then, if the Commands of God which
are unquestionably just, holy, and good, and of universal expediency unto men,
yet as occasion and circumstance may be, may very lawfully, and without the
least touch of sin be transgressed, much more may the Commands of men,
especially such Commands, the equity and expediencie whereof for public good
are very dubitable, upon just occasion, and in due order to some important
good, be disobeyed, not only without such height, and heighnousnesse of guilt,
as the passionate, but withal rediculous exclamations of many import to be
contracted to the Army; but without any touch or tincture of guilt at all.

4. And lastly, as the saying is that there is no general rule but has its
exception, one or more; so there is no ordinary or standing Law, but must give
place, and yield obedience to that Law, which is the Law of Laws, the Law of
necessity; when this speaks, it is like a King upon his Throne, against whom
there is no rising up; all other Laws must keep silence before it, and bow
down to it as their Sovereign. It is true, this law when it speaks,
commonly troubles the world; by turning the accustomed and settled course of
things in it upside down. The voice of it sometimes is like the roaring of a
Lion, which makes the beasts in the Wilderness to tremble, but herein it
makes some kind of recompense, it troubles not the world often, it but
seldom interposeth, to the prejudice, or non-observance of standing Necessity
is by the Jews called lex horae 1. the law of an hour and by others lex
temporis the Law of the times. Davevant Detrem. p. 191. Necessitas enim tollit,
and evertit omnes leges: mio nulla habet legum vinculae luth. T. 2. wittenb. P.
376. Necessitas tollit legem necessitas inducit privi legium. etc.
Laws; yea and when it does interpose, the rule and Kingdom of it soon has
an end: like to the tempestuous winds, which (as some Mariners have observed)
sometimes blow upon the Coasts of the Island Brava, whose only praise it is,
that they continue not above an hour, but within this time they commonly
change all the points of the compass. Necessity (says Luther) takes away and
overturnes all Laws; yea it has no band or tie of any Law or Laws upon it.
And such sayings as these. Necessity takes away the Law, Necessity brings a
privilege with it, etc. are very common in the civil Law. And though the
Jews, especially in their doctrinalls, were very strict and rigid for the
observation of their Sabbath, yet it is a known rule amongst them, that
Periculum, vitae pellit Sabbathum, 1. danger of life drives away the Sabbath.
But the saying of Iunius a late learned Divine, is very memorable to this
purpose. This (says he) belongs to como^n Law and equity, that unto
extraordinary evils, extraordinary remedies must also be applied. It were easy
to multiply both rules and examples, out of the best approved Authors, to
justify the doing of many things in cases of necessity, which out of such
cases are unlawful, as being contrary to ordinary Laws, and standing rules.
So then, the Law and Command concerning obedience to Magistrates and Rulers,
being an ordinary and standing Law; it is, and ought to be subject to the Law
of necessity, neither ought any man, or any society of men in or for his
obedience to this to be judged culpable, or any ways delinquent, though it be
with disobedience to that other. Therefore it no ways follows. The Army have
disobeyed the Commands of their Superiors, therefore they are not censureable
as evil doers. But

Secondly, it is like it will here be yet further objected and said. Yea but
who shall Judge of a case of necessity? if inferiors and they that are under
government, and ought to obey shall be allowed to Judge, and to determine of
cases of necessity, it is like, that whenever the commands of their Superiors
do not please them, or suit with their ends or desiers they will pretend and
plead Necessity in way of bar to their Obedience And so the Ordinance and law
of Maiestracy, will upon the matter be made void, and of no effect, and then a
Chaos and confusion of Anarchywil soon overspread the world. In the present
case, the Patliament who is the most competent Judge, if not the only Judge of
a case necessity especiallyin order to the public good and welfare of the
estate and Kingdom, did not apprehend any necessity at all. for the Army to
deny their obedience and subjection to their ordinance and command for
disbanding; and is it lawful for inferiors, and by name for the Army to
oppose the judgment of the supreme Iudicatory of the Kingdom, espesially in a
case of such a referrence and import as that? To this also I answer. 1. in
general. 2. in particular.

First, for cases of necessity they are for the most part very easy to be
judged and discerned, men's senses usually informing their understandings when
they fall. When David and his men were an hungry, and saw no possibility of
being supplied, or relived otherwise (suppose them all persons of far less
understanding then they were) they were and had been (ever under such a
supposition) the most competent, and best quallified Judges in the world of
that case of necessity which was now in upon them, viz. to do that in eating
the Show-bread which in other cases was not lawful for them to do. By the way,
this instance concerning David, and his men, being made a Booke*case by Christ
himself, clearly proves that extremity of hunger, is a real and authorized
case of necessity; and consequently priviledgeth those that are under it,
whilst it continues upon them, from subjection to such Laws, which oppose the
relief of it, and whereunto they are, and ought to be subject, at all other
times. And if hunger, though but of one or of a small number of men, be
warranted by Christ, for a case of necessity, and as a dispensation from an
ordinary and standing Law; much more are the like, and especially greater
concernments of greater numbers of men, to pass in our judgments for cases of
like nature name and import.

Secondly, though some may pretend and plead a case of necessity where none is,
to exempt themselves from some laws or commands, which they have no mind to be
subject unto (who are justly punishable upon sufficient evidence of their
dissimulation) yet this is no competent ground or motive to deny a lawfullnesse
of power unto mea in general, to judge of such cases of necessity, whereof
they are capable by principles of common sense, and ordinary understanding.
Though many are hipocrites in Religion, and profess they believe in God, when
they do nothing less, yet this is no reason to interdict any man, either the
trial or judging of his faith, or the profession of it. when indeed he has it
and does believe.

3. Though men in places civil Judicature and Magistracy be ordinarilyand in
the general the most competent Judges of such cases of necessity which are of
public Interest and concernment: yet first, considering what was said toward
the beginning viz. that a gift (and consequently any thing of like influence
and operation upon the heart of men* as vehement desiers, and hopes of
irregular and undue injoynments in anykind etc) blinds the eyes of the wise,
and pervert the words of the righteous; 2. The richly testified and long
approved integrity of others, who though (happily) not vested in any place of
civil authority, yet are men of sound judgment and ofexecellent abilities to
discern in many cases the dijudication of such an interest we speak of, as far
more competent and proper for some private men, then for those that are above
them in Authority and power. When a man not suffsiently acquainted with the
way. which he is to Travail, shall hier, and take a guide along with him* who
knows the way, to direct him, though in this case it be ordinarily more
regular and rational, for such a man to follow his guide, and to be directed
by him; yet in case his guide falls blind by the way, he is fitter from thence
forth to be his own guide, and to follow the dictates of his own eyes and
judgment, then to be led along, happily into ditches and precipices by a blind
man,

Or suppose a wise and discret woman, should join her self in marriage to a
man of worth, and considerable ability: though it were most agreeable to the
will and law of God, and to the principles of natural order and reason, that
this woman should obey and be subject to the counsels and directions of such
an husband, whilst God shall please to keep him sound in his intellectuals; Yet
in case God shall take of the Chariot wheels of this man's reason and
understanding and smite him with ^ frenzy or madness, in this case, it is
more meet that the husband though naturally the head, should follow the
council and directions of the woman, though more generally the weaker vessel,
then that the woman being discreet and sober, should be dispesed off, or
concluded by the will or commands of the man. It is a true observation and
saying of Bazil, (...): (Lib. D Spiritu fancto cap. 20.) that is according to
the order and course of nature, that which is wise or prudent is to order, and
rule. So that in case a person, one, or more advanced to the place of
Magistracy and civil power, at first judged upright, and capable of the things
appertaining to his place* and to the public good by those who advanced him,
shall in time so far degenerate, and become unlike himself, that either by
bribery, covetousness, ambition and impotency of desire of arbitrary
domination, or the like, he suffers his eyes to be blinded, and loses his
habit or principle of discerning matters of public concernment: in such a case
private men, yea the generallity of men are more competent judges of their
common concernment then he, And as the Lord Christ in that saying, If the blind
lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch. Matt. 15. 14.
gave men a piercing Item in their spiritual affairs, to seek for eyes of
their own wherewith to find out themselves, and to be able to judge of the
ways of life, upon a supposall that their leaders would sometimes, if not very
frequently, prove blind, in which case, unless themselves had eyes to see, and
should walk accordingly, they would certainly perish for ever: so is it in
men's temporal and civil affairs proportionably: If the blindlead the blind.
If blind Magistrates shall lead a blind people, or a seeing people, (for there
is no difference in case the one be led as well as the other by the blind) if
the people* (I say) whether blind or seeing shall subject themselves without
due examination and trial, to whatsoever their blind Rulers, whether in
pretense, or in reality of intention (for their is no difference in the case we
speak of) shall command them to do in order to their peace; they run an iminent
hazard of falling into the Political ditch of external misery and ruin. Nor
is their much question to be made, but that men are in every whit as much
danger of being led by the blind, in their politic and civil concernment as
in their spiritual: The bench and throne affoording commonly more dust to
blind men's eyes, then the Chair or Pulpet. But

Fourthly, Suppose Rulers and Judges, should be men of integrety (for the
maine) yea and for wisdom and understanding in their appropriate affairs, men
not much, lower then Angels of God, yet we know the common saying humanum est
errare, men have nothing more incident to them then error and mistake: and this
many times in matters of very material consequence both to themselves and
others, yea the wisest of men have their turbidaintervalla, and now and then
dead flies are found in their Ointment. David was a man after Gods own heart
for uprightnes and sincerity and had a very rich anointing also of the spirit
of wisdom and understanding; Yet we know the time was, when he commanded, and
that with much importunity and vehemence of contest, that which was of very sad
consequence, both to himself and many thousands of his people: the evil
tendency of which command, though himself for the present apprehended nothing
of, yet was it as it seems resented by Ioab a soldier and General of his
Army, who contested with him a while for a reversal of it. If then Rulers and
Governors though men of cleerest both hearts and parts, may sometimes, through
incogitancy, or weakness of judgment or by reason of some present over*
shaddowing with some corruption, temptation or the like, command such things to
be done, which have a direct and clear tendency to the puplique prejudice and
damage of that state and people who are subject unto them, and this
discernable to private men who are standers by: ought not these men to judge,
and speak what they see, and believe in these cases, yea and to charge the
commandments of their Rulers, rather then to obey them both to their owns
prejudice, and the prejudice of many millions of men, whose wealth, and safety
they stand bound in conscience with the best of their interests, and endeavors
to procure. It Christ does not only allow the generality of Christians to try,
examine, and judge, of the Doctrines of their teachers, if they be able; but
injoynes them (as we heard) at the peril of their souls to vest in themselves
such an ability, by which they may be able so far to discern and judge of
their Doctrines, as to determine whether or no their teachers be blind or
seeing, admonishing them further if they be blind, at no hand to be led by
them, for fear of falling into the ditch doubtless, he allows (at least)
the generallity of men, a right and interest of judgeing and discerning, if
they be able (and what should hinder of being able to acquire a faculty of
judging temporal and civil things, when Christ himself supposes them
capable of obtaining an ability to judge of spiritual and heavenly things) the
politic Doctrines. 1. the Injunctions and Commands of their civil Rulers: and
if he allows them to judge and determine of them, whether they be truly
politic, and consistant with the public good and safety, or no, certainly,
he allows them withal, either to obey, or disobey according as upon good
grounds, they shall judge them to be.

It is like it will be here replied and demanded.

Yea, but by what rule shall inferiors judge of the Commands of their
Superiors? Or by what Character or mark, shall such Commands which may
lawfully be disobeyed, be so clearly distinguished from such others, which are
necessary to be obeyed, that the conscience of him that obeys not, may be
secured in peace, in, and under his non-obedience? I answer.

First, the conscience of the inferior who disobeyeth, may upon every whit as
clear, and satisfactory terms, be secured, concerning the lawfulness of his
non-obedience, as the conscience of the Superior, concerning the lawfulness
of his command. Nay, of the two, there are more snares and temptations upon the
superiors to impose unrighteous Commands, then upon the inferior to
miss-judge or mistake, those which are righteous for unrighteous* The Superior
is in little or no danger at all (I mean in respect of any civil punishment or
sufferings, if he judges any command of his whatsoever unjust, refusing
accordingly to obey it: yea he is in danger of suffering both from God and men
in case he mis-judgeth any such command upon such terms, so that there is
nothing so much danger, that the inferior himself should mis-judge his
superiors command, as that the superior himself should mis-judge it, and so
sin in the proposal of it.

Secondly, Were it to be granted, that the Inferior who is to obey runs some
hazard of mistake, when ever he judges and concludes any command of his
superior to be unjust: yet, 1. the superior runs the same (or a greater)
hazard, (as has been said) whenever he judges that which he commands to
be just; so that if the possibility or a danger of a mistake, in the inferior,
be a ty or engagement upon his Conscience, to forbear any act of judgment at
all about the command of the superior: the same of greater possibility or
danger in the superior must oblige his Conscience also from imposing any
command at all upon the inferior, and consequently, all both commanding and
obeying should cease from the world, and the interest of Magistracy and
government wholly be dissolved. 2. As the inferior shall run a hazard of
mistake, whenever he shall judge it righteous: it being every whit as
difficult clearly to determine what is righteous and just, as what is
unrighteous and unjust, so that if the danger of a mistake, in judging the
command of his superior to be unjust, be an engagement upon his conscience, to
forbear all such judgment, by the same rule, and upon the same ground, he
should never judge any such command to be just neither: in which case all his
obedience must needs be sinful, as not being performed in faith: 1. Out of a
knowledge or wel-grounded persuasion of the lawfulness of it. But

3. Evident it is, that in some cases there is no danger at all, no hazard run,
in judgeing the commands of superiors, unlawful: no not when the superiors
themselves shall be most confident of the lawfulness of them: Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednigo ran no danger of a mistake, when they judged the command
of King Nebuchad-nezar, for the worshipping of his golden image, to be unlawful
and unjust: and yet the King himself (as appears by the story) yea and all his
Nobles, were violently confident of the equity and justness of it. Nor did
Daniel run hazard of a mistake, when he judged the command of Darius his
Prince and Councillors, that no man for thirty days should ask any Petitions
of any God, or man, but of the King only, to be unjust: though it is no ways
like, but that at least the major part of them, judged it very reasonable and
just. That mixed Assembly of Rulers and Priests (Act. 4. 5. 6.) were confident
more then enough, that they did well, in commanding Peter and John, to preach
no more in Christ's name, (verse. 17. 18.) yet the men ran no hazard at all of
mistake in refusing to obey it, as unjust. So by the way, it no ways follows.
The Parliament it self, (at least the major part of it* judged their Ordinance
or Command for the present disbanding of the Army, to be just: therefore the
Army sinned, or ran a hazard of sinning, in refusing to obey it accordingly. But

4. In case the inferior should at any time mistake, in judgeing some command
of his superior unlawful, having conscienciously used compitent means for his
due Reformation, and judging of it as he does, in the simplicity of his heart,
not out of any sinister end, or respect as neglect of Magistracy, etc. yet such
a mistake, with the new obedience accompanying it, is a far less offense, much
more pardonable or excusable, then either the swallowing down of all commands
whatsoever from superiors without examination, and much more then his
subjection to this or any other command against judgment and conscience would
be: so that though a non obedience in an inferior upon such a mistake, as was
now discribed in the command of his superior, be not simply justifiable or
lawful, yet it is comparatively justifiable, being a far lesser sin, supposing
the invinciblenesse of the error, or mistake, by ordinary means, then the
contrary, yea then any other department would be mistakes upon diligence, and
reasonable m^^ns conscientiously used for the prevention of them, as they are
the frequent, so are they the lightest mis-carryings of the Saints, and least
obnoxious to the displeasure of God.

5. (And Lastly for these) There are these three characters and symptoms very
incident (amongst some others) to the commands of superiors, which being found
upon them, render and declare them manifestly unjust, (in which case the
inferior runs little or no hazard in judging them accordingly) First, When
they are calculated and formed with a peculiar and clear antipathy to the
comforts and peace of such as are religious, and withal peaceable in that way
of Religion wherein they worship God. This is one character of an unjust
command. It is not material in this case, whether the superiors we speak of or
others void of Religion, know who are Religious (...). That may be clear and
manifest to Religious persons themselves, which is either unknown or doubtful,
unto others. Secondly, When such commands smile upon the interests of the
Commanders themselves, or any prevailing party or faction of them, as upon
their profits, pleasures, honors, powers, etc. and withal lowre and frown
upon the ease and accomodations of the comminalty of the people under them.
This is another manifest character or sign of their injustice, easy enough to
be discovered. Thirdly, (and lastly,) When they have strong and pregnant
conjunction, in point of conversallity, whether privative or possitive, with
any such design, whether real, or justly suspected, which tends either to the
enslaving of the generallity of the people, or to the extinguishing and
defeating of their just rights and liberties; and withal, have no connection at
all, with any imaginable benefit or good, of equal consideration unto the
people. This also is a pregnant character of injustice in such commands.
Suppose there be no such design as we speak of really intended, as for the
enslaving of a free people (or their liberties) yet if there be any strong
presumption (much more i^ many) that there is indeed such a design intended,
so that there is a great Jealousy and fear of such a thing, generally fallen
upon the people, yet in this case, for superiors, especially those who are
most suspected for contrivers and drivers on of such a design, to command such
a thing, which has a palpable and notorious consistency, with such a design
in case it be intended, and withal but a faint and slender connection,
especially if none at all, with any proportionable benefit unto the people, is
at least even in the best and most innocent tendency of it, to torment the
people with fears and Jealousy, which is unjust for these to do, whose interest
of duty is, to be Nurfing Fathers unto them: and though there be no
demonstrative, or Logic sentence, that such or such a command as we speak of,
coming from a person, one or more suspected, of the design specified; has a
real conjunction with such a real design, yet if there be a political or
moral certainty, which stands in strength and pregnancy of probability and
presumption, this is sufficient to clear and justify, as well the judgment,
as the practice of those; who judging the said command to be unlawful and
unjust, shall accordingly yield obedience to it. It is well observed by
Aristotle, that a considering man ought only to require and be content with
such Arguments and proofs, as the nature of the subject under consideration,
whatsoever it be, will bear and admit. From Mathematitians we may expect close
and exact demonstrations, because the subject of this science will bear it;
but from Orators, or men handling political, and moral matters, we ought to
be satisfied with probabilities, and topique arguments; because the nature of
such subjects as these, will not admit of regular and perfect demonstrations.
Suppose a person, one or more, have a real intention to destroy or enslave a
nation? it is not lightly possible for any other man possitively and with a
Mathematical evidence, or certainty of knowledge to affirm it, until it be
effected, and then it is too late to prevent it. Therefore when there is a
grand probability before us, a result of many circumstances, strongly inducing
a belief of such an intention, it is sufficient to build any such practice or
engagement upon, which is necessary for the prevention of it. Thus in general
for answer to the main objection and demand last propounded.

For the particular I shall need to add little, all circumstances relating
hereunto, being generally known unto this Kingdom. The command for the
dis-banding of the Army, being contrived and procured by, and coming from such
persons (though happily in conjunction with others) who are strongly, and upon
grounds wel-nigh irresistible, suspected of a machievation or design
destructive to the peace, lawful Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom; and
moreover, the said command notoriously comporting with such a design as
directly tending to break in sander that bar of Iron which only obstructed the
birth and execution of it; and yet farther, having no compliance at all with my
considerable or proportionable good unto the nation: and yet more, being so
exactly bent against, and levelled at the faces of such as are really
conscientious and religiously peaceable in the Land; to whom the Army by reason
of their union and power, were a little Sanctuary, and as that shadow of a
Rock in a weary Land. These things laid together, and duly considered cannot in
the eye of any reasonable or dis-ingaged man but abundantly, and with honor
acquit and vindicate the Army in what they have done, though ten thousand angry
and impertinent Querents more, should be levied against them, to attempt the
avilement and abasement of those to whom the God of heaven has said, Be ye
honorable amongst men.

As for that which is wont to be objected, touching breach of privilege of
Parliament, it is of no consideration or comparison with the objections already
answered; and besides, there is abundantly sufficient in the premises, to cut
the sinews of any such objection. Though privilege of Parliament, really
such, and not simply but truly so called, be truly honorable and little
less then the light, and life, and strength of the freedom of the nation: yea,
no man as yet has, nor whilst I live shall take away this crown from my
head, of being cordially zealous in the defense and maintenance of them; yet
are they not of equal consideration with the holy Laws, and righteous
commands of God. Therefore if these may, and ought notwithstanding the jealousy
of God over them, sometimes want that obedience and subjection from men, which
in ordinary cases is most due unto them, much more ought the privilege of
Parliament, notwithstanding any sovereignty of great (...) in them, how down
at the feer of that sovereign and supreme Law, (...) Solus populi, the safety
of the people, which certainly is above all Parliaments and Parliament
privilege whatsoever. Yea, it is a truth unquestionable, that nothing that it
sinful, nothing that is inconsistent with the honor, peace, safety, just
rights or liberties of the people, can for ever be, or make a privilege of
Parliament. And whilst men act in a due and cl^er concurrence with this great
Law, the safetye of the people unpossible it is that they should entrench or
make the least breach upon any privilege of Parliament whatsoever. And whether
the Army have thus acted or no, I am freely willing to leave to the judgments
and consciences of all those who have diligently read, duly considered, and
retain in memory what has been argued in their behalf in their papers, to
judge and determine. There may be (I confess) some other things of lighter
moment objected against their proceedings* unto which, though these have not
been given an answer in the letter, yet confident I am* that there is none of
them all able to stand before that spirit that has spoken, and yet speaks in
the premises.

The God of all grace and glory, continue the Parliament in a full and
peaceable inioyment of all their privileges and honor; make straight that
which is croocked, sweet that which is bitter, righteous that which is unjust,
peaceable that which is troublesome, holy that which is profane amongst them;
leaving nothing in their Assembly that may offend either the eyes of his own
glory, or the minds of the sober and well-affected people of the Land. The same
ever blessed God, who is the Lord of hosts, vouchsafe still to delight in that
Army in which he has greatly delighted hitherto, and out of the midst whereof
he has looked, as sometimes he did out of the cloudy and fiery pillar, when he
took off the chariot wheels of the Egyptians, and caused them to drive
heavily: whilst they were in hot pursuit of his people Israel, direct them in
all their counsels, give them a pattern from the mount, to make and form all
their proceedings by; keep them in righteousness, peace, and honor, and make
them an happy band in his hand to bind up a scattered and undigested Nation,
which scarce knows where to find a right end of it self, into a compacted and
well made up bundle of love, unity, and peace.



FINIS.

