Good and bad News FROM IRELAND.

CONTAINING, 1. A true and perfect Relation of the manner of the taking of the
Fort and Castle of Limerike, who has been besieged since a week before
Easter, till the yielding of the same, which was the 23. of June. 1642. 2. The
Mariner how, and upon what condition they yielded it. 3. Likewise good News
from other parts of the Province of Munster, relating the two particular
overthrowes given to the Rebels, by the English forces in those parts. 4.
Together with the death of Sir William St. Ledger, Lord President of Munster,
who dyed this month of June, and was buried on Friday was afortnight, to the
great grief and sorrow of all the English in those parts.


Which Relation was read publicly in the Honorable House of Commons,

LONDON, Printed this 13th of July, 1642. for Francis Coals.

Good and bad News from Ireland.
WHen he came first into the Castle there were 200, able men, 60. of them were
listed with Captain Courtney to be Warders, besides 28. of the old Warders,
and daily there came in more for safeguard, and so in all there were 300. able
men to bear Arms, and he verily believes there were men, women and children
300. more.

He says there was provision enough in the Castle brought in by the abler sort
at first, but the most part of them that were Warders had small store of
provision, being most of them men that had bin stripped by the Irish, and poor
Tradesmen that had little but from hand to mouth, and could not be suffered by
the Town to carry any thing into the Castle, but such as could be gotten by
favor and stealth.

He says there were in the Castle weapons for 200. men such as they were, but
not above sixty Muskets and Calivers that were serviceable, the rest were
Petronells, Pistolls, Carbines, brown Bills, and fowling pieces, three
Demy-canons, two Sagars and one Minion.

He says that ever since Shrove-tide the English were stripped, robbed, and killed
in the Town, and all Letters were intercepted that came to the English by the
Major, and many that came from the Lord President to Captain Courtney, and
sometimes the Castle people had liberty to go to the Market and bring
provision into the Castle, and anon they were hindered; all this while they were
making a chain thwart the River under the Castle, over against a place called
Mock-begger, the chain was made of long Aspine Trees fastened together with
linkes of Iron, one end on Thomonside fastened to two Mil-stones, the other end
to the Tower of the Key, the Castle perceiving that they intended to thwart the
River, and so to hinder any relief to come to the Castle by water, shot at
them, so for a time hindered them, but afterward it was set down. He verily
believes there was not above five or six firkins of powder, and some of that
very bad at that time, which was about five weeks since, then the Town shot
at the Castle, and presently as many English as were in the Town fled to the
Castle for safeguard of their lives, and brought no provision with them which
did much pester the Castle, and most of the rest of the English that stayed in
the Town turned Papists, and so had some kind of protection. Then there was no
quarter kept between the Town and the Castle, but shot past betwixt them
night and day, and some killed on both sides: In the Castle were killed one
Thomas Young, John Slegg, John Wethers, one Leonard, and a boy, several women
and children hurt and killed, the shot played so continually from St. Mary's
Church, and other parts of the Town, that none could stay in the Castleyard,
and some few days after the Castle perceived the Town to begin a Mine near
Saint Nicholas Churchyard, which they were in about three weeks, and the
Castle within Counter-mined, and met the enemy, and the Castle men were beaten
out by reason the enemies Mine was above the Castle Mine, so the enemy cast
down water upon them, and so the enemy came under the Bulwark, and there set
fire on the Timber that propt up the earth: within three days, part of the
Bulwark fell down.

There was another Mine within two pierch of that, upon the street, going from
Newgate to the Castle, which the enemy intended to bring under the Curtain,
next to the Bulwark, and with a counter-mine from the Castle was met, and the
enemy forced out by the Warders and some of the enemyeskild, and so that Mine
was destroyed.

There was another Mine began next to the Town Wall, which was intended to be
brought to the South plat-forme, and went not far with it, but the Water came
in upon them, and then they took another way Eastward to come under the other
Curtain, and brought in near the Curtain, but it is not yet fallen, but the
enemy has set fire to the underpropting, and certainly it will fall. He says
that there were 16. in the Castle went out at the Sally Port in the ni^gt
before the enemy had turned the Mine, and before the water came in and wrought
in that Mine a little hole, being not deep from the top of the ground, fell in
amongst them, and beat them back to the Mine mouth, possessed themselves of two
Iron Sakers, both of them being laden, the one they discharged, and the other
they cloyd the Touchhole with an Iron nail, and so forced to leave their
place, two of their ablest men being shot, William Manwaring shot in the thigh,
and afterward dyed; Robert Helmes shot in the Thigh, and is yet alive: and so
not seconded with aid they retreated, and came to the Castle, before the
Bulwark did crack, and before any fire was put to the Timber, that did
under-prop the wall. Garret Barey, and the Irish General, the Major sent to
Captain Courtney persuading him to yield the Castle, or else no Quarter.
Answer was returned that the Castle was kept for the King, and would not be
yielded. Then the General sent another Letter, advising them to yield, and
they should have Quarter, and go away with their wearing apparel. Answer was
returned to the General, that if they did aim at the Arms in the Castle, and
the goods that were there, they might get their lives if they could, for which
they were resolved to stand as long as breath lasted, whatsoever came of it;
for the Arms they resolved to take that course, that they should not be
serviceable for them, and to destroy their goods by fire: whereupon a parley
was desired, then Mr. Jones a Chaunler of Limrick, and Mr. Robert Lillies, were
sent up to them, and then in fine it was agreed between the General Major and
the Castle, and an oath taken for performing the conditions, the particulars
whereof he knows not: part was, That all should leave the Castle; and carry
their goods with them that were their own, but not other goods that were left
there, and their persons to be protected for foureteen days, and to be safely
conveyed to Cork, or Youghall: all this was concluded on Wednesday the one
and twentieth of June, 1642. But before the Castle was yielded, one part of the
Wall fell down, and about Wednesday following, at eleven of the clock, the
Irish General, the Major, the Lord of Muskrey, Baron of Loglemay, and all the
Irish Captains and Commanders came to the Castle, the gate being open to them,
and they had access to the Captain: what past betwixt them he knows not, but
the Colors were possessed by the Rebels: every one striving by much ado to to
carry away their goods, which they did, and then the captain went the same
night, and lay there, and the next day went into the Town again. He faith the
enemy has excellent powder, it gives but small Report, but drives a Bullt with
extraordinary force.

The powder is made in Town by Doctor Higgins, Nich. Sower, John Arthur, Fitz
John, and all St. Mary's, and St. John's Churchare dug up three or four foot
deep, for salt Peter, and some say they make 100. pound a week, some say less,
the certainty of it he knows not.

He says that John Beech the Gunner, charging of the Cannon, and putting the
powder, and some key shot, it fired at the mouth, killed the Gunner and three
more, and William Bentley, and three more blasted with the powder. He says
there was killed and dyed in the Castle first and last 220. men, women, and
children, buried in the Castle; most of them dyed of the Flux, and of-swelling
under their feet: Diverse came forth of the Castle very weak, and some dyed as
soon as they were forth of the Castle. He says, that when the Castle was
yielded up, there was but a Ferkin and an half of powder left.

The Bishop, Doctor Webb, being Bishop of Limrick, being in the Castle, dyed
the day before it was yielded up.

Sir William St. Ledger Lord President of Mnnster, dyed this month of June,
and was buried on Friday was a fortnight to the great grief and sorrow of all
the English in those parts.

Another Letter from Youghall the fourth of July, 1642.
Having this opportunity and some good news to communicate to you, I could not
choose but acquaint you, that upon Wednesday last a party of 500. Musquetters,
and 3. troops of Horse marched from the Camp of Duncrail into the County of
Limrick to Shandrum, where 2500 Horse and foot of the Rebels, quartered, whom
our men (dispersing their numbers) very valiantly assailed in their quarter,
but not before they were provided for them, for they had long before taken the
Alarm and had sent out a troop of their horse, and after that their whole
body, whom our men declined till they came into good ground and then made a
stand ready to receive them, but then they retreated to their quarter in the
Town, and ours advanced both Foot and Horse, they entertained a pretty
Skirmish with our foot, wherein we had 2. men lost and 8. hurt, at last the
Lord of Dungarvans troop, commanded by Lieutenant Carleton, observing that
they with guarded the entrance of their quarter, and not suddenly to be
relieved, flew in and forced it, whereupon as their manner is, fell to their
heels. and our hearse to execution for 2. miles space, until they came to a
wood, their common refuge, there fell of the enemy between 4. and 5. hundred,
we took one Captain, and 12. others of quality, 6. Ensigns, 6. drums, 2.
Bagpipes, 2. wagons, 120. Muskets and abundance of pikes, and some Ammunition,
we had only 2. Horses hurt, yesterday the Lord- Broghall with his troop. and
between 2. or 3. hundred Foot going to releeve Sir Richard Osbond who was in
great distress at his Castle, and was encountered by Sir Nickolas Welsh, (near
Cappa) with three troops and 6. or 8. colors of foot. after an hours
skirmish they fell into disorder, brake, and fled: Our men did execution upon
them until they got the wood to their shelter; they found 250. dead bodies,
took 40. Muskets, abundance of Pikes, some powder and bullets, and a great
deal of good cheer wherewith they intended tobe merry after they had wash
their hands in English blood we lost one only Gent: Mr. Maynard eldest son to
the Lady Maynard, whom we all much lament.

I rest your assured loving friend, Th. Moore.

FINJS.

