Thou see not whom: thou see, then do not say
That this is HE who cash a lump of clay
Without it is soul a man^ thou see ne^ more.
Nay, but the SHADOW of that lump what (...)
Of gifts and graces* what perfections rare*
Among ten thousand persons scatt'red are:
Gather in one, Imagine it to be
This SHADOWS substance and then say us HE. DT
G G sc^^t


bristodikai

THE OBSTRVCTOVRS OF JUSTICE. OR A Defense of the Honorable SENTENCE passed
upon the late KING, by the High COURT of JUSTICE.

Opposed chiefly to The Serious and Faithful Representation and Vindication of
some of The Ministers of LONDON.

As also to, The Humble Address of Dr. HAMOND, to His Excellency and Council
of War.

Wherein the Justice, and Equity of the said SENTENCE is Demonstratively
Asserted, as well upon clear texts of Scripture, as principles of Reason,
grounds of Law, Authorities, Presidents, as well Foreign, as Domestique.

Together with, A brief Reply to Mr. Jolm Geree's Book, entitled, Might
overcoming Right: wherein the Act of the Army in garbling the Parliament, is
further cleared.

As also, Some further Reckonings between the said Dr. Hamond and the Author,
made straight.

By JOHN GOODWIN.

But thou O God, shall bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody and
deceitful men, shall not live out half their days.

Psalm. 55. 23. Howl Fir Tree: for the Cedar is fallen.

Zech. 11. 2. And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was in
quiet: For So the former Transl. read it. (...) and Tr^mell* Post q^^^. ^.
after that.
they had slain Athaliah with the sword beside the Kings house.

2. Kings 11. 20. Fiat Justitia, and ruat Coelum.
Ad Generum Cereris, sine caede and sanguine, pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Juven. (...).
(...).
Hom. Odyss. LONDON, Printed for Henry Cripps, and Lodowick LLoyd: and are to
be sold in Popes-head-Alley. 1649.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE COMMONS of ENGLAND Assembled in Parliament.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THe Glorious God, who (as Elihu says) accepts not the persons of Princes,
Jo^. ^4. 19
has by your hand cast down the mighty from their seat: his next work (I
trust) will be the exaltation of those of low degree, by the same hand; I mean,
the redemption of this poor, afflicted, distracted, distressed, and long
oppressed Nation, out of all her troubles. I confess when I look upon the
manifold and grand discouragements, which you still meet with from the
unthankfulness of that People, with whose liberties, comforts, and well being
in every kind your soul daily is in travail, I apprehend great cause of fear,
lest your hands should hang down from the work, considering that the arm of
omnipotency it self contracted an impotencie when time was, from the
unworthiness of those, for whose sake it was otherwise ready to have lift up
it self gloriously. And he COVLD (^aith Mark, speaking of the Lord Christ,
being now in his own country) there DO NO MIGHTY WORK: M^^^ 6. 5.
the reason whereof is plainly expressed by another Evangelist, viz. because of
their unbelief. Matthew. 1^. ^^.
^. (by a metonymie of the effect put for the cause) because of the
frowardness and great averseness of their spirits, either to inquire after, or
to consider of, such things, which were proper and effectual, being duly
considered, to have raised a belief in them, that he indeed was their Messiah.
He COVLD DO NO mighty work for this People,.i. he had no mind, no desire (the
want whereof is an impotencie, ^s to action) to gratif^e so unworthy a
generation of men at so high a rate. Or else, He could do no mighty work, etc.
^. it was repugnant to the Law of that wisdom and righteousness, by which, as
God, he governs the world, for him to do any matters of that sacred import for
such men.

But he, who once by himself, could do no mighty work, for a careless,
froward, and thanklesse People, at another time by Moses, his servant, was able
and willing too, to bring water in abundance out of a rock for the preservation
of the lives of such men, and their cattle, whom Moses himself thought it no
wrong, to call Rebels. M^^^ ^^. 1^. 11.
As the Devil (whether through want of will, or of power otherwise* i^ not so
^a^^e to determine) is not wont to work those mischiefs in the world
immediately, or by himself, which he frequently works by the mediation of
Witches and other Instruments anointed by him for his service: so neither is
the glorious God pleased to act such matters of Grace for the children of men
with his arm unbared, which he is many times ready and willing to do for them,
when he has Agents at hand ( taken from amongst m^n) pleasing to him, and meet
to make a covering for his arm in reference unto such actions, Thus, whilst he
had Joshua, by whom to negotiate the affair (and so those Elders who had lived
with Joshua, and outlived him) he kept the people of Israel from Idolatry.
Josh. 24. 31.
Afterward he did the like by the hand of those Judges, whom he was pleased
(in a way more than ordinary) to raise up, and set over them; whereas still,
in the intervalls between Judge and Judge, which were sometimes larger, and
sometimes lesser, he suffered this People to turn aside after Idols. In like
manner, by the hand of the faithful High Priest ^^^^^ada, whilst he was in
being, he steered the young King ^^^sh in ways that were good; but his
Instrument and Steers-man failing him by death, he suffered this King to ruin
himself by groves and Idols. Esa 31 3.
Examples in this kind are no ^arities in Scripture. The 2 Chr. 24 ^^ 18.
hope I have that God has fitted you for a covering of complacencie and
delight to his own arm, in order to the lifting up of this poor Nation from the
gates of death, will not (I trust) make me ashamed.

I beseech you therefore know no discouragements after the flesh: Your enemies
ar^ m^n, and not God: and th^i^ horses flesh, and not spirit.* W^^^ the Lord
shall stretch out his hand, both he that helps your opposers, and he that is
helped, shall fall down, and they shall all fail tog^th^r. There is but a st^p
between those mountains, which magnify themselves against you, and their
melting down into plains. You know who it is, that only by touching the
mountains, makes them to smoke. If you value your selves by your selves, and by
your friends made of men, you estimate your hay and stubble, but forget your
silver and gold. The strength of the Almighty becomes yours only by-laying
claim to it, and dependence on it. How came Ch^mosh to be the god of the
Moab^t^s, or Ashtaroth, the god of the ^^donians? Did these relations acc^ue
unto them upon any other account, than merely their own choice of these
abominations to serve and worship them as Gods? If you shall choose out the God
of Israel from amongst all the gods of the earth, to serve and honor for your
God, you shall appropriate him to yout selves: he will not, he cannot deny
himself to be yours. And they who are circumspect and careful in the choice of
their God, may be secure about their enemies. If you had all the world your
enemies, yet had you but the dust in the balance, or the drop of the bucket to
oppose you: the greatness of your God swallows up all consideration of your
enemies into ^^ctorie, and makes them bread for you. Only take heed that you
profane not the excellency of your strength, either by fearing the faces of
men, or by crouching to the God of this world for any of his morsels. The glory
of the incorruptible God, is (as unto men) turned into the basest lie, into the
similitude of a dumb and dead Idol, when they who pretend to his service, shall
show themselves either fearful, or unjust. In either of these deportments
(much more in both together) men blaspheme the name of that God, whom they
serve (if indeed they serve any) either as defective in power, wherewith to
help them, or in goodness, which should engage this power for them, or in
both. A well built Confidence, and Conscience answerable to it, are two noble
Principles, absolutely necessary for those, who desire to live in amity, and
friendship with God.

Be not troubled, that the Nation is departed from you; keep your hold fast
upon God, and (with Jacob) let not him go, and he will bless you: he will
^isse unto the Nation, and bring them back again in a moment unto you. Depend
with your whole heart upon him, and you shall render him as unable to forsake
you, as to deny himself. You know how soon the minds of the poor People of the
Isle Melita were turned upside down within them, concerning Paul. He that was
in their thoughts as this hour, a murderer, a man whom Divine vengeance would
not suffer to live, the next, became no less than a God. Acts 2^. 46
I trust the weak and sinful People of this Island have left you upon no worse
an account, than On^simus (as Paul hoped) sometimes for look his master
Philemon: they have therefore departed for a season, that you should receive
them for ever. Philem 1^ Pert^n^^ b^^itas al^* qu^* ^^ ^^n^^t.
There is no evil, no frowardness so stubborn, but pertinacie in goodness
will in time overcome. If your straits were so great, that you knew not
otherwise what to do, Jehosaphats stratageme of casting your eyes upon God, 2
Ch^^^. 20. 18.
is always ready for execution; and none more promising success against
enemies, than it. Nor can I much fear, but that that God, who stood by you,
when the wickedness of your Heads compassed you about, and gave them into your
hand, will any more ^avour the iniquity of your heels Psalm 4^ 5.
against you, or suffer you to fall into their hands.

One thing by which you are losers (at present) in the judgementts and
affections of many men, makes you (most assuredly) great gainers in the favor
of God; (your zeal, and faithfulness, I mean, in that most exemplary act of
Justice upon the late King) and will (I question not) counter-work it self in
the hearts of the same men, as the Gospel sometimes did in the conscience of
Paul, when having first provoked him into persecution, afterward it wrought
him about to a zealous predication and propagation of it. In so much that the
Saints said of him, He which persecuted us in times past, now preaches the
Faith, which once he destroyed. Gal 1 ^^.
The first apparitions of things new and strange, especially when the reasons
and causes of them are unknown, most of all when there is place and
opportunity for the jealousies and fears of men to write their consequences
and effects, sad, and bitter, are usually disturbing, and offensive to their
apprehensions. But when a diligent inquiry has satisfied them from whence
they come, and a little experience, whither they go, and no evil found in the
form^^, nor felt in the latter, that which was at the first offensive, soon
cease, and the things themselves become the delight and great contentment of
men. When the Disciples at Sea, in the fourth watch of the night saw Christ
walking on the Sea toward them, they were troubled (says the text) saying, it
is a spirit, and they cried out for fear: M^^^. 14. 26.
but when he was come into the ship, and had reconciled the boistrons winds and
Seas to their desires, he proved the joy, and great rejoicing of them all. The
Scriptures afford several other instances in this kind. That that Royal Act of
Justice we speak of, whereunto your hearts and hands were lifted up by God,
should for a season exercise and trouble the sancies of many, is not to be
numbered amongst things that are strange; considering, 1. how long the
judgments and consciences of the generality of men in the world have been
overshadowed with Prerogative Divinity; 2. how unaccustomed the present Age is
to bear the weight of such Heroique transactions; 3. that neither were their
Fathers able to report unto them any such thing as done in their days; 4. how
general only, and therefore in many respects, unsatisfactorie, most of those
accounts are, which have been drawn up for the Justification of the Action; 5.
(and lastly) what latitude and scope there is for the jealousies and fears of
men to play up and down in forming and fore-casting the events and consequences
of the Action, almost to what dismal and formidable variety they please. But
the two things already hinted, 1. a distinct and clear apprehension of the
justiftablenesse of the grounds, upon which the said Action stands fair, and
without spot; 2. a competent experience, that in the consequence of it, it will
only bless, and not at all curse, the Nation, will perfectly heal the
offensivenesse of it, and bring back the hearts of men unto you, by the same
way they went from you.

Out of an unfeigned and humble desire to set both your persons and Honorable
proceedings (especially about the late King) right and straight in the minds
and affections of the Nation, having withal diligence and good conscience
surveied that great Transaction of yours in all the circumstances of it, and
all the Pleas relating to it, as well by way of opposition, as comport, (as far
as my weak apprehension was able to discern any thing of such an import) I was
willing to tax my self at so much time and pains (which I have now levied
accordingly) as to draw up a Report in writing of what I found in that my
survey. This I humbly present unto your Honorable House in the next ensuing
discourse, attended with the strength of my desires that it may (and with some
^aint hopes, that it will) accomplish that good thing on your behalf amongst
men, whereunto it is consigned by the Author. That God, who will bless the
righteous, Psalm. 5. 12.
compass you about with his favor, as with a shield, and make you as Angels
of God to discern the cond^oements of this poor Nation, and to quit your selves
in all manner of worthy and prudent actions with all faithfulness,
accordingly. This is the prayer, not in face, or words, but in heart and soul,
of

Your Honors most constantly devoted Servant in the Lord JOHN GOODWIN.
From my Study May 17. 1647.
The Contents of the ensuing Treatise.
THe Ministers, great Contributioners to our late, and present troubles. Sect.
1. The weakness of their Address to the General, and Council of War, for the
taking them off from assisting the Judiciarie proceedings against the King.
Sect. 2, 3, 62, 63, 64, 65. God himself cautioneth against the exemption of
Kings from Humane Justice. Sect. 3, 4, etc. A Law of the Land for putting Kings
to death, as well as other men 5, 6, 7 The Plea drawn from the incompetencie of
any Authority to question, or sentence the King, answered. Sect. 8, 9, 10,
etc. The King especially under Delinquencie, not superior, no nor equal to
the body of his People. Sect. 9, 10, 11. and 29. The People have a lawful
power to change their Government, when they see just cause. Sect. 11, 12, etc.
Romans 13. 4. Vindicated against the critique Annotation of Doctor Hamond. Sect.
13. 1. Petr. 2. 13. Vindicated against the said Doctor. Sect. 14, 15, 16, etc.
The Doctors Arguments, for the immediate derivation of Kingly Authority from
God, answered. Sect. 20, 21, 22, 23, etc. Par in parem non habet potestatem, a
rule in some cases, none in others. Page 29. 30, etc. The greatest necessity
lightly imaginable, lying upon the Army to purge the House, as they did. Page
130, 131, etc. Argument drawn from Scripture injunction to obey Kings and
Rulers, answered. Page 32. Who are to judge, when, or whether Kings be Tyrants.
Page 33. The Parliament a true Parliament, and in a capacity of ^recting a
Court of Justice for the Trial of the King. Page 34, 35. Not under force Page
36, 37, etc. The non-concurrence of the House of Lords, disableth not the Act
of the House of Commons, concerning the Trial of the King. Page 38, 39, 40,
etc. The execution of Justice, when neglected by the Magistrate, d^v^lves of
course to the People. Page 41, 42, 44. The fact of Phineas (so of Ehud)
reducible to ordinary and standing rules of duty. Page 43. 44, etc. The
Ministers Plea from the Covenant, answered. Page 48, 49, 50, 51, etc. Reason
why the Ministers build so much upon the Solemn League and Covenant. Page 56.
Argument from the Oath of Allegiance, answered. Page 57, 58, 59, and^. Not
necessary that all accessaries in all cases of murtherous engagements, be
punished with death. Page 61, 62. Why the King rather to be punished, than his
instruments. P. 62, 63, 64, etc. The Ministers Plea from the punishment of the
Kingdom of Israel, and of Saul's posterity, for Sa^l^ violation of the Oath
made to the G^^^onites, answered. Page 66. The Ministers put darkness for
light, etc. Page 67. being ^^e^, the worst of all Sectaries. Page 6^. How
weakly they plead their opinion from the Scriptures. Page 69. The notoriou^
untruth of their Plea, taken from the constant judgment of Protestant Divines.
Page 70, 71, 72, etc. The Plea drawn from de^ect of Presidents, answered. Page
77, 78, 79, etc. The Plea from the un-accountablenesse of Kings unto men,
answered. Page 82, 83, etc. Psalm 51. 4. Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, opened. P. 86, 87, 88. The King had suffi^i^^t means to know, that his
life might lawfully be taken from him, for such p^^p^rations, as he practiced.
Page 88, 89, etc. The taking of the Protestation and Cov^nant after his
engagement in blood, by the Parliament and Kingdom, was no s^are upon him. Page
89, 90. The King no way^s defensible by plea of Innocence. Page 90, 91, 92,
etc. His confession (or concession rather) of bloud-guiltinesse, though (in
appearance politickly provisioned) yet no argument of such depth of wisdom, as
some attribute to him. Page 95, 96. A b^i^f touch upon the Kings Book (so
called.) Page 96. The blood shed by the King, no blood of wa^ (in any excusing
sense.) Page 97
The Contents of the second Treatise.
Mr Geree stumbleth at the threshold. Page 100. The reason of his Dedication.
ibid. Mr Geree no friend to the Parliament, though gratified by the Assembly.
Page 101. He condemns himself. Page 102. Prejudice an effeminate Passion.
Page 103. In stating the Question between him and Mr. G. he mistakes in every
particular; and besides conceals some things necessary thereunto. Page 103,
104, etc. Mr. Geree pleases himself in finding out imaginary bulls. Page 108,
112 Popish writers, in points extra-controversall, as acute, and sound, as
Protestant. Page 110. Mr. Geree confutes by the Authority of such Principles
as this, What the Word of God says in one place, it must needs say in every
place. Page 111. Not the same reason of subjection to Magistrates from
Subjects, which is from servants to their Masters. ibid. M. Geree jears at new
lights. Page 112. How, and how far, Oaths to be taken, according to the
intentions of those who administer them. Page 113, 114, etc. Mr. Gerees four
arguments to justify the sequestered Members of Parliament, answered. Page
115, 116, 117, etc. The Kings Concessions, voted large, by Mr. Geree and Mr.
Ptynne, antivoted dangerous and destructive, by the Reason of one, and the
Religion of another, Kingdom. Page 117, 118, etc. An un-princelike Principle in
Princes, seldom or never to keep Faith with their People, upon discontents.
Page 122, 123, etc. The King (according to Mr. Prynne) the avowed servant of
the Pope. P. 124. his distaste against the English nation, hereditarie. Page
125. The Parliament would not have been invested in the peoples affections by
any recommodation with the King. Page 127.
A DEFENSE Of the Honorable SENTENCE passed by the high Court of JUSTICE upon
the late KING.
Sect. 1.
IT is somewhat a slight Proverb, but carries an Sect. 1.
experienced Truth in it of good portendance to the Commonwealth; that Good
ale sieldom wants a friend on the beneh. But that vile Actions, Oppression,
Tyranny, Treason, Rapine, Depopulations, Murders, horrid Murders; yea the
evident exposall of a poor wasted Nation to a re-suffering of her late endured
miseries and extremities, should find so many Friends in the Pulpit, and
amongst Pulpit-men as is notoriously known they do at this day, is matter of a
far more deplorable and threatening import* unto the Nation. That those forty
odd Ministers of Jesus Christ (nam quoniam vult Alexander Deus esse* Deus
esto) or rather the stickling part of them (for some were rather subscribed,
than subscribers, yea some I understand, have repented of their subscription)
who were not ashamed to make God himself a Patron and Protector of murderers,
in a letter to his Excellency, should, especially having Kings for their
Clients, turn Proctours for blood, makes no impression at all of a wonder upon
me, when I consider that of the Apost^^ But evil men, and seducers (...). i.
shall or will, advance to that which is worse, deceiving and being deceived 2.
Tim. 3. 13.
. The zeal of secular Greatness has deceived them, and caused the shadows of
the mountains seem men unto them. For did not, do not, tumults, insurrections,
rebellions of the people against Authoricie* in ordine ad bonum Presbyteriale,
in order to the Advancement of high Presbytery, seem lawful* yea and
commendable practices unto many of them? Upon what account else did they
separate their con^ecrated lungs for bellows to blow up these co^^s amongst the
people this last summer? Or were not they the ghostly Fathers of all, or the
greatest part of those Anti-Parliamentary ^arabbasses, who so lately commenced
Masters of mis-rule in Surrey, Sussex, Kent, Esse^* Wales, etc. and who, had
they not been timely degraded by the Army, were very like to have made the land
the second time an Aceldama, or field of blood? Or do not the Ministers I speak
of, at this very day, instead of lifting up (...) vo^^^s like (...), to cause
the people to know their a^^^icati^^ lift them up like trumpets to prepare them
to commit a^^minations? And instead of sowing the inc^^r^pti^l^ (...) Word,
whereby children should be begotten unto God* they scatte^ the corrupt ^eed of
their own unhallowed dist^mpered fancies, whereby they beget in their own
likeness* children of seditious, turbulent, and most inveterate spirits. Yea
had not the people been wis^^ than their teachers; it had not failed but that
before this, they had been again Pulpitted over head and ears into blood;
though it is true, they suffered much rebuke from some of their Tutours for
this wisdom* and were temonstrated by them in their devotions unto God for
cowards, because of it. I heartily wish, for their souls sake* they could wash
their hearts in innocence before God, from these imputations* for (with
Pilate) to wash their hands before men* is but a waterish and faint consolation.

As for their letter, they who can afford their judgments, ^ect. 2.
and consciences cheap* or at those low rates of reason, which here they bid
for them* may have their custom: but the premises in this letter* will never
(I presume) be able to make a match* between their conclusion* and the belief
of any ingenious or considering m^n. For besides the irrelativenesse and loose
sitting of those Scriptures which they produce, to their (...)
cause, which half an eye is sufficient to discern; and has been very
satisfactorily demonstrated by others* (even by ^en of their own side;) and
besides their pleading for themselves only with overthrown a^guments, such as
in the Court of Reason and Truth have been nonsuited over and over, they take
not the least knowledge at all of any of those Scriptures, which rise up
against them like so many Kings upon their Throns, and laugh all their
reasonments and pretenses of Scripture for their turn, in the face to scorn.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood he shed: for in the image of
God made he him. Gen ^ 6
This was enacted for a Statute Law unto all Flesh by that Great Lawgiver, the
Ancient of days, and proclaimed in the midst of the world immediately after the
flood. Afterward it was revived, and that from time to time, in that polity
or Commonwealth, unto which God himself vouchsafed after a peculiar manner, to
prescribe a Government and Laws. He that smites a man, so that he die, shall
be surely put to death. Exodus 21. 12. And he that kills any man, shall be
surely but to death. Levit. 24. 17. But most fully and with an addition of such
a motive, for the through execution of it, which nearly concerns all Nations
and communities of men. Numb. 35. 30. 31. 33. Who so kills any person, the
murderer shall be put to death by witness: but one witness shall not
testify against any person to cause him to die. Moreover, ye shall take no
satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death, but he
shall surely be put to death. So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are:
for blood it defiles the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood,
that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. So again, Prove. 28.
17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee to the pit:
let no man stay him. Unto all which we may add that of our Savior. All they
that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. Matthew. 26. 52.

It was extreme weakness in the Ministers we speak of, knowing, Sect. 3.
that so many texts of Scripture of so express a tenor, of such a pregnant
import, as these* lie point blank against that position (or, supposition
rather) which they so magisterially and imperiously assert in their letter, not
to attempt (at least) such an explication of them, by which their apparent
enmity to their Doctrine, might (at least seemingly) be reconciled thereunto.
Were they so simple as to imagine, that a strong man who keeps his house, and
stands upon his guard, will deliver it up (with the threasure in it) unto those
that besiege it, only upon big words, or high flourishes of valor, or until
they have taken away, those weapons from him, wherein he trusts? We charge them
with plain and clear Scriptures, wherein God evidently, without speaking any
parable, without the least intimation of any person, or persons whatsoever, to
be excepted, commands that murderers be put to death. Now unlesle they be able
to balance such Scriptures as these, either with other Scriptures, wherein the
exemption of Kings from suffering the penalty inflicted by these Laws upon
murderers, in case they shall murder, is as plainly asserted, or commanded
by God, as the execution of this penalty upon murderers, is commanded by him
in these; or else produce some clear principle or dictate from the light of
nature, by which it may fully appear to be a sencelesle or unreasonable thing,
that the before said Scriptures should be extended unto Kings, they do but beat
the air with all they can say, or plead upon any other account whatsoever: all
their reasons, arguments, and passionate ululations otherwise, will be turned
into stubble, and rotten wood before them. How much more, if it be made to
appear from the Scriptures, that here God himself puts in caution against
any exemption of Kings themselves in that kind? Take heed what ye do (says
J^^osaphat, by the spirit of God, to the Judges appointed to execute Judgment
in the land of J^dah) FOR YE JUDGE NOT FOR MAN, BUT FOR THE LORD, who is with
you in the Judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord ^e upon you, take
heed and do: fr there is no iniquity with the Lord our God* nor respect of
persons, nor taking of gifts ^ where first it is observable, that not only
(...)
Kings, but Judges also, inferior in place unto them, judge for God. i. in the
place and office of Judicature, represent God himself, or perform that work*
which properly belongs unto God himself: therefore ought to behave themselves in
all acts of judgment, as their consciences tell them, that God himself would
do, in case he sat in judgment himself, and were to give sentence with his own
mouth. 2. That though God does not sit, or appear visibly with such Judges,
when they sit in judgment, yet he is after a very peculiar manner with them at
such times [ who i^, or* will be with you in the judgement] viz, to observe
nar^orowly with what courage* conscience, and integrity, they act for him, and
how they represent him upon the tribunal: and so to assert, and vindicate them
in every just sentence, against any person, or persons, how great soever, and
of whose face otherwise they might be afraid. 3. That such Judges as these, are
in a more especial manner to take ^eed, that in matters of judgment they do
not mis-represent God, either first, in respecting men's persons; or 2. in
taking of gifts. 4. (And lastly) that it was a godly and wise King, who said
unto inferior Judges created, and deputed by himself* that they were not to
judge for man, [i. with respect to any humane Interest whatsoever, no not his
own] but for the Lord. i. with an entire respect to the Interest of God, and
so, that he may not suffer in any of his Attributes, through any unworthy
carriage of theirs in their places.] A like passage we have from Moses also. Ye
(says he to the Judges appointed over the people) shall not respect pers^ns in
judgment, you shall not be afraid of the face of man: for the judgment is
Gods. Deuteronomy. 1. 17. So that if we ought to judge it a thing altogether unworthy
of God* and dishonorable to his infinite Greatness* in case he sat in
judgment himself, and gave sentence immediately, to think that he would respect
the persons of Kings in Judgment, and sentence only meaner men, both being
alike guilty; certainly it is dishonorable likewise unto him, and would be
sinful in an high degree, if they who are entrusted to judge for him, and in
his Name, place, and stead, should do the same; I mean, accept the persons of
Kings, or Princes* how worthy soever of death, and only adjudge inferior
persons to the suffering of this punishment, when they prove guilty hereof.
Were not this to represent God unto the world, as an accepter of persons? and
so to turn the glory of his unpartial justice into a lie? And might it not be
more properly and truly said of such Judges, that they judge for man, and not
for the Lord? Does the Law of the most High God know any man after the flesh?
Or is it afraid to say unto Kings, ye a^e wicked? or, when they shed man's
blood, that by man shall their blood be shed? Is it like to a spiders web,
which serves to catch smaller flies, but hornets break through, and escape?

It is a frivolous pretense to say, that Kings are accountable Sect. 4.
unto God, when they transgress his Law, though not unto men; and in this
respect the Law of God is not made void in respect of them, though they should
not suffer for their transgression of it, from the hands of men, as others do,
and ought. For even those also, who suffer (and in the judgment of these
ministers themselves ought to suffer) from men for the transgression of the Law
of God (as in the case of murder, or the like) are nevertheless accountable
unto God, for their transgression, their suffering from men notwithstanding. So
that if an accountablenesse unto God for the breach of such laws of his, which
are punishable by men, were a due ground of exemption from suffering in the
courts of humane Justice; not only Kings, but Subjects also of all sorts,
might justly challenge that exemption (in this kind) which is contended for by
our Ministers, as the Prerogative of Kings. And if the Law of God should
privilege Kings against the bar of humane Justice, for what crimes soever
leaving them accountable only unto God, and not indulge the like favor unto
meaner men, but make th^se* for their delinquencies* answerable to both
tribunals, should they not (together with the Lawmakers himself) benototiously
partial? Or what is partiality in Laws, or Judgment, if to blend an
equality in cause* with an inequality of a sentence* be not? This respect of
persons in judgment is elsewhere and that frequently, very severely prohibited
by God. See Levit. 19. 15. Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Deuteronomy. 16. 19. Prove. 24. 23. etc.

Against this Authority of Heaven* which arraigns even Kings (...). 5.
themselves, as well as persons of inferior rank, at the bar of Earthly
Judicatures, it is more than in vain for our Jure-Divino men to oppose a Jus
human^m, or rather a defect of Jus h^ma^um, to inhibit the process. Ought not
Christ to be worshipped, as God, because the Senate of Rome refused to
apotheize him? Or must such a Law of God, which is both natural, and positive
(the Law which commands life for life, the the life of the murderer, for the
life of the murdered, is such) be overruled for the gratification of Kings,
to their own, and the worlds undoing with them, by a mere non-ens, or by that
which is not? Or is this good Logico-Divinity? There is no Law of the land, no
Law of man, for the calling of Kings to account, for any crime what soever, no
not for murder it self: therefore the law of God, which imposes a sentence of
death upon murderers, without all exception, or respect of persons, must be of
none effect in respect of Kings, when they murder? The Sert^es and Pharisees
of our Saviors time were sharply reproved by him, for making the Command of
God of none effect by their tradition. M^^^. 15 ^.
Yet these men had some thing, they had their instrument, such as it was, they
had their tradition, wherewith to work this profane feat, the making the
Commandment of God of none effect. The Moses-chair-men of our days, make
account that they are able to remove a like mountain without any instrument, or
means at all; only by they want a tradition, which should make it stand fast.

But what if there be a clear Law of the Land, for putting even Kings to death,
when they commit murder? Doubtless that law of the land, which sentenceth
murderers with death, as it specifieth no particular rank* or calling of men,
whereunto it is to be limited, so neither does it particularize any order or
degree of men, by way of exemption. Therefore since there is a Law of the Land
clear enough for the punishing of shoe-makers or taylours with death, in case
any of these vocations shall be found guilty of murder, though there be no
particular expression of either of their professions, in the Law, which
sentenceth murderers with death; why should not the same Law be conceived to
lie as clear for the p^nishing of Kings with death, in case they murder,
though there be no express insertion of their Office or calling in the Law, to
signify their inclusion in it; considering that there is no more intimation
neither for their exemption, than for the other?

To say* that the Law we speak of was never extended unto or Sect. 6.
understood of Kings, and therefore neither ought now to be extended unto, or
understood of them; would be to say some what, but what is next to nothing.
For, 1. who is able to give any sufficient account that it was never, in no
age, by no person, understood of Kings? That in point of execution it was never
extended unto Kings* is but a slippery proof that it was never understood of
them. Very possibly it was never (in such a sense) extended unto musicians, or
moris-dancers, yet this, if it could be proved, would be no proof* that
therefore it was never understood or meant of them. Besides if the Law we speak
of never extended unto Kings in the execution of it, it is no great wonder;
considering. 1. That there being but one King at a time in the whole nation, it
can be no matter of wonder, that he should not be a murderer, which supposed,
(I mean, that never any King of England heretofore, was, or was known to be a
murderer) there was no possibility that the said Law should formerly have bin
extended unto Kings in point of execution. 2. In case it could be proved that
some former King, one, or more, were guilty of murder, yet probably those who
were entrusted with the execution of the Law we speak of, might connive either
through fear, favor, flattery* or the like. In such cases as these, there was
no opportunity of extending this law in the execution of it, unto Kings Upon
the same account it may well be, that however the Law ought in reason, equity,
and according to the import of the letter and words of it, be understood, as
well of Kings, as of meaner men, yet it might never be publicly and
Authoritatively declared that it ought to be so understood. But

2 What if it can no more be proved, that the said Law was ^^^t. 7.
never yet understood of Kings, than it can be proved to have but executed upon
Kings? Does it therefore follow, that neither now it ought so to be understood?
especially considering. 1 That the express letter and tenor of the Law will
fairly bear such a sense. 2 That such an understanding and interpretation of
it, will well stand with all principles of reason and equity. 3. That the
pulick interest peace and safety of the Nation requires such an Interpretation
4 (and lastly) that the contrary can never be proved; I mean, that it was
never understood (inclusively) of Kings. Suppose there were such a sense or
interpretation of some text or sentence of Scripture, lately given, which every
ways comports with the letter, and gramaticall sense of the words, fully
agrees with the Analogy of Faith, or the received principles of Christian
Religion, falls in very genuinely with the context* or scope of the place,
perfectly accords with the clear sense of the like phrase and expression in
Scripture elsewhere, etc. were such an interpretation to be rejected merely upon
such a pretense as this, That it cannot be proved that ever it was given* or
received by Christians heretofore?

Nor is that color less washie or fading* wherein to the exemption of Kings
from humane Judicatories is commonly put, to give it some semblance, or shadow
of a Truth; that the King is Supreme, and above all persons in his Kindom; and
in this respect there can be no competent or lawful Authority on Earth, to
question, ar^aign* or judge him; it being a received Maxim in politiques, that
^ar in parem non habet potestatem; multo minus inferior in superiorem;.i. that
no man has any right of Authority over his equal; much less an inferior
over his superior. For to this we Answer

1. That the Scripture cannot be dissolved by the authority of Sect. 8.
any Politic Rule or Maxim whatsoever of humane sanction. If God in the
Scripture says, that who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed; men must not reply to him, and say, we are content to put this Law in
execution, when Kings are not the transgressors: but herein we must be
pardoned; we have no Authority* nor Know we how to create any, by which to
punish Kings according to the exigencie of this Law, when they offend against
it. We have a Canon sacred and inviolable amongst us, which prohibits any man,
or numbers of men, to execute this Law of thine upon Kings. Will that God,
whose name is jealous suffer the Divine Authority of his Law to be trodden
under foot by men, for the salving of the credit of a Law or Principle of their
own? But

2 It was never yet proved (nor, I believe, ever will be) Sect. 9.
either by any Scripture, or sufficient Reason, that the King (especially under
a Delinquencie or crime deserving death) is either Par, equal [ viz, in power]
much less superior, to the body of his people, or their Representative.
Master Rutherford, whom these Ministers may well look upon, as Praesidium and
dulce decus suum, the chariot of Presbytery, and the hors-men thereof,
teaches them another lesson over and over, in his book entitled, Lex, Rex.
For the subject of Royal power (says he) we affirm the first, and native
subject of all power to be in the community. (...) p. 5^.
. Again: There is not like reason to grant so much to the King, as to
Parliaments; because certainly PARLIAMENTS, who make Kings under God, ARE ABOVE
ANY ONE MAN; and THEY MUST HAVE MORE AUTHORITY and wisdom, TH^N ANY ONE KING,
except Solomon (as base flatterers say) should return to the thrones of the
Earth. I^^^ p ^^*
Yet again* wherever there is a covenant and oath betwixt equals, yea or
superiors and inferiors, the one has some coactive power over the other;
which position he clearly proves ^ I^^^ p. ^9
by a case immediately subjoyned presently after: Though therefore the King
should stand simply, superior to his Kingdoms and Estates (which I SHALL NEVER
GRANT) yet if the King come under covenant with his Kingdom, as I have proved
at length c. 13. he must by that same come under some coactive power to
fulfill his covenant. Ibl^^m.
Again: unanswerably I have proved, that the Kingdom is superior to the King
I^^^ p 46.
. Yet over again: If we consider the fountain power, the King is subordinate to
the Parliament, and not coordinate* for the constituent is above the
constituted. If we regard the derived and executive power in Parliamentarie
Acts, they make but a total and complete Sovereign power, yet so, as the
Sovereign power of the Parliament, being habitual and underived, a prime and
fountain power (for I do not here separate people and Parliament) is perfect
without the King, for all Parliamentarie Acts, as is clear, in that the
Parliament make Kings I^^^ p 37^.
. It were easy to make the pile of such quotations as these, from this Author,
far greater, and to show how frequently he styles the King, one while, the
Servant, otherwhile, the vassal, of the Commonwealth. So that our London
Presbyters in their most audacious, shameless, and seditious vociferations and
out cries against the Parliament, as having no Authority, or right of power to
proceed as they did against the King, and upon this effeminate account,
desperately charging the most exemplary Act of Justice, and for which the world
round about them, yea even Kings, and Princes themselves, may have cause to
bless them, in sentencing him unto death, with the odious and horrid
imputation of Murder, do as well defy their own great Oracle of Presbytery,
as the Parliament; and withal acknowledge men of greatest learning, worth, and
parts, in the Order of Presbytery, to be tainted with errors of as soul and
hateful a nature and import, as any that are lightly to be found amongst
those, whom they honor with the ancient badge of Christianity, and call,
Sectaries.

Mr Prynne, another author of their own, and supreme glory Sect. 10
of their Interest, in the Law (as the former in Divinity) does not only
acknowledge, but voluminously and abundantly demonstrates, (if the frontispice
flattereth not the body of his building) the superiority of our own, and most
other foreign Parliaments, States, Kingdoms, Magistrates, collectively
considered, over and above their lawful Emperors, Kings, and Princes, by
pregnant Reasons, Resolutions, Precedents, Histories; Authorities of all sorts,
etc. Our London Pulpittiers, who abuse their credulous and malignantish
Auditories by teaching for Doctrine this tradition of their own, that the
Parliament had no more right to deal by the King as they have done, than a
thief by the high way to take their purse, should have acquitted themselves
like men, and deserved (in part) that Interest and Authority in the
consciences of men, which they expect and claim, as their due, if they had
substantially answered the two Books now mentioned, composed by Jachin and
Boaz. (...)
the two great Pillars of their own porch, before they had suffered themselves
to be so deeply baptized into Shimer's spirit, as to bring the railing
accusation of Murder against the Parliament, for their just and regular
proceedings against the King. Howsoever ( etenim fas est and ab host doceri)
by what the two late named Authors have upon irrefragable premises concluded,
it fully appears, that the people, or their Representative, are superior in
power or authority unto the King; and consequently that this Maxim, Par in
parem non habet potestatem, suffered not by the Kings suffering under the
Parliament.

Besides, Reason it self gives the superiority of power to the Sect. 11
people, or Parliament, and not to the King. For 1. as the Apostle argues the
preheminencie of the man above the woman, from this consideration, that Adam
was first formed, then Eve; 1 Ti^ 2 ^^
so may we infer the like prerogative of the people over the King. The people
were first in being: the King takes his turn after them, is not, till they have
been.

2 The same Apostle concludes the same pre-eminence of the man over the woman,
from hence also, that the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man 1
C^r. ^^ 8
. The same foundation is as pregnant to bear the superiority of the people
above the King. The people are not of, sprang not from Kings, but Kings of, and
from the people.

3 The same Apostle yet again derives the prementioned privilege upon the man,
from this spring; The man was not created for the woman, but the woman for the
man 1 C^^. 11 9.
. In like manner it being evident that the people were not made for Kings, but
Kings for the people, it follows merrily upon the same wheel, that the people
have the precedence in honor before the King.

4 The servant is not (says our Savior) greater that his Lord John 13 1^.
; but on the contrary, the Lord, then his servant. Now the King bears the
Relation of a political Servant, or vassal, to that State, Kingdom, and
people, over which he is set to Govern; as appears by those three essential
characters of servitude, inseparably attending his office; 1. Regulation or
appointment of work; 2. Wages in consideration of his work, duly and faithfully
performed; 3. And lastly, an obnoxiousnesse to a laying aside, by the people,
when they see it meet.

The King has his work of Governing, appointed or set out unto him by the
people, in those Laws, which they constitute and make for their own Government,
and his, by their Representatives, or Trustees in Parliament. Secondly, he
receives such allowance or proportion in wages, in consideration of his work
in governing, as the people or State, whom he serves herein, judge meet and
reasonable to confer upon him. For this cause (says Paul, meaning, for their
work and faithfulness in governing) pay ye tribute also [viz. unto Kings, or
rulers] as ye pay wages unto servants: only you pay it under another name, the
nature of this royal service being more Honorable* than common services are*
and the exigency of it for your good, requiring greater respects in terms, and
otherwise, then inferior services do. The Crown is but the Kingdoms, or
peoples livery. Thirdly, (and lastly) the Servant (says our Savior) abides
not in the house for ever. [1. necessarily, or upon any such terms but that his
Master is free, notwithstanding any Law of God or of nature, to put him out of
his house, when ^e sees cause, yea though the cause be not very material or
weighty but the Son abides for ever (...)
. In like manner the people (I mean collectively taken) have no Law of nature,
or of God upon them, which prohibiteth them from laying aside a King or Kingly
Government, from amongst them, when they have a reasonable cause for it. Such a
cause as this they have (I mean, that which is just and reasonable, and
competent) for so doing when either they find by experience that Government by
Kings has been a nuysance to the peace or liberties of the people and
apprehend by reason, that, if continued, it is like still so to be; o^ find,
that the charge of maintaining such a Government* has been, and if con^inued,
is like to be (for the future) o^e-barth^n'om to the State, conceiving upon
good g^^und* withal that another form of Government will accommodate the
Interest of the State upon equal* or better terms with less charge and
expense; especially when they find, that the Government we speak of is gotten
into a race or blood, that is unfit for Government, as that which for several
de^^^rts together, as in Father, in Son in Sons son* etc. is either boyld up
into, and breaks out in oppression and tyranny, or else turns to a water of
natural simplicity and weakness or froths into voluptuousness and luxury,
or the like; in all these cases (I say and many others like unto these* a
people or State formerly Governed by Kings, may very lawfully turn these
servants of theirs out of their doors; as the Romans of old, and the ^^^land^
of late (besides many nations more) have done, and are blameless^.

Yea God himself, though he charge the people with sin, in desiring a change
of their Government, which was by Judges* (wherein himself in trueness of
construction, was, as Samuel tells them, from his own mouth, their King, 1.
Sam. 8. 10. with cap. 12. 12.) into that by Kings; yet condescending to their
desires herein, and so yielding (in a sense) to his own dethronization amongst
them, he plainly, and exabundanti, avoucheth the lawfulness of power in the
people, to alter their present frame of Government, whatsoever it be, when they
see cause. The sin of the people we speak of, did not stand in this, that they
simply desired an alteration of their Government; but that they desired it with
the forgetfulness and contempt, of those many Royal favors and blessings,
which under their pre^ent Government by Judg^s, he had from time to time heaped
upon their heads, in many wonderful preservations and deliverances from their
enemies (as appears, 1. Sam. 12, 6, 7. 8. etc. besides other places) Yet that
he might not seem to check* or straiten in the least the liberty which people
by nature and of right, have, to exchange their Government, when they ^^e
cause, he yielded (as we have heard) to the rejection o^ d^posall, not only of
his faithful servants, and Prophet Samuel* but even his own also, by the
people* 1. Sam. 8. 7. 9.

Nor does that critique annotation of the Royal Doctor, Sect. 12
taking notice that the Supreme power, or Ruler, is in this Relation styled by
the Apostle, the Minister of God, (Romans 13.) and not of the people ^ Ham^^d*
H^^^ ad ^^^sse (...)
, any ways in-fringe the credit of this conclusion, that Kings are the
Servants* or Ministers of the people. For Paul, and the rest of the Apostles,
were the Ministers of God, (2. Cor. 6. 4.) and the Ministers of Christ, (1.
Cor. 4. 1.) and the servants of God, and of Christ. (Col. 4. 12. Tit. 1. 1.
P^t. 1. 1. etc.) and yet did they acknowledge* yea and more than acknowledge,
even preach, themselves the servants of men. For we preach not our selves, but
Christ Jesus the Lord; and our selves YOUR SERVANTS for Jesus sake, (2. Cor. 4.
5.) So Paul says of himself, that ^^ went to Jerusalem to MINISTER TO THE
SANITS, Rom 15. 25. yea, (1. Cor. 9. 19.) he says that he had made himself A
SERVANT OF ALL. Yea, Christ himself, that Great servant of God, (Isa. 42. 1.)
was, this relation of his notwithstanding, (...), a MINISTER, or Servant OF THE
CIRCUMCISION, (.i. of the Jews) Romans 15. 8. So that the Doctor argues much
beneath his degree, when he syllogizeth thus: The Supreme power, or Ruler is
styled by the Apostle, the Minister of God, and not the Minister of the people:
Therefore he is the Minster of God only, and not the Minister of the people;
as if the one Relation were incompetible with the other. Why the King, or other
Ruler (for the Doctor mistaketh in his supposition, that the Apostle
appropriateth this style, the Minister of God, to the Supreme power, or Ruler;
evident it is, that he speaks it of Rulers, indefinitly, and as appliable
unto any) but why the King, or other Ruler, should be expressly asserted by
the holy Ghost, the Minister of God, and not the Minister of the people (though
he be as well the one, as the other.) the reason is obvious. First, because the
Relation of a Ruler unto God, as being his Minister, is a spiritual truth and
not so obvious to the minds or thoughts of ordinary men, as that he is the
Minister, or servant of the people; as that Pastors of Churches, are Ministers
of, and servants unto, the respective Churches, unto which they Minister in the
things of the Gospel, is a far nearer-hand truth, than that they are the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, i. that they Minister unto them in his Name, place,
and stead, and that the nature and exigency of their office requires of them,
that they speak and do the same things to, and for them, in order to their
eternal peace, which they conceive Christ himself would speak and do, if he
were their immediate and only Pastor. Now it is much more proper for the holy
Ghost to deliver and assert (in the Scriptures) truths of a more sublime and
spiritual import* than those whereof the common light of reason in men is
sufficient to persuade and lead them unto.

2 The scope of the Apostle (in the Text in hand) being to (...) 13
persuade subjection unto Magistrates or Rulers, it was very pertinent and
proper for his purpose, to assert them the Ministers of God; but had been much
out of his way, to tell them that they were the Ministers, or servants of the
people. As when his intent is to dis^wade men from Apostasy, he does not
enforce his dehortation by any such motive as this, that God is loving,
gracious, merciful, long-suffering, or the like, but by this, vengeance
belongs to him; and* it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God: (...)
and again; For our God is a consuming ^ire; yet his representing of God under
these expressions of (...)
terror, upon a special occasion* does not imply but that he is loving,
Gracious, etc. no more does he, in stiling the Magistrate, the Minister of God,
by way of inforcement to a special duty, deny him to be, or suppose him not to
be, the Minister of the people also. Yea there is a plain intimation of this
Relation likewise in the Magistrate, in the same place; as where it is said,
for this cause pay ye tribute also; for they are Gods Ministers attending
continually upon this very thing. i. Upon the promotion of your good, by
Governing. Now what is a more proper badge or character of a servant, than
attendance, especially continual attendance upon another for the conveniencing
of him in his affairs?

5. The creature is not superior to the Creator, nor the thing made unto it is
maker* but the contrary. Now evident it is from the Scripture it self, that
the people are the makers of Kings, and Kings their creatures, or work-manship.
Though David was expressly nominated and appointed by God himself, for King over
Israel, yet was he not a King over Israel, until the people made him so. The
Text expressly says, All th^se men of war that could keep rank, came with a
perfect heart to Hebron to MAKE David KING over all Israel: and all the rest
also of Israel were of one heart TO MAKE David KING. 1 (...) 1^ ^^
So the men of Shechem are said to have MADE Abimelech KING. Judge ^
So also the people are said to have MADE Saul KING before the Lord in Gilgal.
1 S^m 11. 1^
So again, half of the people of Israel are said to have followed Tibni, the
Son of Ginah, TO MAKE HIM KING. 1 King 1^* ^1.
In like manner Edom revolting from Israel, are said to have MADE a KING over
themselves. 2 King 8 20.
So that it is familiar with the Scriptures to make the people the MAKERS of
their Kings. And God himself supposes the people to be those, that should set
Kings over themselves, if ever they had any. THOU SHALL in any wise SET HIM
KING over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose. D^^t. 17 1^ 15 Deuteronomy ^^ ^^.
According to this notion Peter also (...) calls the Civil Magistrate, as
well Kings, as others, (...), the ordinance, or creature of man; ^ P^^ ^ 1^.
viz. because they receive their very beings from the people* as Kings, and as
Magistrates. Nor is that mist, which the Royal (...) ^f this in M. Rutherford.
^^^ ^^^. pa^. ^^
Doctor (before mentioned) has cast before the face of this Text* to hide
that lineament of truth therein which we speak of, so thick, but that the light
thereof shines through the thickest of it. For 1. The King is not here called,
Supreme, in comparison of the whole body of the people collectively taken, over
whom he rules (as the Doctor supposes) but as compared with subordinate
Rulers. The very tenor of the context is evidence enough for this: whether it
be to the King, as Supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by
him, 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14
etc. So that the Supremacy here asserted unto the King, is not over the whole
body of his people, but only over inferior Officers, or Rulers; and these
distributively too, not collectively taken. Therefore this is no signal
character, which keep the text from concluding the Supreme power to be
originally in the people.

Nor 2. is this any such Character, that Governors are distinguished Sect. 15
v. 14. from the King, or Supreme, by this, that Governors are sent by [i.
have commission from] the King; whereas the King is not said to be sent by the
people; which yet might be affirmed of him, if he were the Creature, or
Creation of the people. For 1. Argument^m ab authoritate ductum negative, non
valet: It does not follow, that because such, or such a thing is not said,
therefore it might not have been said, and that with truth, and propriety of
speech sufficient We have lately heard it said in many text of Scriptures, that
Kings were made by the people, set ^ver those, whom they govern, by the people.
Now I would gladly learn from my Teacher, what signal difference there is,
between, being made, and set over, and being sent, or commissioned, by the
people. Are not those Governors, who are sent by the King, made Governors,
and SET over others, by him? 2. It being said, that Abraham begat Isaac, and
Isaac, Jacob; it need not be said further, that Abraham was Progenitour, or
Grandfather unto Jacob, to make it matter of belife, that he was so. In like
manner, it being expressly said by Peter of the King, that he is (...), the
creature, or creation of men ^i. of the people] and, that Governors are sent
by, or have their Commission from the King, he need not say, that Governors
are sent by the people, to render it certain* that so they are, [ mediante
Rege.] Nor 3. does it at all make against the originalitie of power in the
people, that subjection is commanded to be paid unto the King, not for the
peoples, but for the Lords sake.

For 1. He that persuades by one argument, does not hereby Sect. 16
deny that he has no other but this one* to plead. When the Apostle exhorts
Christians unto Hospitality upon this ground, that thereby some have
entertained Angels unawares, (...) 13^
he does not imply, that the duty could not have been commended unto them by
any other motive or consideration, but this. Nor does Peter suppose, when he
presses subjection unto Kings, for the Lords sake, that therefore he could not
have enforced it by any argument relating to the people. But 2. Kings (and so
all subordinate Rulers) being the Ministers and Servants of God (in one sense)
as they are the Ministers and Servants of the people, in another (which
different senses have been opened) it was far more reasonable and persuasive,
to require Subjection unto them from particular persons, being members of the
people, upon the account of their Relation unto God, as his Ministers, than
upon their Relation to the People, as being theirs. Especially considering,
that Peter (in the Scripture in hand) presses that subjection we speak of,
upon Christians; who were not like much to respect their Rulers, whether
Supreme, or subordinate, as they were the creatures, or servants of the people
amongst whom they lived, being generally Heathens, Pagans, and Idolaters; but
understanding that they were the Minister^ and Servants of God, and ordained by
him to rule them could not lightly but take a lively impression of subjection*
from such a consideration. 4. The ^le^m and opera which the Doctor bestows
upon the opening of the original word, (...), is merely lost* there being
nothing gained by it (though all his suppo^als in order to it, should be
granted him) toward the relief of his cause. He beats up and down a large
field to start this notion, that (...), without any restraint, signifies
generally all man kind, Gentiles, as well as Jews. His chief pillar to bear up
the fabrique of this interpretation, being Romans 8. 19. though strong and
straight in it self, yet stands trembling, if not a wry, under it. The carriage
of the context here, from v. 19. to v. 22. (inclusively) will very hardly, if
at all bear it, that* by the ^^^^c^ation of the creature* should be meant the
hope which the ^eat^en w^^ld ^ad, that at the R^v^lation of the gracious
priviledg^s of the (...), they ^i. the Gentiles] also should be freed from the
slavery of corruption (their villan^us ^eathen sins) unto the liberty, etc.
For 1. It will sorely strain and stretch all the sinews of all the parts,
learning* abilities, which the Interpreter has, substantially to prove, that
the Heathen world had any such hope* as he here ascribes to them, viz. of
being freed from their villainous ^eathen sins, at the Revelation, of the
graci^us privileges of the Messiah. The Apostle Paul, though writing to a
parcel only of th^se Gentiles* now become Christian* yet describing their
condition, during the time of their Gentilesme, as the common condition of
those, who were Gentiles in the flesh, speaks thus: That at that time ye were
without Christ, being alienes from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenants of promise* having no HOPE, and without, God in the world.
(...)
Doctor Hamond supposes, that the Gentiles before Christ was revealed unto
them* had hope of an investiture with one of the greatest spiritual
privileges, which the Revealing of Christ (the Messiah) is wont to confer upon
the world, viz. freedom, or deliverance, from their villainous sins: but the
great Doctor of the Gentiles, affirms, first, that these Gentiles, during
the time of their Gentili^me, were without Christ, [i. without the knowledge of
Christ, the Messiah, and so could not expect any R^velation of his Gracious
Priviledges] 2. That they were strangers from the Covenants of promise. 3. That
they were WITHOUT H^^^ in the world; and consequently that they could not
expect, or hope for such a glorious Freedom, as the Doctor supposes, being
one of the greatest and richest privileges contained in the Covenants of
promise. Yea it is far more like, that the Gentiles this Doctor speaks of,
were more afraid of parting with their villainous sins, than taken with any hope
of being delivered from them.

Besides, what a man hops for (taking the word in the ordinary Sect. 17
signification) he must needs desire. Now then if the Gentiles, before the
Revelation of the gracious privileges of the Mes^ias, desired to be free from
their villainous sins, (doubtless) they were freed from them, at least to a
good degree, and as far, as Christians themselves ordinarily are* at, and by
the Revelation it self, of the gracious Privileges of the Messiah unto them;
who seldom attain any further Freedom from sin in this life, than
un^eignednesse of desire to be perfectly free. To will is present with me
(says the holy Apostle himself) but how to perform that which is good* I find
not. Rom 7 1^.
So that (questionless) the pen royal sit's quite besides the Apostles
meaning, in the interpretation of the word, (...), in the text in hand. It were
easy to show with how many more insuperable difficulties from the context it
self, the said interpretation is incumbered. As 1. it is no easy task, to
explain, how, and make good, that, the Gentile World waited for the
manifestation of the Sons of God. verse. 19. 2. How the said Gentile World, (as
contra-distinguished to the Jewish World) can be said to have been made subject
unto vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him, who has subjected the same
in hope. verse. 20. Or 3. (and lastly,) how this Gentile World, can be said to
groan, and travail in pain together [viz. with the Saints, or believers
themselves] until now. v. 22. There are th^se, and some other bars of iron in
the way, very hard for the Doctor to break, to make way for his Interpretation
to come at his Text. So that his Opinion, denying the Relation of Kings to the
people, as their Creatures, is but in a very deplorable case, having no better
prop to support it, than so un- proper, and unprobable an Interpretation.

But grant him his Interpretation so much labored for in the Sect. 18
fire, thus far, that by (...) the creature, or creation, (in the Scripture
lately insisted on) is meant the Heathen or Gentile world, will it follow from
hence, that therefore (...), i. every creature, or, the whole creation,
signifies determinately, the Heathen world? which yet is that which he was to
prove according to his engagement.

But yet again, give we the Doctor his fill of that his precarious
Interpretation mentioned, as that (...), and (...), signify the Heathen world,
yet I presume his ingenuitie will serve him so far, as to grant, that they
signify the world he speaks of, in the relation, or under the consideration
of, being the creature, or creation [of God] If so, what has he sowed by such
an interpretation, but wind? or what can he reap, but a whirlwind, in
reference to his cause, which is to prove, that (...) (in the place in Peter)
does not signify, the creature, or creation of man, or the civil Magistrate,
as being the creature, or creation of man, but this Magistrate, as free from,
or void of any such Relation? For it will avail him nothing for his purpose, to
prove, that (...) (in the Scripture under debate) signifies the civil
Magistrate, or the Heathen Magistrate, as well as Jewish, unless he can prove
withal, that the said complex expression signifies either the one, or the
other, without any intimation or supposition, of their being the creatures, or
creation of men. I can willingly go along with him thus far, that the meaning
of the precept of S. Peter to his Jew-Christians is clearly this, that they
must be obedient, not only to Christian Magistrates, but to Gentiles, Heathen
also; but my company for this mile will do him little good, unless I could go
along with him this other also, and grant, that the Apostle, in the same words,
imports no relation at all of creature-ship in Magistrates unto the people. How
little he has yet said, to draw either me, or any considering man, into part
and fellowship with him in this notion, I appeal to every man, that has read
his discourse without partiality. How unlikely it is, that he will ever be able
to say any thing so much as competently engaging thereunto, may be judged,
partly by what has been already cited, and argued, from the Scriptures, to
prove it the Interest, and (as it were) the occupation of the people, to make
Kings; partly also (and more particularly) by this consideration; that the holy
Ghost, is seldom or never wont, to express either persons, or things, by words
importing such a relation, whereof the persons, and things so expressed, are
incapable. When the Doctor shall present me with two or three pregnant
instances from the Scriptures, of such a character, I shall be many degrees
nearer to a closure with him in his opinion, which avoucheth, that the holy
Ghost styles the King, or Magistrate, (...), the Creature of Man, without
supposing him to be a Creature so related; though I must aver withal, that
even such an atchivement, how dexterously soever performed, would not be
sufficient to remove me from my present sense, which assures me above, and
against, all dialecticall opposition whatsoever; that Kings are the
manufacture, workmanship, or creatures of the people.

Nor is the Doctor any whit more dexterous, or successful, Sect. 19
in the vindication, than he was in the assertion, of his Interpretation. The
objection, which himself raises against it, over-poyseth his Answer. I shall
only take notice (at this turn) how unexpert he is in those two passages of
the word of righteousness, unto which he repairs for balast to his Answer.
When (says he) ^e [i. the Apostle] commands to honor all, it m^st be
understood, all, to whom honor belongs; superiors, not inferiors. This
gloss clearly corrupts the Text. For the Apostle* commanding them to honor
all, or all men, plainly supposes, that there is a debt of honor, or
respects, due from every man, to every man; not only from Inferiors to
Superiors, but from equals to equals, yea and from Superiors themselves, to
Inferiors. This is evident from that of the Apostle Paul, Romans 12. 10. In
honor preferring one mother: or (as our former Translatours rendered the
Original (...)) In giving honor go one before another. Therefore it is the
duty of Christians to exhibit honor, or honorable respects, not to their
Superiors alone, nor to their equals alone, but to their Inferiors also. Thus
Timothy, though a chief and extraordinary Officer in the Church, is yet
enjoined to honor widows: ^ Tim 5. 3.
yea and these of the poorest and meanest condition, (as is evident from the
sequel in the context) A second Scripture, by which our Doctor seeks to
credit his answer, is 1. Pet. 5. 5. where (as himself says) he commands them
to be subject to one another. But (says he) it must not be understood, that
the Superior must be subject to the Inferior, a^ the Inferior to the
Superior: (...) Hu^bl^ ^^^^ess, (...) page 7 8
but a^ the nature of the duty inforces to interpret, the Inferior to be
subject to the Superior only. It seems the Doctor is not acquainted with,
does not understand the nature, or Law of Christian Church Fellowship, wherein
there ought to be a mutual condescension, or subjection, of all the members
one unto another, as well of the Superior to the Inferior, as of the
Inferior to the Superior, in all things reasonable and equal; without which
it is unpossible, that unity, love, and peace should long continue amongst
them. And that it was such an universal reciprocal subjection, as this, which
the Apostle exhort's them (in the said words) unto, the tenor of the place it
self sufficiently evinceth. Likewise ye younger, submit your selfs to the
Elder; yea, all of you be subject one unto another, and be clothed with
humility; as if he should have said, it becomes, not only the younger to
submit unto the Elder, (though many times the younger are Superior in place,
and the Elder, Inferior) but even all of you, without exception, without
standing upon terms either of natural, or Civil Superiority, or secular
greatness in any kind, to be subject one unto another, i. as well the
Superior to submit unto, to comport with, the Christian advice, the reasonable
and equitable requests and demands of the Inferior, as on the contrary. He
does not here speak of that subjection, which Christians, as well as others,
stand bound to exhibit, in a politic consideration; but of that, which they
ought to practice among themselves in their Christian communion, and in a
spiritual consideration. And thus Peter accords with Paul, who injoyn's the
Ephesians to submit themselves one unto another in the fear of God. ^ph. 5 21.
Thus we see, how the main pillars, upon which the Doctor build's his Answer
to his Objection, fail him: so that the Objection remain's still in full force,
strength, and virtue, (the said Answer notwithstanding) and consequently, the
Interpretation assaulted by the Objection, falls before it (though upon another
account also, which has been fairly cast up, it be null.)

But though the Scriptures be but strait-handed toward him Sect. 20.
in his conceit, his confidence is very great, and hardly to be born, that
Reason will deal bountifully by him. Passing by his impertinent demands. 1.
Whether, if Adam and his posterity H. (...) Humble Address* etc. page 8, 9.
had remained in that innocence* wherein both he, and they in him, were
created, they would not have been capable of positive precepts in order to a
civil life, and consequently whether in reason some one, or more men should not
have had superiority over all others, Parents over children, and the like. 2.
Whether the diverse orders and subordination of the Angels that never fell, be
not an evidence, that even in state of innocence God designed superiority, not
equality; passing by (I say) these impertinencies, wherein he plainly confounds
natural superiority, with civil, and which by himself (in the very next
passage of his discourse) are rendered impertinencies indeed; let us close with
him in such allegations, wherein his cause is more nearly concerned. To prove,
that God gave not all men that freedom, which (he says) is the supposed
foundation of that Doctrine, which places supreme power in the people, he
alleges, that it is most certain that God did design and appoint Government.
But this alledgement may stand, and yet his cause fall. For what though God
design and appoint Government? does it therefore follow, that all men (viz.
collectively taken in their respective communities) were not naturally free, i.
to choose, by what kind or form of Government, they would be Governed, as
whether by Kings, or by Counsel of State, or by popular Suffrage, etc. 2. In
case of either of the two former Governments, to choose what persons they
pleased, for the administration of that Government, whereunto, they thought
good by Common consent, to subject themselves. 3. To proportion, limit, and
circumscribe that power, which they were to confer upon the Administratours of
that Government they should choose, for the exercise thereof, by what Laws, or
Covenants they pleased; only provided, that in all these they have a due
respect unto, and make a competent provision for, the due and just end of
Government; which is, the politic or civil welfare and good of the Governed?
Doubtless Gods appointment of Government, does not any ways infer a
restraint in civil or politic societies or communities of men, in respect of
any of these things. For if men set over themselves any lawful and just
Government whatsoever, sufficient for their Regulation in a politic way, they
do not at all contravene Gods appointment concerning Government, but duly
comport with it. But if the Doctors meaning be, that the Doctrine he speaks of
( which places supreme power in the people) stands upon any such foundation as
this, that God gave all men freedom, either to do what they list, or to live
without all Government; or that he gave a freedom to every, or to any
particular man, to refuse Subjection to that particular Government, which is
lawfully established in that Community, where he lives, so far as it is
lawful, he puts darkness for light, and bitter for sweet. That Doctrine is
built upon no such sand, but upon this rock, (amongst others) that no
Governor, whether Supreme, or subordinate, has any just power beyond what he
has been invested with, by that Community of men, which he Governs.

That notion, wherein the Doctor very inordinately pleases Sect. 21
himself, as if it had made him some such promise* as Peter once made to
Christ, that though all the rest of his Disciples should be offended at him,
and so forsake him, yet ^e would not, will be found deceitful upon the
weights* and serve him no better, than Peter did his Lord and Master, at whom
he was not only offended, but so deeply, as to abjure him. The notion, or
conceit we now speak of, the Doctor makes to go far, as poor men use to do
that little money they have; and spreads it very thin to make it cover two
pages, or more, of his discourse. In which respect it is somewhat hard to
gather it up clean, or fix into a regular body of an argument. Yet I suppose I
shall not eclipse any part of the glory or strength of it, by casting it into
this Hypotheticall form.

If no man by nature has power over his own life, so as that he may lawfully
kill, or destroy himself, and yet Kings have such a power over the lives of all
those, that are subject unto them, then cannot this power be derived unto Kings
by men, or from the people. Sed verum prius: ergo and posterius. The strength
of the consequence, stands in the Authority of this topique Maxim: Nihil dat
quod non habet: Nothing gives that to another, which it has not it self. And
if the consequence be tight, and will hold water, it is a clear case, that
Regal, or the supreme power, ^^ not originally in the people; but conferred
upon the Supreme Ruler immediately by God.

To this Argument I answer, by denying the consequence in the proposition. The
reason of my denial, is this: because though no man, [.i. no particular or
individual person considered apart by himself,] has by nature any such power
over his own life, as is here mentioned; yet as a Member of a Community, or
politic society of men, he has, not simply a power, but a necessity lying
upon him by way of duty, in order to the peace and civil good of this
community, to consent with others, that his life also shall be taken from him
by the hand of Justice, as well as any other man's, in case he shall wrong the
community by any crime deserving death. The power of life and death is
eminently and virtually in the people* collectively taken, though not formally.
And though no man can take away his own life, or has power over his own life,
formally; yet a man, and a body of men, have power over their own lives,
radically and virtually; in respect whereof they may render themselves to a
Magistrate and to laws, which if they violate, they must be in hazard of their
lives: and thus they virtually have power of their own lives, by putting them
under the power of good Laws for the peace and safety of the whole. This is
evident in all those, who either make, or consent to the making of, any such
Laws, which inflict death, in any case of misdemeanour deserving it. First, it
is a clear case, that they, who are entrusted with a legislative power, for the
good of that community, which intrusteth them, stand bound by way of duty, to
enact, or consent unto the continuation of Laws already enacted, for that
punishing with death, such and such Transgressors against this Community, as
Murderers, Rebels, Traitors, etc. 2. As clear it is, that the persons we
speak of, who are of duty to join in, and consent unto, the making of such
Laws, are themselves as Subject unto these Laws, being made, as other Members
of the same community. 3. It is as little questionable, as either of the
former, but that these persons, both before, and at the time of their making,
or consenting unto such Laws* clearly know, that themselves are, must, and
ought to be, thus subject unto them. Therefore it is a noonday truth, that men
by nature have such a power over their lives, as voluntarily according to a due
course and process in Law, to expose them to the stroke of public Justice, in
case they shall offend that community, whereof they are Members, by any crime,
or crimes* worthy death. Nor has the King himself any other power over the
lives of any of his subjects, but that which is thus conditioned and limited.
The King has no power to take away the life of any of his subjects, without
cause; no nor yet for every cause; nor indeed for any cause* but that only,
which by the Law is made punishable with death. Nor has he any such power over
any of his subjects, or their lives, which enables him, to command any of them
to be their own Executioners, though by Law guilty of death, yea and sentenced
accordingly. So that that principle, Niiil dat, quod non habet, show no
countenance at all to the Doctors argument* own any relation to it. Men have
such a power over their lives, as is vested in Kings: nor could Kings have any
such power over them, as now they have, did not men themselves invest them with
it, and that in a regular and lawful way. Men have by nature a right or power
over their lives, whereby they may lawfully submit them unto the sword of a
Lawful Magistrate, and consent* that in case they shall commit things
punishable with death by the Law, they shall be taken from them thereby. And
what power have Kings over them but only (as has been said) according to the
tenor of such a submission, and consent, as this? Or upon what other account
(at least immediate) does even this power it self a cerve unto Kings, but by
the equitable force and virtue of such a submission and consent from the
people? The very image, tenor and form of the power, which Kings have over the
lives of their subjects, plainly shows it to be the offspring, or natural
issue of that power, which themselves by nature have over the same. And that
men in some cases, have not only a power by nature, but even a necessity by
Religion, to expose their lives unto death, is evident from that of the Apostle
John; Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us:
and we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren. (1. John. 3. 16.) 1. To be
always ready and willing to lay them down, upon any just occasion

Besides, if the power, which the King has over the lives of the people, were
(as the Doctor supposes) immediately from God, than he might lawfully execute
the same, and take away the lives of men, without any mediating Direction, or
warranty from any Law, at least from any politic or humane Law, whatsoever.
For certain it is, that the execution of no Commission immediately issued by
God, ought to be suspended upon, or determined or regulated by, any Commission,
or constitution of men. But whether the King has any regular or just power
over the lives of men, other than that, which is proportioned, formed, set out,
and bounded by the Laws of that State, wherein he rules, I do not much fear
to refer to the arbitration of the Doctors himself.

Again, if the power of Kings over the lives of men were Sect. 23
by immediate derivation from God, then must this power be uniform, of the ^ame
measure and extent, in all polities, and Kingdoms whatsoever. If so, then will
it follow, either that there is no just power of this kind, I mean just in the
compass of it) in any King now reigning upon the earth; or, in case there be
some one King whose power over the lives of his Subjects, is just, that the
power, which is owned or exercised by all other Kings not being every waves
commensureable with this, is unlawful and unjust. First (not to reflect upon
the Doctors abilities in the least I believe it is above their sphere, to
prove, that any King under heaven, either has, claims, or exercises any
such dim^^s^^n or exact proportion of power over the lives of his Subjects,
which upon the supposall of an immediate derivation from God, is only
competible unto him. For whatsoever proceeds immediately from God, and without
all association of second causes, for, in, or toward the production of it,
must needs be absolutely perfect and complete (for the kind.) Therefore they
who affirm that that power, which any particular King in the world, claims,
and exercises, over the lives of his subjects, is by an immediate investiture,
or derivation from God, run an extreme hazard of blaspheming God, or at least
of ascribing that to him, which is unworthy of him. Secondly, there being
scarsely two Polities, States, or Kingdoms in the world, wherein the power
claimed and exercised by their Kings, or Supreme Rulers, over the lives of
their Subjects is every ways commensurable and co-extensive, the one with the
other, it must needs follow, that the power (in this kind) generally claimed
and exercised by Kings, is irregular and unjust, and consequently not of any
immediate derivation from God.

Yet again; to aff^rm that the power which Kings have over Sect. 24
the lives of their people by immediate influx and derivation from God, is to
smite them with blindness, and to put them into as ill a capacity for the
finding of this their power, or what it is, as the m^n of Sodom were in, when
they wearied themselves with se^king ^'s door. Gen 19. 11. For what light can
such affirmers exhibit unto Kings, whereby to discover and find out the Alpha,
and Omega, the Dan and the Beersheba of such their power? If they claim and
exercise, a narrower and more contracted power, than that which is supposed to
be immediately conferred upon them by God, they make themselves transgressors
by not fulfilling the Ministry and trust, which they receive from God. If they
claim and exerci^e a larger power than that, so derived unto them, they sin on
the other hand by usurpation. To leave them to their own judgments and
consciences for their information about the true compass and content of their
power, is to turn them over to blind guides, and to tempt them to make their
lusts their Teachers. To send them to the Scriptures, or Word of God, as to the
Judicials of Moses, or the like, for their direction in this kind, is
constructively to exauthorize Statesmen, and persons of civil employment, from
legis-lation (at least in criminal matters which concern the lives of men) and
to interesse Divines and Clergymen in that affair, at whose mouths the Law of
God [.i. the mind of God in his Law] is to be sought, and (of right) should be
found. So that the Doctors opinion concerning the immediate derivation of
Kingly power from God, is of a very ensnaring nature unto Kings, of a
disturbing nature unto States, and directly tends, either to send this power
into a land of darkness, where it shall never be seen, or found, by any man,
or else to make it as unnatural and monstrous, as Kings themselves please.

Once more (and so enough of this for the present) if the said Sect. 25
Opinion be Orthodox and Authentic, then can no act of the People contribute
any thing in one kind or other, toward the investiture of the King with that
power, which he has over their lives. This is evident. For that derivation
which is immediate from God, can be no ways assisted, furthered, or promoted
by any creature, or second means. But certain it is, that the derivation of
that power we now speak of, upon the King, is either properly effected, or at
least furthered, by an act of the people, and particularly either by that act
of theirs, by which they elect, or else that, by which they create and make him
King. Ergo. The assumption stands firm, upon this ground. No King is invested
with power over the lives of the people, neither by God, nor otherwise, until
he be their King, either actually, as by Creation, Installment, or Coronation;
or designatively, as by Nomination or Election; and this either formal and
explicit, as when the people meet, and vote such, or such a man King; or else
vertuall and interpretative, as when the people having formerly consented to
receive the heir in such, or such a race or family, for their King,
successively, do not upon a vacancie of the Throne by death, express any
revokement of that their grant or consent. So then, the people must of
necessity act, either by Electing, or by Creating the King, or both, in order
to the investing of him with such a power over the lives of his Subjects, as we
speak of, before he be invested herewith: which plainly shows, that this
investiture, or power, accrueth not unto him by any immediate derivation from
God, but by the intervening (at least) of the Act of the people, either (as
has been said) Electing, or Creating him, for their King, or both. And the
Truth is, supposing that power over the lives of men* hitherto so much spoken
of, to be essential to the Kingly Office and Dignity, (which is, I question
not, the ready and round sense of the Doctor) and withal, that this power is
not derived thereunto by the people, but immediately from God, it undeniably
follows, that the people have no sufficient interest or right of power* either
to choose, or create, any King for themselves. Nor can they assure themselves,
that that person, whom they choose, create, and call their King* is truly such,
or that he has any power at all over the life's of his Subjects* unless they
suppose it to be conferred upon them by themselves* it being impossible (by
what has been argued to the contrary) that they should have any assurance,
that it is conferred upon him immediately by God.

Th^se things considered, had the Doctor (think we) any Sect. 26
such great cause to greet his Excellency, and Council of war, with such an
overweening insinuation, and conceit, not only of the high-convincing power,
but of the raritie also, and unheard-of-nesse, of his Notion, as is expressed
in these words, p. 10. For it is possible that I may put you in mind of an
evident Truth, which perhaps you have not taken notice of; that as the Original
of Government in any particular place, cannot be imagined to be by any more
then two ways, either Gods designment, or the peoples a^^; so in either of
those two cases it is God only, and not the people, that gives the power of the
sword, or the power of life to the Governor, etc. As for the evidence of
Truth, in his Notion, we have found it as clear as the Sun at midnight. For
the raritie of it, which he insinuates in those words, [ which perhaps you have
not taken notice of] the truth is, that between 30. and 40. years since, when I
was a young Student in Cambridge, such Doctrine and devises all these, that the
people in their Election do but present an empty cask unto God, and that he
fills it with the wine of Royal Power and Authority, that the Interest of the
people extend only to the nomination, or presentation of such a person unto
God, who they desire might be their King, but that the Regal power, by which he
is properly and formally constituted a King, is immediately, and independently,
in respect of any act of the people, derived unto him by God; These (I say) or
such like positions as these, were the known preferment-Divinity of the
Doctorate there, and as the common air taken in, and breathed out by those, who
lived the life of hope in the King, and sought the truth in matters of Religion
by the light of his countenance. The Doctor has accused me for a flatterer
(with much a do, it seems, to forbear a deeper charge) before his Excellency
and Council, and the whole world, pretending that he himself [as composed a man
as he is, as little subject to admiration through the abundance of knowledge in
him, as another] was amazed at the largeness and exorbitance of my expressions
that way. But whether I be a flatterer, or no, (for the Doctor, spent in his
charge, faints in his proof) most certain it is, that he, with the whole Legion
of the Royal faction, who generally hold and teach, that monster, as well in
Reason, as Religion, that Kings are contable unto none* but God, are the
firstborn of that evil generation: and by the unhappy breathing of that
fulsome and importune principle alone into the ears and spirits of Kings, have
brought a world of troubles, miseries, and calamities upon the world* yea and
have apparently consulted shame, and miscrie to Kings and Princes themselves,
both in this world, and that which is to come. But we shall not trespass upon
the tenor of our present discourse by having further to do with our Royal
Antagonist here: there is an odd reckoning of an elder date between him and
me, which I shall endeavor to set straight in convenient place: and there I
shall answer further to my charge of flattery. In the mean time, we have (I
suppose) upon sufficient and undeniable grounds evinced the superiority of the
people over the King: so that that State maxim, [ Par in parem non habet
potestatem,] Equal against equal* has no power, may stand, and yet the
capital proceedings of Parliament and High Court of Justice against the King,
stand in honor with it. But 3. Evident is is, that that Law-principle we speak
of, Par in Sect. 27
parem, etc. though in ordinary and most cases it may be admitted to umpire,
as a Truth; yet is it not of that sacred or universal Truth, but that with most
other general rules founded upon humane observation, and Authority) it suffers
the disparagement of an, Est ubi pe^cat, and may* upon circumstance, be justly
waved and declined. It is to be supposed that two neighbour-States or Nations,
one no ways relating unto the other, but in neighborhood of soil, or
te^ritorie, are ^ares equal, neither superior, neither inferior, unto other.
Yet in case the Laws of neighborhood and of Nations, be broken by the one*
the other may very lawfully repel violence with violence, and in ca^e they
have power, compel their delinquent neighbors to a regular satisfaction. In
like manner, though it should be granted, that the King* and people (in their
Representative the Parliament) are coordinate, and so equal* in their power
(which is all that the more considerate party of Royallists claim on the Kings
behalf) yet in case the King shall turn the Interest ^f power, which he has*
against the people and be inju^io^s and oppressive unto them, they may ve^^
lawfully, and without any check from the pol^^ick axiom mentioned improve
their Interest of power to compel him to a just satisfaction or otherwise to
secure themselves from him. So that (as M^. Rutherford well observes) mutual
punishments may be, where there ^e no m^tuall relations ^f superiority and
inf^riority. (...) Re^. p (...)
From whence likewise it plainly appears, that the Rule so often repeated* and
opposed to the Parliaments proceedings against the King, only takes place in
such cases, 1. When there is a a third power lawfully constituted over both the
parties that are at variance. 2. Where recourse may be had to this power for
justice, or redress, without running an imminent hazard either of loss of
life, or of sustaining some considerable damage in the inte^^m. Out of these
two cases, (which are both cases of necessity* though in different kinds) it
may be admitted for reasonable, and equal that they that are equal, should
not exercise any power one over* or against, the other. But the case between
the King and Parliament was the former of these (as has been said) and so is
one of the two, which are reserved from the specified Rule. Yea

4 It is not only true, that in some cases (and particularly, Sect. 28
in those mentioned) Par in parem may have potestatem, one equal, exercise a
coactive power over another, but that in some cases also, even those that are
Inferior may do the like over their Superiors. Where there is a civil bound,
Covenant, or oath, between an Inferior, and a Superior, this bond or oath
being violated o^ broken by the Superior gives the Inferior a ^ight of power
to compel his Superior to the performance of the terms ^atified by this bond,
or oath. In case a Father gives bond to his s^n or makes any other civil
contract with him, valid in Law and conscience, for the pa^ment of (...)
five thousand pounds at such a day; if he pe^form not accordingly, the Son by
the Law of Nations, and by the civil Law, has a right of power to compel him
thereunto. So that though it should be supposed, that the King simply and
absolutely is Superior to his people, yet having entered into a civil, yea and
sacred covenant and bond with them the breach hereof on his part gives unto
them a Lawfullnesse of right or power, to compel him to the terms of his
agreement; or to make satisfaction for his violation of them. In such cases of
Delinquencie, as this, that superiority, which for argument sake we suppose (in
simple and absolute consideration) to be competent to the King, is for the
time, and until just satisfaction be made, forfeited unto the people, and they
made the Superior hereby. For doubtless he spoke very conformably to the Law
and light of nature, and nothing but what the Scripture it self frequently
attests, who said,

-- Fa^^^^s* quos inquinat, aequat, i.
Sin levels all* as far as it pollutes.
If then Superiors joining in any act of impiety with their inferiors, lose
the honor and dignity of their Superiorship, and render themselves as v^le
and low, as these their Inferiors, who partake in the same impiety with them;
they must needs, by the contraction of such guilt upon them, fall beneath their
Inferiors, who are innocent, and turn the Relation of Superiority and
Inferioritie between them, upside down. Therefore,

5 And lastly for this) though it should be granted, that a King (truly and
properly* so called) is either equal, or Superior, in power, to his people in
Parliament, yet being degenerated into a Tyrant, he is neither A King, and a
Tyrant, are as specifically distinct* as a lawful husband, and an adulterer.
This clea^ly appears by their respective descriptions, or definitions, which do
(...), one answer the other in a relative opposition, after the manner of two
species contra-distinguished (the one against the other) under the same genus.
He that is a Tyrant (says Aristotle) minds his own benefit, or profit [in his
Government] (...). (...)
but he that is a King, that benefit of those, that are governe^ by him. He is
a Tyrant, (says Peter Martyr) that rules contrari^ to equity, good, and the
Laws. Now certain it is, that as neither God, nor men, ever ordained that the
adulte^er should be the head of the woman, or claim, or hold any superiority
over her, whose chastity he attempts by force; So neither ever did the one or
the other, ordain by Law, or otherwise, that a Tyrant should be the politic
head of a body of people (collectively taken) or that such a body as this
should acknowledge him for their Superior. Kings themselves (in the notion of
the Civil Law* and of sound reason it self, as was formerly argued) are but
servants, or vassals, to their Kingdoms, or those respective Commonwealths
which they govern. We hold that the ^aw says with us (says Master R^therford)
that vassals lose their farm, if they pay not what is due. Now what are Kings
but vassals to the State, who if they turn Tyrants, fall from their right. (...)
Elsewhere: If a King turn a Pa^ricide, a waster and destroyer of the people, as
a man he is subject to the coa^tive power of the Laws of the Land, etc. (...)
page ^^^
If Kings in the best of their honor* according to the very tenor, and tenure
of their Office, and before any tainture with Tyranny* be the servants of their
States and people, and in this consideration are their Inferiors; how much
more when they have abused themselves with wickedness in their Government* and
violated those very Laws, which were the spirit, life, and soul of their
Authority.

That particular Christians are enjoined by God in the Scriptures Sect. 30
to obey Kings and Rulers, when they were persecutours and wicked, is no
argument at all, whereon to conclude, that therefore such Kings or Rulers, were
not the Servants of, and in their power and Authority dependent upon, those
respective States and Kingdoms, which they ruled. There is little question to
be made, but that particular Members of a Statest and bound in prudence* as
well civil, as Religious and therefore* (and in both respects) in conscience,
to yield obedience unto him in all things Lawful, until his Master, or
Lawful Superio^r, I mean, the body of that State (or in cases extraordinary*
such a part of it as shall be spirited and strengthened by God for the
atchivement) which has made him their Ruler, shall in a Regular way* dis-title
him* and take that Interest of power and Authority from him, which they gave
him: as Masters use to do by their servants, when they discharge them of their
service. But this proves not, so much as in face, that therefore the entire
body of a State, in their representative stand bound in prudence, either civil,
or religious, to continue such an Head, in the power and Authority of his
Headship over them, or to own him still for their Superior. A Corporation or
Company convened together may Lawfully do many things relating to their body,
which no single person of them may do; as (for example) they may discharge an
Officer, whom they find unfaithful in, or insufficient for, the place, wherein
he has formerly related unto the Company, which no particular person amongst
them can, or ought, to do. And certain it is, that the Apostles did not direct
their Christian precepts or exhortations concerning obedience and subjection
unto Kings, to Bodies politic, or whole States, or Kingdoms (collectively
taken) but unto Christian Churches, and the Members thereof in particular: Nor
did they undertake to umpire by any sentence or order directed unto them from
heaven, between Kings, and States, touching their civil rights, or politic
interests, but left them in these to the Regulation of the Law of nature, and
of nations.

To object, but who shall judge, whether the King be a Tyrant, Sect. 3^
or no; or, is it meet that the people, who are a party, and his enemies,
should be admitted Judges, in their own case; is but to call for an answer near
at hand. First the Laws of the land are very competent and unpartiall Judges in
such cases. If these do not, either expressly, or constructively and by
evident consequence, declare a man to be a Tyrant, it is probable that he is
not guilty: but if these speak his guiltiness in that point, the testimony
against him is sufficiently valid. If it be further demanded, but who shall
declare, or expound the Law in this case? I answer; the known Rule in the Law
is; that it (...)
appertains to them to interpret the Law, to whom it belongs to make it. Now it
being the Interest or right of the people in their Representatives, to make
their Laws, it must needs be their right also, in the same capacity, to
interpret them. If it be yet said; yea but the King is interessed in making of
Laws, as well as the people: therefore it belongs, as well unto him, as unto
them, to interpret them. I answer, no: the King is not interessed in making, 1.
in framing* or contriving Laws, but only in ratifying or confirming them. That
which he contributes toward the Laws, is only the gift of his Royal assent;
which supposes them made, before they come at him. His Assent unto the Laws
made by the people, is (in it self, and simply considered) but a State
formality, yet apprehended (it seems) of such consequence, that the people
formerly, judged it meet, to constrain him by an oath at his Coronation to
exhibit it. So that the Interest of declaring Laws, resides wholly in the
people. But

2 Where there is no opportunity for the interposure of Sect. 32
other Judges, the Law of nature and of nations, allows every man t^ judge in
his own case. When a man is encountered upon the way by a thief, who demands his
money, and in case of refusal, threatens and assaults his person, this man is
allowed by all Laws whatsoever, that yet I have heard of, but injoyne^ by the
Law of nature to become both a witness, and a Judge, yea and executioner too,
(if he knows himself able) in his own case; as 1. to say unto himself, this man
assaulteth me; and 2. to sentence him, as worthy of blows, yea of death it self
for so doing, if he refuses to desist from his attempt; yea and 3. in case of
non-desistance* to execute this sentence upon him, if he be able, by s^aying
him. When Hanun the King of the Ammonites by the counsel of his Princes, abused
(...)
David in his messengers, David took upon him (and that without the violation
of any Law) to be Judge in his own case, and committed the execution of the
sentence, which he awarded therein, unto the sword of Joab, and of the men of
war with him. So that when Kings turn Tyrants over their people, the people
themselves are competent Judges, though they be parties, and the case their
own, because they are not in a capacity of making an application or address,
unto any other Judge, for redress of their wrongs. Even as the late King took
upon him to be Judge in his own case, when he sentenced all those, who served
in the Wars on the Parliaments side against him, for Rebels and Traitors, and
commanded execution accordingly. But whether in such cases, as those lately
specified, where no recourse can be had to other judges, or in what cases
soever, men do not sin, simply by making themselves judges in their own case
(for who is there but in any case relating to him, undertakes to judge what of
right belongs unto him?) But 1. in judging partially, or unrighteously, in
their own behalf. 2. In not suffering their own judgment to be overruled by
the better sentence of a competent Judge. 3. In not abiding (with patience) by
the sentence or award of a Judge, or Judges lawfully constituted and deputed
for the cognizance of their cause, upon a pretense or supposal of in-justice in
it. Thus then it is as clear as the sun, that the topique Authority of this
saying, Par in parem non habet potestatem, reflects nothing, but peace, upon
the Sentence passed upon the KING.

Yea but (say some) we cannot approve the said sentence, as Sect. 33
just, in respect of those who awarded it. The Parliament, by whose Authority
the High Court of Justice was erected, were no legitimate, or true Parliament,
or Representative of the people; nor in a capacity of acting in a Parliamentary
way, a considerable part of their members being detained from them by force;
and those remaining, being under force. To this I answer*

1. The absence of twice so many members, as were detained from the house by
force, does not at all maim the legitimacie or truth of a Parliament, nor
disable the legal Authority of it in respect of any Parliamentary end or
purpose whatsoever; forty sitting in the House, being legally invested with
the same power for all public transactions, which four hundred, or the whole
number of them could have, in case they were present.

2. The deteinment of some of their members from them by force, does not alter
the case, in respect of nulling the Authority, or Parliamentarie power of
those, who did s^t; especially they not consenting, or being accessarie to such
their deteinment. Suppose some of their Members employed by them in carrying
Messages, or Petitions to the King, during the time of the Wars, had been
forcibly detained by him; would such a restraint laid upon them by the King,
have dissolved the Parliamentarie Authority of the House?

If it be said, Yea but the Members, who met and sat in the Sect. 34
House, during the deteinment of their Fellow Members, did unworthily in not
demanding these Fellow Members of theirs out of the hands of those, who
detained them; or, in case of being denied in this kind in not refusing to act
in a Parliamentarie way any further, until they had been re-delivered unto
them. To this I answer,

1. It does not all relate to the point in hand, whether the Members remaining
in the House, during the restraint of the other, behaved themselves worthily,
and as became them, in all points (though I have nothing to charge them with to
the con^rarie) but whether they were a legal Parliament; legal I mean in such a
sense, which imports a sufficient investiture or qualification, according to
the Laws of the Land, with Authority or rightfulnesse of power, to perform
such acts, which are lawful only for Parliaments to perform. That they were
not a legal Parliament in this sense, has not yet been proved, nor (I believe)
ever will. I have heard nothing I know nothing so much as to color, or
pretense, such a supposall.

2 They did demand the restitution of their detained Members once and again.
But to infer, from their being denied in this their demand, or from the
non-restitution of their Members (especially receiving a satisfacto^^e account
from those, who detained them, why they could not restore them,) that therefore
it had been their duty to have suspended all Parliamentarie proceedings;
considering in what a trembling and distracted posture the great affairs of the
Kingdom then stood, what is it, but to make the misery, ruin, and destruction
of the people, the duty of those, who were entrusted with the procurement of
their peace and safety? But

3. Whereas the main Objection pretends, that the Parliament, ^ect. 35
or Members remaining, who voted the Erection of the High Court of Justice,
were at the time of this transaction, and ever since, under force; unless the
Objectours will pretend to know more in this point, than these Members
themselves, they must acknowledge vanity and falsehood in such a pretense. For
these in their late Declaration of Febr. 17. 1648. published by way of Answer
to two letters sent unto them by the Scottish Commissioners, plainly deny it.
For the said Commissioners (in one of their letters) pretending, that the
exclusion of some of the Members of the house by the Soldiery, had occasioned
many others to withdraw, because they could not act as a free Parliament, they
repone to them these words ( page 15. of the said Declaration) whether this be
their judgment, or the Commissioners own, we know not* if some Members that
are absent, be of that judgment, that they cannot act freely, we neither force
their judgments, NOR FIND OUR SELV^S UNDER ANY SUCH FORCE, AS TO HINDER THE
FREE EXERCISE OF OUR OWN.

4. If the Parliament of England, because of the sequestration Sect. 36
of some of their Members by the Army, were under force, or in no capacity to
act Parliament-wise, doubtless the Parliament of Scotland now sitting, is much
more under force; and upon this account, all they have acted since the first of
their sitting, or shall act yet further, must be null; yea more formally and
apparently null, than any the Acts of the present Parliament of England. For
about six months since (the Army of the Parliament of Scotland which invaded
this Kingdom, being by the blessing of God overcome) those that now govern
affairs there (who were before oppressed by them) raised forces of their own
Authority, and by force caused them, who See the Parliaments Declaration o^
(...) 17. 16^^ Page 12. 13.
had the Parliamentary Authority, to flee from Edinburgh: and (by the help of
the English forces than in the North, invited to their assistance) did compel
the disbanding of the forces there remaining, that were raised by the
Parliament: and having modelled their own forces, did call another Parliament
while the former was (by Adjourment) continued, and gave such limitations to
the new Elections, as they judged most for the interest, safety, and peace of
that Kingdom. And that Parliament has since sat under the Protection of those
forces so raised. So that the present Parliament of England is much more free,
than the Parliament of Scotland. For 1. The Members of the former were Elected,
without any limitations prescribed to, or about, their Election; whereas the
Election of the Members of the latter was incumbered, and not carried, or made
with the like freedom. 2. The Parliament of England now in being, was not
brought in by force over the head of another Parliament legally chosen, this
being forced to flee, to make way for that, which is the case of the Scottish
Parliament. 3. (And lastly) the Parliament of England sits under the
Protection of forces raised by their whole body, and whilst all their Members
had full liberty to sit: whereas the Parliament of Scotland is attended, (for
their security) by forces raised by some few of them only; the forces raised
by their free Legal Parliament, being by force compelled to disband. But

5. That the Parliament of England acts freely, and not as Sect. 37
under any force, since the want of their secluded Members, (or at least as
freely as they did before) is evident; because they now act by the same
principles, and according to the same genius, by which they acted, whilst
those Members sat with them; though by the number, and potent influence of
these Members upon the House, matters were still overruled in opposition to
them, (as well as to the liberties and safety of the Kingdom.)

6. There is no color to judge the Parliament now sitting to be under force,
in as much as those, under whose Protection they sit, are their real,
cordial, and ^ried friends, being their own Army, raised by themselves, and
who have stood by them, and by the Kingdom, with all faithfulness, and with
the eminent hazard of their own lives, from the first until now. Do m^n use to
be afraid of their friends* their known, their long, their thoroughly
experienced friends? Suppose they had been under such a kind of force, which
had strongly inclined them to act contrary to their judgments, (I mean,
contrary to such principles, as by which* it is like, they would have acted,
in case such a force had not diverted them) yet unless it can be proved, that
those judgments of theirs, according unto which it is supposed they would have
acted, in case no force at all had influenced them, were consistent with the
liberties, peace, and safety of the Nation (which consistencie has not yet
been proved, nor ever will) there can no sufficient reason be given, why their
acts should be judged null, or illegal. It is the saying of Seneca: It is an
happy necessity, which compels men to better (...) c^^p^.
ways, than otherwise they were like to take. And in case Parliamentary Acts
should be questioned in point of legal validity, upon a supposall (yea and
this in some degree, reasonable) that Parliaments, at the time of their
transaction, were under force, or (which is the same) under fear of acting
otherwise, upon this account the validity of all Parliamentary Acts whatsoever
in this Kingdom (if not in others also) will be obnoxious, and liable unto
question. For it may very reasonably be doubted, whether any Parliament were
ever so free in the passing of any Act, but that they were under fear, either
of the King, and his power and party, on the one hand, or of the people, and
their discontent, on the other: and consequently, whether ever any Parliament
acted with such preciseness of liberty or freedom, as that the genuine and
native ducture of their judgments was no ways touched or wrought upon by any
influence of persons, or things, feared by them.

If it be yet objected: yea but it was only the House of Sect. 38
Commons, that voted the Erection of that Court of Justice, which gave sentence
against the King; The House of Lords concurred not with it. Therefore the
Authority of this Court, was illegal; it being contrary to the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, that either of the two Houses should assume unto
themselves or exercise, a complete Parliamentary power, without the concurrence
of the other. I answer

1. Many talk of the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, who (I believe)
understand not, (at least, consider not) what the word, fundamental, imports.
Certain it is, that no other Law, or Laws, of this Kingdom, can with any
propriety of speech, be termed fundamental, but only such, the observation
whereof by the body of the Kingdom, is of absolute necessity to the wel-being
of it. And no less certain it is, but that the welfare and prosperity of this
Kingdom may stand, without any house of Lords at all; and much more* without
their concurrence with whatsoever the House of Commons shall pass, in order
thereunto. Upon the same ground evident it is, that the Trial of Malefactors
or Delinquents (especially in extraordinary cas^^ of Delinquencie) by Juries,
is no fundamental Law of the Kingdom, in as much as the wel-being of the
Kingdom may subsist as well without it.

2. All Authority, and Power of Government being originally Sect. 39
and fundamentally in the people (as has been already proved at large) they
have a just and legal power (in their Representative, which is the House of
Commons, without the Lords) to act and do, whatsoever they rightly judge
conducible to their wealth and safety; especially when the Lords shall refuse
to concur with them in such things. It is unreasonable to conceive, that it
should be a matter of sin, or unlawful for a Kingdom, to make provision for it
self, and it is own good, unless such, or such a small party amongst them, who
prefer their own undue personal Interests, before the public Interest and
welfar of the Nation, should consent, and join with them therein. That Law, or
Custom of the Kingdom, which places the supreme Authority, or power of
Government* in the three Estates, of King, Lords, and Commons, does it upon
this presumption, or ground, that they all would, and should join, consent, and
agree, in, and to all such things and transactions, which make for the benefit,
and wel-being of the Kingdom So that when this presumption, ^^ ground, fails,
as when either the King, or Lords, refuse to consent unto things of such a
tendencie and import, that Law, or Custom we speak of, lose their interest and
force of Obli^^tion, yet without any violation of their intention. For it is
not imaginable that any such Law should ever be enacted, whereby a Kingdom
should be denied a liberty, or right of power, to provide for it is own
wel-being and safety, unless those that are enemies to the making of any such
provision, would consent notwithstanding that it should be made. Therefore
though the Erection of a Court of Justice by the House of Commons without the
Lords, be contrary to the letter and outside of the Law; yet a requisitenesse
of it supposed in order to the peoples good, it is of perfect compliance with
the spirit and soul of the Law. But

3 (And lastly) suppose that, (which is the height of suppositions Sent. 40
that can be made against the* Justice of that Sentence* ^ow under defense and
withal, far from truth) viz. that the Parliament, by who^e Authority the said
Court of Justice was founded and created, wa^ no formal* legal, or complete
Parliament, yet will not this neither disable the Justice, or righteousness of
the Sentence, unless it could be further supposed (which apparent Truth
prohibiteth any man to suppose) that there was some other Magistrate, one, or
more, superior in place and Authority to this Parliament, who probably would,
either have erected alike Court of Justice for the same end (I mean, for the
Capital trial of the King) or else have called him to the ^ar of some Court
of Justice already established, and prosecuted the same trial here. For
doubtless the execution of Justice and Judgment is so absolutely and
essentially necessary to the preservation and well-being of a State, or body
politic, that both the Law of God, and nature, does not only allow it i^ any
member, one, or more, of such a body, in their order, turn, and course, (1.
when those, who are peculiarly deputed for such Execution, shall neglect, or
refuse it, as viz* Magistrates, and Judges) but even calls them unto it, and
requires it at their hand, in such cases. The Execution of Justice, in order
to the peace and safety of the Public, is not a work so appropriate to the
office, or calling of a Magistrate, but that, when they in all their
subordinations shall neglect it, it devolves (as it were) of course, unto those
who are not Magistrates; yea by ^^y of duty and necessity unto such, who have
opportunity and means to perform it. This is the clear sense both of God and
men.

When God first published unto the World, that great Law Sect. 41
of Justice against murderers, (mentioned Genesis 9. 6.) he did not limit or
confine the Execution of it unto Magistrates, or draw it up in such terms as
these; Who so sheddeth man's blood, by Magistrates shall his blood be s^ed; but
thus, by man shall his blood be shed; doubtless to imply, that the Execution
of this Law does concern every man in his order and place, and not the
Magistrate only (in his) the Magistrate (indeed) first: but then others also,
under his deficiency. The like intimation (I conceive) is given afterward,
where this Law, at first given unto, and imposed generally upon, all flesh, is
particularly inserted, and that several times, amongst those Laws, which God
himself was pleased to prescribe unto the Nation of the Jews. He that smites a
man so that ^e die, shall be surely put to death. Exodus 21. 12. So again: He
that kills any man shall be surely ^ut to death. Levit. 24. 17. The word
SURELY import's* that though the Magistrate be unfaithful in his place, and
shall neglect to put the Law against murder in Execution, (which is here, it
seems, supposed, that sometimes he will do,) yet the murderer must not so
escape. He shall surely be put to death: if he, to whom it more properly and
peculiarly belongs to administer justice in this case, shall prove like a
sliding foot or broken tooth, to God, and that people, which has set him over
them, and neglect the administration, yet shall they, to whom the said
administration belongs in a secondarie and more general way, supply that
which is wanting in the Magistrate on this behalf. In like manner our Savior
himself repeating and confirming (though in other words) the same Law, Mat. 26.
52. does not express it, thus; All they that take the sword, shall perish by
the sword of the King, or of the Magistrate; as if there were none that had
right to execute justice upon such, in case these refused it; but, in the
general, and without confinement to the sword of Magistracy, thus: All they
that take the sword (viz. to do violence to the blood of any man) shall perish
by the sword. It is much considerable to the further clearing of the point in
hand, that God in delivering those politic or judicial Laws unto the Jews,
which he judged meet for their Polity, uses the same form or tenor of
compellation, wherewith and wherein he delivers the Moral Law unto them, with
the respective precepts thereof. As he directs these to the whole body of
this people, divisim and conjunctim, sometimes in the second person singular,
as THOU shall ^^^^ no ot^^r Gods before me; THOU shall not make to thy self any
graven image, etc. Sometimes again in the same person plural, as YE shall not
make with me Gods of silver, or Gods of gold, Exodus 20. 23. YE shall not
trouble any widow, etc. Exodus 22. 22. (which manner of expression implies, that
obedience unto the things commanded appertains unto and is expected from them
all,) so does he, in ^^^ delivery of the Judicial Law, and the particulars
thereof, add^^sse himself to the generality and body of the people also, a^^er
the ^ame manner. ^^ THOU ^^^ a^ H^brew servant, ^e shall (...) s^^ ^^^^s, etc.
Exodus 21. 2. THOU shall not ^uffer a witch (...) Exodus 22. 18. THOU shall not
overthrow the right of (...) Exodus 23. 6. etc. So again: Also (says (...)
Mos^^) Thou shall sp^ak unto the children of Israel, say^ (...) die and have no
son, then YE shall turn his inheritance unt^ ^is da^g^t^^. And if he have no
daug^ter, YE shall give his inheritance unto ^is brethren, etc. Numb 27. 8. 9.
see also, ve^s. 10. 11. So, YE shall appoint the Cities, to be Cities of
refuge, etc. Moreover, YE shall take no recompense for the life of the
murderer, etc. Numb. 35. 11. 31. (with many the like) This tenor and form of
words used by God himself in the promulgation of the Judicial Law, undeniably
evinceth, that the observation of this Law, in the several branches of it, did
not so relate to those, whom this people should set over themselves for
Magistrates or Judges but that they themselves were concerned, the whole body
of them, jointly and severally, to see the said Law observed and duly put in
execution as well, though not as imm^diatly or by propriety of office, as
they. The^ were first (for their own accommodation and convenience) to appoint
Rulers and Magistrates over them upon whom the Execution of these Laws should
in special manner lie: and in cases these Rulers and Magistrates proved
faithful unto them in a d^e Execution of these Laws, the people should be
looked upon by God, as having discharged their duties in this behalf b^ them
(their Rulers.) But in case these Rulers entrusted by them with the Execution
of these Laws, should prevaricate with their trust, so that the Laws we speak
of were not put in exec^tion by them, it highly concerned themselves (I mean
the body of this State, or generality of this people) one and other, without
e^ception of any, to provide for this Execution. And (questionless) upon this
account and ground it is, that when injustice, violence, and oppression are
practiced without control in a Nation, whether by Magistrates themselves
only, or by others likewise with them, the displeasure of God for these sins
is not kindled against Magistrates only, as if they alone were guilty of them,
but against the people al^o, even the generality of them; as might be showed by
many pregnant instances, both from the Scriptures, and from other Histories.
Which plainly proves a joint delinquency in the people, with their
Magistrates, in their non-execution, or non-providing (by one means or other)
for the Execution of such Laws amongst them, which are made for the due
punishment, (and so for the prevention) of unrighteousness and oppression. For
it is no ways consistent with the righteousness of God, or with that
equitablenesse of his ways (concerning which he is willing to make his enemies
themselves, Judges. Ezech. 18. 25, 29.) to punish the people for the sins of
their Rulers, unless they were their fellow-sinners.

By the way, Inferior Magistrates, yea and the generality of Sect. 42
the people, shall do well to take knowledge, how highly it concerns them, (as
they are Members of that State and Community where they live, and have much of
their peace and comfort bound up in the peace and wel-being of the public,)
diligently to consider, when their Superiors are remiss, and loose, in the
Execution of their Laws, such especially whereby such sins, which are more
provoking in the sight of God, as injustice* oppression, murder, adultery,
etc. are made punishable; that ^o they may understand, when the public peace
and ^afety call's for them to interpose and act in an extraordinary way, as
viz. by executing Justice and Judgment in their land, upon the default of
those, who bear the sword in vain, and thereby expose the land unto a curse.
Run ye to and fro (says God himself by his Prophet) through the streets of
Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, IF Y^
CAN FIND A MAN, IF THERE BE ANY THAT EXECUTES JUDGMENT, that seeks the
Truth, and I will pardon it. ^er* ^* ^


And whereas the ^act of P^in^^as, (recorded Numb. 25. 8.) Sect. 43
and which is termed by the holy Ghost, the executing of j^dgement (P^al. 106.
30.) is commonly resolved into an extraordinary instinct, or impulse of spirit,
from God, as if without some such warranti^ as this it had not been
justifiable, the resolution (I conceive) is not only reasonlesse, and without
ground* ^ut even clearly refutable by the Scripture it self. For 1. God himself
imputes the act we speak of, unto Phineas his z^al for God: because he was
zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the Children of Israel. ^um ^5 1^
Now to be zealous for God, and hereby to make an atonement for our people, is
but a regular duty, and whereunto we stand all obliged continually. 2. This
fact is said to have been imputed unto him (by God himself) for rig^te^^s^esse.
(...) 31
1. to have been commended and rewarded by him as an act of righteousness. Now
to act righteously, or work ^^g^teousnesse, does not require any extraordinary,
immediate or forcible in citation from the Spirit of God, being nothing but
what all men stand bound to perform by that standing and ordinary pre^ence and
assistance of the spirit, which is vouchsaf^d unto them, yea and which hereby
they may perform. By Faith (says the Apostle, speaking of the Saints of old)
they wrought rig^teousnesse. ^^b 11. 33.
3. The kindling of that ^lame of zeal in Phineas, by which he was strengthened
to the act we speak of, the Scripture ascribes, not unto any extraordinary
a^^^^tu^, or revelation from heaven, but to the occasional sight or beholding
of that daring wickedness in one of the people (though a great person) who, in
the sight of Moses, and of all the congregation of the Children of Israel, now
wee^ing before the door of the tabernacle of the congr^g^tion, brought along
with him a Midianitish woman, and carried her into his tent. And when Phineas
the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, saw it, ^e rose up from
amongst the congregation, and took a javelin in his hand, and went after the
man of Israel, etc. N^mb ^5* ^ 7 ^*
That which may seem most irregular in the fact* viz. that he should do that
severe Execution so suddenly, and this only upon his own evidence, and
without conviction by witnesses, etc. is reducible to terms of common
righteousness and equity, by the consideration of these three circumstances;
1. The desperate daringnesse of the impiety in both the Delinquents, especially
the man, who being an Israelite, brought an Idolatrous Woman in the sight of
Moses, and of all the congregation, and carried her into his tent. 2. This
wickedness was thus daringly and dreadlesly committed, when the wrath of God
was now kindled amongst the people, and a devouring plague set in amongst them,
which had already destroyed the lives of many thousands of them, and was
advancing in full carier to make a further slaughter, and this for the sins of
this people with the daughters of Midi^n* 3. (And lastly) it was committed i^
the sight of Moses, and of all the congregation of the Children of Israel,
whilst they were mourning and weeping before the door of the tabernacle of the
Congregation, to pacifi^ the w^ath of God, which was now fallen in so terrible
a manner upon the people. Now when there is not only a sufficient ground in
point of demerit, for the punishment inflicted upon a Male^actour, but an
addition also besides of any provoking and aggravating circumstance, one, or
more, the Justice of God in this case may well be conceived, proportionably to
allow somewhat out of course, and above the rule for ordinary cases, touching
the manner of inflicting the punishment. When a sin, which for the kind of it*
and without any aggravating circumstance, deserves death, is committed with
any unnatural, and execrable aggravation besides, God usually covers all
irregulariti^s, which are found in, or about the Execution of Justice upon the
sinner, and justifies the Execution, though it be not managed in all
circumstances according to standing rules of Justice in ordinary cases. There
is the same consideration of the fact of E^ud in killing Eglon, unto whom by
right of conquest, the Israelites had now been in subjection, 18 years. For
howsoever some Court- Rabbis, secretly to enchant Kings into Tyrants for their
unworthy ends, have endeavored to disguise the face of this example also, and
to make it look like the natural offspring of some super-Scripturall converse
between God, and the spirit of the Actour, yet has the devise been too hard
for them to perform, neither Scripture, nor sound reason, affording any
assistance to the attempt. But this by the way.

Thus then we see, that according to the Scriptures, when Sect. 44
Superior Magistrates faulter in such executions of just Laws* which properly,
and by office, belong unto them, the right of these Executions acc^ue to the
Inferior: and in case these faulter and fail likewise, the power, right, and
care of all such executions devolves, not only by way of right or power, but
of duty also, upon the people. Nor is this principle of Devolution, in case of
failer in the Superior, asserted only by God in the Scriptures: our
adversaries themselves (in the ca^se now under plea) are friendly, yea and
zealous assertours of it also The Scottish Covenanters, in the year 1639. upon
the Kings delay in calling their National Synod, published a writing to this
purpose; that the power of calling a Synod, in case the Prince be an enemy to
the Truth, or negligent in promoting the Churches good, is in the Church it
self. T^^ M^^ (...) ^^ ^^^l^nt etc. l^b 3 ^. ^^.
Mr. Prynne, borrowing Junius Brutus his pen, in case of the incroachment of
Tyranny upon the people ( w^o, as he says, are Lords of the Public) from the
Prince, and the conniveance* or collusion, of most of the Nobles, does not
only acknowledge it as a thing lawful, but enforces it as a duty and matter
of conscience, that any one of the Nobles; who considers the inc^oaching
Tyranny, and detests it from ^is soul, take care lest the Commonwealth receive
any detriment: Yea, (says he) he shall preserve the Ki^gdom even against the
Kings will and resistance, by which ^e himself becomes a King, (...)
etc. (with much more to like purpo^e) So that Mr. Prynne is clear, that in
case the next of kin refuses, he that is more remote, may lawfully take the
relict to wife* In the Tractate last mentioned, he c^teth the Judgment of
Georgius Ob^^c^us, a great Lawyer, wit^ several others, standing to the same
point. M^. R^t^e^ford, the great Patron of Presbytery, notwithstanding
patronizeth also that devolution we speak of. Convention of the Subject (says
he) in a tumultuary way, for a s^ditious end, to make War without warrant of
Law, is forbidden: but not when Religion, Laws, Liberties, invasion of foreign
enemies, neces^itat^th the subjects to convern, though the King and ordinary
Judicat^res going a corrupt way to pervert judgment, shall refuse to consent
to their conventions, etc. (...)
And more plainly in another place: When the King defends not true Religion,
but presses upon the people a false and Idolatrous Religion, in that they are
not under the King, but are presumed to have no King, eatenus, so far, and are
presumed to have the power in themselves, as if they ^ad not appointed any King
at all: as if we presume the b^dy had given to the right hand a power to war^
off strokes, and to defend the body, if the right hand should by a palsy, or
some other disease, become impotent, and be withered up; when ill is coming on
the body, it is presumed that the power of defense is recurred to the left
hand, and to the rest of the body, to defend it self in this case, as if the
body had no right hand, and had never c^mmunicated any power to the right ^and
at all. (...).
Long before him* Mr. John Knox his countryman, and great Architect of the
Presbyterian discipline in Scotland, in a general Assembl^ a^ouched it (in a
dispute against Lethington* Secretary of State) to be the judgment of Calvin,
and of the most godly and most learned Presbyterian Divines that be in Europe,
that the Inferior Magistrates, and upon their final default, the people may,
and ought to, execute their Princes for murdering or destroying there liege
Subjects. Pol^nus a learned man, and a Reformed Divine of good note, expressly
grants, that when Bishops and Ecclesiastiques are defective either in will,
or skill, for the Reformation of Religion, and the Church, laiques, or private
men, may lawfully supply their defect herein, and act the part of Bishops or
Ecclesiastical persons in such Reformation. (...)
So that opinion, which asserteth the right of Authoritative Executions, unto
Inferior Magistrates, though properly and primarily appertaining unto
Superior, when these neglect, or refuse them; and unto the people, when all
Magistracy, as well that which is Inferior, as that which is Superior,
neglect them, is no Independent opinion, much less any private opinion of mine
own: it is the signal Doctrine of the greatest Rabbis in the Presbyterian
School. Let me add this from a late writer; that from dilig^nt search m^de
into our ancient books of Law, it is affirmed, that the Peers and Barons of
England had a legal right to judge the King: which was the cause most likely
(for it could be no slight c^^se) that they were called his Peers, and Equals.
And to conclude (as to this point) this present Parliament, whilst as yet the
Legality of it was not questioned in the least through any dismembering, or
otherwise, and whilst it was (as yet it remains, for ought I know) Presbyterian
enough, viz. in May 164^. upon that Kings refusal of the Bill for the calling
of the Assembly, o^t tendered unto him, fell to argue, fully a^gued, what i^
^^c^ cas^^ might ^e done by Authority of Parliament, when the Kingdoms g^^d is
so much concerned, when a King refuses, a^^ abs^nt^th himself from the
Parliament. And at last it was brought to this Conclusion: that an Ordinance of
Parliament, wh^r^ the King is so absent, and refusing, is by the Laws of the
Land, of as good Authority to ^ind the people, for the time present, as a^ A^^
of Parliam^nt it self can be. The M^^ H^^^ ^^ ^^r^ ^. l^b ^. ^ ^^.
Therefore this Conclusion stands like a great mountain, immovable; that the
Justice and Honor of the Sentence against the late King are no ways
impa^rabl^ b^ any such supposition, as this, (be it true, or be it false) that
the present Parliament, neither is, nor was at the time, when the said Sentence
was passed, a compleatly-legall Parliament. There being no Authority in the
land Superior to it at least, which was either willing or likely, to have
brought that Grand Delinquent to condig^ punishment, the right of power, yea
the necessity of the duty, to effect it, devolved in course upon them.

But amongst all the pleas, pretexts, and pretenses levied by Sect. 48
the Ministers of London, against the Justice of the said Sentence, that
wherewith they arm themselves out of the magazine of the Covenant, is most
importune, empty, and senseless, and has been grownd to powder ten times over
by the weight of those counter-reasonings, which have fallen from many pens
upon it. But their Covenant, their solemn League and Covenant, is their
Cornu-copia, or Amalthean horn, out of which they furnish themselves withal
things necessary for the sustenance and support of the Presbyterian cause, when
it faints, and is in want. They make both Sea and Land of their Covenant* to
supply them either with fish* or flesh. It is not only a Gladius Delp^icus in
their hand, a sword wherewith they can strike both ways, but a Gladius
Versatilis, a sword which they can turn every way, to guard the entrance into
their Paradi^e (...) p^g ^^.
against all as^ailants whatsoever. By virtue of their Covenant, they claim,
and exerci^e, N^buchadnezzars prerogative: whom they will, they slay, and whom
they will they keep alive: whom they will, they set up, and whom they will,
they put down: (...).
and all this out of a conscientious observation of their solemn League and
Covenant. As they go to work in justifying of themselves, and condemning
others, in reference to the Covenant, they represent it as a Covenant
unpossible for them to break, and as unpossible for other men to keep. For let
them act in never so diametrall and keen an opposition to the greatest and
deepest engagements of this Covenant, let them seek by all the means they can
imagine, to diminish his Majesty's just Power and Greatness, let them fire the
whole Kingdom about his ears, whilst Presbytery is like to have no portion in
him; let them tread and trample upon the Rights and Privileges of Parliament,
like clay, and mire in the streets, by abetting, countenancing, encouraging,
the sons of B^lial in their affronting, threatening, ^^rcing the House; let
them, in stead of discovering with all faithfulness all Incendiaries,
Malignants, evil Instruments, in order to the bringing of them to public
trial, and that they may receive condign punishment, as the degree of their
offenses shall require, or deserve, etc. (which the Covenant imposes upon all
others, who take it) but let them (I say) instead of all this, join hand in
hand, comply, comport, consociate themselves, with Incendiar^es, Malignants,
and the worst of instruments, make Defection to the contrary party, and this
in the sight of the Sun; yea and oppose with all their might and interest in
the people, the bringing of such men to ^ublick trial, and their receiving of
co^dign ^unishment, and cry out against such, who out of Conscience of their
Covenant faithfull^ endeavor to do either, as Covenant-breakers, perjured,
unjust, bloody, murderers, etc. yet they in all these most impudent,
shameless, and broad-fac'd violations and prophanations of their Covenant,
must have the honor and repute of the most intemerate, chaste* and
superlatively-conscientious Observers and Assertours of it. On the other hand,
they who have been, and are, as careful, as strict, as unblameable, as
dwellers in houses of clay lightly could be, in performing all, and every the
Articles in this Covenant, so far as would stand with the main end and intent
of it (which indeed* interpret Conscientia, Conscience being the Interpreter,
is the Covenant) that is, who have endeavored both the Prese^vati^n, and the
Reformation of Religion, expressed in the first Article; who have in like
manner endeavored the ^xti^pation, mentioned in the second; who have also
endeavored, both the Preservations, the one, of the Rights and Privileges of
Parliament, the other, of His Majesti^s person and Authority, with, and
according to, the limitations and conditions specified, in the third Article;
who again have no less endeavored that discov^ry, that bringing to pub^ick
trial and condign punish^ent* which the fourth Article requires; yet again*
who have (after the same manner) endeavored that firm peace and union*
demanded in the fifth Article, and lastly, who have conscientio^sly exhibited
that assistance and defense, which the si^t (and last) Article requires; such
men (I say) who have th^s regularl^ and with all faithfulness, walked
according to all the engagements of the Covenant only and merely because no
worshippers of their Diana* are by these Ministers paradigmatized, reproched,
and traduced, as the most perjured Covenant-breakers under heaven. Never
(doubtless) was there any pearl ^o mudled and padle^ in the dirt with the feet
of swine, never any holy thin^ so desperately polluted and profan^d* as the
Covenant we speak of has been, and is yet daily, b^ this generation of men.

But let us join issue with them more closely, in debating that Sect. 50
clause in the Covenant, wherein they so importunely trust to render the
proceedings of the Parliament against the King, as against the Covenant also.
Herein (say they) we have covenanted, that we will sincerely, really, and
constantly etc. endeavor to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and
Authority, in the preserv^tion and defense of true Religion, and liberties of
the Kingdom. Where

1. It is very observeable, how (like unto the Scribes and Pharisees of old, as
our Savior himself deciphereth them) they title the m^^t, anise, and cummin of
the Covenant, not only with passing over, but with rising up against, the
weighty matters of the Covenant, as judgment, and mercy. If there be, or was,
any thing less considerable than other in the Covenant, I mean, of looser
connection with the main end of the Covenant (which I presume to be the peace
and happiness of the three Kingdoms) doubtless it was the Preservation of
that Person and Authority, which these men insist upon in opposition to that
great Article of the Covenant, which calls for justice and judgment,
bringing to public trial, and condign punishment, all Incendiaries,
Malignants, evil Instruments, etc. as likewise in opposition to that weighty
clause, wherein the said Covenant binds us to endeavor with our estates and
lives, to preserve the liberties of the Kingdoms. For who knows not, but that
the peace and happiness of the Kingdoms may very possibly subsist (as they
have subsisted heretofore) without that person, or his personal Authority,
whose preservation these men urge (with so much importunity) from the Covenant,
both against that Justice and Judgment, to the Execution whereof upon
delinquents, the Covenant binds, as also against that mercy to all the three
Kingdoms, which would be expressed and showed unto them, as well in the
preservation of those liberties, as in the Execution of Justice upon their
enemies, and disturbers of their peace.

2. Suppose the preservation of the Kings person, had been, Sect. 47
simply and without any limitation or condition, enjoined in the Covenant, yet
the injunction being grounded upon this presumption, that the King himself
should, and would, enter into the same Covenant with us, he refusing to come
into the bond of the Covenant, excludes himself from all the benefit overtu^ed
unto him in the Covenant upon those terms, and discharges the Covenanters,
from all Covenant-obligations relating unto him. The Author of the Discourse
entitled, Lex, Rex, was (I suppose) at the framing of the Covenant in
Scotland, yea and (probably) fashioned it both behind and before, or however,
has ploughed with a better heifer, than all our Subscriptioners have done, to
understand a right the riddle of it, yet he teaches us this Doctrine, for
truth: that if the Condition, without the which one of the parties would never
have entered in Covenant, be not performed, that person is loosed from the
Covenant. L^^ ^^g. p^g ^^.
Now I appeal to the Consciences of the Subscribers (or to as many of them, as
have taken the Covenant) whether they would have Covenanted the preservation of
the person and Authority of the King, if they had known the King would not have
Covenanted the other things with them; especially if they had known that he
would so desperately have opposed all the main ends of the Covenant, as he did.
But this nail (I remember) is driven home to the head, by that workman, who
drew up the Armies large Declaration. Therefore

3. Where a promise is either made, or sworn, conditionally; Sect. 48
especially when the performance of the condition by him, to whom, or on whose
behalf, the promise is made, or sworn, is of greater moment, than the
performance of the promise it self, in such cases it is as clear as the light,
that the nonperformance of the condition by the one party, induces a
disobligation of the other party from performance of the promise. How much
more, when there is not only a simple nonperformance of the condition, but
also a practicing with an high hand in opposition to it? First, evident it is,
that those words in the Covenant, [ in the preservation and defense of the true
Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom] import a condition to be performed on
the Kings part, without the performance whereof the Covenant obliges no man to
the preservation or defense of his Person, or Authority. If this be not the
clear meaning and importance of them, the Covenant is a Barbarian unto me: I
understand not the English of it. But if men will impose aenigm^s in the name
of Covenants, or Covenants made of riddles, they can reasonably expect no
observation of them, but only from some Oedipus, or Fortunatus, unless they
will please to send their heifer along with them. Secondly, whether the
Preservation and Defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, be
not a matter of far greater consequence, than the Preservation and Defense of
the Person and Authority of the King, I am content to leave it to the Ministers
themselves to judge, and determine. Thirdly whether the King has not all along,
since the taking of the Covenant by the Generality of the Parliament and
Kingdom, acted in a way of full opposition to the preservation and defense of
true Religion, and the Liberties ^^ the Kingdom, I do not much fear to refer to
the same arbitration. Certain I am, that (if their tongues and pens were not at
va^iance with their judgments) this was their unanimous judgment and award,
wh^^est the Parliament smiled, and the King f^owned, upon the Presbyterian
Interest. Therefore as God by his promise of ^aving those who shall believe*
stands no ways bound to save those who shall not believe; so neither does any
Covenant* or promise, though made with Oath, to preserve and defen^^ the ^ings
Person and Authority, in case ^e shall preserve the true Religion and Lib^^ties
of the Kingdom oblige any man to the preservati^n or defense of either, when
the King acts destructively, either to the true R^ligi^n, or to the Liberties
of the Kingdom, least of all when he acts destr^ctively unto both. M^. Prynne
himself ( approbante calam^) cites these words (amongst many others of like
import) out of J^^tus Brutus. Therefore the people are obliged to the Prince
under a condition; the Prince, purely to the people. Therefore if the condition
be not fulfilled, the people are unbound, and the Contract* void, the
Obligation null in Law it self. (...)
Nay

4 The truth is, all things duly considered, that the Covenant Sect. 49
does not more, if so much promi^e* or overture unto the King, the preservation
or defense of ^is Person, or Authority, by those that should take it, as
threaten him with the neglect, yea and ruin, of both, from them* Thus far the
case is evident: he that promises upon condition, intimates, and (to a degree)
threatens, nonperformance of promise, in case the condition be not performed;
(especially when the performance of the condition is of much concernment to
him, that makes the promise) Suppose that God should only have made such a
promise as this unto the world* Whosoever believes in my Son Christ, shall be
saved, without the explicit addition of this threatening* but he that believes
not shall be damned; it had been a pregnant Item and caveat given unto the
world, not to have expected salvation from him, unless they believed. Yea the
promise ^^ self contains a tacit threatening of condemnation unto those, who
believe not. Nor is it a thing reasonable or worthy of God* to conceive* that
he in a most serious and solemn manner, and when he would speak most like unto
himself, should promise salvation unto the world upon condition that men
believe; and yet at the same time intend to save them, whether they believed,
or no. Nor would it be in men any thing less than taking the Name of God in
vain, to swear in a solemn manner, and with ^ands lifted up to heaven, the
preservation and defense of the Kings Person and Authority, upon condition,
that he prese^v^ and defend the true Religi^n and Liberties of the Kingdom, and
yet to tell or intimate unto him at the same time, that they will preserve and
defend his Person and A^thority, whether he preserves Religion* and Liberties,
or no.

5 If there be any thing in the Vow, Protestation, or Covenant Sect. 50
against bringing the King to a judiciary Trial, and sentencing him according
to his demerits, the Ministers themselves are far deeper in the condemnation of
tran^gr^ssours, than those that have acted in or toward* this bringing of him
to trial, or, that have given Sentence against him, at least in respect of any
guilt contracted by them, by either of these transactions.) In so much that
that of the Apostle may be applied* and spoken unto them (with aggravation and
advantage:) Therefore thou art in excuseable, O ^an, whosoever thou art, that
judge* for wherein thou judge another, thou cond^m^est thy self: for thou
that judge, do the same things. ^^m. ^* ^*
The Ministers were they who deposed the King: and consequently, who according
to the common and known process of Law and Justice in the Kingdom, exposed him
both to that judiciary Trial* whereunto he was brought, as also to that
Sentence, which passed upon him. For a King deposed, is no longer a King, but a
Subject: and consequently, as subject (I mean, according to the ordinary
current* and course of things) unto Law and Justice, as ordinary Subjects are.
The Ministers (with their party) clearly deposed the King, when they denied
their subjection unto him, withdrew their obedience from him, acknowledged and
submitted unto a power as Superior unto his, ( viz. the Parliament) levied war
against him, as against a Traitor, Rebel* and Enemy to the Kingdom, chased
him up and down the land from place to place, confiscated his revenews, and at
last imprisoned his person. But this Doctrine (with a further explication, and
proof of it) has been lately taught them with Authority and Power, by another
pen: Ten^^e of Ki^g^ and Magi^^^^te^* by J M p^g ^9 ^^ etc.
the Sermon being in print* needs no repetition. So then were it granted, that
the Protestation, Vow, or Covenant, did positively, and without any proviso,
enjoin the preservation of the Person and Authority of the King, neither they
who brought him to trial, nor they who sentenced him, can be looked upon as
Covenant-breakers, in either of these actions; because neither he, who was
brought to that Trial we speak of, nor he who was sentenced, was a King when
these things were done to him, but only a Subject that had been a King in his
days, but was now divested of his royal office and power, by the Ministers of
London, and their partisans, and reduced to the rank and condition of a
Subject, and this none of the greatest neither. There is not the least jot or
title in the Covenant concerning the Preservation or Defense of the Person and
Authority of any man that, sometimes was, or had been a King: nor the least
mention of any restraint from bringing to trial, or giving sentence against,
such a person, being a Delinquent; Therefore there being no Law in the Covenant
against the trial or sentencing of such a person, there can be no transgression
in either, against the Covenant. Again,

6. (And lastly) Suppose the Ministers were gratified with Sect. 51
their undue supposal, viz. that the Covenant injoyns the Pres^rvation of the
Kings Person and Authority, without any reciprocal indenting with him for the
preservation of Religion and Liberty; yet there being two express clauses in
the Covenant, the one, injoyning the preservation of the Liberties of the
Kingdoms* the other, the bringing of Incendiaries, and Malignants unto condign
punishment, either of these falling in competition with that, concerning the
preservation of the Kings person, swalloweth up the obligation thereof. For
that is a true Rule, which Peter Martyr delivers (as elsewhere I have observed)
^ht and ^^^h^, etc. p^^. 30.
that when two duties or commands meet in such a strait, that they cannot b^th
receive that honor of observance, which otherwise belongs unto them both, that
which in the judgment of the Lawgiver, is the greater, ought to be observed,
and the lesser to give place.* Now (...) P* M^^t* ^n ^ S^^ ^^* ^. ^
first, certain it is, that as well the one, as the other of these two duties,
the preservation of the liberties of the Kingdom, the bringing of In^endaries
and Delinquents to condign punishment, are far greater duties, of far greater
moment and consequence, than the Preservation of the Kings Person and
Authority. (the highest service imaginable of his Person and Authority in their
best preservation, being the procurement of these, which are very well
procureable too without them) and 2. no less certain it is, 1. that neither
the preservation of the Kingdoms Liberties; nor 2. (and this more app^rantly
th^n the former)* the bringing of Delinquents to condign Punishment, were
consistent with such a preservation of the Kings person and Authority as the
Ministers deem the Parliament, Army, and others obliged unto, by the Covenant.
Late and lamentable experience showed how near the Liberties of the Kingdom
were to ruin, by occasion of the preservation of the Kings person only, (and
that only for a season) though his Authority was kept under hatches. It was
the Preservation of his Person that gave life, and breath, and being, to those
dangerous insurrections in Kent, Essex, London, Surrey, Wales etc. by means
whereof there was but a step between the Liberties of the Kingdom and
perpetual enslavement. It was the Preservation of his Person (with hope of a
restitution of his Authority) that administered strength unto Scotland to
conceive the conquest of England, and to make the attempt by invading it with
an Army of about (if not above) 30000 men: unto whose teeth (doubtless) this
Nation had been a prey, had they not fought from heaven, had not the stars in
their courses fought against them. And had his Person still been preserved
(especially with his Authority) according to all experiments which the world
has made, and had, in such cases, yea according to all principles, as well of
Religion, as of reason and policy, it would have been a spring or fountain of
bitter waters unto the land, and a darkening of the light in the heavens
thereof. (But more of this elsewhere.) And instead of bringing Delinquents unto
condign punishment, it cannot in any rational Construction but be supposed,
that it would have been the lifting up the heads of such persons unto
undeserved places of honor. This, with the other particulars argued upon the
point of the Covenant, duly considered, is it possible to imagine, that the
Ministers should find in their judgments or consciences, or any where else,
but in their degenerous and ignoble ends, the least color or pretense, to
declaim against the Parliament (and those who adhere to them in their
proceedings) with such wide and open mouths, with such multiplied and incessant
battologies of Covenant Breaking, Covenant Breaking, Covenant Breaking, as they
do, for their honorable proceedings against, and royal execution of Justice
upon, the Person of the King? or to think that such Scriptures have any hard
aspect at all upon them, or their actions, as that which they manage against
them, Shall he prosper, shall he escape, that does such things? Or shall he
break the Covenant, and be delivered? As I live, says the Lord, seeing he
despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant (when lo, he had give^ his ^and) he
shall not escape, etc. Ezech. 17. 14* 15. etc. Have they not much more cause to
fear, that the Spirit which spe^k in such Scriptures as these, ^^eth in wait
for themselves, and will break forth as a lion out of a thicket upon them, and
devour them? Or a^^ not they the signal Cov^nant-br^ak^rs of the Nation* in
opposing and pleading against* the bringing of Incendiaries and Delinquents to
condign ^s^nishment, the Liberties of the Kingdom, the ro^ting out of
Episcopacy, the forces raised and continued by ^oth Houses of Parliament for
their just Defense? Or do they not very palpably* and in the interpretation of
all unpartial and considering men oppose all these* in pleading for the
^reservatio^ of the Kings Person and Authority, upon such malignant terms, as
they do? Do they not, in charging the Parliament and Army with breach of
Covenant, do like ^^ti^^ars wife, who accused her servant Joseph unto his
Master, of unchaste attempts; when as she her self was the impure person, and
J^seph a Mirror of that virtue, which was directly contrary to that sin,
whereof he was accused?

But what may we in a fair way* and without the least breach Se^^. 52
of Charity, judge to be the reason, why the^e Ministers, when the Sun, Moon
and Stars do not obeisance unto them, when they find themselves agrieved with
the motions of the State, and the workings of public affairs not kindly
sympathizing with their Interests, still arm themselves with the Solemn League
and Covenant to fight against those, in whose spirits, or ways, they resent
the least noncompliance with them, and their ends? Why do they still rage with
the Covenant in their mouths? why do they still make a staff of the Covenant to
strike and beat their adversaries? Questionless the thought of their heart is,
that whether the Scriptures were calc^lated for the Meridian of high
Presbytery, or no* the Covenant was: and therefore their confidence of a
blessi^g from this* upon that their Interest, is greater, than from those. They
think it impossible, by virtue of the Covenant, that any man should touch them,
and be innocent. It cannot enter into them to imagine, that the Covenant,
considering who were the compilers of it, and from whom they received it,
should suffer any man, with a good conscience, to do the Presbyterian Interest
the ^east harm; yea or to withhold their hand from a zealous promoting of it?
What? the firstborn Sons of Presbytery, draw up a Covenant for themselves, and
for the Honor of their Kingdom, and cont^ive it so weakly, so impolitickly as
to leave the takers of it at liberty, in any juncture of circumstance
whatsoever, to act contrary to their desires, contrary to the e^igencies of
their Kingdom? They must not, they dare not, they cannot, stain the glory of
their wise men, with such an imputation. Hence (I conceive) it is, that without
any more ado, without any further consideration had, than only of the
parentage and descent of the Covenant, whoever troubles them or discontenteth
them in their way, they presently arrest him at the Suite of the Cove^a^t,
making no question but that the Covenant will be too hard for him, and avenge
them on all their adversaries. But poor men* in all this they do not consider,
of whom it is written: (...). He catches the w^se in their [most emphaticall,
and signall] craft (for so the article, (...), seems to import.)

Whereas the Ministers (with their new Friends, generally) Sect. 53
seem to plead the Oath of Allegiance, together with many other O^ths, in way
of bar to the equity and lawfulness of the Parliamentary proceedings against
the late King, and to conclude all under perjury, and breach of many Oaths, who
being under the bands of these Oaths, have either assisted in, or consented
unto, the said proceedings: and posturing themselves upon this imaginary
ground, shake the dreadful rod of such Scriptures over their heads, as those
which threaten perjury, and swearing falsely;

1. I wonder not a little, how they come by a dispensation for perjury, or
oath-breaking, themselves, and that more palpable, and with more-aggravating
circumstances, than they can (so much as with color) charge upon others: or,
in case they have no such dispensation, but the guilt of the sin still cleaves
unto them, where they gat such armor of proof for their foreheads, that they
dare charge perjury upon other men. For (to omit that, which was formerly
mentioned, and has been proved to their faces by others, viz. the express
breach of all the manifold Oaths they speak of, by themselves, in such a notion
or sense, as they charge the breach of them upon others, in their fomenting,
countenancing, abetting the late Wars against the King, with other practices
relative hereunto) have they not violated the many Oaths, wherein they swear
obedience, Canonical obedience, to their Ordinaries, as Bishops, Chancellours,
etc. who knows how often?) and that in the highest way of violation that
lightly can be, viz. by swearing (point blank against those) to endeavor their
extirpation; yea and this without any declaring or acknowledgement, either by
words, or deeds (at least in public) of any unlawfulness in those Oaths, or
of any sin committed by them, in the taking of them? Nay, they have solemnly
sworn the extirpation of Prel^^te, etc. contrary to their former Oaths for the
maintaining of it; yet have they been so far from acknowledging any sin in
these former Oaths, that they have (at least some of them) avouched the
lawfulness of Episcopal Government, and professed the ground of their swearing
the extirpation of it, was only the inexpedience, or inconvenience of it for
this Nation. I believe that neither the Parliament nor any cordial unto them in
their proceedings, ever transgressed any Covenant, or Oath, so much as in the
letter or outside, when they judged the observation of them, only
inconvenient, and not sinful. May we not then retort those words upon
themselves, wherewith they causelessly strik at the honor and repute of his
Excellency, and Council: Be not deceived, God is not mocked. He knows, how
frequently you condemn that, as a great crime in others, which ^ Repre^^n^n
(...) ^^g ^^*
you would have accounted a virtue in your selves. But God, who is no respecter
of persons, allows no such rule: But

2. As Peter Martyr well observes concerning the promis^^ (...) P* M^^^. (...)
cap. ^^. ^^^^ 5
of God, that they are to be understood according to the present State and
condition of things* when they are made: meaning, that no performance of them
is intended by God, in case men shall decline from that integrity, under which,
and in relation unto which, such and such promises were made unto them (whereof
very many examples might be produced from the Scriptures) so neither are the
promises of men, whether made with Oath* or without, to be so taken or
understood, as if the makers of them stood bound to perform the terms of them,
under any possible change or alteration whatsoever in the persons to whom they
are made. If I should promise, and (suppose) bind my self by Oath* by such a
day to deliver back a sword, unto my friend, which I borrowed of him; in case
this friend of mine shall in the interim fall distracted, or mad, I am so far
from being bound to make good my promise unto him, that I should ^in in so
doing, and bring the guilt of all the evil, which this ^n shall do by means of
the sword so by me delivered unto him, upon mine own head. Suppose a State or
Prince, should swear a Covenant, or League of perpetual Amity, with another
Prince or State; in case this Prince or State shall at any time in an hostile
manner invade the territory of the other, the State or Prince invaded are
disobliged from all engagements by such an Oath. Chrysostom writing upon those
words, Matthew. 19. 28. Verily I say unto you, that you who have followed me, in
the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory,
shall also sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel; Demands
thus: what then? shall Jud^^ sit? no, at no hand. How then does he say, that
you shall sit upon twelve Thrones? how shall the contents of the promise ^e
fulfilled? For answer to this question, he refers us to Jer. 18. 9. 10. and to
Genesis 9. 2. In the former of these places, the righteous God speaks thus by
his Prophet. ^t what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning
a Kingdom, to build and to plant it, if it does evil in my sight, that it obey
not my voice, then I will repent of the good, wherewith I said, I would benefit
them. (See an example answering this rule, 1 Samuel 2. 30.) In the latter, thus:
And the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the
Earth, etc. Why this promise of God is not made good unto men, but on the
contrary, the fear of many beasts, as of lions, wolves etc. is upon men, he
gives this reason: He (meaning, man) showed himself unworthy of this command.
(...).
This (says he) is Judas his case; meaning, that though the promise of sitting
upon a Throne was made unto him, as well as unto any other of the Apostles, yet
by reason of that change which afterward appeared in him through his
wickedness, he forfeited and lost his right of interest in that promise:
neither was it any part of the Lord Christ his intent in that general promise,
at the making of it (though no such exception or proviso was expressed) to
obliege himself unto any the rest of the Apostles for matter of actual
performance, but only upon supposition, or condition, of their perseverance
unto the end in that course of following him, wherein they pleased him at the
time, when the promise was made by him. Nor does any promise, though confirmed
by an Oath, of Allegiance, obedience, or subjection unto a King, and his
Successour^ or Posterity, bind any longer, or otherwise, either before God, or
m^n, than whilst, and as, this King, or his Successors, shall continue in the
same depor^ of themselves in the discharg^ of their trust, and administration
of their power, whereby they commended themselves unto us at the time, when we
swear such Allegiance unto them, and in consideration, and expectation whereof
the same was sworn by us. Therefore the King being so notoriously changed from
what he was and proving so contrary to what he was expected to be, when the
Oath of Allegiance was taken by us and in respect of which it was taken, as the
late administration of his power to the destroying of the lives of his
Subjects, and the miserable devastation of his Kingdom plainly declare him to
have been; evident it is, that God himself by the tenor and import of his
promises, and Jesus Christ by the like tenor and import of his together with
the (...) C^^^ ^^g ^^.
Law of nature, and all principl^s of reason, equity, yea and common sense it
self, fully and fairly di^charge and acquit us from all engagements or ties,
which the ^at^ of Allegiance, at the time of our taking it, laid upon us.

3 (And lastly) when the Ob^ervation of Promi^es, Vows, Se^^. 55
P^^t^stations Covenants or Oaths must of necessity be accompanied with sin* as
either with the perpetration of that which is evil* or with the omission of
somewhat that it is morally good, it is so far from being necessary, or matter
of duty, that it is plainly* and without, and above all con^radiction, sinful.
For was it lawful for Hero^ to behead John the Baptist, because he had bound
himself unto it by an Oath? Or had it not been sinful in those Jews who bound
themselves with a^ Oath of ex^cration, not to eat or drink ^^ll they had killed
Paul if they had destroyed their own lives by famine, in observation of their
Oath? I do not compare these Oaths, with the Oath of A^legiance in respect of
the lawfulness* or unlawfulness, of taking (I acknowledge the taking of the
latter, to be much more lawful, than of either of the former) but in respect
of the lawfulness, or unlawfulness, of keeping them: and affirm, that in this
respect the juncture of circumstances considered, the Observation of the latter
by the Parliament, would have been as sinful to them, as the Observation of
the other was, or would have been, had they been observed. For it being as well
unlawful for a People to suffer their land to remain under a pollution, though
brought upon it by another, when God put an opportunity into their hand to
purge it, as it is to pollute it themselves; and the purgation of this land
being utterly incompatible and inconsistent with such an Observation of the
Oath of Allegiance by the Parliament and Army, as the Ministers pressed them
unto, evident it is that this observation of it, had been sinful; yea and had
increased the pollution of the land, in stead of purging it. For 1. that the
land, before the ^entence passed, and executed upon the King, was polluted (and
that with a very grievous pollution, so much innocent blood having been shed in
it) is evident: for God himself says, that, for blood, it defiles (or
polluteth the ^an^. Nu^ ^^* ^3.
If you ask, how, or in what sense, or respect, blood is said to poll^te or
defile a ^and; I answer, first, it does no^ pollute it ceremonially: moral
sins* amongst which murder, or the shedding of innocent blood, is one of the
firstborn, are not wont to defile cerem^nial^y. Secondly, the original (...)
translated, defiles, signifies (as Mr. Ainsworth explaineth it, and Arias
Monta^us rendereth it) impi^usly, staineth, ^ouly de^ormeth. Thirdly, the same
word is used to express that defilement of a land, which it contracteth by
spiritual whoredoms, or idolatries committed in it. Jer. 3. 2, 9, etc. Hereupon
the ancient H^b^^w Docto^s say, Thou have not any thing concerning which the
^aw gives such a charge, as for shedding of blo^d. Therefore fourthly (and
lastly) when a land is defil^^, or polluted, it imports an obnoxiou^nesse,
exposall, or nakedness of it to the stroke of the di^pleasure or just
indignation of God, see 2. Sam 21. 2. King. 24. 2, 3, 4, etc. Esa. 4. 4. Jer.
22. 3. compared with* 6. 5. Lam. 4. 13* 14. Ezekiel. 16. 38, 39. and 22* 2. ^* 4*
etc. So that a Land, or People are in a very dangerous and sad condition,
whilst they remain under pollution.

2. As certain it is, that a land which is polluted with blood, Sect. 56
cannot be recovered from under that danger of divine displeasure, whereunto it
is subjected by such a pollution, but only by the capital punishment of him*
or them, who have so polluted it. For blood (says God himself) it polluteth
the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein,
but by the blood of him that shed it. N^^ 35. ^3.
It is true* where the number of accessaries or of persons drawn in to assist
in any murtherous engagement, is very great, it is not necessary for the
purging or cleansing of the land, that the blood of them all should be shed;
especially when the Heads and Principal Actours in such engagements, are
delivered up by hand of divine Justice, to make the atonement. For though the
punishment or execution of Justice upon the murderers, which God requires in
order to the cleansing of a land (for the present polluted with blood)
requires the blood of the murderer; yet the end or intent of such punishment
or execution, is not the shedding the blood of the offender, but the effectual
prevention of like enormous crimes for the time to come. Therefore when such
punishment is inflicted upon Delinquents in this kind, or Execution of Justice
done, which may reasonably be judged efficacious for the terrifying of
bloudily-disposed men from attempts of blood afterward, it is (I conceive) a
sufficient expiation of the land, and a competent re-enstating of it in the
love and favor of God. God himself in his Law declares the end of that
punishment, which he commands to be inflicted upon malefactors, to be, the
prevention of the like evils in others afterward. For having made a severe Law
for the stoning to death of such persons, that should entice away the people to
Idolatry; But thou shall surely kill him: and again: And thou shall stone him
with stones that he die, etc. he subjoyns (as the principal thing he intended
by such an execution of Justice.) And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and
shall do no more any suc^ wickedness as this is, amongst them. (...) ^3. 1^,
1^.
A like passage we have again a few chapters after: And the man that will do
presumptuously, and will not bearken unto the Priest -- or unto the Judge, even
that man shall die: and thou shall put away the evil from Israel. And all the
people shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. (...) ^7 ^^* ^^
The meaning is not that such an universal reformation as this should
certainly, or infallibly be the fruit, or consequent of such an administration
of Justice; but that such a course, would be proper and effectual to produce
it. So then when Gods end in commanding the execution of Justice upon
malefactors, is sufficiently according to the principles of good reason, and
experience in like cases, provided for, there is no necessity of extending the
execution (especially in the height or rigor of it) any further. It is like
Saul had many accessories, and instruments, counselling and assisting him, in
the cruelty which he practiced upon the Gibeonites; yet God accepted a
sacrifice of only seven of Saul's house (himself upon another account being now
cut off by death) by way of atonement for the land.

If it be here replied and said; but why might not then the Sect. 57
King have been spared, considering that there were besides him, so many
Capital Offenders in the same engagement with him, delivered up to the stroke
of Justice? would not the cutting off of all these by the sword of Justice,
have been a sufficient atonement for the Land, and provisionall in abundance
against the like mischievous perpetrations for the future? To this I answer,

1. That when the Apostle Jude admonishes us, (...), i. to put a difference
amongst [or, between] those, on whom we show mercy, Jude ve^s. 2^.
it would be rather a deriding, then observing* of his injunction, to give most
unto those who are most unworthy, and are like with all to make the worst use,
of what is given unto them in this kind: in like manner, when there is an
opportunity (happily a necessity) of putting a difference in the execution of
Justice, it would be a provoking abuse of this opportunity in the sight of God,
and of all just men, to condemn the grasshoppers in sin, and to let the An^kims,
especially Anak himself, to escape Though the strictness of Law permit the
Creditour to fall upon the surety for the recovery of his money, when the
principal may be had, and is solvendo; yet such a practice as this would not
be of any good resentment with men of ingenuous and fair principles. I think
there are few men amongst us* but will grant, that the King was not only the
Supreme Person, but the Supreme Actour also in the tragedy of blood, which
has been lately acted upon the stage of this Nation; yea and had more of the
guilt of the blood shed in it, upon his consciensce, than all his
fellow-Actours besides, put together. His own confessions at the treaty in the
Isle o^ Wight, implied no other. Now to cut off the tail of wickedness, and to
leave the head still upon the body, what would it be, but to render Justice,
the comeliest of all virtues, as a ridiculous and deformed Monster?

2. Should Justice seize upon Inferior Delinquents only, Sect. 58
and such who have less of the evil done, upon them, and pass by him, who
has been the Grandee, and deeper in wickedness than they all; such an
administration, reason it self being Judge, would be so far from securing the
Nation from such bloody attempts against it for the future, that it would
rather be a means, or occasion to provoke and irritate the same spirit of
wickedness the second time. For if Kings, or Persons entrusted with the
Supreme Power of the Land, or with the Administration of this Power, be more
than inclinable enough to make such Tyrannous and bloody attempts upon their
Subjects, whilst as yet they know not, whether they shall suffer from the hand
of Justice, or no, in case they prosper not in their way; much more will they
be encouraged, and their hand strengthened unto such wicked practices and
engagements, when all fear in that kind shall be taken from them, by an
experimented exemption of their Persons in such a case. And if that of Solomon
be true, that because Sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the hearts of the Sons of men i^ fully set in them to do evil; much
more fully set to do evil must their hearts (...)
needs be, when they shall expect, or fear, no Execution at all, neither
speedy, nor tardy. As for Execution by a Divine hand, or punishment from God
how terrible soever they are, or may be, when they come, yet are they seldom to
Kings* or Persons in greatness of Power, of any resentment at all before.
Divine Justice before Execution, or threatenings from God, are turned i^to
straw and stubble and rotten wo^d, before Kings.

To say that Kings can do no evil, without instruments; and Se^^. 59
from hence to infer, that therefore the punishment of Instruments, is
sufficient to bind the Kings hands from doing evil, and to stop all the issues
of mischief as from him; is but to lay a foundation of sand, to build hay and
stubble upon. For 1. though no man should miscarry, or fall, under Satan's
temptation, yet Satan is nevertheless himself, as much a devil, in his
suggestions and temptations, as he could be, in case all that are tempted*
should fall by him. The evil of Kings is not eased, or diminished upon this
account, that they can purchase, or procure no Instruments, to serve them in
wicked designs: nay such a disappointment as this, unless it shall be supposed
universal, yea and upon such terms, that every person tempted by them (in this
kind) shall at the very first reject their motion with a peremptory
indignation, is like to make them so much the greater Sinners. For as beggars,
that cannot receive relief at one door, are hereby occasioned, and half
necessi^ated to re-act their parts at another: So tempters unto evil, being
under the command of such a lust, which cannot be fulfilled, without the
consent and concurrence of others there^nto, the more denials they receive, are
provoked to multiply their tentations so much the more, and to attempt the
integrity of greater numbers, and consequently to sin the more. And besides,
faint refusals, do but teach the Tempter his art more perfectly. But

2. Whilst Kings, or Persons in Sovereignity of Power, are Sect. 60
free from fear of punishment for evil practices, and consequently, at full
Liberty to assault the weaknesses and infirmities of men by their golden baits
of tentations, it is in vain to conceive or expect, that they should not be
able to raise up a generation of Instruments for their turn against any
disadvantage whatsoever. How many persons have perished and do perish daily in
the sight of the Sun, through Sat^ans temptations, and yet Satan being at
liberty to tempt, the generation of evil doers through his temptations, fails
not, abateth not, nor is like to do either, until the Tempter be tied up in
chains.

3. (And lastly) to the main Objection in hand; I answe^, Sect. 61
that had the servants only suffered from the hand of Justice, and the Master
of the house, the King, being more polluted with the blood spilt in the Land,
that they all, escaped, the Pattern in the mount (I mean, the example of God
himself in executing Judgment and Justice) had been declined, and some ignoble
slimie model of the valley followed in the stead. For the Scriptures from
place to place, still represent God as fixing his eye in special manner upon
Kings and Princes, when he threatens any severe Execution of Justice upon men
for such sins, wherein they were Actours, as well as others. And when seventy
years are accomplished, I will visit THE KING of Babel, and that Nation (says
the Lord) for their iniquities, etc. Jer. ^5. 1^
Afterward in the same Chapter: Then took I the Cup at the Lords band, and
made all people to drink, unto whom the Lord had sent me: Even Jerusalem, and
the Cities of Ju^^h, and the KINGS thereof, and the Princes thereof. Pharaoh
also KING of Egypt, and his servants, and his PRINCES, and all his people: And
all sorts of people, and all the KINGS of the land of Uz. And ALL* THE KINGS of
Tyrus, and ALL THE KINGS of Zidon, and THE KINGS of the Isles that are beyond
the Sea. And ALL THE KINGS of Arabia that dwell in the desert. And ALL THE
KINGS of Zimri, and ALL THE KINGS of Elam, and ALL THE KINGS of the Medes. And
ALL THE KINGS of the North, far and near, etc. and THE KING of She^ha^h shall
drink after them. Ve^s. 17, 1^, 19* 20, etc.
See other places of like import. Jer. 49. 3, 38. 50, 35. Hos. 5. 10. Am. 1. 4,
15. Ezekiel. 29. 3. 31. 18. Psalm. 76. 12. 110. 5, 6, etc. It were easy to make
this pile yet much greater; the holy Ghost upon all occasions seeming to make
special threasure of this Observation, that whenever the wrath of God is
revealed from heaven, (in any public manner) against the unrighte^^snesse of
men, Kings and Princes, when they are of the confederacy, are still placed by
him in the front of the Sufferers, and made to drink of the Cup of his
indignation, whosoever else escapes. Therefore the Ministers who so
importunely press the sparing of Agag, what do they else but change that
precept of Christ into an injunction of their own, wherein he commands those
that profess Faith and Interest in him, to be perfect, not as men, nor as men
count perfectness, but as their heavenly Father is perfect. (...).


By what has been argued concerning Oaths, in point of Obligation, and
Disobligation, it fully appears how irrelatively Sect. 62
to their occasion, our (...) (to speak in Mr. J^^kins Dialect, one of the
Subscribers) insist upon the severe punishment of the Kingdom of Israel, and of
Saul's ^^^t^rity in particular by God, for Saul's violation of the Oath, which
Joshua, and the children ^^^iou^ and F^^^hfull Rep^^^entation.
of Israel, ^ad swor^ unto the Gibe^nit^s. This example is just as much to
their purpose, as if I should allege the severe displeasure of God against the
Nation of the J^ws, for crucifying of Christ, to deter Judges and
Executioners of Justice in a State from putting murderers, or the most
desperate Malefactors, to death. If the Parliament, or High Court of Justice,
should have proceeded capitally against the King, in case his Government and
Deportment toward his People, had been just and peaceable, or without
sufficient and due proof made of matters and crimes against him, justly, by the
Laws of God, and men, and his own Land, deserving death, the examples of Saul's
slaying the Gibeonites contrary to Oath and Covenant, would have somewhat
parallelled the case. But the Ministers, to make the Example, so much as in
color, serviceable unto their design, must prove, either first, that the
Gibeonites, whom Saul slew in zeal to the Children of Israel, had been
murderers, and men of blood, had by inciting and joining themselves with a
discontented party of the Sons of ^elial; destroyed the Lives, burnt the Towns
and Dwellings* ruined the Esta^es of many thousand innocent persons in the
Land, etc. Or else 2. they must prove, that had these Gibeonites committed all
these horrid crimes, and crying abominations in the Land, yet God because of
the Oath and Covenant made with them, would as severely have punished the
Kingdom of Is^ael* and Saul's Posterity, as now he did in case Saul in a due and
regular process of Justice, should have put them to death. Except they can
prove both, or (at least) one of these, they do but beat the air with Saul's
sword, that slew the Gibeonites.

But how miserably, and above measure, blind, do these men Sect. 63
show themselves to be, when they call the proceedings of the Parliament and
High Court against the King, the drawing upon themselves and the Kingdom, the
blood of their Sovereign. A Vindication etc. p^g 7.
That which God, and the Scriptures expressly call a cleansing from blood, these
men (upon the matter, as expressly) call a defiling or polluting with blood. For
blood (says God, meaning, unrighteously spilt) it defiles the Land: and the
Land cannot be cleansed of the blood shed therein, but by the blood of him that
shed it. Nu^* 35 3^
Doubtless that of the Prophet has overtaken these men: Therefore night shall
be unto you for a vision, and darkness shall be unto you for a divination: and
the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.
M^^* ^^*
When David, to the great discouragement of those that had stood by him with
their lives, in his danger, mourned for his Traitorous Son Absalom, being now
dead, Joab challenges him in these words (amongst others) This day I ^erceive,
that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, than it had pleased
thee well. ^ S^^* 19. 6.
It seems the Ministers (the Vindicatours) are deeply baptized into some such
spirit: and that had the Land remained, under that great Pollution, wherewith
the King, by the blood which he had so causlesly, and so abundantly shed, had
defiled it, and the whole Nation perished, or (at least) been severely punished
by God, for the same, this would have pleased them well, so that the man of
their delight, the great Architect of all the late and present miseries and
calamities of the Nation, might have escaped. But it is the less marvail, that
these men should call the purging of a Land, the Polluting of it, considering
that it has been a stratagem of Satan in all ages, to procure his mark, or
brand, to be set upon the things of God: and to entitle himself unto such
actions, as the Author or Promotour of them, which have been signally
excellent, and in the archievement whereof the finger of God has most
appeared. Thus by his Factour Rabshakeh of old, he represented unto the people
those zealous engagements of religious Hezechiah, against Idolatry, whereunto
his heart and spirit were in special manner stirred up by God, as if they had
been horribly sacrilegious, and highly displeasing unto God. But if thou say to
me, we trust in the Lord our God; is it not he, whose high Places and Altars
Hezekia^ has taken away, ^ Es^. ^^
etc. In like manner in the days of our Savior, by his then-Agents, the
P^arisees, he sought to pos^esse the people, with the spirit of his dangerous
Errour^, viz. that when the Lord Christ cast out Devils and unclean Spirits by
the finger of God, he cast them out by no other means, than by Beelzebub the
Prince of the Devils. M^^^ 1^ ^4
Has this Blackamore changed his skin, since these days of old? Or is he not
busy at work upon the same trade, in the tongues and pens of many of his
anointed Instruments at this day, amongst us? Does not the same Spirit breathe
rank and strong in several veins both of our Ministers R^presentati^n, and
Vindication; and particularly, where they set themselves to turn the glory of
the late proceedings of his Excellency and the Army, by which they have highly
honored God, and pre^e^ved their Nation, into the shame of sin and
unworthiness? For is it not in respect of the^e actings, that they pity them
with an, alas! you have eclipsed your own glory, and bro^g^t a cloud over all
your Excellencies. You are now walking in bypath (...) Re^ p^g 9.
of your own? * And again: How is Religion made to stink through your
miscarriages, and like to become a scorn and reproach in all the (...)
Christian World! They have eclipsed their glory [by doubling the luster and
brightness of it] they have brought a cloud [wherein God dwelleth] ^ver all
their Excellencies. They have made Religion to stink through their miscarriages
[i. they have made the Religion of these Ministers to stink in the nosthrils of
all intelligent and considering men, by approving themselves so much more
righteous and Religious, than they.] Doubtless these men stand in the very
dint and sweep of that Woe, which is gone out from before the presence of God
against those, who call evil, good, and good evil: who put darkness for light,
and light for da^knesse; and bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter* Who
justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteou^ from him. ^^^ ^. ^. ^^


But the worst dead fly of all in the ^intment of these Apothecaries, Sect. 64
and that which makes it cast forth a most abominable and stinking savor, is
their insinuation, that their Opinion against the taking away the lives of
Murderers, if Kings and Tyrants, by the Sword of Justice, is first consonant
to the tenor of the S^riptures* And secondly, has allway been the constant
Judgment and Doctrine of Protestant Divines, both at home, and abroad; with
whose Judgement^ (say they) we do fully concur. Represen^^^i^n (...) 1^.
They (presently after) say of the J^suites* that they are the worst of
Papists: but certainly themselves are of the Sect of the Auto-catacr^^es, the
worst of all Sectaries. For is it possible to think, but that they know (in
their Souls and Consciences,) 1. That there is nothing in all the Scriptures,
against the cutting off o^ mu^therers, o^ capital malefactors by the sword of
the Magistrate, no though they be or have been, Kings? 2 That their Opinion in
this point, is so far from having been the constant Judgment and Doctrine of
^rotestant Divines, that there is scarce any Protestant Divine of note in any
of the Reformed Churches, but upon all occasions have declared their Judgments
to the contrary.

First, let us briefly see how ridiculously they in title the Scriptures to
their Opinion. The Apostle Jude (say they) sets a b^and upon those, who despise
Dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Woe unto them (says he) for they have
gone in the way of Cain, and run gredily after the errors of Balaam for a
reward, and perished Represent^ ^^o^, page 1^*
in the gain saying of Corah. Ergo it is not lawful for the Civil Magistrate
to put murderers to death, if they be either Kings, or Tyrants. Are not these
close Disputants? Do they not with much acuteness bring darkness out of
light, drawing a conclusion out of such premises, where neither subject, nor
predi^ate, either formally, or virtually are to be found? So again: You know
(say they) the sad examples of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, (those ^editious
Levites) in their mutinous, Rebellious, and levelling design against
Magistra^ie and Ministry, in the persons of Moses and Aaron. You take too
much upon you (said they to Moses and Aaron) seeing all the Congregation are
holy? Wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord?
Which Moses fears not to call (I know no reason why he should) a gathering
together against the Lord, and warns the people to avoid their Company, Depart
from the te^ts of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be
consumed in all their sins; After which the Earth opened his mouth, and
swallowed them up with all that appertained to them. And yet there were in the
Rebellion a considerable number of eminent men (as there was in the rebellious
Insurrections in, and about the City of late years* both Priests* and others,)
two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, men
of Renown. Ergo, It is not lawful for the C^vil Magistrates to put murderers
to death, provided that they be Kings, or Tyrants. Does not this conclusion
follow roundly from the premises? Is not the inference so pregnant and clear,
that a man without ^^es may see it as apparently as ^e that has the quickest
sight of all? yet again, they seriously beseech his Excellency and Army, ^^
learn John Baptists lesson for Soldiers; Do violence to no man, (or, put no
man in fear) neither accuse any man falsely, and be content with your wages. But
if you persist in these ways [wherein you never yet walked] behold, you have
sinned against the Lord, and be sure your sin [which you never committed] will
find you out* And take ^eed, lest when the hand of God shall overtake you and
turn the wheel over you, you be found to suffer both as evil doers, and as
busybodies (such as we are) in other men's matt^^s. (...)
Ergo* murderers, if they be either Kings or Tyrants, ought not to suffer
Capitally by the civil sword. This is a learned argument, drawn a majori ad
nihil: These (with the example of Gods severe punishment against the kingdom of
Israel and Saul's posterity* for Saul's slaying the Gibeonites, living peaceably
and harmlesly in the land, contrary unto oath; together with those other texts*
altogether as irrelative to their purpose as the former, as has been
sufficiently evinced by others, viz. Prove. 24. 21. These. 3. 6. Tit. 3. 1. Romans
13. 1. 2. are all the proofs they levy from the Scriptures to prove their
opinion, wherein they plead the Prerogative of Kingly murderers against the
express commandment of God, to be consonant unto them. Who can imagine that
forty seven men, professing Scholarship and good letters, and besides trained
up from their youth in the study and preaching of the Scriptures, should not be
able, laying their heads, their wits, their memories, their learning, their
parts (and all but their consciences, which it seems, they laid aside)
together, evidently to see and conclude, that there is not so much as a face,
no nor as the least lineament of a face in all their citations, of that
opinion, which they most importunely and imperiously seek to obtrude upon the
consciences of the General and his Council, and in them upon the world? If
they be mistaken, who judge these men, a selfcondemned generation, it is too
great an opinion of their parts, learning, and freedom from phreneticall
passions, that deceives them.

As for that which they add concerning the uniform and Sect. 66
constant judgment of Protestant Divines, both at home and abroad, as being
consonant unto theirs in the said opinion; it is next to the removing of
mountains for any considering man to believe, but that this also is affirmed by
them, not only with the secret regret, but even with the loud reclamation of
their consciences. For, not to insist upon that saying of one, who (upon good
grounds I believe) is able to make it good against all gainsayers, viz. Tenure
of Kings and Magistrates by J M. p. 29.
That there is no Protestant Church from the first Waldenses of Lions and
Languedoc to this day, but have in a round made War against a Tyrant in defense
of Religion and civil liberty, and maintained it lawful. (And if so, then much
more to proceed in a judiciary way against him, when they have opportunity) The
writings of their own Authors and Friends, persons of the same judgment, and
dear interest with themselves in the cause of Presbytery, (which it cannot
reasonably but be presumed they have read, at least some of them) are pregnant
with this opinion, that Kings in many cases of maleadministration of the trust
and power committed unto them, may lawfully be deposed, yea and sentenced with
death. Insomuch that Mr John Knox a man of renown in all the histories of
Presbytery, and who laid the corner stone of this Government in the kingdom
and Kirk of Scotland, being by a general Assembly commanded by the Nobility,
to write to Calvin and other learned men for their judgments in the question,
whether Kings in criminal causes, as of Murder, Tyranny, etc. might not
lawfully be proceeded against by their Subjects, alleged, that both himself
was fully resolved in conscience, and had heard their judgments, and had the
same opinion [ viz: that Kings might lawfully be deposed and capitally John
Knox his history of Reformation of Religion in the realm of Scotland p. 397.
dealt with in the said cases] of many the most godly and most learned that he
knew in Europe; so that if he should move the question to them again, he should
but show his own forgetfulness or inconstancy. The same Author at this
Assembly maintained openly in a dispute against Lethington Secretary of State,
that Subjects might, and ought to execute Gods judgments upon their King; that
the fact of John and others against their King, having the ground of Gods
ordinary command to put such and such offenders to death, was not
extraordinary, but to be imitated of all, that preferred the honor of God to
the affection of flesh and wicked Princes: that Kings if they offend have no
privilege to be exempted from the punishments of law, more than any other
subject; so that if the King be a Murderer, Adulterer, or Idolater, he should
suffer; not as a King but as an offender: These things he inculcates over and
over into those that were present and ads many more of the same import with
them. This pillar of Presbytery, in another book of his, having declared his
judgment freely against the establishment of Idolatrous and persecuting Kings
and Rulers by the people, advances his discourse in these words: Neither can
oath or promise bind any such people to obey and maintain Tyrants against God
and his Truth known: but if rashly they [the people] have promoted any manifest
wicked person, or yet ignorantly have chosen such an one, as after declares
himself unworthy of Regiment over the people of God (and such be all Idolatrous
and cruel persecutors) most justly may the same men depose and punish him, that
unadvisedly before they did nominate, appoint, and elect. The appel^*


The Author of the book entitled Lex, Rex, full of solid ^ec. 67.
learning and variety of reading, (supposed, as was before intimated, upon very
pregnant grounds, to be M Samuel Rutherford) maintains many positions in this
Tractate, of a close confederacy with the mentioned o^^nion of Mr Knox; as
That the King is the servant of the people, both objectively, and subjectively*
Page ^^7.
That the consciences of Inferior Judges, are immediately subordinate unto God,
not to the King* either mediately or imediately: That an inferior Judge may put
to death murderers, as having Gods sword committed unto him, no less then the
King; and though the King command the contrary: (...)
That the Sanedrims not punishing David, Bathsheba, Ioa^, was but a fact, not a
Law: (...)
That resisting of Kings that are Tyrannous, and patience, are not
inconsistent: (...)
That Christ's non-resistance has many things rare and extraordinary, and so is
no leading rule to us: (...) ^15.
That David's not invading Saul and his men, who did not aim at Arbitrary
Government, as subversion of Laws, Religion, and extirpation of those that
worshipped the God of Israel, and opposed Idolatry; but only pursuing one
single person, is far unlike to our case in England and Scotland: (...) 34^.
3^3.
That if a King turn a Parricide, a Lion, and a waster and destroyer of the
people, as a man he is subject to the coactive power of the Laws of the land:
Page 344.
That Kings are but vassals to the State, who if they turn Tyrants, fall from
their right: Page 404
To omit very many others of the same calculation with these. Hugo Grotius, as
great and learned a Royalist (I believe) as ever took hold of shield or buckler
in the defense of Prerogative; yet acknowledges, that there are seven cases
wherein the people may have most real action against the King to accuse ^nish
him. What the particular cases are, the Reader, if he please, may find in the
last mentioned Discourse. Page ^^^.
Yea Master Prynne himself, having related out of Sozomen and Ni^ephorus, the
Story of J^lian the Emperors death (reputed to be slain by a Christian
Soldier of his own Army) and the fact of the Christians at Antioch, who for
this murder instituted a public Triumph, Epiphonemas it thus: A pregnant
Evidence, that even the Primitive Christians (on whose examples and practice
our Antagonists so much depend, though to no purpose, as I have elsewhere
manifested) held it not only lawful for them to resist, but even in some
cases to flay a pe^secuting Apostatizing Tyrant, bent to subvert Religion,
Laws, Liberties; as may be further evidenced by Constantine the Great his
aiding the oppressed Christians and Romans, against the Tyranny and persecution
of the Emperors Maxentius, Maximinus, and Li^inius, even with force of arms,
with which he conquered these persecutours in sundry open Battles fought
against them, at the Christians earnest importunity. Sove^eig^ Power of P^^^
and K^^gdom^. Append ^o the forth p^^t* p. ^^6* ^^7.


I should multiply quotations from other Protestant Authors, Sect. 68
of the same character and tendencie with these already cited, by which the
constant Judgment of Protestant Divines in the Question in hand, would appear
to be quite contrary to what the Representers most unworthily affirm it to be,
but that others, and that of late, have labored so abundantly in this service.
If the Ministers will please but to peruse their Clericoclassicum, or Alarm to
a third War, (page 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.) they shall find a Constellation of many
Stars, in the Protestant Heaven, clearly shining forth light opposite to that
darkness, which they either so ignorantly, or contra-conscientiously,
attribute to them. Whereunto, if their desire of a Reformation in their
Judgments* (in case their miscarr^age issued from hence) will so far serve
them, and hold out, as to join the like perusal of a few pages ( viz. 23* 24,
25, 26, 27.) in another book lately also published by J. M entitled, The
tenure of Kings and Magistrates, doubtless they will retract that ignoble and
unclerklike assertion, wherein they affirm, that their inhumane Tenet, whereby
they cannot but encourage Kings to turn Tyrants, to commit murders, rapines,
and all manner of abominations, that Tenet of theirs (I mean) wherein they deny
unto Kings the help of that bridle for the ruling of their lusts, (more
needful for them, than for any other sort of men) the fear of death by the
sword of civil Justice upon any occasion whatsoever] to have always been the
constant Judgment and Doctrine of Protestant Divines both at home, and abroad.

Only for a cloze to the point in hand, and to convince them, (if it be
possible, and they not as yet (...)) Sect. 69
that when they wrote the words last mentioned, through a mistake they wrote
their Interests, in stead of their Consciences, I shall briefly present them
with the Judgment of two home-Authours more in the case; the one being one of
themselves, in both the Subscriptions; the other as cordial unto them, as
themselves, in the case in hand, and whose Judgment in the business cannot
lightly be more unknown unto them, than their own. The former of the two, is
Mr. Christopher Love, who intitles himself to the Pastorage of Anne
Alders-gate, as well in the Vindication, as Representation; (but since,
meeting, it seems, with better ^asturage, has voided that title for the
unprofitablenesse ^f it) a man, who (I know) counts it no robbery, to be both
a Protestant, and a Divine. Doubtless this man did not judge it (neither can
he judge it now) to be the constant Judgment and Doctrine of Protestant
Divines at home (whatsoever he might conjecture of theirs abroad) that Kings
upon no occasion, in no case whatsoever might be put to death, when he preached
first out of the Pulpit at Uxbridge to a few, and then out of the press to all
the world, that the late King was the Troubler of England, as ^chan was of
Israel subjoyning, It was the Lord that troubled ^chan, because he troubled
Israel. Oh that in this our State, Physicians would resemble God, to cut off
those from the land, that have distempered it. Melius est ut pereat UNU^, qu^m
unit as. England^ D^^t^mper: a Se^^^n preached at V^bridge before the
Commissioners appointed by the Parliament ^^ ^^^at with the King there* by Mr
L^v^* page* ^^.
Did the man cry out, O^, to have that done by the Parliament, which his
constant Judgment was could not be done without sin? If so, he has no part or
fellowship in that blessedness, which the Apostle pronounces over him* that
condemns not himself in what ^^ allows. Romans 14* ^^
Or did the wind of this man's Judgment, blow to the same point of the
compass, at which it stands both in the Representation and Vindication, when
(a few pages after in the same Sermon) he dogmatized thus: Men who lie under
the guilt of much innocent blood, are not meet persons to be at peace with,
till all the guilt of blood be expiated and avenged, either by the sword of the
Law, or by the Law of the sword: else a Peace can neither be safe or just.
Though I do not find any great store of good sense in this period, (which
seems to suppose, that a Peace can neither ^e safe or just with a person
guilty of much innocent blood, until he be dead) yet the Author clearly
supposes, ^. That the King lay under the guilt of much innocent blood. 2. that
such guilt ought to be expiated and avenged by the sword, either of the
Magistrate, or the Soldier. His meaning cannot be, that the guilt contracted
by, and which lay upon the King, should be expiated or avenged upon the person
of another man (though this seems to b^ M^. Gerees Divinity Might ove^^oming
Right, pa^. ^^ etc.
) because the Peace now endeavored by Treaty, was to have been made and
concluded chiefly with the King. If then Mr. Love be so infected with the
dangerous Error of ^uto-catacritisme, I fear there are very many of his
fellow-Subscribers in the same Condemnation with him. For it is well known, and
commonly talked, that the Sons of high Presbytery have still in matters of
opinion relating to their Interest, but one Judgment amongst them, which
serves them all, and which they weather, as Mariners do their sail^, upon all
occasions, according to the shiftings of the wind.

The latter of the two home-Authours mentioned, is M^ William Sect. 70
Prynne, who though no Divine by profession, yet a Protestant, yea and a Divine
too, both by competency of faculty, and super-frequencie of engagement, since
the sitting of this present Parliament has written and published a large
volume, entitled The Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms; wherein (if
the frontispiece be not too high for the edifice) the Superiority of our own,
and m^st other foreign Parliaments, States, Kingdoms, Magistrates,
Colle^tively con^idered) over and above their lawful Emperors, Kings,
Princes, is abundantly evinced, confirmed by pr^gnant Re^sons* Resolutions*
Precedents Histories, Authorites of all sorts, the contrary refelled. -- And
all Objections, Calumnies of the King, his Council, Royalists, Mal^gnants,
Delinquents, Papists, against this present Parliaments proceedings, (pretended
to be exceeding derogatorie to the Kings Supremacy, and Subjects liberty)
satisfactorily answered, refu^ed, diss^pated in all particulars. This book, all
circumstances considered, as 1. the subject matter of it, 2. the Author of it,
a man of ^minent learning, and great Mecenas to the Pr^^byterian cause, 3. the
largeness and comprehensive fullness of the discourse, 4. the ti^e, wherein it
had been ^xtant, and every where to ^e had, when the Ministers subscribed their
Representation and Vindication, being four or five years (at the least,) 5. the
Grand and pressing occasion, which of later times lay upon all conscientious
men, and more especially upon them themselves, in regard of their solemn
undertakings to Stigmatize (as they have done) the proceedings against the
King, to inquire into the argument for satisfaction; all these circumstances (I
say) with some others of like nature duly considered, is it possible to imagine
that the Ministers had not seen this book, or at least known or heard of the
judgment of the Author therein, about that great question concerning the
power of Parliaments over Kings, so largely there debated, when they subscribed
both the said Subscriptions? If they had done either the one or the other, how
shall not their consciences sweat blood, for affirming that it has always
been the constant judgment and Doctrine of Protestant Divines, that Kings
ought not to suffer from the sword of justice for any perpetrations or crimes
whatsoever. For unless this be their meaning in their stingling and aspersive
language, wherein they profess, that they disclaim, detest, abhor the wicked
and bloody Tenets and Practices of J^suits -- and the murdering of Kings by
any, though under the most specious and colorable pretenses; they do but
baffle their simple Reader, speaking nothing at all to the business in issue.
For who, or which of those, to whom they address in the Representation, do not
with as much clearness and simplicity of spirit as themselves disclaim,
detest, and abhor the wicked and bloody Tenets and Practices of J^suits, -- and
the murdering of Kings, though under the most specious and colorable
pretenses; if Representation page 11.
they mean nothing more than what they say in these expressions? and I wonder
upon what account men pretending to such proximity unto the Heavens, in
sanctity and integrity, as they, should assume that to themselves as somewhat
emphatically excellent and singular, which is nothing but what is found in all
men (without exception) unless it be that congregation of the firstborn of
Satan the Jesuits and their Proselytes. But as commonly it fares with
tradesmen that are much behindhand with the world, and declining in their
estates, they buy dear, and sell cheap, and make all bargains to loss and
disadvantage, till they fail and sink right down; so these men having
overthrown their estates in honor and repute with men, by stretching
themselves beyond their line, and over-dealing both their wisdom and their
worth, are now from time to time (after a ^ort) necessitated to disadvantagious
tran^actions, and such, which will (I fear) in short time lay all their
grandeur and high looks in the dust.

Whereas some pretend an irregularity in the Sentence passed Sect. 71
upon the King, through a defect of President, or example, I answer, this is
the lightes^ and loosest of all pleas, that are commonly made in the case. For

1. An example, is no Rule: God made Rules, before that men, yea or himself,
made examples. Nor does he necessarily break a rule, who acts or works without
a pattern, or example. Bezal^^l and A^olia^ wrought curious work for the
tabernacle, and yet had no patterns of what they wrought, before them. When
Moses smote ^he Egyptian, who wronged the Israelite, that he died, he had no
precedent action of like nature to warrant or justify his action, yet was it
nevertheless justifiable. Nor did J^^ojada the Priest, who caused Athalia^ to
be slai^, act under the Protection of any Parallel. Instances of this kind are
without number.

2. As in descents of families, it is a thing frequent and Sect. 72
commendable, for those who succeed in the inheritance, to add to the
demesnes, with honorable industry and thrift, and to transmit the inheritance
to their Posterity with augmentation: so for any age, or generation of men, in
the course and current of time, to increase the threasury of virtuous and
worthy Presidents, which they received from their forefathers, by casting into
it of their own, for the greater benefit of those, to whose turn it comes to
receive life and being after them, is (or at least, ought to be) so far from
reflecting matter of disparagement upon them, that in rational Construction it
must needs be a memorial of honor unto them throughout all generations.

3. What reason can be given, why it should not be lawful Sect. 73
for the Son to be of the Fathers occupation, supposing this to have been
lawful? or for later ages, yea or this present age, not to make presidents for
those that are yet to come, as well as it was for former ages, to serve these
with the same commodity? Worthy examples of former times are directive, and
engaging, but not exclusive, or confining. Nay,

4. Considering, that of the Prophet David, Day unto day Sect. 74
utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge; Psalm. 19 2.
i. That every succeeding age has an opportunity of being wiser then the
former, by having the experience of the wisdom of the former given in unto it
by way of advance, the best and richest capacity of making Presidents ought
still to be adjudged to the present age. And therefore as it would be a very
simple kind of reasoning to infer thus: A man whilst he was a child, a youth, a
young man, did not buy land, govern a family* bear office in a Commonwealth
etc. Therefore he ought to do none of these things now he is come to be a man;
So is it not an argument of much more conviction, which concludes thus; The
world in the Infancy, youth, middle age of it, did neither so nor so, did not
provide for it is own peace and safety by the arreignment of their Kings, when
they turned Tyrants, and Destroyers of their people: therefore the world in the
maturitie and perfection of it, ought not to do it.

5. Christians are in special manner enjoined to president good Sect. 75
works (for so the Original, (...), bears) i. to (...) 14
make new patterns, or presidents of virtuous and worthy actions, for others to
follow, and work by: yea and not simply to V^.
make such presidents, as these, but, (...), i. to be careful, or industrious
about making them, or, to make them; to inquire where others have been dark, or
defective in the knowledge of the will of God, or in the practice of it, and to
supply the one by their diligence in inquiring out the truth, and the other, by
their faithfulness and conscientiousnesse in the practicing of it being known.
But Sect. 76


6. (And lastly, to this) the Truth is, that they do but unworthily defame the
Justice and Wisdom of the world in former ages, who render it as defective in
Presidents of the deposall, arreignment, and Execution of Kings, upon
perpetrations deserving death. There are some pieces published of late, where
presidents of this kind, are to be seen as plentiful, as silver, or Cedars
were in Jerusalem in the days of Solomon, who made the one to be as stones,
and the other, as Sycom^r^-trees, which grow abundantly in the plain. 1 King
^^. ^
In one of these you may read, that when the Romans, their Empire decaying, had
quitted and relinquished what right they had by conquest to this Island, and
re^igned it all into the peoples hands, the people thus reinvested with their
original Right, about the year 446, both elected them Kings whom they thought
best (the first British Kings that ever reigned here since the Romans) and by
the same right, when they apprehended cause, usually deposed* and put them to
death. Te^^re of Kings and Magistrates by J. ^. page ^4.
The same Author (not long after) reports from Sleidan, that in the ye^r,
1546. the Duke of Saxony, Landgrave of Hessen, and the who^e Protestant
League, raised open War against Charles the fifth their Emperor, sent him a
defiance, renounced all Faith and Allegiance toward him, and debated long in
counsel whether they should give him so much as the title of Caesar. Let all men
judge what this wanted of deposing, or killing, but the power to do it. He
adds, that in the year 1559. the Scottish Protestants claiming promise of their
Queen Regent for Liberty of Conscience, she answering that promises were not to
be claimed of Princes beyond what was commodious for them to grant, told her to
her face at the Parliament then at Sterling, that if it were so, they renounced
their obedience, and soon after betook them to arms; glossing, that certainly,
when Allegiance is renounced, that very hour the King or Queen is (in effect)
deposed. And to let the world know (says my Author in process of discourse)
that the whole Church and Protestant State of Scotland in those purest times of
Reformation were of the same belief [ viz* that Kings* if they offend, have no
privilege to be exempted from the punishment of Laws, more than any other man]
about the year 1567, they met in the field Mary their Hereditary and lawful
Queen, took her prisoner yielding before fight, kept her in prison, and the
^ame year deposed her. And four years after that, the Scots in justification of
their deposing Queen Mary, sent Ambassadors to Queen Elisabeth, and in a
written Declaration alleged, that they had used toward her more lenity than
she had deserved, that their Ancestors had heretofore punished their Kings with
death or b^nishment: That the Scots were a free Nation, made Kings, whom they
freely chose, and with the same freedom unkinged them, if they saw cause, by
right of ancient Laws etc. Concerning the State of Holland, the same Author
says, that in the year 1681. in a general Assembly at the Hague, they abjured
all obedience and subjection to Philip King of Spain, and in a Declaration
justified their so doing; for that by hi^ tyrannous Government against faith,
so often given and broken, he had lost his right to all the Belgique Provinces;
th^^ therefore they deposed him, and declared it lawful to ^h^s^ another in his
stead. Elsewhere in the same Discourse, having given a reason why Tyrants by a
kind of natural instinct both hate and fear none more than the true Church and
Saints of God, inferrs thus: No marv^il then if since the faith of Christ
received* in purer or impurer times, to depose a King, and put him to death for
Tyranny* has been accounted so just and requisite, that neighbor Kings have
both upheld and taken part with Subjects in the action. And Ludovi^us Pius
himself an Emperor, and son of Charles the Great, being made Judge ( Du Haillan
is my Author) between M^l^gast King of the Vultzes, and his Subjects who had
depo^ed him, gave his verdict for the Subjects, and for him whom they had*
chosen in his room. (By the way he here bids us note, that the right of
electing whom they please* is by the impartial testimony of an Emperor, in the
people) for, said he, a just Prince ought to be prefered before an unjust and
the end of Government before the Prerogative. And to prove that some of our own
Monarchs have acknowledged that their high Office exempted them not from
punishment, they had the sword of Saint Edward born before them by an Officer
called Earl of the Palace, ev^n at the time of their highest pomp and
solemnity; to mind them (says Matthew Paris, the best of our Historians) that
if they erred, the sword had power to restrain them. The fact of E^ud in
killing Eglon, and so of Jehu in slaying Jehoram, the said Author reconcileth
with rules for standing practice; with much more to this purpose, which I leave
to the Readers peru^al in the discourse it self.

In another discourse lately published, we have this President Sect. 77
recorded. Brutus General of the Soldiers* and Lucr^tius Emperor of the city
of Rome, assembled the people against Tarquinius Superlus, and by their
Authority thrust him from his Royal Throne, his goods were confiscated; and if
Tarquinius had been apprehended, undoubtedly he should have been according to
the public Laws corporally punished. (...) p ^4.
The same Author subjoyneth* that Christiern lost the Crown of Denmark; Henry
that of Sweden; Mary Stuart, (King Charles his Grandmother) that of Scotland,
and Edward the second, that of England, for the same misgovernment as our late
King lost his Crown and head. The Parliament in their late Declaration mention
this last President of Edward the second; and Peter Martyr concerning that of
Christiern King of Denmark writes thus: In our days the Daues d^pos^d their
King, and kept him prisoner a long time; * where also he adds out of Pol^dore
Virgil, that the English (...) P. M^^^. ^^ ^ud ^. ^ ^. (...)
have sometimes compelled their Kings to give an account of their money or
treasure ill disposed of. Mr Prynne in his Appendix to the fourth part of the
Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, undertakes (in the front of this
Lucubration, and in the body of it performed the undertaking v^ry laudably) to
manif^st by sundry Histories, and foreign Authorities, that in the ancient
Kingdom of Rome, the Roman, Gr^ek, German Empires, the old, the peresent,
Grecian, Indian, Egyptian, French, Spanish, Gothish, Italian, Hungarian,
Polo^ian, Bohemian, Danish, Swedish, Scottish, with other foreign Kingdoms, ^ea
in the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel and other Gentile Royalties mentioned in
Scriptu^e; the Supreme Sovereign power resided not in the Emperors or Kings
themselves, but in the whole Kingdom* Senate, Parliament, State, People, who
had not only Authority to restrain, r^sist, yea call their Emperous and kings
to account, but likewise when they saw just cause, to censure, suspend, deprive
them for their Tyranny, vices, misgovernment, and sometimes CAPITALLY TO
PROCEED AGAINST THEM; with a brief answer to the contrary objections, etc.
Afterward in pursuit of this his notable engagement out of Georgius Obrec^us,
a public Professor of Law, and Advocate to the City of Strasburg, he
furnishes us with these Presidents (besides that of Tarquinius divested of his
kingdom by the people, under the conduct of Brutus and Lucretius) the Roman
Senate judged Nero an enemy of the Republic, and condemned him to the Gallows;
punished Vitellius with death, ignominiously mutilated and dragged through the
City; and spoiled Maximinus of the Empire, setting up Albinus in his place.
Thus the French by Authority of a public Council thorough the care of the
Officers of the Realm, deprived Childerick the first, Sigebert, Theordoric, and
Childerick the third of the Government. -- In the same manner M (...) ^f (...)
^n^ Kingdom* A^pend* p. ^^^.
(says the same Author from Junius Brutu^) we read Adolp^us deprived of the
German Empire, An. 1296. because corrupted with money, he had made War with
France, in favor of the English; and Wenceslaus, A* 1400. Although these may
be called not so well, evil, as less good Princes. Thus in the Realm of
England, Edward the second, for his Tyrannic to his Subjects, especially the
Nobles, whom he destroyed without hearing their cause, was at his Queens
request adjudged unworthy of his Crown by the Parliament. Not long since,
Christierne in Denmark, Ericus, in Sweden, Queen Mary very lately in Scotland
were deprived; which Histories worthy credit testify has been frequently done
in the Kidgdom of England, Hungaria, Spain, Portugal, Bohemia, and the rest.
Thus far* Mr Prynne in Precedents of Kings and Emperors deposed and punished
with death; to which you may please to add what he relates out of Sozomen and
Nicephorus, concerning the death of Julian by one of his Soldiers, and the
fact of the Christians at Antioch upon it, together with his Annotation upon
both; as they were formerly presented Sect. 67. of this discourse; beyond whom
no man that I know has travailed with his pen in asserting the Legality of
such proceedings against them. He that will please to read the History of the
Reformation of the Realm of Scotland by M John Knox, shall find many like
Presidents cited and argued from the Scriptures themselves. So that the
Parliament of England in their Judiciary process against the late king, did
not walk alone in an untrodden path, but in an highway occupied upon like
occasion, by all the chief Nations of Europe; yea by the once only
Heaven-beloved Nation of the World.

The premises from first to last considered, that Doctrine Sect. 78.
which Prerogativeth kings above the stroke of human justice, upon the account
of their being unaccountable unto men for whatsoever they do, (which the
Parliament takes notice in their Declaration of March 17. 1648. page 13. to
have been the late kings Assertion) appears to be very extravagant, and and
Eccentricall to all principles both of Reason and Religion: Such an
unaccountable Officer (as the said Declaration well expresses it) were a
strange monster to be permitted by mankind. For if the main ground of erecting
public Administrations of justice and Courts of humane judicature in all
Polities and States whatsoever, be (both in Reason and Religion) to secure and
protect those, who live justly and peaceably, against the violence and
injustice of oppressors and unjust men; it must needs be contrary unto both,
to exempt such persons from the jurisdiction of these Court and
Administrations, who have always the greatest opportunities and temptations,
and for the most part) the strongest bent of disposition and will, to practice
such unrighteousness and oppression. Put case a man has received several
wounds in fight, amongst which there is one more dangerous, and threatening
life, than all the rest; would it not be a solo^cisme in reason, for this man
with all diligence and care to send for the skilfullest Surgeon he can get,
and when he is come, to limit him in his applications to the wounds that are
less dangerous, and not to suffer him to touch or meddle with that, which is
most like to prove mortal? Again suppose an husband man has a field of goodly
corn, which he greatly desires to preserve from being either eaten up* or
trodden down, or any ways amoyed by beasts; would it not be a signal weakness
and simplicity in him, to make a tight hedge or fence round about this field on
all other parts or sides of it, and to leave that part of it open and without
all fence, which lies toward the Common, where all the Beasts in the Town
daily feed, and from whence his field is in more danger of receiving damage and
spoil, then from any other quarter? The Experience (in a manner) of all Ages,
and of all States, which have made trial of the Throne, and advanced Kings
over them, issues out this clear Observation unto us, that the little finger
of Kings has been more heavy in pressures and oppressions in their respective
Kingdoms, than the loins of other Practitioners in these ill arts. The
consideration of which misdemeanour (with others) so generally incident to this
sort of men, occasioned (doubtless) that sharp saying of an ancient Father:
Miror si aliquis Rex salvabitur; I wonder if any King over comes to be sa^ed.
(...)
And upon this account (questionless) it was (I mean, of those strong and
dangerous tentations unto violence and oppression, wherewith the power of Kings
is continually assaulted) that God himself sought to quench the heady spirit in
his people, of having a King over them, by casting this water upon it by the
hand of Samuel his servant: This will be the manner of the King that shall
reign over you: He will take your sons and appoint them for himself, for his
chariots, and to be his horsemen, and some shall run before his chariots -- and
will set them to ear his ground, and to ^eap his harvest -- And he will take
your fields, and your vine-yards, and your ^liveyards, even the best of them,
and give them to his servants. And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of
your vine-yards, and give to his Officers, and to his servants. And he will
take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men,
and your asses, and put them to his work. He will take the tenth of your sheep,
and ye shall be his servants. And ye shall cry out in that day, because of the
King, which ye shall have chosen you; and the Lord will not hear you in that
day. (...) etc.
First, when God says, this will be the manner of your King, etc. he intends
nothing less, than to assert it as the right, or due prerogative of their
King, to do all that which is specified in the Catalogue; this is a most absurd
and importune construction put upon the words by some fulsome Royalists, and
Throne-servers. Nor 2. does God, in this large Remonstrance concerning those
many grievances, and heavy pressures, which they were like to suffer by the
change of their Government, and by subjecting themselves unto Kings,
particularly reflect upon Saul, or him that should be their first King, as if
he were a man more likely to oppress them with these pressures, than his
Successors; Nor 3 does he intend any prophetical or positive assertion in
this passage, that all and every the Kings, that shall reign over them (not
happily, that any one of them in particular) should make all these sad
encroachments upon them; But (4. and lastly) the clear intent of God in
presenting such a particular and ample draught of Regal pressures unto them,
was thoroughly to possess them (and in them, all other people and Nations of
the world besides) with a clear understanding, and serious consideration, of
the many sad inconveniences and burdens, that are always like to attend upon
a Government by Kings, by reason of those many bewitching opportunities, and
temptations, (hard to be resisted by flesh and blood, especially in the
disadvantagious posture of an earthly fullness, and Grandeur) wherewith the
integrity of men of this Interest is perpetually encountered, and endangered
above measure. So then to bridle Tyrannous and oppressive dispositions in
inferior persons, with the fear of humane Justice and Laws, and to lay the
reins upon the necks of Kings, by making them unaccountable in their actions,
unto either, is, as if a man being to ride upon a sober, and well managed, or
cool metalled horse, should be very provident and careful to have all his
tackling and furniture strong, a sharp bit, tough rains, saddle, girts,
stirrups, answerable; but being to mount a steed, whose neck is clothed with
thunder Jo^ ^^. ^^.
(as God himself describes an horse of War, and fierce courage) and which is
not like to be commanded, but with acco^trements of the best for such a
purpose, should say, he needs no bridle at all, or that a bridle made of a
twine thread* or a bit made of a wreath of grass, will serve his turn. To
restrain other men by Laws, and fear of punishment* and to leave the King free,
is nothing else (being interpreted) but to invite him to accept of a pattent,
or monopoly, to practice Oppression. Certainly when God shall bind up all the
rest of the Devils in chains, he will not leave Beelzebub at liberty.
Unaccountablenesse of actions unto men, is so unreasonable, and burdensome
above measure to the spirits of all considering men, that God himself, in order
(doubtless) to that good opinion, which he desires to raise and to maintain,
of himself, in the mind of his creature, man, no where claims it, as any
prerogative which he intends to insist upon, or make use of, in his
Government of the world. Nay he frequently and in expresnesse of terms
disclaimeth it, and most graciously subjecteth himself and his actions to the
cognizance and judicature of men. And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men
of Judah, judge between me, and my vineyard. What could have been done more to
my vineyard, that I have not done in it, etc. Es^. ^ ^. ^*
So Ezekiel. 18. he appealeth over unto his people, concerning the Equity, or
equality of his ways. Hear now, O house of Israel, is not my way equal? And
again: O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal?
v. 29. Thus Peter and John likewise to the high Priest and Council; Whether it
be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than God, jUDGE YE. And
Paul to the Corinths, judge ye what I say; and yet the things, which he spoke
or said, were the things of God. If he did not allow unto men a faculty or
privilege of judging his ways and actions, would he speak thus unto them?
Yea, not with reverence only, but with the highest admiration of the
unspeakable condescension of the glorious God, be it spoken; he subjecteth
himself to a deprivation and loss of all his great Interest of service,
honor, and glory, in the world amongst men, in case upon a just and due trial,
he shall not be found, in respect of his ways, actions, and administrations in
the world, every ways worthy of them. For of what other tendencie or import,
can those words of the Prophet Eliah be supposed to be? If the Lord be God,
follow him: but if Baal, than follow him, ^ King. ^^* ^^.
Does not the Prophet (and that by commission from God himself) in these words,
give the people a full liberty to desert the worship and service of God, and to
turn Proselytes unto Baal, in case God has not, or should not, in a way of due
examination and trial, approve himself unto their judgments and consciences,
to be the true God, the omnipotent Jehovah, and Baal should do it? Sometimes
indeed God pleads the prerogative of his will in opposition to the wills, or
weak conceits of men; and so claims a liberty or power to do what he pleases:
but still he accounts for the equity or reason ableness of what he wills, or
pleases to do [as we shall, God granting life and health, demonstrate more at
large from the Scriptures, in due time.] Therefore they who would make Kings
too great, and of too sacred an investiture, to account for their ways and
actions unto men, make him greater than God himself, and crown him with a
prerogative (if yet a prerogative it be, and not a mischievous snare rather, or
an importune and fullsome attribute) which ^e that inhabiteth eternity, never
judged meet or equitable for himself to claim, or exercise, over his creature.

That confessionate strain of David unto God, Tibi soli pe^cavi, Against thee,
thee only have I sinned, is too sandy a foundation to bear the weight of such
a tower as we now speak of, whose top reaches up, not unto, but into, yea and
above, Heaven (as had been sheewed) For

1. It is senseless to imagine, that David should think, that in those sins,
for which he humbles himself before God in the Psalm, as viz. his adultery
with the wife, and murder of the Husband, he sinned not against his neighbor,
as well as against God. Certainly there is no such thing as sinning against
men, if such acts as these be not. Nor

2. Can it be proved, (nor is there the least color of reason for it) that
David in that clause pleaded any privilege or exemption for himself from
suffering the penalties of those Laws, which God himself had enacted against
murderers and Adulterers. David at this time was in no case, either in respect
of the frame or temper of his heart and soul, being sorely shaken and afflicted
with the sense of the guilt, under which he now ^ay* or in respect of his
obnoxiousnesse unto the heavy displeasure of God, to claim privileges, to
plead regal prerogatives, or to stand upon terms of Royalty with God. Therefore

3. Calvin upon the place, imports ^e words thus: Lord, though the whole
world should acquit me, yet for me ^^ think and ^ D^ t^t^ ^^s^, ^^^i tamen pl^
sa^^ est qu^^ ^^ s^^um ^^dio^^ s^.
feel that thou alone judge me, or wilt judge me, ^^ more than I am able to
bear. This is the Interpretation also of most of the Fathers.

4. Lyra glosseth the words, as if David should therefore say unto God, against
thee only have I sinned, because God only could pardon him: Hugo Cardinalis,
because God only could wash Sect. 80
him, (which he asks in the text) Junius and Tremellius upon the place
conceive, that David, in saying that he sinned only against God, means
nothing but what the Prophet Nathan charge him with, 2 King 12. 12. Thou
did it secretly, i. thou despisedst the inspection and all-seeing eye of God,
and because there was none conscious to thy sin, but those whom thou supposedst
would be secret enough in concealing it, therefore thou expectedst to escape
the shame and punishment due to it. But (says God by his Prophet) I will do
this thing (1. punish thee, as I have said) before all Israel, and before the
sun. This last exposition has credit and countenance from the words
immediately following, And done this evil in thy fight. As if he should have
said unto God, so foolish was I above measure, and so desperately full of my
wickedness, that I took care only to secure my self from the knowledge or
sight of men, but never remembered that the eyes of thy Holiness were
broad-looking upon me in the whole perpetration. In which respect I somewaies
honored men; and thou only wast he, whom I despised therein.

5. The import of the words in hand may be this; Against Sect. 81
thee, or unto thee, thee only have I sinned: 1. I do not value or weigh any
trouble, shame, or sufferings in any kind, that may come upon me for my sin,
from any other hand whatsoever, in comparison of the loss of thy favor and
displeasure; which I have cause to fear is kindled in thy breast against me. I
can bear the ignominy and reproach, or whatsoever punishment it be, that men
shall, or can inflict upon me for my sin: only the sense and dread of thy
displeasure is unsupportable unto me. But,

6ly. (And lastly) the clearest and best interpretation of the Sect. 82
clause, is (doubtless) this. Against thee, thee only have I sinned; i. I am
deeply and dreadfully sensible of those many and mighty engagements wherein I
stood obliged in conscience unto thee above all others, to walk uprightly, and
to have not only refrained, but even abhorred all such abominations, as those
whereof I now stand guilty in thy sight. So that though the love which thy
people (my Subjects) have expressed unto me, and more particularly, the
friendly respects and faithfulness of my servant Uriah toward me, were bands
and ties upon me, sufficient in a way of ingenuitie and humanity it self, to
have restrained me from those most odious and shameful practices wherein I
have now miscarried; yet am I so above measure (in my present agony)
astonished, with the consideration of the number and weight of those
infinitelygreater bands, wherein I stood bound in duty and conscience unto thee
(all which I have des^ised and trampled upon in these provocations) that I am
sensible of no wrong, no injury I have done to men, but only of that measure
of vileness and unthankfulness, which I have measured out unto thee. Against
thee, thee only etc. This interpretation might be confirmed by many reasons,
as first by considering that the restrictive particle only, is frequently used
in Scripture in such a comparative sense, as the interpretation given puts upon
it in the clause under debate. See Psalm: 71 16. Mat: 4. 10, etc. Secondly, by
weighing the sequel of the context, in these words, That thou might be
justified, etc. there being nothing more proper to clear the justice of God in
punishing, than the vouchsafement of means and motives in abundance, to keep
men from sinning. Thirdly (and lastly,) by considering that nothing does more
deeply pierce or wound the conscience under the guilt of sin, than the
rememberance of those great and many engagements, which God has laid upon the
sinner, to abstain from all iniquity; as there is nothing more sovereign or
efficacious to preserve men from the perpetrating of sin, under tentation, than
such a consideration or rememberance. Genesis 39. 9 2. Sam. 12, 7, 8, 9. Mat. 18,
32, 33. etc. But I hasten.

Enough (I presume) with advantage has before this been Sect. 83
argued, to wash off the color of this plea: The proceedings against the King
are not justifiable, because he had no reasonable ground or means, whereby to
conceive or judge, that his life could lawfully be taken from him for those
crimes, for which he was sentenced. To omit several other things, which have
received a just debate, sufficient to reconcile this pretense, with the
sentence awarded against the King; that the Law of God against Murderers and
unjust shedders of blood, so often repeated in the Scriptures, so fully explained
and vindicated in this Discourse, gave light in abundance unto the King,
whereby to see and understand, that for those very crimes and bloody
perpetrations, of which he was arreigned, his life was obnoxious to the hand of
humane Justice, or rather of Divine Justice executable by the hands of men. So
that if he were ignorant of his liablenesse unto death for the misdemeanors
committed by him, it was Ignorantia Juris, non facti, which (as Aristotle
says) excuses no man. Besides, the frequent cases and examples of Justice
executed upon Kings by their Subjects, obvious as well in the Records of
Scriptures, as in the Histories of many Nations, (a first-fruit whereof has
been presented in this Treatise) were abundantly sufficient to give the light
of this information unto him, that if he sinned against the blood of his
people, it would render him ipso facto a child of death. Besides, had he not
defaced that writing, which was written by the finger of God himself in the
tables of his own heart, here might he have read it in characters legible
enough, that he that unjustly takes away the life of another, makes a present
forfeiture unto Justice of his own.

Nor was the taking of the Protestation or National Covenant Sect. 84
by the Parliament and Kingdom, after the Kings engagement in blood, any sna^e
upon him in this kind, as ministering any sufficient ground unto him to
conceive or judge, that Kings might destroy the lives of their Subjects as they
pleased* without being countable unto the Justice of their Laws, for the same.
It is contrary to all principles of reason, or common sense, to think* that
either the Parliament, or Kingdom, should do any such act, which in the direct
and native tendencie of it should either flatter, or encourage the King in
ways so out^agiously destructive to their lives, Liberties, Estates, as those
were, wherein he was now driving furiously, when the Protestation and solemn
Covenant were taken by them. But such an Act as this do they pretend to be done
by them, who affirm, that by their taking the Protestation and Covenant for the
Preservation of the Kings Person, after he had lift up his hand unto blood,
they ministered a sufficient ground unto him to conceive, either that for what
he had already done in that way, he was not obnoxious, either to the Law of
God, nor to the Laws of the Land, inflicting death; but especially to conceive,
that what progress or advance soever he should make in the same way, yet they
meant never to question him, but to make the ^hoicest threasure of his life,
though he should make the ^^se^^ dong^e of all theirs. But the substance of
this plea was formerly weighed in the balance and found too light, when we
clearly proved, that there was no engagement made by any man, in taking either
the Vow, Prot^station or Covenant for the Preservation of the Kings life, or
Person, but only conditional; and that none of those conditions (for there
were more than one) upon which the takers of any of the three, became actually
engaged o^ bound to the said Preservation, were performed by the King. And the
truth is, that all that was ministered by way of occasion, or ground, unto the
King, by those Acts of the Parliament and Kingdom lately mentioned, was for him
to judge and conceive, 1. that they both affectionately desired his honor,
life, and happiness: 2. That in case they could not procure or obtain them in
conjunction with the liberties, peace and safety of the Kingdom, that they
meant to provide for these, whatsoever became of the other.

To draw toward a Conclusion of the present debate; if Sect. 85
the righteousness of the Sentence passed upon the King be not impleadeable by
the office of a King vested in him, much less is it impeacheable by his
innocence. Doubtless never was there any person under heaven sentenced with
death upon more equitable or just grounds in respect of guilt, and demerit. As
for Ner^, Maximinus, and other Heathen Tyrants, though the letter of their
guilt might possible be as deep, or deeper, than his, yet the spirit of it was
but light and shallow, in comparison, They wanted the light of that knowledge,
without which, though men may be monstrously wicked, yet are they not capable
of admission into the Congregation of the firstborn of sinners. The King
abounded with this light; (at least comparatively) and wrought in the face of
it works of darkness, horrid works of darkness. Oh, how great was the
darkness of such works! Some rise up early to commend and praise him* for his
parts of knowledge, wisdom, understanding etc. but do these men know, that
speaking these things, they put him to the greater rebuke, and justify his
Judges, who condemned him, so much the more? That servant (says the great and
righteous Judge of all the earth) which knew his Lords will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be ^eaten with many strokes.
Luke 12. 47.
Knowledge and ^^derstanding are the great inh^^nsers of sin, and cause the
fo^^ace of hell to be h^^ s^ven times hotter than ordinary. But for the
criminal demerits of the King, which make the righteousness of the Sentence
against him, like unto the light at noonday, I shall not mention th^^ in words
of mine own, l^st I be charged with undue aggravations; but shall present them
in such ^^^ms, wherein his best and most cordial Friends (at least in
appearance) and such who took hold of shield and buckler for his Defense in the
time of his greatest danger, have before me represented them unto the world.

Mr. Prynne, who in zeal to the Kings cause, attempted to Sect. 86
shake Heaven and Earth, and who because he could not (with Joshua) cause the
Sun to stand still in the midst of heaven, until he had acted his part in
favor of him, procured (in stead thereof) the turning of a natural night into
an artificial day made of candles, for the design; speaking of the King whilst
yet his hands were but half full of the violence and blood, which were found in
him at the time of his arraignment, expresses himself in the business, thus:
What severe judgment may such Christian Kings expect from the God of Heaven,
who contrary to their own frequently reiterated solemn public Vows,
Protestations, Imprecations, MOST INHUMANELY DESTROY their own flourishing
Christian Realms, with fire and sword; plunder, pillage, captivate, slay,
MURDER their most pious Protestant Subjects every where without pity, or
remorse. Popish Royal Favoritie Epist. to the R^ader* page ^.
Immediately after: If Ahab, Jezabel, with all their Royal Posterity, were
utterly cut off, e^tirpated in a moment, for countenancing Idolaters, and
putting Naboth unjustly to death, only for a pretended blasph^^ie against God
and the King, of purpose to gain his single vineyard, then what will become of
those Kings, Jezabels, and their Posterities, who not only cherish and protect
many Romish Idolaters, Priests, Jesuits; but likewise use their armed power to
murder, plunder, ruin many thousands of innocent Protestant Naboths, yea seize
upon their whole Estates as forfeited, under a pretense of Treason or
Rebellion, etc.

The Author of these passages, was not ^ender of arraigning the King as a
Murderer, because he never murdered or s^ew any with his own hands. The
Prophet Nathan by Commission from God charge David with slaying ^ri^^ ^ith
the sword, Sa^. ^^. 9.
though he was so far from slaying him with his own hands, that he gave no
express order or warrant to have him slain by others, but only to have him
set in a place of danger in the battle, with an intent that he might be slain
by the sword of his Enemies. Yea and David himself in his humiliation before
God, upon the same account prays to be delivered from bloud-guiltinesse.
Psalm. ^^. 14.
To murder with the hand is too servile, and small a game of wickedness, for
Kings to play at: He that murthereth with the hand, must take pains; and
besides, is like to be weary before he can dispatch many; the way and Method of
murder appropriate unto Kings* is to murder thousands without striking a
stroke, and whilst themselves take their ^ase, only by speaking a word, or
subscribing a Commission: and in this sense the King may be said to have
murdered many thousands of his poor Subjects even with his own hands, inasmuch
as he signed those Commissions, by means whereof many thousands of them were
murdered, with his own hand, as the late mentioned Aut^our (besides many
others) frequently charge him. The best and most zealous Protestants (both
he) Ministers, People, both in England and Ireland, have been every where most
cruelly Ma^^acred, Pludered, Tortured, Imprisoned, Ruined by the blood-thirsty
Popish Cavaliers, many of their houses, and almost whole Towns fired and sacked,
by his special COMMISSION. ^^pish ^^* vo^^^^ ^p* ^^ the Reader.
A little after, since this unhappy civil* War, the Papists both in England
and Ireland have been armed against the Parliament BY HIS MAJESTY'S SPECIAL
COMMISSION etc. In another place he affirms that the Irish Rebels, (whom the
King calls his good Roman Catholic Subjects in the Articles of Pacification)
were authorized by COMMISSIONS FROM HIS MAJESTY under the Great Seal; now at
last (if not at first) to take up Arms against all Protestants, who shall not
submit to this strange Pacification there, after the bloody slaughter and
butchery of above an hundred and forty thousand innocent Protestants, (whose
blood must pass altogether unrevenged by the hands of public Royal Justice)
and by SPECIAL COMMISSIONS (as we are most certainly informed; a very probable
Argument they had not only pretended, but real COMMISSIONS FROM THE KING at
first for what they acted against the Protestants in Ireland) are now sent for
over into England, (where thousands of them are lately arrived, and more daily
expected) to fight against the Parliament, and Massacre English Protestants in
their own country, as freely as they did in Ireland, his Majesty making base
Irish moneys current in England by special Proclamation, in favor of the
Irish Rebels to be transported and made current Subjects here to MURDER us; --
By all these, our whole three Kingdoms, if not the very blindest and
incredulous Malignants (unless given over to a Reprobate sense) must of
necessity see and acknowledge* that there is and has been all his Majesty's
Reign till this instant, a most strong, cunning, desperate confederacy
prosecuted to set up Popery in perfection, and extirpate the Protestant party
and religion, in all his Majesty's Dominions: which Plot now visibly appears
above ground. The Popish Ro^^^^ F^vorite. ^^^. 39.


The Commissioners of both Kingdoms spoke thus unto the King in their answer of
Jan. 13. 1645. Concerning the Personal Treaty by your Majesty, there having
been so much innocent blood of your good Subjects shed in this War by your
Majesty's Commands and Commissions, Irish Rebels brought over against the
Parliament and Kingdom by your Majesty's COMMISSION; the War in Ireland
fomented and prolonged by your Majesty, whereby the three Kingdoms are brought
near to utter ruin and destruction; we conceive that until satisfaction and
security be first given to both your Kingdoms, your Majesty's coming hither
cannot be convenient, nor by us assented unto. See the Collectio^ of all the
public Orders Ordinances, and Declarations of both Houses in f^^ Append. page
^^.


By the way, these things considered, with ten times more of Sect. 87
like tendency, which might readily be cited from Mr Prynne, especially what he
has written concerning the Kings most solemn and avowed engagements to the
Pope, avouching these for the root and spring of all our late troubles and
bloodshed; can he be looked upon as a person worthy to breath in English air,
or to tread upon E^glish ground, much more to sit in an English Parliament; who
in the face of so many pregnant circumstances, breathing out nothing but
certain ruin and destruction to the Peace and Liberties of the English Nation,
in case the King should ever have repossessed his Throne; set himself with all
his might, called up his heart and soul, all his parts, Wit, Learning, Law, and
all that was within him, to Re-inthrone him, and that without the least color
or show of the least touch of Repentance in him, for those his most disloyal,
and disroyal enslavements and engagements of himself to the Pope, and popish
Interests. He talks at random of I know not what Jesuiti^all undermining
projects swaying in all the consultations and proceedings of the Army, and of
the Armies being spurred on and ridden with a full carrier, by Jesuiticall
furies, The Substance of a Speech (...) by (...)
etc. but certainly those Counsels, by which Mr. Prynne and his Partisans were
acted and swayed in their attempt to advance into a three-Kingdom'd Throne, a
person, so deeply and desperately devoted, as the late King was, to the Papal
chair, who had sold himself under the Popes feet, smelled far ranker of the
Jesuit, and of a Roman Catholic brain, than any, than all the Counsels,
actings, or proceedings whatsoever of the Army. But this by the way.

But Mr. Prynne is not alone amongst the late Kings Advocates, Sect. 88
and Friends, who in drawing up the charge of his guilt and demerit, abundantly
justify (as to that point) the Sentence passed upon him: I meet with several
expressions from others of them, of the same accommodation. The Ministers of
London themselves, and the Church of Scotland, charge him with being the
greatest Delinquent, guilty of the blood of hundreds of thousands of
Protestants, the bloudiest man under heaven, etc. Mr. Christlover (I) Hope (but
a Christ-hater, I fear, upon too sufficient grounds) in his Uxbridge Sermon,
page 37. represents him in those days as a man lying under the guilt of much
innocent blood, as a person not meet to be at peace with, till all the guilt of
blood be expiated, and avenged, etc. He was not only made (says J. M.)
obnoxious to the doom of Law by a charge more than once drawn up against him,
and his own Confession to the first Article at Newport, but summond and
arraigned in the sight of God and his people, cursed and devoted to perdition
worse than any Ahab or Antioch^^, with exhortation to curse all those in the
name of God, that made not War against him, as bitterly as Meroz was to be
cursed, that went not out against a Canaanitish King, all most in all the
Sermons, Prayers, and Fulminations, that have been uttered this seven years by
those cloven tongues of falsehood and dissension, who now, to the stirring up of
new discord, acquit him: and against their own Discipline, which they boast to
be the Throne and Scepter of Christ, absolve him, unconfound him, though
unconverted, unrepentant, unsensible of all their precious Saints and Martyrs,
WHOSE BLOOD THEY HAVE SO OFTEN LAID UPON HIS HEAD: and now again with a new
sovereign anointment can wash it all off, as if it were as v^^e, no more to be
reckoned for, than the blood of so many dogs in the time of a pestilence.
Ministers of sedition, not of the Gospel: who while they saw it manifestly tend
to civil War and bloodshed, never cea^sed exasperating the people against him:
and now they see it is likely to breed new commotion, cease not to incite
others against the people, who have saved them from him; as if sedition were
their only aim, whether against him, or for him. But God (as we have cause to
trust) will put other thoughts into the people, and turn them from looking
after these firebrarnds, of whose fury, and false prophecies we have enough
experience, Ten^^^ of Ki^^^ and M^gistrates, page 3^. 3^*
etc. The same Author elsewhere charge these Ministers with often citing him
[the King] under the name of a Tyrant in the hearing of God and Angels and men,
and charging him with the spilling of more innocent blood by far, than ever
Nero did, with often terming him Agag, etc. I^^dem page ^^
Not long after, to the same point, thus: He who ^rewhile in the Pulpit was a
cursed Tyrant, and enemy to God and Saints, LADEN WITH ALL THE INNOCENT BLOOD
SPILT IN THREE KINGDOMS, and so to be fought against, is now, though nothing
penitent, or altered from his principles, a lawful Magistrate, a Sovereign
Lord, the Lords anointed, not to be touched, though by themselves imprisoned.
Ibid. p. 6.


It were easy from the mouths and pens of these Ministers Sect. 89
and others, so affectionately, so conscientiously zealous over the King, to
muster up many other passages and expressions besides these, wherein they have
deciphered him, as Opprobriun^ generis Humani, as the Reproach of man kind, the
most bloody Monster and Miscreant under heaven: but those already mentioned,
are sufficient to make measure, ^eaped up, and running ^ver, of this truth,
that without all controversy there never was, for matter of guilt, and
death-deserving crimes, a Sentence more just and righteous awarded in any Court
of Judicature in any age throughout the whole world, than that which passed in
the High Court of Justice against the late King. We might insist upon his own
Confession (for, habemus Consitentem r^um) not long before his death, at
Newport, wherein he adjudged himself worthy death, by taking upon himself the
guilt of all that blood, which has, since the beginning of th^se late bloody
Combestions, been shed in the Land. But because this Confession was so
provisioned and conditioned, that it seemed rather a politic Concession, than
a Religious Confession, (especially there being so many noonday evidences
touching matters of fact besides,) we shall grant him the benefit of his
providence about the making of it, and not make use of it against him; unless
it be, to stop (in part) the mouth of that pretense, which exempts him from
murder, upon this account, viz. because all the blood he spilt, was the blood
of War. I had rather make use of it for him, and on his behalf; as viz. by
interpreting it to be a manifest Argument and sign, that he was not the man for
reach or strength of understanding, which his Friends, though to his dishonor,
and greater aggravation of his unworthiness (as was formerly noted) please
themselves with boasting him to have been. For will any man of much wisdom make
a public acknowledgement or Confession of some notorius crime or wickedness,
with a clause of reservation publicly likewise expressed; as viz. that such
his acknowledgment shall not be made use of against him, unless in such, or
such, a case; especially when it is in the power of others, whether they will
accept of his condition specified in such a clause, or no; or whether they will
not make use of his acknowledgement to all ends and purposes against him,
absolutely, and without limitation? Doubtless that conditional clause,
wherewith he incumbered his Confession, declared him to be a man scarce sound
either morals, or intellectuals. But his defect in the one, is somewhat (I
confess) the more excusable because of the sympathy in the other: whereas they
who magnify him for his wisdom, abase him more than the full proportion for
his wickedness. As for the Book which passes up and down by the title of
^IK^N ^A^IAIKH, which strains so many men's wits to invent, so many men's
Consciences to exhibit, elogies of honor, admiration, astonishment,
commensureable with the Seraphicall worth of it, whether he were the positive,
or only putative Author of it, though some make it their great Interest, yet
to me it is a mere impertinencie, to determine. Were it the legitimate issue of
his own pen only, we know men may be skillful in limming, able to give
comeliness of face and feature to their artificial productions, whose natural
Children in the mean time are full of deformity. Yet let me say thi^* that
Kings have opportunities above other men, to adorn their names and reputations
with the choiest plumes of what wits, parts, or learning (all most) they
please, as if they were their own. By that hours discourse or more with him,
whereunto both he (I conceive) as well as my self, were rather importuned by
others, than led by either of our respective desires* a few days before his
death, I found an experiment of truth in that common saying,

-- minuit praesentia famam. i.
What fame makes great, presence finds less to be.
But (to conclude) for the blood which he shed, it is so far Sect. 90
from being the blood of War (in the sense of the Objectours, i. such blood,
the shedding whereof criminizeth not unto death) that Mr. Prynne himself,
Advocate to the said King in chief, and who understands the Laws of the Land
(in this point) sufficiently, every where (as we heard) speaking of it, cries
out, murder, murder, murder. See Sect ^^
Yea our Subscripturient London Ministers, though Monarchical all over,
frequently arraign him (as we lately also heard) under the name of a Tyrant,
and a shedder of innocent blood: which, being interpreted, amounts to Mr.
Prynnes murder, murder, murder. Besides, the blood of Uriah, which David
shed by the sword of the Children of Ammon, was (in a sense) the blood of War
(for Uriah was slain in battle) yea and that War, wherein he was slain, was
lawful on their parts, (at least) who slew him (for it was in defense of their
City) yet David, by his own Confession ^ ^^^ 1^* ^ P^^l ^^ 14.
deserved death for the hand which he had in the shedding of it
notwithstanding. No War, but that which is necessary, honorable, and just,
has any Faculty or Authority to confer the honor of innocence, upon the
shedding of blood: in all others, the sword makes as many murderers, as
man-slayers. Yea he that is the Architect and Masterwork-man in raising an
unnecessary, or unjust War, makes himself the firstborn of murderers, and is
responsible both unto God and men, for all the blood that is shed in this War.
If Kings might make War upon their Subjects, when and upon what pretenses they
please, and then be justified and acquitted from all the outrages of blood, and
other villainies, perpetrated in this War, upon the bare account, that they are
perpetrated in War, one sin might make an atonement for another; yea one great
sin a cloak and covering for many. The late Wars, wherein the King, by the
sword of those men of blood, who cast in their lot with him, shed so much
innocent blood in the Land, being causlesly, and contrary to the frequent
obtestations, humble Petitions, earnest Solicitations, grave Advisements of
his great Council, the Parliament) commenced by himself, are so far from
mediating for the blood shed, on his behalf, that they open the mouth of it the
wider, and cause it to cry so much the louder for vengeance upon him, and his,
both unto God, and men. For with how much the greater pomp, and solemnity of
preparations, wickedness is committed, so much the more abominable must the
perpetration of it needs be, in the sight of God, and of all serious and
considering men.

FINIS.
A Brief REPLY To a Treatise, entitled, (...) OR Might overcomming Right.
Published By M. J. GEREE, a little before his death.
THe Author since the publishing of this Treatise, Sec. 1.
having taken Sanctuary at the grave, I shall so far afford him the benefit of
this Sanctuary, as his Book, which yet lives (though it be dead too, in a
sense, even whilst it lives) will suffer me, without prejudice to the Truth.
As for all personal reflections and hard sayings in this kind, whereof there
are more than enough (especially in so small a piece) I shall bury them with
him; though it had been much better if they had never been born. Upon the first
coming out of this Book, a person of much ingenuity told me, that he had
perused it without partiality, and found in it much untoward language, but no
answer, (worthy the name of an answer) to any of my Arguments. I presume a like
perusal of it will produce the same opinion in the mind of any other ingenious
and considering man, concerning it. In which respect I shall not burden my
self or my Reader with any bulk of answer; but, touching some few particulars
besides very lightly, shall close somewhat more ingagingly with his Arguments,
or grounds which he lays down page 12. 13, etc. To clear it (as he speaks),
That the Parliament men restreined, are, in reference to the Soldiers, sober,
in their right wits, and true to trust, and that the contrary Errors rest
among their Oppressors. Herein (I con^esse) lies the main point of difference
between Mr Geree and me; if he can substantially prove, that the Parliament men
restrained, were true to their trust, in those actings and proceedings upon
which they were restrained, I am his Proselyte without any more ado; my lines
shall bow down at the feet of his. We shall bring his Arguments to the test,
anon.

In the mean time I cannot but take knowledge (in the first Sect. 2.
place) how his pen by stumbling at the thresshold, presageth the nullitie of
his Answer in the House. For in his Title Page he calls his book A clear Answer
to M. John Goodwins Might and Right well m^t: Whereas Mr John Goodwin never
published or wrote any Treatise, or piece so styled. For in the Title of that
discourse of his, which Mr Geree here means, he does not set Might before
Right, (the Cart before the Horse) but Right before Might, and that upon this
account; viz. to overture in the Title of his discourse, that the consideration
which commanded in chief with the Soldiers, when they appeared for the Kingdom
against the destructive actings of some Parliament men, was not the
consideration of their strength or Power to make good their enterprise, but of
the justness and righteousness of the undertaking.

2. Concerning his Dedication, I cannot but by occasion of Sect. 3.
it call to mind the observation of Hierome long since, viz. how that Satan,
when he has any Masterpiece in hand, which he is more then ordinary
sollicitous to effect, ad vetus recurrit instrumentum, he makes his recourse to
his old Instrument, the weaker sex; hoping to accomplish that by the mediation
of relation, and affection, which by dint of Argument and manlike grounds of
conviction, he despairs of bringing to pass; even as Incendiaries, when they
go about to set an ^ouse or a town on fire, do not apply the Element, by which
they hope to effect the mischief, (I mean the fire) to the stones, or main
timber in the buildings, but to the thatch, or other the lightest* and most
combustible matter near to them. Our London Subscribers; with whom we had to do
in the former discourse* are well versed in the depths of this learning.

3. Whereas he musters up those worthy names of men, Mr. Sect. 4.
Bi^ield, Cartwright, Traverse, Dod, Bradshaw, Jewel, Reynolds, Whitaker, etc.
before those worthy Ladies, to whom he applies himself in his Dedication, with
an insinuation, that these men were of his opinion and spirit, and would have
protected Murderers, if Kings, against the Law of God, and the justice therein
commanded to be executed by men upon this generation of evil doers, and takes
up an effeminate (indeed a ridiculous) lamenation over his Religion, as if that
were like to suffer shame by those men, and those actions, which are like to be
a praise and an honor to it in all generations; he does both the one, and the
other, in a regular comportance with his Design in his Dedicatees, knowing that
fabulous and light presumptions intermixed with some pathetique strains,
commonly do more execution upon Feminine Spirits, than seven Masculine
Demonstrations. I have ground in abundance to suppose, that had those worthy
men he speaks of lived in these days, and stood off as clear from that
besotting interest of High Presbytery, as some of them did from that of
Episcopacy, they would have found no fault at all in those persons, or
practices, which (it seems) were the abhorring of Mr Geree's Soul. But why he
should commend himself to his Lady Patronesses, (and in them, unto the World)
as so Grand a sufferer under the Bishops, Chancellours, Courts, High
Commissions, etc. and not so much as mention his sufferings under, and from, the
Parliament, which were much greater than any endured by him under the Bishops,
I cannot conceive; unless it were to conceal the sore of his Malignancie; (for
the noysomnesse whereof, he was Sequestered from his living in Tewksbury,) that
so he might not too much discover himself to be an Enemy to the Parliament; at
least in the former constitution and proceedings of it, before the late
garbling by the Army; inasmuch as such a discovery as this must needs have
been a grand prejudice to his project in his Book. But they who shall
attentively read this Book of his, will find, not only that he owneth not the
Parliament at all* in no constitution of it since the late King forsook it, but
that upon all occasions he ^^ily reflects disparagement upon it, as page 18.
where he insinuates the Parliament into a Community of erring, for depriving
the King of his Power* over the Militia of the Kingdom* notwithstanding his
exercising of this Power to the misery and ruin of the Kingdom. And had not
his good friends in the Assembly out of a prudent apprehension that he, though
an Anti-Covenanter, might yet befrind them at a back door, baulked with their
own Principles (that I say not, Consciences) to gratify him, and make him free
of the Presbyterian corporation, without putting him to the Test of the
company, (I mean the taking of the Covenant) he had wanted the covering of a
Church-living, and so the nakedness of his Anti-Parliamentarie Malignancie had
appeared unto all men.

Whereas in his Preface he obliquely upbraids me, as being, Sect. 5.
either through want of wit or honesty, an Abettour to a prevailing Faction;
they that have but any competent knowledge of my Spirit, and of the course I
have steered in the world, all the days of my vanity hitherto, will (I know)
be my compurgators from this imputation; and testify on my behalf, that undue
compliance with any Faction or Party whatsoever, whether prevailing, or
failing, has been none of my (at least visible) sins. It is well known, not
only to my familiar friends and acquaintance, but (I presume) to thousands
more, how small and faint correspondencie I have, or hold with that Faction (as
Mr Geree counts Faction) which dogmatizeth with me about matters of
Church Government, and which he looks upon as prevailing. My Interest in
these men, though it was never much considerable, yet was it much more whilst
they were the tail, and the high Presbyterian Faction the Head, than it has
been since the turning of the Wheel, (if yet it be turned) or than now it is.

But whereas he advances this decision, that confidence in a Sect. 6.
dubious case does argue, either great shallowness, or deep prejudice arising
either from doting affection, or unworthy Interest* I marvail that a man
pretending to such signal abilities of learning, judgment, understanding,
etc. (as M^. Geree does in this Tract) should not Apprehend, and see that this
dart strikes through his own liver, as well as mine: For if the case depending
between him and me, be dubious, and he every whit as confident as I am, (or
lightly can be) in his Determination and Judgment upon it (which the Spirit
ruling all along his discourse abundantly witnesses) then has he given
sentence against himself, as a man either profoundly shallow, or deeply
prejudiced, either through doting affection, or unworthy Interest; though (for
my part) I apprehend no such Antipathie between shallowness, and prejudice,
(whether arising from the one cause, or the other) but that one and the same
earthen vessel may well be a receptacle of them both. Yea I look upon
prejudice, as not occasionable either by Interest, or affection, without the
influence of much shallowness upon the production. For what does prejudice, as
well in the very Grammatical notation of the word, as in the nature of the
thing it self, import, but an immature act, or conclusion of the Judgment, as
viz. before it has had either time or opportunity, or else the consent of the
will, to inquire out, and duly weigh, such arguments, which according to the
principles of sound reason are sufficient to raise such a Conclusion upon? The
Truth is, that prejudice is as effeminate and weak a passion, as is incident to
the nature of man.

Whereas he magnifies himself against me, as a man that had Sect. 7.
discovered such weakness in the patronage of error; I make no question but
that he, who has so much of a man in him, as to consider duly, before he
judges, will upon such an account, judge my weakness (as he is pleased to
call weakness) too hard for his strength, and my Error, for his Truth.
Certain I am, that the sense of some of those Parliament Men themselves, (yea
some of the ablest of them) whom M^. Geree accuses me to have accused
causlesly, yea and of some others of their most judicious friends, is
otherwise. Only herein (I confess) they agree with him, pretending, that I
have, as to the men, only accused, but not made good the Error objected. But
whether I have only accused the Parliament Members, and not made good the
Error objected, or whether he has not only justified them without making
good any ground of their justification in those particulars, wherewith they are
charged by me, we shall in due time engage, not strangers, or enemies, but
their own actions and counsels, to determine.

In his right stating of the Question (as he pretends) he deals Sect. 7.
unrighteously. For 1. he supposes some things, which truth opposes. 2. He
suppresseth some things, which the right stating of the Question calls upon
him to express. First he supposes a discontent not only in, but of, the
Nation for the sad Condition of the King. It is somewhat hard to be believed,
that a Nation, should be so super-eminently Christian and pious as to be in
sorrow or discontent, that the greatest enemy which they ever had, from whom
they have suffered more miseries and extremity, than from any other hand
whatsoever, should be in such a condition, wherein they need not fear more
misery, or mischief from him. And besides, that sad Condition of the King, of
which M^. Geree speaks, was the prize for which the Nation (for seven years
together) had run through fire and blood: and is it like that they should be in
discontent for their success in obtaining it? The Discontent of the Nation,
was for the unsettled and dilatorie proceedings of their Trustees in Parliament
(as then the Constitution of the House was) wherein they saw no ground of hope
of any setlement, either of the Government, or distracted affairs of the
Kingdom. The reduction of the King to his Regal Interest and Throne, was the
desire of the Nation but only (...) (as the proverb is) and under the Notion
of a lesser evil, of the two; I mean, than their languishing in misery and
despair under such a Parliament, from which they saw, at least, as they
supposed, certain ruin and destruction coming toward them, like an armed man.)
Secondly, he supposes, that the Demands of the Parliament in the last Treaty
with the King at Newport, were the sum of all that had been formerly demanded
in any other treaties, or proposals, or ^ad been held forth in their
Declarations. The noto^ious untruth whereof as many wise and good men then
resented, so may any man whosoever, that has leisure and opportunity to
compare the one with the other, clearly enough understand. Thirdly, he
supposes, that the Parliament from the beginning thought the Concession and
Confirmation of such Privileges, as they demanded of him in the said last
Treaty, conducible (surely he means, sufficient, or else he speaks at a very
low rate) to render this people free and happy. I must borrow some such Faith
as Mr. Geree (it seems) had to believe this also. Certain I am, that the
Parliament it self, much better able to judge of the conduciblenesse of these
proposals, to the ends mentioned, then Mr. Geree* express a far different
sense of them. These Members (say they) in their Declaration of Jan. 12. 1648.
speaking of those very men, about whom the present contest is between Mr. Geree
and me) did notwithstanding proceed to make such Propositions to the King at
the Isle of wight, for a safe and well grounded peace, as if they had been
granted and kept (of which there was no probability) would but have returned
the people again to their former slavery, forasmuch as by these Propositions,
neither this Parliament, nor any succeeding one, was put into a capacity of
ever being able to make any good Laws, the King being still suffered to
continue his Negative Vote, so long opposed, and so strongly voted and declared
against by this Parliament, etc. So that these two supposals of Mr. Geree last
mentioned, are stigmatically false. Fourthly he supposes, that the Major part
of the House of Commons were so far from being forced to it (the said Treaty)
by Petitions, that neither the impetuousnesse of Peti^ions from people, nor
fear of Soldiers Pistols could make them relinquish it. Hear what the
Parliament it self also speaks in opposition unto this, in their said
Declaration, page 9. We had long since (by Gods assistance) happily effected
the Settlement of the Government, had not a Malignant party amongst the
Seamen, the like in the Counties of Essex, Surrey, Sussex, and the City of
London (many of which have since been in actual arms against us) by their
PRESSING AND URGENT PETITIONING of the Parliament for a Personal Treaty with
the King at London, and to disband the Army, thereby diverted and frustrated
our earnest and hearty desires, etc. (with much more to this purpose.) Fifthly,
Mr. Geree supposes (in order still to the right stating of the Question) that
the Parliament men, against whom, I, for whom, he, contendeth, were satisfied
in their Consciences, that the Treaty with the King, which they were now upon,
was the fairest, justest, and most probable way to promote and settle the peace
and weal of a distressed Kingdom. The Parliament (as we lately heard) judged
the quite contrary; as viz. 1. That there was no probability, that the
proposals in that Treaty made by the Parliament, if granted, would ever have
been kept, or observed, either by himself or any of his party. 2. That should
they have been kept, they would but have returned the people again to their
former slavery. 3. Concerning the defection of those Members of theirs, whom
Mr. Geree presents as men acted only by their Consciences in these their
Applications to the King, they declare thus ( page 7. of the said Declaration)
Yet here again we were encountered with unexpected difficulties, by the
APPARENT DEFECTION of some of our own Members, who (not regarding the glory of
God, NOR GOOD OF THE COMMONWEALTH, but being carried away WITH BASE AVARICE,
AND WICKED AMBITION; these are Mr. Gerees Conscientious men) did labor the
bringing in of the King again with all his faults, without the least
Repentance, etc. Sixthly, Mr. Geree (upon the account a foresaid) supposes,
that the said Treaty was prosecuted till it was very near an happy Conclusion.
With what heifer did the man plough, or with what oracle did he consult, to
prognosticate happiness in such a Conclusion, wherein, had it taken place, so
many men of a far better inspiration than he to judge between the likelihood
and unlikelyhood of political events saw no probability of good unto the
Nation, but a plain ground laid for bringing the people back again into their
Egyptian slavery. Seventhly, Mr. Geree supposes and asserteth (as before) that
the Army, over and above those four Members, and more, which he says ( page
3.) they took into safe custody, violently kept and frighted a Major part out
of the house, debarring them liberty of sitting, and voting there. But 1.
whether Mr. Gerees Arithmetique be orthodox or no, which counts the Members
taken into custody by the Army, to be above forty, I shall content my self
with doubting* and not determine* But 2. Whereas he adds, that they violently
kept any more, than these, out of the house, I suppose that had Mr. Geree been
put upon the proof of this, his proofs would have been much more modest than
his Conclusion. The far greater part of the Members sequestered by the Army,
were not detained, or restrained by them from sitting again in the House, but
by their own voluntary refusal to submit unto such a Test, which the Parliament
then in being (according to a late President and practice amongst themselves in
a like ca^e.) judged meet to impose upon themselves for the discovery of such
of their Members, who (in their sense of meetnesse) were not meet to sit
amongst them, or to have any part in the great transactions of the Kingdom. Not
long before they had ordered the taking of the Covenant, for a Test or
touchstone, whereby to make trial of the fitness, and unfitness (according
to the Notion of fitness in this kind, which then ruled in the House) of their
Members, to sit in the House. By means of this Test imposed sundry of their
Members, whose Judgments and Consciences stood against taking of the Covenant,
were debarred from sitting, and came not to the house. The same Parliament
(though not consisting of all the same Members) judged it meet to make now
another Test for the same end with the former, viz. a subscription to a Vote
formerly passed by them; whereunto the Members Mr. Geree speaks of, refusing to
subscribe, fell from their capacity of sitting in the House. So that the Army
had no hand at all in the Continuation of their restraint or absence from the
House, but it was occ^sioned by a known and regular practice of the house it
self. 3. (And lastly) whereas he further says, that they frighted a Major part
out of the house, debarring them liberty, etc. it is only one of his
presumptions, no part of his knowledge. For doubtless the Parliament it self,
had as much reason to know the truth hereof as Mr. Geree: and yet in their
answer of Feb. 17. 1648. to the Scottish Commissioners, who pretended, as Mr.
Geree does, that the excluding of some Members by the Army, had occasioned many
others to withdraw, because they could not act as a free Parliament, to this
pretense they answer thus: Whether this be their Judgment, or the
Commissioners own, WE KNOW NOT: if some Members that are absent be of that
judgment, that they cannot act freely, we neither force their Judgments, nor
find our selves under any such force, as to hinder the free exercise of our
own. So that evident it is, that Mr. Geree in all his preparatories to the
right stating of the Question between him and me, scarce speaks one word of
truth. Is it then any ways like that he should argue work-man-like to the
point in controversy? But

2. As to (or rather, from) the right stating of the Question, Sect. 8.
he supposes and asserts many things, wherein he spares the Truth, so he
suppresseth some things, the knowledge and consideration whereof, are
Essential thereunto: As first, that the Parliament had unanimously both Lords
and Commons, not long before the unhappy and importune engagement of some of
the Members about the said Treaty at the Isle of Wight, voted no more addresses
to the King: 2. That their votes were made upon such, and so many Reasons of
great w^ight and high concernment for the good of the people, that to the least
of them these men never gave any answer (as the Parliament it self declares in
their mentioned Declaration of Jan. 15. 1648. p. 10.)

3. That the Members excluded the House by the Army (at least the leading men
of them, who had now by their Arti^ices of all sorts, infected many of their
Fellow Members, formerly sound) had made a defection from the Interest of the
Kingdom and people, unto the King, his Interest, and Party; and had by a long
continued series of Councels, actions, and endeavors sufficiently discovered
the same; the particulars of which story, are ext^^^ in the Parliaments
Declaration of Jan. 15. 1648. p. 7. 8, etc. 4. And lastly, that the very Tenure
of the Commission, which the Army received from the Parliament, did
principally and particularly oblige them, as well as enable them, to endeavor
in their way* (i. by force of Arms) the Peace and safety of the Kingdom,
especially against the King, and his adherents. The ingrediencie of these
circumstances in the state of the Question, will quite alter the relish and
taste which Mr Geree has given it. And the truth is, that the Declaration of
the Parliament, so often mentioned, is alone a sufficient Confutation of all that
he has said to the main of the Question between him and me; as I signified (in
part) unto himself by a Letter* wherein I gave him thanks for the Book he sent
me, with a Letter; and withal imparted this apprehension of mine unto him,
that if he had seen, and well considered the said Declaration, before the
publishing of his Book* he would have forborne it; which himself in a second
Letter written unto me in Answer to mine, does not very strongly gainsay.

Whereas p. 6. he opposes this round Confession (as he Sect. 9.
terms it) of the Army, that the restraining of the Members was a course in
it self irregular; and unjustifiable, but by honest intentions, and
extraordinary necessity* as contradicting, 1. that assertion of mine, that
their calling and Commission was to Act in the capacity of Soldiers, for the
peace, liberty, and safety of the Kingdom* 2. that saying also of mine unto
them in my epistle, viz. that I doubt not but they were satisfied in the
Righteousness of their actions from Heaven, before they were in being* I
wonder wherein he should conceive the least opposition, between either of these
passages of mine, and that of the Army. Do I in either of these expressions,
or any where else throughout my discourse, go about to justify that so much
controverted act of the Army, without the supposall both of honest intentions,
and an extraordinary necess^tie. Indeed I plead the purport of their calling
and Commission, as qualifying them before other men, to Act besides the the
common and standing rule in times of Peace, for the safety of the Kingdom, when
any extraordinary necessity calls for such actings; but it was as far from my
thoughts, as Mr Gerees own, to justify the Army in that they did, simply and
solely upon the ground of their calling or Commission, or out of the case of
such a necessity as the Army it self mentions: But Mr Geree (it seems) pleased
himself much in finding out supposed bulls (as himself calls them p. 27) where
likewise he practices the same Art of jumbling fair and clear consistencies,
into obscure contradictions. But to trace him in these Methods of vanity, would
take more in time, then yield in edification. For he is again making sport for
himself with the same feather, p. 28. What he argues about Oaths,
Protestations* Covenants, etc. has been abundantly answered in the former
discourse. What he discourses p. 4. and in the former part of p. 5. concerning
Christ's intent in that saying, that the Sabbath was made for man, and not, etc.
both untruly and irrelatively to the business in hand, he retracts (upon the
matter, a little after the midst of p. 5.) in these words; If there be any case
wherein necessity amounts to a calling, it must be, where that necessity
ingageth to a duty, that ought to take place before this Commandment for order
amongst men. This is one of the most substantial passages I meet with in the
whole discourse. I trust that the heirs of Mr Gerees judgment, and I, agree
perfectly in this; that the necessity of saving a Kingdom from eminent and
apparent danger of ruin or misery, ingageth to a duty that ought to take place
before the duty of following or keeping precisely within the accustomed limits
of men's ordinary and particular callings.

Whereas I say (by way of Answer to an objection) that Sect. 10
Lawgivers, when in their right minds, may give out Laws against mad men,
which may be put in execution against themselves, when they are mad etc. he
tells me (p. 8.) that this is a wild Answer. I confess that my answers are not
so tame or tractable as his, but his reasons to prove the wildness of my
Answer, is far more wandering then my Answer is wild. For the excluded
Parliament men (says he) are in the same way, and in the same Principles, in
which they first gave out Commissions. How far this is out of the way of Truth,
is visible enough by the light of those passages cited Sect. 7. of this
discourse from one of the Parliaments own Declarations; which light
notwithstanding we shall strengthen and increase in good time.

In the mean time, I judged Mr Geree to be a man of a more Sect. 11
steady pen, than to write, that a Justice of Peace, may usurp and be
punishable in reference to an Act, though it be never so just. Yet this is his
Divinity, p. 9. But methinks he plays at the smallest game of all, when he
taxes me (p. 10) for citing Thomas Aquinas (in my margent) as holding this
position, that in case of extreme necessity all things are Common; falling foul
likewise upon the Author, calling him a Popish writer, and a fit Patron for a
false position. I confess the man ware the Livery of the times, wherein he
lived, upon his judgment, and was Romish: But I wish that many who please
themselves with the honor of a better profession of Religion (for which
notwithstanding I fear, they are greater debtors to the State and times wherein
they live, than to their own choice or studies) were not further behind him in
ingenuity and fairness of Spirit, than they are before him in an e^ternall
Religious Denomination. Besides it is very well known, that many Popish writers
in such points, which are eccentricall to the Controversies on foot between
them and the Protestants, and where they have their judgments at liberty, are
as acute, solid, and sound, as Protestant writers themselves. And for the
position which asserts the commonnesse of all things in case of extreme
necessity, and which Mr Geree brands with falsehood, he should have done well to
have disabled the grounds, upon which the said Author maintains it for a
Truth, before he had done that severe execution upon it. The Truth is, that
this position (in the sense of the Author, from whom, and wherein I cite it)
is an Orthodox saying, and nothing more than what very learned Protestant
writers themselves, assert and hold (at least in principles and grounds, if not
in plainness of terms also; as I could readily prove, if it were a prize worth
the running for, upon this occasion.)

What I argue touching the sense and import of that Scripture, Sect. 12
Romans 13. 1, 2. both from the context, and from the express words themselves
of the Holy Ghost, (besides the concurrence of several Authors of his own
beloved Interest) he (page 37, etc.) balanceth and opposes, partly with the
conceits and words of men upon the place, partly with uncivil and s^^^derous
imputations, partly with importune and inpertinent suggestions. First he is not
ashamed to say, that the conclusion I infer, is point blank to the word of
God: whereas the conclusion he speaks of is built upon the clear, pregnant, and
und^niable sense and signification of the express words themselves, and indeed
none other, than what his own friends and party, the Ministers of Scotland,
inferred from thence before me. But the reason by which he would prove this his
assertion, is (in his own terms) as wild, as the assertion it self unworthy.
The conclusion I infer from the said Scripture, is point blank to the word of
God; why? Because the Apostle Peter directs servants to be subject, not only
to the good and gentle; but to the froward, etc.

Was there ever any man pretending to learning, and soberness of Judgment,
that ever reasoned at such a forlorn rate as this (unless happly it were his
neighbor Mr. Jenkin?) For does not the strength of his arguing lie in such a
principle or notion, as this; what the word of God says in one place, it must
needs say in every place? Because Peter says so, or so, in such a place;
therefore Paul also says the same thing in such a place. My Conclusion is,
that in that place Romans 13. there is no subjection commanded of God to any
higher Power, further, or otherwise, than they a^t and quit themselves in due
proportion to the good of men. This Conclusion (cries Mr Geree) is point blank
to the word of God, because Peter says so, and so. If Peter had said, that
God, in the said place of Paul, Rom* 13. had commanded subjection to any higher
power, upon other terms* than those expressed by me, M^. Geree had said
somewhat. But this is the man and this is the line of his arguing, stretched
over his clear Answer from the one end of it unto the other. Besides, what
point-blanknesse (as he calls it) is there, between that Conclusion of mine he
speaks of, and that exhortation of Peter, which he represents? God may
command servants to be subject to their Masters, not only when they are good,
but even to such as are froward, and yet not command subjects or communities of
men, to subject themselves to Magistrates, or the Higher Powers, when they act
otherwise, than in due order and proportion to the good of men. For 1. that
great Light in the Firmament of Presbytery, Mr. Rutherford, expressly informs
us, that the King (much less any inferior Magistrate) has no proper,
masterly, or herile Dominion over his Subjects: his Dominion is rather
fiduciary and ministerial, than masterly; which assertion he proves by four
pregnant reasons. L^^ R^^ page 116.
So that as a trustee or pupil, does not ow the same Subjection, or Subjection
upon the same terms to his Trustee or Guardian, which a servant or slave, owes
to his Master* so neither does a Subject, or a freeborn person, to a Civil
Magistrate or King. 2. Where the prejudice, or inconvenience of a man's
Subjection, or yielding in any kind, can redound only to himself, a man may
stand bound, for the honor of the Gospel, and in Conscience toward God, to
subject and yield (which is the case of a servants Subjection to his Master)
but where his Subjection or yielding* has a direct tendencie in it to bring
evil or inconvenience upon many others, no such obligation lies upon him;
which frequently is the case of such Subjection, that is yielded unto
Magistrates in such commands which are destructive to the Peace, Liberties, and
public Interest of the people. 3. (And lastly) neithe does Peter enjoin
Servants to be subject to their Masters, in such commands, wherein their
Subjection is like to prove injurious or mischievous unto other men; but only,
to be subject unto them, though they be froward, i. of harsh and unpleasing
tempers or Dispositions. And surely Mr. Geree does not find in that Conclusion
of mine, which he so taxe^h, the least intimation of any Denial of Subjection
to the Higher Powers, upon such an account as this; (I mean, of their
frowardness, or lesse-pleasing dispositions) Therefore Mr. Geree deals not
like a man, unless it be in malice, in affirming my deduction from Romans 13. to
be point blank contrary to the word of God. Nor does that which follows
(presently after) savor of any whit a better or more ingenuous spirit, where
he tells us, that the Apostles, whom Jesus Christ made the infallible lights of
the world, were most careful to warm Christians: but new lights tell us, that
we need not suffer, but when we are evil doers. A most un-Christian and
unworthy calumny! the least jot or title whereof the whole Presbyterian
Synagogue is not able to show in my discourse.

I shall crave leave of the Reader to show him the same face Sect. 13
once more in another glass, of the same temper and make with the former. And
then I shall proceed to examine his grounds for the justification of his
clients, and so conclude. Mr. Geree tells me, page 28. that formerly I made
exceptions in the cases of extremity, that a man may not lie, forswear himself,
etc. Now all bonds must give way to the Law of necessity, not only word, but
oath; giving me (for a cloze) this Christian farewell: Oportet esse memorem.
The man (it seems) was much given to sow discord between friends: for all along
his discourse he attempts to set variance between such sayings, the one whereof
is conscious of nothing against the other. But is there so much as a face of
contradiction, between these two; A man ought not to lie, forswear himself etc.
for the save-guard of his life; and this, A man ought not to keep either a
Covenant, or Oath, when the Observation of either is sinful, or contrary to
the Law of nature? For the former, Mr. Geree himself (I question not) would
have admitted it for a truth: and to the latter, certain I am that our best
Protestant writers allow the same honor. Let the Commentaries of Calvin,
Musculus, and others upon Matthew. 14. 9. 10. determine the case. Doubtless, Mr.
Geree's Logique, had it been only and merely natural, was sufficient to teach
him this; that between such assertions, which are both, or all, true, there can
be no Contradiction. It is no marvail that Mr. Geree should dedicate his book
to women: it might be thought by the tenor and strain of the contents of it,
that he intended the reading of it likewise only for women. That which follows
in the same page, is of the same Calculation: What he adds (says he) touching
the intention of the Covenant-makers, and the Covenant-takers, I refer me to
his Conscience, whether though they [surely he now speaks of the former only,
the Covenant-makers] did not intend to bind to things against the Law of
nature, yet they intended, that they themselves should be ultimate Judges what
was for the weal of the Kingdom, and so not against the Law of nature, and what
not: and you know the old rule; whatsoever art of words are used in the Oath,
the Oath is to be interpreted, according to his sense that gives it, not his
that takes it. Because Mr. Geree refers himself in the particulars of this
passage to my Conscience, I shall very clearly and faithfully give out the
sense of my Conscience upon them.

1. If the Covenant-makers intended, that themselves should be Sect. 14
the ultimate Judges, of what is, and what is not against the Law of nature, I
conceive 1. that such intentions are not justifiable in them, (and
consequently, not to be presumed by the Covenant-takers.) 2. that (howsoever)
there is no intimation of such intentions in them, in the Covenant it self; so
that this might lawfully be taken without any such supposall by them, who take
it; unless Mr. Geree will say, that he that takes an Oath, is bound to take
it (and so to observe it) according to all the possible intentions of him or
them, that administer i^* whether rationably deducible from the words of the
Oath* or not. This latter (I suppose) is too gross to be numbered amongst Mr.
Geree's notions or conceptions: therefore I leave it to shift for it self
amongst men of understanding. For the former; if the Covenant-makers intended
that themselves would be the ultimate Judges of what is, and what is not,
against the Law of nature, their intentions in this behalf were irregular and
unreasonable. For if I be either to act, or to forbear to act* where it is a
question with some, whether I stand bound b^^ the Law of nature, either to the
one or to the other, no man whatsoever ought to be, or can be, the ultimate
J^dge of my conscience in this case, (as viz. whether I ought to act, or ^o
forbear) but my conscience it self. For let whoever will, judge, conclude, and
determine, that I either ought to do, or not to do, such or such things, I
stand not presently bound by virtue of their judgment or determination, either
to the one, or to the other; but mine own judgment must super^een theirs, and
interpose either with approbation, or dissent, between their judgment, and my,
either action, or forbearance. Nor is the judgment of any person, or persons,
of what abilities or capacities soever, any sufficient ground or warrant for
me, either to act* or to forbear action, contrary to mine own. So that in
whatsoever I do, or refrain doing. I am to follow ultimately the sense and
dictate of mine own judgment, not other men's, how j^st or regular soever they
may be.

2. Whereas he adds, that an Oath is to be interpreted according Sect. 15
to his sense that gives it, not his that takes it; I assent, but with provis^
or explication, that his sense ^e either declared before the giving of the
Oath* or otherwise such, which may readily be gathered or inferred from the
words of the Oath. But if he that administers an Oath to me, the (...) whereof
bears a plain* clear, and direct sense in one kind, shall after my taking of
this Oath, come and tell me* that his sense and meaning of the Oath was quite
another thing, differing from mine* I suppose, that I neither stood bound, when
I took this Oath, to take it in his sense (upon such te^ms)* much le^^^* having
taken it, that I stand bound so to keep it. Suppose the sense of those who made
the solemn League and Covenant* of which Mr. Geree speaks, was, that the clause
concerning the Preservation and defense of the Kings Person and Authority, was
to be preferred, in a case of a competition, before that which concerns the
Liberties of the Kingdoms* or the bringing of Inc^ndiaries, and Delinqu^^ts ^^
c^ndign^ pun^^^^ent; or ag^^^ that these words (subjoyned in the former of
these two cl^uses) ^^ the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and
Liberties of the Kingdom, do not import a condition to be performed on the
Kings part, to bring the ta^^^^ of the Covenant under the obligation thereof
for ^he (...) and def^^^^ of ^^^ Person* etc. but have some other ^^y^^icall
^eanin^* ^^r the Covenant-^^kers themselves, but no ways co^^o^^ing with the
plain and direct importance of the words, my conscience does not teach me that
I stood bound either to take, or keep the Covenant, according to either of
these senses, whether intended, or not intended, by the makers. But there
neither was, nor is, any place for such a dispute as this, nor yet for that
question which Mr. Geree in this place puts upon me, in as much as the
Parliament, when they enjoined the taking of the Covenant, expressly gave
liberty of Interpretation (within compass, I suppose, of a regular
construction of the words) to those that were willing to take it. So that Mr.
Geree does but beat the air from place to place, and seldom or never lights
upon his adversary, unless it be with opprobrious and unmanlike terms: In
which respect I judge it not an engagement worthy the Readers pains to follow
him in his answer, (...) but shall hasten toward a conclusion by the way of
his Arguments, whereby he seeks to argue the Parliament men* disturbed in their
way by the Army, together with their Parliamentary proceedings, into so much
worth and honor, as to render that act of the Army, not only indefensible,
but demeritorious also in the Highest.

Through tenderness or fear (as his own words, page 14. Sect. 1^
seem to import) of exceeding in matters so clear [that no man but himself
personally, and partakingly considered, can see either reason, or truth in
them] he abridgeth himself of the liberty of levying any more than only 4
arguments in order thereunto: two of which notwithstanding, are* like Pharaohs
two dreams, for matter of import, only one; but for matter of truth* none at
all: yet such as they are, being the two formest of the retinue, let us give
them the pre-eminence in point of examination. The former of the two, advances
in this form.

Those that keep to their Principles, Professions* and Declarations made, when
they are confessed to be sober in their right wits, and true to trust, must needs
be judged to be so still. The Parliament men who endeavor the settling of the
King and Kingdom, upon his large Concessions, keep to their Principles,
Declarations, and Professions. Ergo.

The second presents it self in these words.

Those that proceed in a way, to which they stand engaged by diverse solemn and
Religio^^ bands, they are sober, in their wits, and true to trust. The
oppressed Members proceeded in a way to which they stood engaged by many solemn
and Religious bands. Ergo.

I shall not take any advantage from the several pe^cancies Sect. 17
(in point of form) which are apparent more than enough in the former of these
arguments, to say that Mr. Geree was not his crafts-master in making
syllogismes: because (it may be) it was only the extraordinary intensnesse of
his mind upon the matter, that occasioned a mindlesnesse in him of the form. I
shall cope with him about the matter of his argument. And here I cannot but
take notice (by the way) how fain he would steal an hypothesis, or ground, to
make his weak argument stand with some seemingnesse of strength. He would have
it quietly, and without the lea^^ noise of a proof, supposed, that the Kings
Concessions at Newport were very large, large enough to settle the peace and
safety of an un^etled, distracted, and half destroyed Kingdom (nay, of three
Kingdoms) upon. For in his loud pleading the bad cause of his Assumption, he
does not so much as whisper the least word for the credit of this supposition.
But it may be that M^. Prynne and he had compared notes together; the sense of
the said Mr. Prynne concerning these Concessions, being this, that they were
the largest, the safest, and beneficiallest ever yet granted by any King to his
Subjects since the Creation; M^ Prynne* Epist (...) h^^ S^^^ch of Nov ^* (...)
(with I know not how many Rhetorical, that I say not ecstaticall,
encomiastiques heaped upon their heads besides.) P^^ (...) Spe^ch.
It may be Mr. Geree believed half of what Mr. Prynne a^firmed; and this was
sufficient for his purpose. But the best is, we have the Reason of one Kingdom,
and the Religion of another, to balance the confidence of these two men's
imaginations, about the largeness of the said Concessions. First, the
Parliament of England (which is the Reason of Engl^nd) declares, that the
Propositions themselves which were made to the King at the Isle of Weight, were
such, as if they had been granted and kept (of which, they say, there was no
probability) yet would but have returned the people again to their former
slavery; of which assertion they give a very sufficient account (in the words
following) for as much (say they) as by these propositions neither this
Parliament, nor any succeeding one, was put into a capacity of ever being able
to make any good Laws, the King being still suffered to continue his negative
vote, so long opposed, etc. (...) of ^^^ 15. (...).
If the Propositions themselves, had they been granted head and tail, from
first to last, and kept as liberally, as granted, amounted to no more, than to
the re-enslaving of the Kingdom; what may we think those partial and
cautionary concessions of them by the King, as large as his two Champions would
make them, were like to have profitted the Kingdom? Unless the old adage
should administer some hope to us in this kind;

(...).

The half sometimes is more than is the whole.

Thus then we see that the Reason of England makes but coals (and that upon a
very demonstrative account) of those Concessions of the King, of which Mr.
Geree, with his Royal Assistant M^. Prynne, makes such treasure. These men
cry up* adore the largeness of them; whereas the other, who have calculated
the dimensions of them, with far more exactness and skill, complain of the
narrowness and sca^tinesse of them, as comprehending, neither the abolishing
of the Kings negative vote, (and thereby no competent, or tolerable provision
for the liberty of the people) nor yet the taking away of Episco^acy, root and
b^anch (...) of the (...) a^sw^^ ^^ the 5 (...) page ^^
(which the Parliament have engaged themselves by Covenant and Oath to
endeavor to the uttermost) nor yet any sufficient provision for matters of
Religious concernment; Ib^d. page ^4. ^^.
which yet has always been prescribed, and urged upon the Parliament by M^.
Geree and his party, as the Primum quaerite, in their accords and closures with
the King. By the way, how shamelesly, does Mr. Prynns pen over-lash, in
affirming, that the King, by these concessions has fully and actually
performed those two grand Conditions, the preservation and defense, 1. Of M^
Prynne. Speech of Declar 4. 1648 page ^4.
the true Religion, 2. Of the liberties of the Kingdom; upon which the
preservation and defense of his Person and Authority are suspended by the
Covenant, as himself grants.

By the Religion of another Kingdom, condemning Mr. Gerees Sect. 18
and M^. Prynnes judgment about the Concessions of the King, I mean the
Ministers of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, who in their necessary and
seasonable Testimony against Toleration, concerning the Treaty in the Isle of
Whight, page 12. speak thus: And doubtless the Lord is highly displeased with
these proceedings in the Treaty at Newport, in reference to Religion and
Covenant; concerning which they accepted of such concessions from his Majesty
as being acqui^sced in, were dangerous and destructive unto both. This sense of
these Ministers, touching the said concessions of the King, the late Scotch
Commissioners in the latter of the two letters sent to the Parliament a little
before their departure, express not only a^ their own, but as the sense of
their Parliament itself also. Their words are the^e: Wherefore we do in the
Name of the Parliament of Scotland, for their vindication from fal^e a persions
and calumnies* Declare, that though they are not satisfied with his Majesty's
Concessions in that late Treaty at New^o^t in the ^^^ of (...) (e^pecially in
matters of Religion) and are resolved ^ot to crave his Majesty's restitution to
his Government, before satisfaction be given by him to his Kingdoms, yet, etc.
Was not M^. Geree a substantial and close Di^putant, to take that for granted,
and as needing no proof, the truth whereof two Kingdoms and that in their best
capacity of discerning, do not only question, but positively deny? Nor could
M^. Prynne lightly have uttered any thing more stigmatically and desperately
reprochf^ll to the whole species and Order of Kings, than in saying, that the
Kings Concessions were the larg^st, safest, and beneficiallest, ever yet
granted by any King to his Subjects since the Creation. But

Secondly, to the Assumption of Mr. Geree's first Argument, Sect. 19
I answer further, that the Parliament men he speaks of, were so far from
keeping to their Principles, Professions, and Declarations, in their endeavors
to settle the Kingdom upon the terms he speak's of, that herein they started
aside ( like broken bows) from them. The Parliament it self complains of their
apparent defection in this kind Yet here again (say they) We were encountered
with unexpected difficulties, by the APPARENT DE^ECTION of some of our Members*
who (not regarding the glory of God, nor good of the Commonwealth, but being
carried away by base ava^ice and ambition) did labor the bringing in, of the
King again, with all his faults, without the least Repentance* etc. Declar^^.
of the ^^^^ of J^^ 15 ^^^^
Again, when they endeavored such a settlement of the Kingdom, as Mr. Geree
speaks of, did they keep to their Principle, or Vote, of no more addresses to
the King* as being a person incapable of further Trust? or to their profession,
of indeavo^ring to preserve the liberties of the Subject, or of the ^xtirpation
of Episcopacy* or to that principle, by which the^ sometimes judged it
necessary, that some one Proposition (at least) for t^^ honor of the
T^eatours, and for the security of the things treated for, should be premized*
and assented unto by the King, before any Treaty; ^e^ ^he ^^^^ D^^l^^. o^ J^n
^^. ^^48 page ^1.
or did they keep to their principle of bringing Incendiaries and Delinquents
to condign Punishment; or to their principle concerning the abolishing of the
Kings negative Oath? The clear truth is, that in that attempt of settling the
Kingdom, which Mr. Geree speak of they turned head upon all their Principles,
Professions, and Declarations at once, which at any time formerly they either
held* or made, in true Conjunction with the Liberties of the People, and
Interest of the Kingdom. Therefore with this Argument he only beats the air,
instead of relieving his Clients.

Nor does his second Argument turn to any whit better accommodation Sect. 20
unto them. For (to pass by the Major Proposition, which yet* without further
explication is not too sacred to be touched) the Minor is no Correspondent with
the Truth. The oppressed Members (as his over-compassionate Mus^ styles them,)
did not, in that act of settlement he speaks of, proceed in a way to which they
stood engaged by many solemn and Religi^us ^ands* no: he neither does* nor can
prove* that in the said Act or attempt, the Members he speaks of, discharged,
or observed any one solemn or Religious band, to which they stood engaged,
according to the legitimate and true import and intent thereof. For neither did
the Oath of Allegiance, nor the Oath of Supremacy, nor the Protestation, nor
the National Covenant, engage t^em to preserve the Kings Honor, Safety, and
Greatness, upon any such terms, the performance whereof should clearly involve
them in a manifest disobedience to the Law of God (as viz. that, which inflicts
the penalty of death upon the Murderer) and apparently withal expose the
Nation to slavery and misery, which the reass^ming of the King into his Throne
and Power upon his Concessions, m^st need^ have done, as the Parliament it ^elf
has once and again declared* yea and reason it self, in con^ort with the
experience of all age^, abundantly confirms. But that the^e Members in their
intended settlement of the Kingdom upon the terms magnified by Mr. Geree, did
break many Solemn and Religious bands, wherein they stood engaged unto God, and
to the Kingdom, is a truth ^ic^^r in evidence than to need proof. They stood
engaged by such ^ands* to the observation of the Law of God, as well where it
commands the punishment of Murderers, as otherwise, to the Preservation and
Defense of the liberties of the Subject to the Extirp^^i^n of Epis^^^^cie, ^^
the bringing of In^endia^ies and Delinquents to condign punishment, etc. all
which bands, with many more, they b^^^^ ^^d ^^st from them, ^^ the^^ compliance
with the King upon his terms. So that Mr. Geree's clients are not yet recti in
Curia.

He lifts up his hand yet again in their Defense, and shows his Sect. 21
good will toward them in this Argument.

They that walk in a way suitable to the Religion that they profess, and after
the pattern of the wisest and best Professors of it, they are sober, etc. The
Parliament men in according with the King upon his Concessions walk suitable to
the Religion they profess, and follow the patterns of the wisest and best
Professors of it. Ergo. But here also Mr. Geree assumes that which was not
lawful for him to do. For the Parliament men he speaks of, did not in
according with the King upon his Concessions, walk as he pretends, either in
the one respect, or the other. For 1. It is no ways suitable to the Religion,
which these men profess, either to walk in manifest opposition to the Laws of
God, or to recede from, especially to tur^ head upon, such religious
Engagements, which they might very well have discharged, without any touch or
tincture of sin* Nor 2. did they in their said accord with the King, follow the
Patterns of the wisest and best Professors of their Religion. For amongst the
wis^st and best Professors of this Religion, obedience to the Laws of God is
both taught, and practiced; and so likewise is the observance of Religious
engagements, when it may be exhibited without sin. Mr. Gerees proof of his
Proposition from Junius Brutus, passes by on the other side, and scarce looks
so much ^s toward it. The passage he cites, speaks not of Princes that h^ve
murdered their Subjects, and are like, being admitted to terms of peace, to
murder them s^ill: nor of Subjects, who have engaged themselves by many
Religious bands unto such things, which are utterly inconsistent with such an
admission of their Prince to peace, as he speaks of. And I believe, that
neither Juni^^ Brut^^, nor any other Protestant Author, can parallel the case
between the late King of England, and his Subjects, no not in such
circumstances* which are of greatest moment and weight to fram a resolution
upon. Therefore Mr. Geree has not yet recovered hi^ friends out of that
political frenzy, in respect whereof the Act of the Army in restraining
them, is justifiable.

His fourth and last Argument managed in their De^ence, i^ Sect. 22
this*

Those whose work and trust is to provide for the Honor* safety, peace, and
prosperity of a Nation, who proceed in the most probable way to promote the
honor, safety, peace, and prosperity of that Nation, they are sober, in their
wits, true to trust. But such was the work and trust of the restrained Members;
they took the most probable way to promote all these. Ergo.

I answer by denying, yea and more than denying, the Minor. The restrained
Members, in their closure with the King upon the terms so often mentioned, were
so far from proceeding in the m^st probable way to promote the honor, safety,
etc. that the course they steered herein, was highly menacing the honor,
^afety, and peace of the Kingdom, yea (according to the most pregnant symptoms
of a probability,) likely to have filled the land with all the bitter and dismal
fruits of enraged Tyranny. For

1. The King was an old and known Practitioner in pretenses and shifts, to
evade any obligation whatsoever lying upon him, whether by promise, compact, or
oath, in order to the promotion of his tyrannical ends; yea though he were in
never so clear and absolute a capacity for engagement, when he did engage
himself in any of these kinds. I shall not need to instance particulars: he
never pawnd, but he forfeited: fides quoties facta, toties fracta. Hi^ wont was
in his greatest enjoyment of freedom and power, to spread promises, as snares,
in the way of his people, to take and to destroy them. Now the bypast actions
of men (as I say, and prove more at large, in my Right and might well met) P^g
19. ^0* etc.
especially practiced in an uniform tenor for any considerable space of time,
are prophetical of what their future ^ctions are like to be. Neither does Mr.
Geree tender so much as a first fruits of the least, or lightest probability,
that the King, had he been re-advanced unto his power upon his Concessions,
would not upon the first opportunity have taken and cast them behind his back,
as he had from time to time served his promises, formerly. In respect of this
known ^edifragous disposition and G^nius of the King, the Parliament plainly
say concerning his Concessions, that there wa^ no pr^bability that they would
be kept D^^l^^. o^ J^n. 15. ^^^^. page 10.
.

Nay 2. there was so much the (...) ^^obability, that the Sect. 23
King, for standing by these Concessions, would have receded from his former
practice of promise-breaking* by how much the more plausible a pretext he had
for ^^^ de^^rting them, above what he was ever accommodated with before for the
violation of any other promise made by him. All his former i^gagements were
taken up by him, whilst his person was infulnesse of honor, liberty, and
power, whereas these Concessions were drawn from him upon an advantage taken
from his low condition, being now in a kind of durance, and under the power of
the Parliament. In which respect, whatsoever he should grant or ^ield unto upon
such terms, would seem ra^^^r e^torted and wr^ng from him by the iron hand of
neces^ity, and fear, than be looked upon as the genuine and free ^cts of his
will: and con^equently a recesse from them m^st needs have been very easy of
digestion unto him* who had so familia^ly accustomed himself to eat words of a
far worse and mo^e di^ficult concoction. Upon this ground the Parliament it
self looks no otherwise upon those Concessions of his, which M^. Ge^ee and M^.
Prynn^ so much magni^ie, than as words intended by him only for his
accommodation, not obligation. Neither can we believe (say they) that any
agreement we could have made with the King in the Isle of Wight, (in the
condition he was then in) would ever have been ob^erved, either by himself, or
his pa^ty. For ^etting aside the bare name of Honor, Safety, and Freedom,
which the Treaty did pretend unto, neither the King, or any of his, did ever
hold him in any other condition, than that of a Prisoner. (...)
And having clearly proved this from expressions of his own, both in a message
sent by him to both Houses, Oct. 2. 1648. in letters to a prime Magistrate in
this City, as also from the Prince his Declaration made at Goree, they subjoyn
thus: And since enforced Oaths are (in many men's judgments) not necessary to
be kept, what assurance could we have, that He, who had so often failed of his
promise made to us, when he was free, and at his own disposal, would make that
good to us, when he came to be re-established in His Royal power, which he had
obliged himself to do, when he was in durance, and a Prisoner. Yea Mr. Geree
himself seems to intimate, a degree (at least) of unreasonablenesse in the
terms put upon the King by the Parliament, in the said Treaty; (...)
as if he intended to make a doo^ thereof, by which the King might make a
plausible, if not an honest, escape from his Concessions, when he pleased.

3 It has been the Observation of many Generations, that Kings never held
themselves bound to keep any agreement made with their Subjects, especially
made in order to a composure of any differences between them, further or longer
than themselves pleased. Many examples are upon record of the violation of such
agreements by Kings; but few, or none, of the Observation of them, upon any
other terms, than those speci^^ed. ^^^ist^^^n the second, King of D^nmark, not
much above an hundred years past, driven out by his Subjects, and received
ag^in upon new Oaths and Conditions, broke through them all to his most bloody
revenge; slaying his chief Opposers, when he saw his time, both them and their
children invited to a ^east for that purpose. Maximilian the Emperor dealt
little b^tter by the inhabitants of ^ruges, after he was reconciled unto them;
yea though this reconcilement was procured and eff^^ted by the mediation of the
Princes of Germany* and drawn up in public writings sealed. And (as one well
observes) the bloody massacre at Paris Anno 1572 was the effect of that
credulous peace, which the French Protestants made with Charles the ninth their
King; (...) p 4^.
who likewise adds, that the main visible cause which to this day has saved
the Netherlands from utter ruin, was their final not believing the perfidious
cruelty, which, as a constant Maxim of State, has been used by the Spanish
Kings on their Subjects that have taken arms, and after trusted them; as no
later age but can testify, heretofore in Belgia it self, and ^his very year in
Naples. The same Author likewise observes (very pertinently to the point in
hand) that David, after he had once taken arms, never afterward trusted Sa^l,
though with t^ars and much relenting he twice promised not to hurt him. This
dissembling of ^e^d till an opportune time for revenge, was (it seems) even in
H^me^s days taken notice of as a principle familiarly practiced by Kings; who
upon this account makes Chalcas speak concerning Agamemnon thus:

(...).
(...),
(...),
(...). i.
A King, when angry with a meaner man,
Will have the better on it. For though to day
He should digest his chol^r, yet be can
Reserve in breast, on purpose to repay,
Wrath and revenge, in due time afterward.
The present Parliament likewise takes knowledge of that unprincely Principle
in Princes, which we now speak of, in their oft-mentioned Declaration of Jan.
15. 1648. page 12. 13. Hardly (say they) can any example be produced either
foreign, or domestic, of any Prince once engaged in a War with his Subjects,
that ever kept any agreement which he made with them, longer than mere
necessity did compel him the^eunto. The e^amples to the contrary are so many,
and so manifest; and the late bloody violation of the peace betwixt the Crown
of ^^^in, and those of Naples, is so fresh in our memori^^, as we cannot expect
any Propositions agreed upon at the Isle ^^ ^ig^t, should bind the King more,
than Fundamental Laws, and Coro^ation Oath; besides his often Protestations,
and engagements in the Name of a King, and o^ a Gentleman, which He has so
often violated. And though that P^overbia^izing Prayer of the Italians, to be
delivered from (...)
a ^^^^^ened ^ or strained ^ wind, and from a reconciled enemy, too generally
understood may well be conceived to trench upon the Principles of
Ch^^stianitie; yet in reference to Kings and Princes it imports none other than
that Serpe^tine Wisdom which Christianity allows, yea and commends unto
her children.

4. If the Thrones of other Kings and Princes have been so ^^^^. 25
constantly haunted with the wicked spirit of Covenant Breaking with Subjects,
upon differences and discontents, there was little hope that the Throne of such
a King would be free, whose Genius should inspire him with this saying, that ^e
never ^ad forgiven an injury, nor ever would. Ex ungue l^onem.

5. There was yet so much the less hope that the late King would have stood by
his Concessions, because he had so solemnly and with so much Conscience (such
as it was) resigned up himself (if Mr. Prynns story be true) to the service of
the Pope who first claims a right (...) ower to dispense with Oaths (and much
more, with all engagements of an inferior nature) and 2* drives an Interest
altogether inconsistent with the real and effectual performance of the said
Concessions by the King. The words of his own letter to the Pope, as Mr. Prynne
translateth them, are these. I entreat your Holiness to believe, that I have
been always very far from encouraging Novelties, or to be a Partisan of any
Faction against the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion. But on the contrary I
have sought all occasions to take away the suspicion that might rest upon me,
and that I will employ my self for the time to come, to have but one Religion
and one Faith, seeing that we all believe in one Jesus Christ, having resolved
in my self to spare nothing that I have in the world, and to suffer all manner
of discommodities, even to the hazarding of my estate and life, for a thing so
pleasing unto God. (...)


6. (And lastly) It was the confident sense of some very intelligent and sober
men many years since (from whom I received it upon a very good account, for the
Truth of it) that upon the Execution of Justice upon the Scottish Queen in this
Kingdom there entered a foul spirit of revengefull intentions against this
Nation, into the line Royal of that, which (as they suggested) has wrought
accordingly ever since, as well in the Father, as in the Son, though not with
an uniformity of open vigor, or violence, the natural temper of the one being
more timorous, and inclining to politic, clandestine, and underhand actings,
than of the other. But that the mischief, ruin, and destruction of the English
Nation was become the hereditarie engagement of that Crown unto which it was
subject, till of late, is conjecturable, if not demonstrable, by the footsteps
of so many State-actings from time to time of an uniform tendencie that way,
that a man must shut the eyes of his understanding very close not to see, or at
least not to be strongly suspicious of it.

And by this time, enough (I presume) with advantage, has Sect. 26
been said, to prove Mr. Gerees sense touching the point in hand very
anti-rationall, viz. that the King, had he been restored upon his Concessions,
would not have let out his spirit in a destructive way of revenge. His temper,
spirit, tenor of former actions, resignation of himself, Crown and Kingdom,
unto the Popish Interest his heiring an inveterate and deadly feud against the
English Nation, with several other symptoms of like Prognostication with
these, proclaim aloud the contrary. His fairer probabilities in the other side
are but of a very washie and faint complexion. I wonder what ample testimony
he ever gave of such a deep Wisdom, as Mr. Geree poetizeth in him? Himself
insisteth upon no particular in this kind: Nor (I clearly profess) do I know
how to furnish him. As for some witty expressions, plausible insinuations, she
evasions, captious overtures, dissembling pretenses, with never so many FINE
DESIGNS of no better calculation than these, he that will call d^^t^s ^^
wisd^m, declares himself to be but shallow. The wisest ^^ad^ that leaned to
him, in his late engagements and tro^bles, h^ve from time to time, more
complained of his WILL, than admired his wis^^m: and some of them (in
particular) presaged that which has since befallen him, from his defective and
unpo^^tick managing his last and fairest opportunity in the Treaty at the Isle
of wight. And for that invincible patience, and tra^q^illity of spirit i^ h^^
sufferings, wherewith the fancy of this Author seems to be so much ravished*
I must be beholding to him to ^end me his Faith to believe either the one, or
the other. It is too well known, how effectually the spirit of impatience and
revenge wrought in him all along his sufferings; during all which time his head
was as a furnace, or smiths forge, which had always these two irons in it, an
escape from his rest^aint, and a plotting mischief and destruction against his
Parliament and Kingdom. Yea whilst the last Treaty it self was on foot,
wherein the terms of his restitution were brought many deg^es lower, than in
an^ former Treaty they had been, and indeed too low by far for an healthful
situation to the Kingdom (as was formerly proved) yet did he relent nothing at
all from the inveteratenesse of his spirit both against Parliament and Kingdom,
but was now as intent and active in giving Commissions, and in other
contrivements, in order to the misery and ruin of those* who sought his honor
and peace, in away of righteousness, (only in conjunction with their own,
safety) as at any time formerly he had been. Are these M^. Gerees Symptoms of
an invincible patience, and tranquillity of ^^irit in sufferings? As for his
experience, which Mr. Geree supposes would have made him wary, the truth is,
that men of will and revenge are of the worst temper and capacity to learn
wisdom of such a mistress. Experience of miscarriages, defeatures, losses,
etc. seldom teach such men any better wisdom, than to project and practice
revenge upon such persons, by whom they have been worsted from time to time,
with so much the more subtilty, industry, and unrelentingnesse of spirit.

Whereas Mr. Geree adds, that should the King have been Sect. 27
willing to have let out his Spirit in a destructive way of revenge, yet ^e
could not, because his hands by these concessions were tied, this conceit has
been weighed in the balance already, and found light. If he speaks of such an
impotency in the King, which is contra-distinguished to a legal or equitable
po^er, he says very true, that the King COULD NOT after his Concessions (no,
nor yet before) break out in a way of revenge. In this case the saying is true,
Id ta^^u^ possumus, quod jure possumus. But for the tying of his hands which he
speaks of, they were much faster ti^d by his Coronation Oath, and his signing
the Petition of Right (besides many other bands as well of Religious
engagement, as civil) than by his late Concessions (for the reason above
specified) And if, whilst he was but a novice and young practitioner (in
comparison) in the art of Oath-breaking, and promise-waving, ^e was so ^ar
master of both, as to be able to overruled the strongest O^ths* and the
clearest and most signal promises in order to the satisfying of his lusts and
making way to his own ends, is it imaginable, after so great an obduration of
conscience as by so long an habituated custom in both, must needs be contracted
by him, that such Concessions as Mr. Geree speaks of, so pretensible with
arguments and pleas for ^ lawfulness of r^cesse or non-observance, should be
able to bridle, or hold him in?

That which follows is but a puff of the same wind. By Sect. 28
this recommodation ( says he) the Parliament would be reinvested in the
peoples affections: and any attempt of breach on the Kings part, would carry so
much ill in the face of it, that the whole Nation would be ready to rise upon
and pluck in pieces, whosoever should be supposed to be either Counselors, or
Actours, in such a breach of Faith, etc. And the Militia being in the
Parliament^ hands, etc. What intelligent man is there, to whom such discourse
as this seems not a ridiculous kind of utopianisme? For

1. In case of a closure or agreement between the Parliament and the King* the
King would have been applauded and adored by the generality of the people, as
the Author of all the satisfaction and contentment, which should have accrued
unto them thereby, and the Parliament looked upon, not so much as those who had
procured their good at the last, as those, who by their unreasonable and unjust
demands of the King formerly, had obstructed their good hitherto. The body, and
bulk of the people would have thought the whole and entire substance of all
their affections a gift little enough to bestow upon their King; the Parliament
was like to have had little, or no part of fellow-ship, in the business: The
Son that had been long lost, and at last was found, had the fat calf killed for
him.

2 Had the King been re-invested in his Throne, he would Sect. 29
soon have put the nation out of a capacity of rising up against him, or any of
this Instruments, whatsoever either He, or they, on his behalf, should have
done, though in ways of greatest violence and oppression. We know, that
whilst his Honor and power were yet under a great Eclipse, and himself in
durance, he had a party in the Kingdom ready, and able (according to a
rational estimate of ableness, or power) to have done him the service of
treading down the Nation under his feet, and of breaking all his Opposers in
pieces like a potters vessel; yea and this whilst they had an Army valiant
and faith full, and for number, not inconsiderable, for a guard to them. Yea
had not the glorious God, who loves the righteous, engaged the Stars to fight
in their courses against that party of his we speak of, the work had been done
to his hand: the bones of the Nation, in a way of all humane probability, had
been so broken, that it could never have stood up more to defend it self
against him, what yokes of Tyranny soever he should have bound upon the neck of
it. If then his influence was so potent upon his party, whilst he was yet in
so great an Eclipse, and in disputable condition whether he should return to
his Throne, or no, as to spirit them with zeal and courage, to attempt the
shaking of the whole Nation for his sake, to batter, ruin, and destroy both
Parliament, and Army, and whatsoever should be found standing up against him;
what would his presence upon the Throne, withal the rays of Majesty spread
about him, have been, but as life from the dead unto them? Or is it reasonable
to conceive, that He, that had so many hands reached out unto him, whilst he
was dismounted, and in no capacity of rewarding them, to help him up into his
Throne, would, having been once seated in the Throne, where fields, and
vineyards, and Captain-ships over hundreds and over thousands do abound, have
wanted hands to have supported and maintained him in it upon what terms soever?
Was there ever a generation of husbandmen heard of, that were zealous in
sowing, and lukewarm in reaping?

3. Suppose the nation, or the far greater part of men in it, Sect. 30
would have been ready to rise up against all such, whom they had judged either
Counselors, or A^^ou^s in any such breach of Faith on the Kings part, as Mr.
Geree speaks of, in respect of the generality of the people, (I mean, in case
the King contrary to his concessions* should have fallen foul upon men, no
way^s obnoxious to the hatred of the people* for Religion) yet it is an extreme
weak Supposall, to think, that the Generality of the Nation would have
acquitted themselves with such supererogating zeal in the behalf of such men,
whom they inwardly hate, and look upon as the enemies and disturbers of their
peace, and the worst members in all their body. Now these are the men, men that
are truly conscientious, and that cannot swallow the morsels of the Common
iniquity of the times, and profanesse of the places where they live, whom the
King looked upon (and that not without cause) as the firstborn of those who
opposed him in his late insufferable encrochments upon the liberties and
comforts of his people; and consequently, are the men, either only, or
chiefly, with whose misery and ruin he was in travail: yea and (questionless)
might within a few days after his return to his Throne, have found a time for
an easy deliverance.

4. (And lastly) concerning the being of the Militia in the Sect. 31
Parliaments hand; it is of every whit as empty a consideration in reference to
Mr. Gerees purpose, as the former. First, because the King, and the Parliament,
as now the constitution of it was reduced and wrought about, (at least in
respect of the Members sequestered, who we know had a potent influence upon the
house) were no more two, but one: The Members we speak of, had (in works)
renounced fealty to the weal of (their old Lords and Masters) the people, and
were turned homagers to the Interest of the Crown. So that, in point of
benefit, or safety to the Commonwealth, it was much of one and the same
consideration, whether the Militia were to be put into the Parliaments hand, or
the Kings. If it were in the Parliaments hand one day, it was very like to have
been in the Kings the next. But 2. suppose the Parliament in their united
strength should have kept close to the interest of the people, and managed it
in due distinction from that of the King, there is scarce an hairs breadth of
probability, but that the King, having recovered the advantage of his Throne,
would in a very few days have made himself as absolute a Lord of the Militia,
a^ ever he had been heretofore. It was generally esteemed half a miracle when
time was, that Sr. John H^tham should make such a dem^^^e as he did, about
rendering up the Town of H^ll, unto the King, upon his demand: and yet we know
he was caj^ld afterward with the enchantments of Majesty, and Majestique
proffers. Where should the Parliament have found men through the Kingdom, in
whose hands the Militia might have been ^o much as probably secured to them*
from between the Kings smiles, and frowns? Parliaments themselves, who have the
b^st foo^ing of all others to keep their standing, yet how pro^e and ready have
they been from time to time, to ^ick ^^^ dust at the fe^t of Kings? Many (says
Solomon) will entreat the favor of the Prince: and every man is a friend to
him that gives gifts. Prove 19 ^.
Besides, it is but too well known, of how weak a Constitution the trained
bands in the respective Counties generally were, and ready to arm with the
King, though against themselves, and their own peace, Moreover (as we reasoned
lately) if the King whilst yet he was sitting upon the dunghill, ^ound Men
and Arms enough (for he wanted no numbers of either) to lift him up into his
Throne, though both a Parliament, and Potent Army with all their Interest and
power, forb^d the Elevation; questionless had he been advanced, and once warm
in his Throne* accommodations in both kinds would have flowed in much more
abundantly unto him. He that had no want of Friends in adversity, was it like
prosperity should impoverish him? So that as well one, as the other of M^.
Ger^^s conceits, first that the King, though ^^ had been able, yet would not
have let out his spirit in a way of revenge* ^econdly, though ^e had been
willing, yet ^e would not have been ^ble, are both ^^^^ably frivolous and
importune. There is no reason worthy a con^idering man but ^o think* tha^ he
would have ^ound both will enough in himself* and power enough in others, to
have ave^ged himself on the Nation, (those especially wh^m ^^ looked upon as
his greatest Opposers) had he regained the opportunity and advantage of his
Throne.

And thus, I suppose, the premises considered, we have Sect. 32
b^ought ^orth this Conclusion into a^ clear and perfect a light, as any the
Sun shines at noonday; that there was a very great and formideable Necessity
lying upon the Army to li^^ ^^ both ^^^rt ^^d h^^d to that great w^^^ of (...)
Parliament into a capacity of showing mercy to the Nation, by freeing them
from the sad incumberance of such Members, who^e counsels and proceedings in
the House obstructed them in that good work, and threatened apparent misery to
the land. Yet (for a Conclusion) give me leave to light up a candle or two,
whereby to see the Sun; I mean, to give a furth^r account of the primogeniture
of that Necessity, which, a^ far a^ the credit o^ Authority of any thing
whatsoever, known by the Name of a Necessity, extends, justifies the Army in
that commendable, and yet withal, so much condemned, an action. First besides
the declared and known intentions and resolutions of the Members ^equestered,
to bring in the King upon his own terms or Conc^ssions, the Army (I understand)
had steady inteligenc^, that the said Members (or at least the Grandees, the
active and leading men amongst them) had resolved the very next morning after
the rub they met with, to have Voted the disbanding of the Army: And secondly,
to have adjourned the House for two years. Both which votes, their numbers*
Subtilty, Industry in promoting their own ends, interest in the House,
considered, they might easily have carried: and as for the House of Lords, in
all things relating to the Royal Interest, they were, as these were* they
could deni^ them nothing. How apparently destructive both these Votes,
especially in Conjunction, would have been to the Kingdom, and more especially
to the Army, and the whole Parliamentary party in it, a ^ew un-prejudiced
thoughts are sufficient to determine. First, the Army, being despoiled of the
Title and Authority, by which they had acted hitherto, and by which they are
yet in a regular and l^gall capacity of acting, had been left nacked ^o the
fury and revenge of the King, and his party* (there being no provision at all
made in those his Concessions for their security or indemnity) in which
condition, they had been necessitated, ^ither to reject that Parliamentary
Order or Vote, by which they were enjoined to disband, and to stand to their
a^m^ upon their guard, notwithstanding (which in all likelihood would have
involved the Nation in new combustions* and th^se as bloody* and grievous, as
any the former had been) or else to have offered their throats to him* whose
mercies ^^re ^^^^ll, and whose cru^lty had been whetted by themselves to the
k^^nest edge, which the metal of it would bear, by 7. years provocations.
Which considered, were that true, which Mr. Geree presumption-wise charge
them with, as a matter of high demerit, viz. that it was through fear of their
own lives, and to escape themselves, that they dealt so roughly with the
Parliament men, the truth is that they were not much, if at all, upon such an
account to be condemned. For peril of life, yea though not extremely imminent
or urging, is of that kind of necessity, which the positive and express word
or Law of the Gospel it self, authorizeth with a dispensatorie, or superseding
faculty over many the Law^ of God himself (as I have fully proved in my Right
and Might well met) yea which the Law of nature it self authorizeth with a like
power over the Laws and constitutions of men And if it be lawful for me to
defend my self against him that assaulteth me, though with the peril* yea or
loss of the life of my Assailant, why should it be deemed unlawful for me to
turn such men out of their way, though it be with their disparagement, and
contrary to a standing humane law, whom I clearly find to be under a purpose
and present engagement of delivering me up into the hands of my implacable
enemies, without cause? I add this: that for men to make their peace with
their enemy, with the heads and lives of those, who have with the eminent
hazard thereof, for 7. years together, protected them against the revenging
power of this enemy, is as unreasonable, unnatural, unworthy an Act, as is
lightly incident to the nature of man, not extremely imbased and degenerated.

For the latter of the two intended Votes mentioned, concerning the adjournment
of the House for two years, what did the intendment of it by the said Members
import, but their deliberate, desires if not clandestine and underhand
engagements unto the King, to remove all obstructions and impediments out of
his way, and to bring him in with the greatest liberty and freedom his soul
could desire, both for taking revenge upon all those, whom he or hi^, would
please to call, enemies, and to put the Kingdom it self into what posture he
should desire, to be trodden upon and tyrannized over* without danger? I
confess, if this, with all the particulars formerly mentioned by way of
inducement unto the Army to sift and garble the Parliament, as they did, will
not amount to a Necessity, yea to a Necessity of the first magnitude, to a
Necessity like unto a King upon his T^rone, against whom there is no rising
up, I have need to be taught the first rudiments of Necessity* because, upon
such a supposition, I am conscious to my self that I understand nothing ^^ all,
of the nature, property, or condition of such a thing.

Some odd Reckonings between Doctor HAMOND and the Author, set straight.
I Perceive by some pieces published by this Doctor Sect. 1.
since the late troubles and differences in the land, that he has some
particular desire to engage me. I cannot account, either unto my self, or to
any other man, for the reason or cause of such his desire; considering that
many others have taken up the bucklers against that cause and party, which he
maintains, as well as I; and that I never in any of my writings, until now,
either mentioned his name, or any of his writings, or any ways personally
reflected upon him, in the least. I have (I confess) heard frequently of him;
nor have I at any time heard any thing concerning him but well, and worthy of a
man, his Judgment in the Grand State-question of the times only excepted: the
disparagement whereof I was very willing to pass by, as judging it honestly
covered with his other principles, and regular deportments in the world. But
since he has once and again (and perhaps oftene^ than is yet come to my
knowledge) lift up the standard of his pen against me, I have at last taken the
field, hoping to right my self at that weapon, wherewith I have been assaulted.
What of mine he has essaied by way of argument to make crooked, in his humble
Address, etc. I have (I suppose) in the first of these Treaties, upon the same
account, made perfectly straight. What of mine he further censureth by way of
charge and imputation, in that Treatise, I shall revise and vindicate, after
the engagement of a few lines first, to right a former Treatise, of mine (now
of seven years standing, and more, in the world) called Anti-Cavalerisme,
against some injust aspersions, cast upon it by this Doctors pen. Which
nakedness of his notwithstanding I had covered with silence and neglect, had
he not allarmed me the second time with the same Trumpet.

Page 24. of my said Treati^e entitled Anti-Cavalerism^, the Doctor (it
^eems) met wit^ this passage from my pen. How easi^^ mig^t he [Tert^llian]
mistake and miscarrie in a matter quite besid^s ^is profe^sion and course, who
not long after miscarried s^ grievously in his own, as to turn Montanist, who
called himself the ^oly Ghost, etc. The latter words of this period the Doctor
exagitates with the^e. -- as if (says he) I should RESOLVE this man knew no
Logic, beca^se in this period he offends so much against Grammar, in these
words [to turn Montanist, who called himself the holy Ghost;] where the
Relative [who] has certainly no Antecedent; Tertullian CANNOT: for he called
not himself the holy Ghost. -- and Montanist CANNOT, unless as once Areopagi
signified the Areopagites, so now by way of compensation* Montanist must pass
for Montanas; for he it was that called himself the holy Ghost. What? an eagle
thus to beat and tear her self with catching, nay with catching at, a fly?
nay, only at the shadow of a fly? For the Doctor laboring in the very fi^e
to make me a Grammatical Delinquent witho^t a cause, incurres the realty of
the same guilt himself, and this over and over. But first, that the words, or
clause of mine he ^peaks of, are no ways Antigrammatically inclined, and that
there is an antecedent, to the Relative, [ who] sufficiently expressed, is
super-suffic^ently evident by that common and known Rule in the Grammar
Syntaxis: Aliquando Relativum, aliquando and ^o^en Adjectivum, respondet
primitivo, quod in p^ss^ssivo subintelligitur. Sometimes the Relative, yea and
sometimes the Adjective, answers [or agrees with] the Primitive, which is
[included,] or understood, in it is Possessive. The Grammar instance or example
of this Rule, is that ^aying of Terence (who was not to seek in his
Grammaticalls) O^^es o^nia b^na dicere, and laudar^ f^rtun^^ me^^, qu^ ^ilium
^ab^rem ^ali ing^^io pr^ditum. Might not the Doctor, with every whit as much
truth and reason, cry out against this construction, and say, The R^lative
[Qui] WHO, h^th c^^tainly n^ Antec^dent: Omnes c^^^^t: for it agrees not with
it in number: Fortunas, ca^^^t: for it ^grees neither in number, nor in gender.
But as in this example, the Ant^^ede^t to the said Relative, Q^d, i^ the
Pronoune Pri^iti^^, Eg^, which though not expressed, ^^ yet clearly enough
contained, or implied in the Possessive, m^^^* so in that clau^e of mine, which
the Doctor arraig^eth at the unjust tribunal of his Gr^^^^^ learning, the
Antecedent to the Relativo [ wh^] i^ the primitive word. Montanus, which is
significantly enough implied, (yea and more than half expressed) in that
Derivative, or Posses^ive word, Montanist. For what does the word, Montanist,
in the most plain and obvious signification of it import, but a follower,
scholar, or disciple of Montanus? The ker^ell of the nut was very easy to come
at, the shell being so tender. The holy Ghost himself delights sometimes in
those very constructions of speech, which my Teacher reproves in me. For he is
a liar (says Christ* speaking of the devil) and the Father of it. John ^ 44.
Will the Doctor say, that here is no An^ec^dent to thi^ Relative it, because
here is none expressed; when as it i^ so clearly understood, in the Derivative,
(...), liar? It seems he had not ^^^t with the Rule, which ^iscator In Psalm 65.
^^.
delivers in these words: Pronomen relativum refertur ad adjunct^m ^j^^ ^ei*
cuj^^ praecessit menti^ i. The Pronoune Relative is [sometimes] referred to the
adjunct of the thing beforementioned, and not always to the thing it self.
This Rule he lays down upon occasion of a pregnant instance, Psalm. 65. 9.
Th^^ visitest the Earth, and ^^^^res^ it (says David unto God) ^hou gr^^tly
^nrichest it with the river of God, which is full of water: thou preparest them
co^n, when t^o^ ^^st so provided for it. The Relative, THEM, in this period,
^^^th no Antecedent, as the Doctor counts A^ent (i^ his c^nsorio^s disc^urs^
la^ely touched) yet the Holy Ghost judges that it has an Anteced^^t reg^lar
and in^^lli^ible e^ough, in the word, Terra, Ear^^, viz. the Isra^li^^^, the
inhabit^nts of this Earth. Another example of the li^e const^^ct^^n the Render
may please to peruse, 2. Tim. 2. 17. And THE^^ word will eat as does a can^^r,
etc. It will so^^ly trouble my Royal A^tago^^st to find an Antecedent to the
R^lative, THEIR, in this cl^^^^, ^^y where expressed in the context. The
Scriptures have ^^ny e^pression^ of this kind; which though they be somewhat
(...) Grammatically, (as all Metapho^s also a^e in another kind, yet a^e they
commodious enough for the understanding, which ^^ the So^^reign and chief end
of al word^ and express^^^^. In re^^^^^ of the fr^quencie of them in the
Scriptures, learned M^^^^^ ^ak^^ the use of Relatives without An^^cedents
exp^essed ^asy to be ^^de^s^ood, an Idiome or propri^ty of the Hebrew tong^e.
Relativ^^ ^^^^ Ante^^d^n^^ q^^d ^^cil^ sub^^^^lligi^ H^^ vi^ Me^cer. in ^ccl*
7. ^.
I ^^ke no question but the Doc^our h^th oft^^ h^ard of (...) P^^lina (amo^^^t
ou^ (...)) (...) ^^ss^g^^ in the writings of Paul, wherein the ordinary
formalitie^ of Gr^^mar have no Religious observance from him. See to thi^
purpos^ Mr. (...) in ^^^ 2 7. and D^n H^n^^us (...), s^c^^ ^d N. T page ^^^
For the first instance from John 8. 44. if the Doctor will disavow both our
English translations of the Relative, (...) and render it in the Masculine
Gender, of him, whereas they render it in the Neuter, ^f it (for which
disavowment notwithstanding* there is not the least ground, or necessity) the
instance (I confess) will not bind him. But all our Protestant Translatours
and Expositours of other Churches, as ^eza, Calvin, Tremellius out of the
Syriac, Gualter, etc. give the right hand of fellowship to our English
Translatours in the reddition specified: nor (indeed) will the sense of the
place rise any whit commodious, or tolerable, with the other. But it seems the
Treatise against which the Doctor had a mind to cavil, deals nothing
bountifully with him in matters of real exception: otherwise (doubtless) such
shadows as this would not so solemnly have engaged him. But

Secondly, whilst he s^eks to make me so great an offender against Grammar,
who as yet know no such delinquency by my self; he dasheth his own foot once
again against this stone. For 1. is Grammar so well pleased with such a phrase
or form of expression, as this, I resolve this man knows no Logic; or, I
resolve Doctor Hamond knows not good Grammar, when he meets with it? My
meaning only being, that I conclude, or am satisfied within my self that he
knows it not. I believe he can hardly instance me the like use or acception of
the word, resolve, out of any approved English Author. 2. when he charge in
this tenor of words, where the Relative [VVHO] has certainly no Antecedent;
Tertullian cannot, for, etc. and again, Montanist cannot, unl^sse, etc. is he
so devout an observer of the Discipline of Grammar? For where shall we find any
regiment of construction, for his two, cannots? Or in what Author will he find,
that the word, or words, cannot, signifies, cannot be, or cannot be it, where
the Verb Substantive, be, is neither used, nor understood, either in the same,
or in the next perceding sentence? Tertullian cannot: Montanist cannot: I am
sure Doctor Hamond cannot purge himself from the guilt of a double
Grammatical crime, in his two, cannots. For his conceit of Areopagi, which
once (it seems) signified the A^eopagites, I neither know from whence it comes,
nor whither it go^^, or tend^: nor shall I trouble my self with making i^quiry
^^^r ^^ther.

Concerning his prolix (that I say not, tedious) counterarguings Sect. 3.
in his said discourse, to what I lay down by way of answers to the Common
objections from Tertullian against the cause maintained by me in my Anti-
Cavali^risme, because in these h^ deals only in conjecturals, and though his
conjecturals in this kind should be indulged into demonstrations, yet the cause
against which he levieth them, would be very little endammaged by them; upon
this double account, I shall discharge my self from reponing any thing of mine
own unto them, judging that which has been already published by others, to be
fully sufficient for the ex-authorizing whatsoever he has written or can be
written, either by him, or any other man, in the behalf. A first fruits hereof
I shall present unto the Reader from the pen of a learned Scotch-man (a man
royal enough, though not so rank happily of the Devotion, as the Doctor) in
this transcription following. I will not go about ( says ^e in answer to his
Pre^^ticall Antagonist, who brought Tertullian with his old worn weapons into
the field against him) to say that Tertullian thought it lawful to raise Arms
against the Emperor: I ingenuously confess Tertullian was in that error. But
1. something of the man. 2. Of the Christians. Of the man: Tertullian after
this tur^ed a Montanist. 2. Pam^lius says of him (in Vit. T^rtull.) inter
Apocrypha numera^ur -- excommunicatus. 3. It was Tertullians error in a fac^,
not in a question, that he believed Christians were so numerous, as that they
might have sought with the Emperors. 4. Mr. Prynne does judiciously observe
(3. part Sovereign power of Parliament, page 139. 140.) he not only thought it
unlawful to resist, but also to ^^ee: and therefore wrote a book de Fuga: and
therefore as some men are excessive in doing for Christ, so also in suffering
for Christ. Hence I infer, that Tertullian is neither ours, nor theirs in
this point: and we can cite Tertullian against them also. J^m sumus ergo pares.
Yea Mr. Fox in his Monum, says, Christians ^^^ to the stakes to be burnt, when
they were neither condemned, nor cited. 5. What if we cite Theodore^ fol. 98.
de Provid. who about that time says* That evil men reign, (...) through the
Cowardlinesse of the Subjects. As the Prelate says of T^r^ull^^^^, I ^u^n it:
if T^^^doret w^^e now living, he would go for a (...) About that time,
Chris^i^^^ so^^ht help from Constanti^^ the Great against Lyri^^^^ their (...)
perour, and overthrew him in battle. And the Christ^^^s being oppressed by the
King of Persia, their own King* sent to Theod^^i^s to help them against him. 1.
For the man. Tertullian in the place cited, says, ^he Christians were
strangers under the Emperor. Externi sum^s: and therefore they h^d no Laws of
their own, but were under the civil Laws of Heathen, till ^onstantines time,
and they had sworn to J^li^n as his Soldiers: and therefore might have, and no
doubt had, scruples of Conscience to resist the Emperor. 2. It i^ known* that
J^lian h^d huge numbers of Heathen ^n his Armies and to resist had been great
danger. 3. Wanting Leaders and Commanders (many prime men doubting of the
Lawfulness thereof) though they had been equal in number, yet n^mber is not
all in War: skill in valourous Commanders i^ required. 4. What if all
Christians were not of Tertulli^^^ mind? 5. If I would go to humane Testimonies
which I judge not satisfactory to the Conscience I might cite many; the
practi^e of E^a^^^ of (...) the Divines in Luthers time^ (as Sleid^n. 8. cap.
8. 22.) re^olved resistance to be Lawful. Calvin, Beza, Pare^^* the Ger^^^^
Divines, B^c^n^^, and an host might be p^oduced. L^^ ^^^ page ^7^. ^7^


To this passage, I shall only add the mention of some p^rticulars Sect. 5.
in order to the Docto^^s satisfaction about any t^^^g found either in
Tertullian or Cyprian about the point depend^^g between him and me, from Mr.
Pr^^ himself* a man as deeply now at last baptized into the Spirit of
Roy^lisme* as the Doctor himself. First ^hen (says Mr. Pr^^) I say, that
^eit^er of their Father^ say, that the primitive Christians ^^ld i^ ^nlawfull*
much less damnable, in point of cons^i^^^e for them to resist their
persecuting enemies: no such syll^ble in any of them. And Tertulli^^s, Si non
ap^^ ista^^ discipl^^^m magis Occidi licet, qu^n ^ccidere, by the way of
necessary defense, implies no such thing, but rather proves the co^^rary, that
resistance is lawful, because it is Lawful to be s^^int as a Martyr;
therefore in thi^ case to slay. So that there is nothing in their Authority, in
point of conscience to condemn the Parliaments resistance, and defensive War,
^^ unlawful.

Secondly, they all seem to* grant, that the Ch^^st^^ns deemed ^esistance, ^ven
by force of A^^^ to be Lawful for them, though they used it not, no Text of
(...) ^^ohibiting, but allowing it, and their Fathers producing no one Text,
which truly condemns it; this being the very sum of their words: That though
the Christians were exceeding many in number* of strength and power abundantly
sufficient to de^end themselves in a Warlike manner against their Perse^utors,
and had full Liberty and no restraint upon them in point of Conscience, either
to withstand their persecutours with Arms, or to withdraw themselves from under
the Jurisdiction of their persecutours into remote parts, to the great
weakening and loss of the State; yet such was their patience, ^nnocency, and
desire of Martyrdom, that they resisted not their adversaries with force, nor
re^ired, nor ^^ed away -- but cheerfully yielded up their bodies, liberties,
lives, to the cruelties of their enemies, to obtain that Crown of Martyrdom,
which they d^sired, etc. This is the sum of all those Authorities, which
evidence Resistance Lawful in it self, and to those Christians too in their
own judgments, and resolutions, though the desire of Martyrdo^ made them
freely to forbear it.

Thirdly, their examples of not resisting Persecutours, being rather voluntary,
than enjoined, out of a longing desire to be Marty^^, and an assurance of
Divine vengeance to be executed on their Persecutours, is no restraint nor
ground at all for other Christians, now not to use any forcible resistance (
with much more upon this head.)

Fourthly, the Christians not only refused to resist their oppressing
Emperors and Magistrates, who proceeded judicially by a kind of Law against
them, but even the vulgar people, who assaulted, stoned, ^lew the^ in the
streets against Law, as Tertullians words, Quoties ^nim pr^^^ritis ^ vob^ su^
jure nos inimicum vulgus inva^it lapidibus and incendi^s, etc. manifest without
all contradiction. And indeed this passage so much insisted on, relates
principally, if not only, to such assaults of the rude notorious vulgar, which
every man will grant the Christians might lawfully with good Conscience
forcibly resist, because they were no Magistrates, nor lawful higher powers
(with more likewise to very good purpose, upon thi^ head)

Fifthly, Admit the Christians then deemed all for^rible resistance of
Persecutours simply unlawful in point of Conscience, ^^ being a thing quite
contrary to Christian Profession and Religion; then as it necessarily proves
on the one side* that even Christian Kings, Princes, Magistrates, must in no
wise forcible resist the Tumults, Rebellions, Insurrections, and Persecutions
of their Subjects, because they are Christians, as well as Rulers, and in this
regard equally obli^ged with them not to resist with arms (much less then
their Parliaments forces lawfully raised for the public Defense) so on the
contrary part it follows not, that therefore resistance is either unlawful in
it self, or that the Parliaments present resistance is so. For first, such
resistance being no where prohibited (as I have formerly proved) their bare
Opinion, that it was unlawful to them, cannot make it so to them, or us, in
point of Conscience, since God has not made or declared it so. Secondly the
Primitive Christians held many things unlawful in point of Conscience, which
we now hold not so [he might have added, nor have any sufficient ground so to
hold.] Of which assertion he makes proof by ^^^dry particular instances, which
the Reader may please to peruse at his leisure. Sovereign (...) of (...) etc.
page ^^^ ^^^* 142* 1^^* 144.
I suppose the Doctors Tertulli^nisme is ^ufficiently and with advantage
balanced by the discussions recited from the two pre-mentioned Authors: whose
learning and Authority I rather chose to make use of for his satisfaction,
because of the friendlinesse between their judgments and his i^ the case of
the late King.

-- (...). i. Him. ^^* ^^.

An admonition from a friend
Is likest to obtain it is end.
All my Contests with the Doctor hitherto* have been levied and managed in
justification of my Intellectuals against the imputations of his. There is
only one more remaining, wherein I shall plead the innocence of my morals,
and demonstrate the unrighteousness of his, in their criminations. For page 6
of his humble Address, etc. he charge me with flattery; yea with such
flattery, the very mention whereof was matter of amaz^ment and horror unto
him, (besides many other eloquentiall aggravations) But that I may not make my
Accuser more unrighteous in his accusation of me, then he has made himself, I
shall transcribe the words of his charge, as himself has drawn it up (in the
place mentioned) Having recited some passages and expressions of mine
concerning the Army, and some of their late actions (which I shall have
occasion presently to mention) he commenteth thus. The la^genesse and
ex^rbitanc^^ of these expressions I was my self so amazed a^, that I cannon but
mention them to you (by the way a^ matte^s of horror, which lik^ the peoples
acclamation to Herod, or the Lycaonian^ to Paul and Barnabas, if they beget not
in you a just indignation with the latter, may very probably bring the fate of
the former upon you, to be eaten up with worms (after you have been thus
terr^fied) now that you have no other visible enemy but your selves, and such
Flatterers, etc. For matter of moral deportment, I confess I have not heard
of any thing wherein the Doctor has so abused his name and Reputation (not to
meddle with his Conscience as in this ^ycophantrie, or false accusation. But
herein God has showed me the Grace and Favor, which very frequently he
shows unto his servants, (as heretofore I have observed) in case of
accusation and charge, by men; which is, so to blind and order the cal^mniating
spirit in their Adversaries, that it shall not see or take notice of their true
and real infirmities or failings, but seek their de^amation by laying such
things to their change, which are most contrary to those virtues or
commendable Principles and ways, that are most signally eminent in them. For
the truth is, my Conscience bearing me witness, that of all un- Christian, and
un-manlike mis-behaviours, there is a peculiar Antipathie in my Genius and
Principles against the sin of flattery and all unworthy compliance with great
Persons. Which Principle, though it has kept me from honor and preferment in
the world yet has it abundantly recompensed that inconvenience otherwise: nor
do I intend to sell it, of to recede from it, at any rate whatsoever. And as
for the Practique of Flattery, and all undue Applications to the Greatness of
this world, I presume all that know me, and the manner of my course and
conversation* will very freely be my compurgatours. But as there is a great
abho^^encie in my temper from Flattery, so I confess there is a strong and
vigorous propension to vindicat^ worthy and honorable Actions, by whomsoever
performed, whether by shrubs, or Cedars, when I find them in distress (I mean,
under obloquie and reproach) by the tongues or pens of men. In the managing of
this Principle, (...) it is very possible that my pen being warm, man rhetorize
a little on the right hand; which has always been counted a very ^^niall
De^inquencie by ingenuous men.

But concerning those expressions of mine, which the Docto^r Sect. 7.
very unworthily and witho^t cause, charge with ^orrid and amazing Flat^^^ie,
with Flatteri* portending Herod's fate of scol^cobrocie to the Lieutenant
General and his Council of War* unless they reject it with indignation, if he
had read them with a s^^gle eye, he would have found them nothing worse than
w^^ds of s^be^nesse and of truth. The first expression, the ^xor^i^ancy whe^eof
so much amazed him, was, that I pretend to demonst^ate the Honor and Wo^th of
the Armies Actions. I wonder by the mediation of what topique axiom, the
Doctor will be able to reduce this expression to an import of Flatter^^; much
more, of any amazing, or horrid Flattery. To speak of a Demonstration of the
Worth and Honor of such Actions, which indeed are worthy and honorable, was
never (doubtles^e) until now, deemed Flattery. If he conceives that in this
expression, there is Worth and Honor insinuatingly asc^ibed unto these
Actions, and means, that this is flattery* it h^d been time enough for him to
have taken up this conceit, when he had substantially proved the said Actions
to have been neither worthy, nor honorable. But hic lab^r, ^oc opus est.

The ^econd Expr^ssion* which (it seems) was accessory to that ^ad effect
mentioned in the Doctors fantasy, is, that I lift the Army up to a blessed
Victory of overcoming evil by doing good. The truth is, I do not lift up the
Army to any such Victori^ (though if I should, or could, lift up not only the
Army, but the Doctor himself also, and all his Friends, thereunto* I should
neither flatter them nor endanger or hurt them otherwise) I only wish the good
will of him that dwelt in the bush, upon the head of such Warriors, who pursue
that blessed Vi^torie of overcoming evil by doing good. Now to pursue such a
Vic^^rie as this, does not necessarily suppose it as already obtained by the
Pursu^rs. See Philip. 3. 13. 14. Doubtless my wish of the good will of God
upon the head of the Army, does no ways endanger them of being eaten up with
^orms: much less such ^ wish relating indifferently, as well unto others, as
them.

The third Expression, of which the Doctor complains for distempering him is,
that I say, what the Army ^^th done, ^^ll^^^ to mind the unparall^ll^ble
ex^mple of the Lord Jesus Christ, who went down into the ch^^bers of death,
from th^^c^ to bring wi^^ ^im ^ lost world. I may truly say and profess, that
the Action of the Army I speak of, did br^^g to my (...) the gre^^ ex^^ple
specified: if it did not bring it to the Doctors mind, I think the fault was
his, in that he was no better disposed and prepared for a rememberance of it.
What a man frequently and familiary (especially if with delight and much
contentment) converseth in thought with, a very slender occasion will ^uffice
to be a remembrancer of it unto him However the Poet did not any ways
exorbitantly flatter the grass, or herbs, when he said,

Praesentimque refert quaelibet herba Deum. i.
Each pile of Grass presents God to the mind.
Who knows not that a babble crucifix, scarce worth the price of two sparrows,
is ^pt enough to bring to the minds of the beholders, the unpa^allellable
example of Ch^^st dying upon the cross? Yet he that ascribes this to it, does
not hereby flatter the Crucifix, nor much commend it. It the Doctor should
marry a couple, and say to them, or to others, when he had done, that their
marriage occasioned him to remember the mysterious marriage between Christ, and
his Church, were this such an exorbitant expression, or so prodigiously rank of
flattery? A very light resemblance will serve to revive the memo^ie of greate^t
Actions, when they are habitually known, and the actual ^ememberance of them,
matter, either of much sorrow, or satisfaction. Therefore when the Doctor
blames the Expression last mentioned, as being f^l^ome, breathing flattery, he
condemns the innocent. No ne^d his Excell^^cie, or C^^^sel reject the said
Expression with indignation, or pro^esse, that no Action of theirs ever called
to any man's ^ind the unparallellable example of the Lord Christ and out of any
fear or danger of being ^^^en up with wo^ms, unless they do it.

The fourth Expression, which the amazed* Doctor, being recovered, charge
with the guilt of his susp^^ded intellectualls, is* that I represent the Action
of the Army, as b^ing aline^ment of the f^^^ of D^vin^ good^^sse in the doing
good to s^ ^^ny, as well ^n^^ie^, ^^ friends* But this ^^ not so ^^ch ^^^
Flatt^ry, as the Doctors forge^i^. My ^ord^, though o^c^s^oned (I conf^sse) by
the parti^u^^r Action of the Army, y^^ are general, and the ^^^our of them
^^^ly this: But to do good to a^ ma^^ (...) w^ll ^^^^ies (...) fri^nds ^^y ^^
expo^^ll of our (...) ^n^^ d^^th f^^^th^ ^plishm^nt ^f i^, i^ (...) ^f that
face of Di^i^^ (...) ^^ich Pl^^^ (i^ i^ (...)) ^^^^r (...) If the Docto^r
cannot find falsehood in this saying (a danger against which I am fully secure)
let him never pretend to find ^lattery in it. Or if the Army did expose their
lives unto death for the accom^lishm^nt of good unto many, as well Enemies, as
Friends which I have much more reason to believe, than he has to deny) is it
any such signal flattery to say that the Principle out of which they acted, is
a lineament of the face of Divine good^^sse?

The 5. expression, which the Doctor finds in the retinue of those, which for
a time (it seems) quite bereaved him of his senses, is this: that I ^ay the
Army deserves that place at the table of Honor, which the Roman Orator says
all Nations bestowed on the Assertours of their Countries Liberties, even next
to the immortal Gods themselves. Reader, here again the Doctor, to make me a
flatterer, makes himself a false acc^ser. I no where say, that the Army
deserves any such place, as is here spoken of* nor do I any where (to my
rememberance) so much as use the word, deserve, or any other word equevalent to
it, with reference to the Army. As to the passage which the Doctor here aims
at, I truly relate what the Roman Orator said long since: and that not simply
and absolutely to justify the Nations in the practice, or custom here ascribed
to them* but only to show in what Honorable esteem such Persons in all
Nations have been, who have stood up to assert and maintain their Countries
Liberty, against those who oppressed or invaded them. As for this Emphaticall,
EVEN, it is very unequally here inserted, and swells above the line and level
of my assertion: and so his, BESTOVVED, is a word bestowed on me gratis, and
without cause.

The 6. and last expression, which the Doctor reproves for amazing him, is;
that I cast upon the Army, the Honor of meditating the method of the warfare
of Heaven, and seeking to reconcile a Nation unto themselves by not imputing
their unthankfulness. It seems he was very desirous to plurifie the Articles
of his impeachment against me, into as great a number* as he well knew how. For
this ex^ression (as he calls it) is but a Member, or clause of that passage,
out of which he drew the second expression (already mentioned) and i^
vindicable upon the same account with that. And however, for my part I can with
a good conscience, and upon a very fair and rational account, profess and
say, that the Army did, and still does seek to reconcile this Nation (I mean,
and meant, in the disa^^ected part of it) by not imputing their
unthank-fulnesse unto them. i. by not ^eeking to revenge themselves on those
that have reproched them, and sought their ruin, (as they have had opportunity
enough, again and again, to have done, at least by very many of them) but
endeavoring to do them all the good that lies in their way to do: whereof
they have had sufficient experience, but that (as Solomon says) ^e that ^ath a
froward heart finds no good; (...). ^0*
no not though it lies never so visibly and palpeably before him. And if the
tenor of the Armies deportments toward the Nation, will fairly bear such an
interpretation as this, I know no reason but that it may, without Sect* 8.
the least touch or tincture of flattery, be said of them, that they imitate
the method of the wa^fare of Heaven.

But that which drew the Dr. into this snare, to imagine and call all that,
flattery, prodigious amazing flattery, which reflects Honor in the least upon
the Army, though spoken with never so much caution, conscience, soberness, and
truth, is that Hypotheticall distemper, which often times surprizeth even the
greatest wits, parts, learning, when found in conjunction with irregular ends;
or otherwise preventeth them by the advantage only of education. The Doctor
judges me a flatterer much upon the same account, on which Fest^^ judged Paul*
m^d. Festus was bred and brought up in the principles, and practice, of an
Idolatrous Religion, wherein it was (...), an universal supposition, too
^acred to be questioned or disputed, that there was no truth in any other
Religion contrary to it* Fes^us making so much the greate^ treas^re of this
supposition, because it well comported with his Honor and preferment in the
Roman Sta^^. The confidence of truth in his own Religion, augmented by the love
which he bare to it, for the commodiousnesse of it unto him in the things he
much desired* occasioned him without the least scruple to conclude and judge
Paul* mad, to prea^h a Doctrine so contrary to that supposition of his, as the
Doctrine of Christ's sufferings and other main grounds of Christianity, was*
When I consider the Doctors education from his youth up to have been in that
way of Religion, which may be called (...), the deep-devout serving of Kings,
and their Interests, and further, how promising, and to a first fruits,
performing, this Religion had been unto him; I do not much wonder* nor take
any great offense, that he should so positively conclude, all such Doctrines,
erroneous or mad, all such persons and practices highly irregular, which strike
at the main pillars of this his Religion to cause it to fall. It is seldom o^
never found, but that (...).

As for Mr. J^nkins (my Antagonist,) when I have any competent reason to judge,
that he writes, either that by way of Argument, which himself knows not how to
answer, or that in way of report, which himself believes to be true, I shall
think him worthy an answer, when he writes. But having very sufficient reason
from his late writings to judge otherwise of him in both particulars, I shall
commend the Answering of his Arguments to his own judgment, and the
confutation of his stories to his own Conscience.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in some Copies.
Page ^. (...) ^y for they wan^ read the wan^ of* p ^. l 24 for wherein to r.
wherein to p. 17. l. 14 for ge^^^lisme r gentilisme l ^6 for al^ene^ r al^ens
p. ^^. l 20. d^l^ that* p. 25. l. ^5. for ^^^rve p. accrue. l. 3. for show. r.
shows. l. 4. for own r. ownes* p. 2^ l. ul^ for al^ ^ ^^ p 35 l 3^. for all r.
at all. p 46 l. ^^. for conven^ r. conve^. p. ^^ l ^^ for put r putts ^. ^6
after* been, r. to their respective takers. p. ^0* l. 30. f^^ ^mperour r.
Governor p. 82. l. 31. ^^le and* p. 85 l. 22 for over r. over and over* p ^^
l. 40. d^le the p ^2. l. 1^. for both r ^a^th p. 105. l. 38. a^^e^^ion, ( p.
107. l. 39 for (...) tenou^ p. 10^. l 19 for the* r* that* l. 30. after,
ne^^^^i^y. ^ p 109. l 41 for, livery r. livery. p 120 l. 35. for from r. ^^^me.
p 125. l. ^8. for in r. on p. 12^. l. 31. for withal r. with all p. 131 l 29.
for ^^cked* r. ^^^ed p. 132. l 28 co^^^ after de^i^e^, not before p. 133. l.
26. for Treaties* r. treatice^ p 134 l 1^ for ^eal^y, r. reality. p. 1^6. l.
19. for o^^^, r. once and* p. 1^^ l. ^. for answers* ^ answer l. 1^. for the
r. that* p. 138* l* ^^. for their r these. l 36. for their Authority, r. these
Authorities. p. 139. l. ^. for the^^, r. these* p. 141. l ^. for terrified, r
de^^^ed. l. 4 after, way) l. 1^. after conscience.) p. 14^ l. 4 for Li^ut^nant,
r Lord. p 143 l 5. after with* comm^. l. 24. after fulsome, r. and* l. 25. for
no, r not. l ^^. d^l^ and p. 144. l. 5. after friends ( l ^^. for liberty, r.
liberties* p. 11^ l. 14. (...) co^^^ p. 140. l. 25. for (...)

Some other lighter mistakes are, about pointings, parentheses, etc. which
Reader is desired to pardon, and amend.

Postscript.
Let this following passage ^e read in to Sect. 32. of the first Treatise, at
the end of the said Section, page 35.

Nay suppose the House it self had been accessory to their detainment, and
approved the fact of the Army therein, neither would this have divested them of
their complete Parliamentary capacity. The two Hothams, Father and Son, being
seized upon by some of the Parliament forces, upon suspicion of treachery,
without any warrant or direction from the Parliament, the fact was generally
approved by the Parliament than in being; nor was there the least muttering or
question made of any irregularity contracted by the House thereby. By the way,
this Act of the Parliament in justifying and approving the said Act of their
Soldiers, I mean the seizing, and violent detainment of two of their Members,
without any warrant, order, or direction from them, only upon suspicion of
treachery, does as far as any Parliament Authority extends, clearly and
fully justify the Army, in their securing by a strong hand such of their
Members, as were of late secured by them, upon the like presumption or
suspicion, though without any particular or express order from the House. And
they, who with Master Geree, Master Prynne, and some others, condemn and
reproach the Army for this fact, offer no whit better measure to the Parliament
it self, in it is best, (at least in it is most unquestionable) Constitution. For
if it were lawful yea and commendable (as the Parliament in that capacity we
speak of, adjudged it) for one party of the Army, to lay hold on and secure two
of their Members only upon suspicion of treachery, without any special
warrant from them, it must needs be as lawful (yea and as commendable) ^or
another party of this Army, to do the like by others of them, though more in
number, upon the like grounds. If one Judge upon su^^icient evidence may give
Sentence of death against two murderers; another Judge of the same capacity,
may upon like evidence, give a like Sentence against five. Offenders are never
the more privileged by Law for being many. That the grounds of suspicion, upon
which the Army of late proceeded to the seizure of their prey, were pregnant
and strong enough to bear such an Action, has had (I presume) proof and
demonstration in abundance, in the second Treatise (besides a former,
entitled, Right and Might well met.)


