INSTRUCTIONS For Young Gentlemen: OR, The Instructions of Cardinal SERMONETTO
To his Cousin PETRO CAETANO, At his first going into Flanders to the Duke of
PARMA, to serve PHILIP King of Spain.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Fr. Bowman of Oxon. 1650.

The Printer to the Reader.
GOod Reader, I have Printed this little volume upon the advice and persuasion
of some of eminent worth, and much experience. As well to spare the labor and
trouble of writing out Copies, as also to prevent alterations and errors which
are usually contracted, and multiplied by often transcribing; as water we see
the farther it runns, and the more remote from the fountain, the more impure.
Yet I dare not affirm, it is now presented to the world without all blemish or
imperfection: for I am told it is somewhere a little suspected, not to be so
fully and exactly rendered; which if it shall appear, I confidently promise all
defects and deformities, (if it come to a second impression,) shall be taken
away. For the matter it self, the only complaint is, that it is so short,
which I suppose may be somewhat supplied by reading it often; nec satis est
legisse semel.

POSTSCRIPT
Most of those places suspected are amended in the Errata.

THE INSTRVCTIONS of Cardinal Sermonetta to his Cousin Petro Caetano at his
going to serve the Duke of Parma.
MOST noble Lord, your Lordship shall follow on your voyage with such Orders
and Advertisements as you have already, and you shall write from every place as
hither to you have done, to the end that by every Post that comes to Rome,
it may be known where you arrive from place to place; if between the day of
your Lordships Arrival at the Camp, or wheresoever the Prince is, and the
dispatch of the next messenger for the parts of Italy, you can be more then
once in the Company of the Paymaster of the Army, you shall endeavor to
learn the state of this War, and what is done, and what is meant to be done
for the Kings service.

For by these means in your first Letters you may give some Advertiseme^ts of
matters that pass in that Province, you shall be a great Comfort to these most
Honorable Lords, and your Allegiance shall breed great Honor to your self.
Howbeit your Lordship must beware that you write not any thing which in case
your Letters should miscarry, might hurt either you, or any other. And in this
manner I pray you proceed, until such time as some Cipher be appointed between
us.

Let it not greiue your Lordship to write: for it will profit your self, and
serve and satisfy their turns, whom it does concern: Note briefly in leaf
of Paper such things as you shall learn, or come into your mind to write, or
make a remembrance of them; when you write set that lease before you, and when
you have written your Letters, deface your note.

Make also a List of their names, to whom you write from time to time: For so
you shall not incur the want of memory. In your Letters, which are to be
showed unto others, insert no matter, or advise, or any other thing that may
not be showed: Your Letters that contain diverse matters, write distinctly in
several branches or heads, and do not make your writing a continued draught.
Keep Coppies of such Letters as seem to be of importance: Keep your Letters
by you when they are written, and never close them, till the Post has his
dispatch: for so you shall not be cloyed with too much matter; and besides, you
may add if need be.

If you write many Letters to one man, which are to be read in order, mark
them in the Endorsment thus 1a, 2a, 3a, etc: and so let them be tied up orderly
in the packet.

Your Lordship must Answer Letters and satisfy every man; except no person,
although he be a man of no account.

Read and read again the Letters more then once which you shall receive;
mark the words and such things as are to be noted in them; Lay them before you
when you Answer them; Read them over again and trust not your memory.

Keep Letters of importance, for at some time or other they may serve either
for justification, or for a warning; Burn those that cannot be kept without
danger.

There shall be sent to your Lordship a Cipher with the declarations thereof,
and the points to be observed therein; to the end you may write ever with
security.

Get the familiarity and good will of the Postmaster by making much of him,
and some times presenting him with somewhat: for you shall have great use of
him and particularly you shall be partaker of diverse Advertisements that come
from many Countries, and shall be one of the first that shall know them; He
will give you intelligence daily when there is any dispatch; His Packets will
carry credit, and so your Letters shall have safe and speedy delivery.

Your Father at your Lord (hips going into Flanders, did write to the Kings
Majesty, and his Letter was to this effect; That now it is thirteen years
ago, since he dedicated his service to his Majesty with a purpose to purchase
of him the name and desert of a Servant, for that till then he could not serve
him but only in very small matters. That every day he did feel more and more
the sting of devotion and duty. That to supply the defect of fit occasions,
he did send Peter his eldest Son into Flanders, to the end, he should serve
his Majesty in the war under the Order, and Obedience of the Prince, the
governor of those Provinces. That above all things he desires to his
goodwill, and his Sons, there want no occasion to Fortune; Beseeching his
Majesty to Vouchsafe the admittance of this his resolution, which though it
never avail any other, yet it shall at the least make manifest, that in the
services of his Majesty, he has pawned the person of his Son as a gage of
his Faith. To this effect your Lordship shall speak and write to the Kings
officers, to the end that both with his Majesty and them, there may be a
Correspondence of speech and writing, and so they may be persuaded, that you
are gone thither to serve and deserve.

The Prince (as your Lordship knows) is his Catholic Majesty's Lieutennant
in the Low Countries and Commands the' Kings forces, and has Sovereign
Authority in all things; and therefore it is to be presupposed that if you will
serve the King, you must serve the Prince, and that serving his excellency you
serve his Majesty.

And for as much as to serve, and not satisfy is a kind of not serving; your
Lordship must resolve with your self, so to do, that the Prince may be served
by you to his satisfaction; and think with your self that he will then be
satisfied with your service, when you shall serve him well, and well you cannot
serve him, unless you make your self active and of good capacity: In this
point therefore it is necessary for you to bestow all your travel and
industry, and to learn that which you do not yet know; which in my Opinion
is of two sorts: One belonging to the exercise of war; the other to the
honor, and particular manners of his Excellency.

For it is not enough for a Captain to know the Art of warfare, but it
behooveth him also to know how to use it according to the Honor and pleasure,
and proper manner of his General.

This being presupposed, your Lordship shall seek to have full information of
the Province of Flanders, and to learn upon whom it boundeth, of what Compass
it is, on what side it may be avoided or not, into how many parts it is
divided, by what name or Title every part of it is called; what Sea, what
Haven, what Mountains, what Rivers, what Lakes, what Marshes it has, and
such other places of mark or note. The things likewise wherewith it abounds,
what it wants, to whom it yields any thing, and of whom it receives any
thing, (I mean of such things as the Country breeds or breeds not, as
Cattle, Fruits of the earth, and mines, and moreover their Trades, and
Laborers; Also their Cities, and Especially their principalls; how bigg they
be, how well built, how strong, how populous, how rich, their noble Families,
and their wealth; their Adherents; in what reputation and credit, and how
affected one toward another, the natures and conditions of the men; to what
they are most apt, and to what they are unapt; and to what things they apply
themselves most and least; their Religion, their Judgments, their Customs and
the manner of their government. The Kings revenue in what it consists;
whether it may be augmented or no, and how, and how much;

To the knowledge of these things your Lordship must Add the Original and
cause of this War, the true causes, the pretended causes of it, the
principal causes and the secundary, how Flanders was governed by the Duke
D'alua, how by the great Commander of Castile, how by Don John of Austria, and
how it is now governed by this Prince; The diversities and the likeness of
their governments, their errors which they have committed, which are amended
and which not; and how they were amended; the profitable provisions and
consultations that have bin put in execution, or not, with their good, or evil
success; The forces of the Rebels, the aid and relief which they have, how
sound, how durable it is; The expenses that run upon the King, and the War,
whether it may be finished or not; if it may, why it is delayed; if not, what
they expect, and what it is they fear;

Your Lordship must use all diligence to know the situation of the Fortresses,
that are of greatest name and importance, in all the Province; whether they be
held by the King, or by his Rebels; understanding the wants of every one of
them, how they may be woone and kept, what number of Soldiers is necessary for
offense and defense; what Artillery, what Munition, what Victuals, what
Succors, and what impediments, and such other things besides, that may be
Learned by men of practice and experience.

These observations are to be noted either under your designement, or under the
Situation of the fortresses, or else in some other convenient leaves.

Every art or profession that a man learneth, is nothing else but a collection
of Lessons and rules, serving to some Certain end, which are found out and
drawn forth of practice and discourse; And therefore if your Lordship will
learn the Art of warfare, you must learn it of them that have it, and mark
how they put it in execution, noting their Precepts and observing their Actions;

It shall be good for your Lordship at all times to be talking of it, and yet
not with every body, but only with such as are cuning and expert, endeavoring
your self to be eapable and resolved in such things as they shall tell you,
and in such other things as you shall hear of daily in your ordinary
discourses which shall happen: For it is very likely that you shall oftentimes
hear such matters; but it will not be any profit to you to hear and conceive
them; if when you have heard and conceived them, you should not dispose them in
some order and make a remembrance of them.

And therefore, I would greatly Commend your Lordship, if you would herein use
your pen, and write the Cases and rules which you shall have heard; And so by
little and little you shall make your self a rich Treasure-house of Military
propositions;

The manner that I would observe herein, should be to have my leaves and every
one of them noted with a word, signifiing either a person, or an instrument or
an Action, or some other thing concerning war; Under which word as under a
general term, or head, I would write all the Maxims, the Sayings, the
Opinions, the Judgments, and Conceits, that I 2hold learn belonging to such
things, Actions, Instruments, Persons.

As for Example. If I should understand that the Pike should be Sixteen foot
long, and that it was invented to keep out horses, I would refer this saying
to the leaf that is noted with the word, Pike. And if I should hear that in
fight the Arquibusier after he has discharged his piece, must give place to
the shouldier that stands next behind him, and so retire himself to the
tail of that row, I would place this saying in the leaf that is noted with
the word Arquibusier. The like I would do generally in all other matters that
I should happen to hear, appertaining to a Captain, a Searjant, a
Standerd-bearer, a General of the Army; and others; also to Artillery, to
Arquibusiers, to Pikes, and other weapons of defense and offense.

Likewise for Victuals, for Munition, for Bagage, and such like; for Lodging,
for marching, for fighting, and other actions of warrefare; and also for the
seige of a city; for the releiuing of it, for Trenching, for Undermining, for
Baterie, and such other works: To which heads and general Terms, many
others may be added;

Notwithstanding all this it will not be sufficient to learn and write, and
make a remembrance of these things, unless your Lordship take a delight also
to see them put in practice, and to exercise your self in them.

And therefore you may not omit to be at every muster, and at every Action,
and you must endeavor your self to be always one of the first at them, that
you may see the beginning, the middle, and the end of all still demanding a
reason of all that you 2hall see done; and wh it is rather thus done then
otherwise, and whether it be always so done or not, together witht he
differences of places, and times:

You shall also endeavor your self to yield your aid and help to the
Officers, so that you have leave so to do, in matters that do not slacken, or
hinder the Action of the Officers, or engender a confusion or disorder; but
above all, that you do not trouble the minds of the said Officers, and that
you have the good will and leave of the Prince to do what you do.

I did put your Lordship in mind here at Rome to keep a Diarie. I do now
again put you in mind of it; for your own benefit: you may make a book to
write such things in, as happen from day to day; wherein you shall write not
only the Successes, but also the manner and causes of them; For (as you know)
every Action has its original vupon some advice, and he that putteh in
execution, keeps or at least ought to keep within certain bounds. And thus
may your Lordship by all this your pains and travailes with speed obtain the
Ability and Valor, which yet you want.

Touching the manner how you are to serve the Prince, in matters of war, I
can say no more unto you, but that you must endeavor to learn it, and use all
the diligence you can to learn it of those that have notice thereof, and so
put it in execution.

Your Lordship must not only serve the Prince well in those things that
concern the Kings service, but in your proceedings with him you must please
him, and apply your self to the humor and fashion of his Excellency; thereby
to get his love and favor. The report is, that the Prince stands upon terms
and keeps a great Majesty, so that it is likely (as some think) that he
will use with your Lordship terms of great gravity; But because I am of a
contrary opinion from them, I must tell you that in this your beginning, the
Prince will either make much of you, and talk familiarlie with you, and so
favor you, and bestow some charge upon you, or he will do clean contrary,
or else he will keep mean between both.

In the first case I must put your Lordship in mind, that in all your Actions
you constantly observe one perpetual cause of obedience, and reverence, and the
more you shall be honored, and favored by the Prince, so much the more must
you show your self reverent and modest toward him; not fore-slowing in any
sort thoroughly to perform your duty; nor in any case taking to your self too
much liberty, or license by it.

In the second case your Lordship must not take any offense, neither yet
distrust him, nor disdain him; Serve him as you ought to do, and in your
service show your good will and constancy, and be not dismayed at any
accident, that may peradventure breed your dislike. Consider with your self,
that the Haughtiness of the Prince, is either in him by nature, and so it is
the more excusable, or else it proceeds from his own will, his Excellency
thinking with himself that it is necessary for him so to do, both in respect
of the quality of his business, and of the Government which he has; and
also because he sustaineth the Authority and person of the King there in
Flanders: from whom we may well say also, that he has received order and
commandment so to do: these two advertisements may declare to your Lordship
what course you should keep in the third case.

The Prince is Courageous, and some think, that he is more venturous then is
requisite for a person, that has upon him such a charge as he has;
Considering that the Kings reputation leans upon him, and the safety also of
so much as his Majesty possesses in Flanders; And therefore he was reproved
by the King, when he was wounded at Tornay, for that (Like a Private Soldier)
He would venture himself to win the ditch of the fortress, with such
danger as every man knows. In this respect the Prince loves resolute men,
regards them much, and makes great account of them;

His Excellency plaieth neither at cards nordice, and it is likely that such
as are like him should consequently be the more in his favor.

The Prince loves one Lady of good quality, and takes great pleasure, that
she should be Courted and served by those which esteem his favor. It will
become your Lordship also to do your best to that end, lest otherwise you
displease the Prince; And for the same respect you must likewise abstain from
doing too much, and always remember that a woman is a frail Creature and a
very dangerous thing.

Other matters that touch the mind and honors of the Prince, you must learn
of those that use his company, wherein your Lordship must employ your
diligence. And although it shall be your office and duty to serve and attend
the Person of a Prince, yet you must understand, that too much continuance in
so doing, will hurt, and engender a loathing; for it makes the superior to be
a servant as it were, and breeds him much hinderance and inconvenience. And
therefore inform your self well, how the Prince disposes of his time, at
what hour he is busy, when he would be alone, and when he desires Company
to pass away the time, and with whom; to the end, that while you study to
please him, you do not importune him, or molest him;

In the presence of the Prince speak but little, and speak only what you
know, and that upon good occasion. Premeditate before hand, what you mean to
speak to his Excellency. And do it resolutelie, and in good order

To such discourse as shall pass in the presence of the Prince, or when his
Excellency does discourse himself, show your self to be very attentive,
otherwise it will be thought that you regard neither who speaks nor what he
speaks.

Show your self also capable of such things as are discoursed upon, that
thereby you may breed a good opinion of your sharpness and wit. Likewise give
some token of your opinion and affection touching that which you shall hear,
to the end that it may be seen, that you either like, or dislike that which
in truth is to be liked, or disliked.

In all these shows, you must be far from all shadow of Cunning, but do
it in silence.

In the presence of the Prince do not show your self Melancholy, nor
thoughtfull; for sadness, and musing offend great Personages, who do
attribute it to the little reverence that is borne to them, when a man is
present in body, and absent from them in mind.

Such things as the Prince shall tell you, keep to your self, and if you
chance to hear them of any other, make you as though they were news to you,
and be you always the last man that shall talk of them.

There will not want some, that either for their own private interest, or for
their friends sake will request your Lordships intercession for them to the
Prince: I must here put you in mind, it will be noe easy matter for you to
please them herein; For if you obtain the grant of his Excellency, he will
keep a reckoning of it; if you do not obtain it, he will think your Lordship
is discontented with the repulse. And in truth every day to be a requesting for
other men, may breed a great trouble. And therefore it shall behooue you in
mild to answer those, for whom you deny to make intercession, and to use some
reasonable excuse, that they may go from you with good contenment.

If you do make intercession for others, (which by my advise you shall take
upon you but seldom) let the things which your Lordship shall desire, be just
and fit for you, and convenient for the time, not unusual to be granted; and
if it be possible; let them be a greeable to the Service of his Majesty, and
the honor of the Prince.

The Persons for whom you shall make suite, let them not be odious, nor of ill
name.

Before you resolve with your self to entreat any grace or favor for other
men, first see, and learn thoroughly, whether the Person that desires your
Mediation, has any competitour or no; and who it is; And if his competitour be
supported either by any great person, or by some servant that is favored of
the King, or of his Excellency;

In case your Lordship obtain his suite, you must show that you make great
account of it; but in case you do not obtain, yet you must show your self to
be contented, and make the Prince believe also, that it is so.

If the Prince shall commit any service to your Lordship, take your commission
plain and distinct; read it and read it again to his excellency, and depart
not from him with any doubt. If it be long, or if there be many, or if any
importance, take their declarations, and Interpretations in writing, and
resolve with your self rather to importune his Excellency, then to run into
any danger of committing any error.

In public Actions have no regard of degree, or precedencie, and Venture upon
every thing; Account every place honorable, and every Action worthy of
you, and put things in execution in the presence of the Prince, as though it
were in the presence of the King himself; and in the absence of the Prince, as
though it were in the Eye of his Excellency.

If any man come to complain himself of his greifes to your Lordship, give
him the hearing for once; and make as though you were moved with compassion
toward him: put him in good comfort and extenuate the Injury that he
pretends, but ever excuse the Prince, and exhort the party to hold his
peace, and be patient; especially and above all, be very wary in offering or
Ministering any Counsel to such Persons; For such kind of men do not use
always to speak the truth, and oftentimes are very full of infirmities, and
commonly we do not know who is their Adversary, nor what they report of us
in secret.

If your Lordship be advised to use but little Speech in the presence of the
Prince, I do reply and add that your Lordship shall observe that advise in the
presence of every man; For silence is above all virtues, and saves a man from
infinite errors, But yet I would wish your Lordship so to keep silence that it
may be known it is wisdom for the most part you shall utter.

In your demands and answers be modest; In all your questions observe
opportunity, and in your answers be breife and sensible.

Question with those that know more then your self, for so you shall put in
execution those aduertisements that serve for your learning.

Tell noe Tales; Use no discourses, oppose not your self against others; Give
your judgment or sentence against no man; Speak well of every body,
Especially of those which are in favor with his Excellency.

Find fault with no man, unless it be more then necessary so to do; Blame
the Action not the Person: Speak Honorably of all Nations, and learn what
is proper and peculiar to every one, and what every one seeks and desires.

Give charge to your servants that they keep their tongues to themselves; and
prattle not too much of any body; For oftentimes it is attributed to the
master which is spoken by his family;

Of the Pope and his fellows give good speeches, show your good contentment
and reverence toward him. Persuade your self that you shall be marked and
noted in all things whatsoever you say, or do; and doubt not but that Camps
are full of Spies, and the Prince himself has some toward him for that
purpose; and therefore he will accept in good part that which they shall tell
him, as his good and loving servants. And will encourage them to advertise him
of such matters as are for his Service.

Be familiar with every man, but especially with such as are of virtue and
Valor; for they will not only instruct you, but also they will breed your
credit: with others keep familiarity: for so you shall not offend them, nor
have any enemies;

You shall be accounted wise by fitting your self to every man's humor, and
practicing with the Italians after the Italian manner, with the Spaniards after
the Spanish, and with the Flemings after the Flemish manner.

You must be advised that the people of that Nation are very credulous,
suspicious, given to Novelties, and unthankful They speak and drink
liberally, and do hardly bridle the infirmities of the body, much less the
passions of the mind.

Give courteous entertainment to all but especially to the Princes servants;
Above all, procure the friendship of his Favorites, and of all his servants and
officers both public, and private, that are in the favor and good grace with
his Excellency;

Disdain no man though he be never so base, remembering with your self, that
in time and place one man may be worth a thousand, especially in occurrents of
war;

Give no ear to such as report other men's actions, and make a profession of
it; nor to such as by that means seek to purchase your favor; Especially if
they be reporters of naughty matters, and of such as shall touch great Lords or
the person of a Prince; In which case your Lordship must not only be loath to
hear them, but also reject them and cause them to avoid your presence.

To those that shall converse with you, do not imparte the evil speeches,
that other men shall utter to you of them; or at least conceal the Authors
name, to the end that through your default there arise no hatred, where none
is; or if there be any, that it be no farther enkindled; and so your Lordship
shall not be noted for lightness.

If any jealous or envious Person seek to slander or prejudice your Lordship
privily, know him thoroughly, and be not deceived, Observe his demeanor, and
make as though you did not heed him; Especially beware you behave your self
well, and go beyond him in that point; Entertain him with all honor, be
often in his company, overcome him in courtesy, and comfort him. To such as he
is a friend unto, do all the service and favor you can; yea even unto such as
know it, and peradventure set forward his evil conceits. To be breife, avoid
all occasion of breach with him, and if there must needs be a breach, let it be
seen, that your Lordship does it of necessity and justice, and that the fault
and default is in him.

With such like Persons and every body else, though it be your open enemy,
keep good intelligence always when there is any matter in hand touching the
service of the King, or of the Prince: and for the service of his Majesty, or
of his Excellency, lay down all private passion or rancour; and in case such
a Person either for want of knowledge, or of power, or for any other cause what
soever should run into danger to commit some error, to the prejudice of the
King, or the Prince; your Lordship may not suffer the error to be committed by
any means, although your Adversary thereby might fall into the displeasure of
his Mtie or of his Excellency; but lend your hand unto it, although it were a
common danger.

Dissimulation is necessary for every man, specially in Arms and in Courts;
yet is not every Dissimulation good and honorable; but that only which
tends to a good and honest end, and which with the observations of due
circumstances, denies not the truth nor goes against that which is right:
Such kind of Dissimulation is a part and kind of prudence and consists for
the most part in silence or holding your peace, and that for these causes
following:

Videlicet, not to publish that which another man has committed to our trust,
not to bring any thing to light, upon knowledge whereof some scandal may ensue;
not to discover any designment, which being discovered should not attain to
his purpose; not to let others see that we know the defects of other men, or
any evil deeds of others. For men of evil imperfections and guilty of any
defaults, when they are known to be such Persons, do commonly hate them that
know them to be so; Not to make known that we know the thoughts of other men;
or the hard conceits which other men have against us, or against such as we
love; or the good affection which other men bear toward those which are our
enemies; Not to give any notice that we know an offense committed against us,
or that we do make so great account of it; nor to put our selves in any
necessity, danger, or destruction by contending to answer, when neither the
matter, nor the Person, nor the Place, nor the time does require it.

Lastly not to bring any hurt or shame upon our selves or others, but to the
benefit and honor of our selves and others.

In all these causes to dissemble with silence is thought to be good, and is
not reproueable: And although it seems to be a very hard matter to deal thus
with our friends in not telling them such things, as being told them would do
them pleasure and service; yet in the cases presupposed, reason would that the
greater respect should not be neglected, and so we do our selves the more
wrong.

But sometimes it falls out, that we must also dissemble with speech: and
that falls out, when we are driven of necessity to answer: And if a man
demand of us whether a matter be so, or not so; and what is purposed or
conceived, It is not fit to dissemble with silence, but we must dissemble with
answer; and this dissimulatio^ requires more Art. For in such cases speech
cannot be avoided, and we are commonly as desirous to keep our selves from
danger in telling a lie, as from danger in telling a truth;

Some there are, that in such a case do use to dissemble by cutting of their
speech, and leaping into another matter; but this does not always sort to good
effect, or at least will not serve the turn.

Others there are, which answer they cannot tell; and this is a fault, because
they deny the truth, and say that which is not; And therefore the answer must
be like to the retreat, which is both without flying, and also without
fighting, goods and persons saved;

In making answer three things are wont tobe observed: first not to deny the
truth, secondly not to tell that which we should not; thirdly not to leave the
mind of him that makes the demand, in the same terms, wherein we found him.
And the answer is so much the more commendable, if it be restrained within
these limits;

Although sometimes it is also lawful to note the demander for his impertinent
demands; which may be done either covertly or openly, according to the degrees
of the persons, and the qualities of the circumstances.

There is a dissimulation likewise permitted by exterior shows and by deeds;
and that is, when for the reasons and ends aforesaid, we abstain from showing
either gladness, or sorrow, or hope, or fear, or any other affection that is
in us; and also from making men to think that we do see those things which we
do see, and perceive those things which we do perceive, and finally that we
do know, deal in, and desire, that which indeed we do know, deal in and
desire.

And be it known unto your Lordship that in the whole life of man, and all his
actions and business, dissimulation is no less profitable then
Counter-poysons; and true preservatives are in Physic: for even as things do
preserve and keep us from poison, and many other evils; so does dissimulation
save us from many deceipts, and errors, and from infinite other hurtful things:

You must know also, that dissimulation being not well used, does discover your
self, and brings forth an effect quite contrary to your meaning, and the
present business: And therefore your Lordship must take heed, that when you
keep silence with your tongue, you do not speak by the motions of your
countenance, nor by other gestures of your body.

Secondly, that when you dissemble by speaking, you do not discover your self
by such means touching the matter you should leave in doubt; And lastly, that
if you dissemble by action or outward appearance, you do it covertly and with
great wariness, and that you do not run into any extremity.

But for as much as in matters which we handle, Fortune has a great stroke,
and in war especially has her principal dominion, your Lordship must watch
opportunity, which indeed is the matter and convenience of your actions, and
makes those things possible, which before could not be brought to pass, and
those things easy, which before were hard, and those things safe, which before
were dangerous, and thosethings good and profitable, which before were hurtful
and naught. And therefore keep these things in your mind always, that you
entertain occasion and opportunity, and wait for them, and not prevent them,
And do not as others do who being impatient in their desires, do, snatch
before their time, and being desirous to prevent opportunity, do venture their
evil fortune and overthrow them selves.

And in case opportunity not offering it self, your Lordship be disposed to
seek it, then you must seek it wisely, and with good means, because such
opportunities as are forced, and as it were begged, are for the most part
neither happy nor commodious, But if opportunity be offered, your Lordship
must take knowledge of it. And because it is a hard matter to know it, for that
it is a hard thing which is not seen, and has no shape when it does come, it
is comprehended by your mind, if you mark all accidents, and be attentive to
the end.

And for as much as all occasions that are offered are not always to purpose;
your Lordship must use great judgment, which will measure and compare things
together, and will discern and, determine upon the conueniency there of: use
all your judgment herein, and take hold of opportunity, and be always ready to
take hold of it. For fortune comes and goes according to the motions of
time, and that offer which is made now, (if it be not accepted of us) a little
while after it will prove nothing.

In the execution of any thing, your Lordship must be, both considerate, and
also hardy: for he that fears, performs less; and he that uses no
consideration, performs more then is convenient; which is the original of
all danger:

In execution two things among others are especially reproved; one is, to
execute imperfectly by not bringing your action to end, and then you shall not
with profit finish the opportunity you took hold of; The other is, that
oftentimes an occasion well taken and well executed engendereth another
occasion which is better; And he that either knows not this second, or has
no judgment of it, or takes no hold of it, defraudeth the public interest of
a good service, and himself of great glory.

The last and chiefest Advertisement, which I have to give your Lordship, is
this; That when you shall come to any towns, or countries, either of friends
or enemies, where Arms and violence shall have supreme authority, for the
reverence of God take care that your people abstain from Churches and
Monasteries; that they have great respect to Ecclesiastical Persons; and that
they lay no hands upon sacred things. In all wars it must needs be a great
fault not to do so; much more in this, wherein the cause of religion is
handled, and the Justice of the Catholic King. And this to do beseems you
far more then any other, because you are a subject of the Holy Church, and of
an house that has many Cardinals and Prelates; and because you have not only
deserved well of the Sea Apostolic, but also you have received and
acknowledged many benefits and honors for the same.

The Lord God bless you, and grant unto you so much of his grace, as you shall
fear and honor him, and show it in your Actions.

Amen
ERRATA
Page 15. line 7. in the war read in that war p. 22. l. 9. avoided r.
anoyed p. 49. l. 5. keep mean r. keep a mean p. 66. l. 12. breed a great r.
breed great p. 80. l. 5. Pope and his fellows r. Pope and his followers p. 93.
l. 1. although r. as though p. 97. l. 11. destruction r. distraction.


