portrait of John Goodwin JOHANNES: GOODWIN. S: THEOL: CANTABRIG: Ao AETAT 47.
1641.

Thou see not whom thou see: then do not say
That this is HE: who calls a hemp of clay
Without it is soul a man^ thou see nee more,
Nay, but the SHADOW of that hemp what store
Of gifts and graces, what perfections rare,
Among ten thousand persons scatt'red are
Gather in one, Imagine it to be
This SHADOWS substance and then say it is HE.
DT.
G G. secit.


The Divine Authority OF THE SCRIPTVRES ASSERTED, OR THE Great Charter of the
worlds Blessedness vindicated.

BEING A Discourse of Sovereign use and service in these times; not only
against that King of Errors, and Heresies Antiscripturisme, who has already
destroyed the faith of many, and has all the faith in the World yet remaining,
in chase, but also against all such inward suggestions and secret underminings
of Satan, by which he privily attempteth the ruin of the precious faith and
hope, wherewith the Saints have built up themselves with much spiritual
Industry and Care.

Together with two tables annexed; the former, of the contents, and several
arguments more largely prosecuted in the Treatise; the later, of such texts of
Scripture unto which some light is given therein.

By JOHN GOODWIN a servant unto God and men in the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of
this world, has blinded the eyes of them who believe not, lest the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them,
2 Cor. 4 34.

O ye foolish Galatians who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth, crucified
amongst you? Gal. 3. 1.

Illis, qui divinas scrutantur Scripturas, nihil potest illudere. Theophilect.

In quibuscunque eorum (sc. aliorum Scriptorum) invenitur eadem veritas, long
tamen est impar authoritas. Aug.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop
entering into Popes-head-Alley out of Lumber-street. 164^.

TO MY BELOVED FLOCK, The Sons and Daughters of GOD, who first gave up
themselves unto the Lord, and then unto Us by the will of GOD.
Dear Christian Brethren,
THE days of mine abiding with you in the flesh, neither you, nor my self can
expect should be many. The Law of mortality established in Heaven, and daily
put in vigorous execution on Earth, cutteth off this hope and expectance, both
from you and me. But the comfort is, the hole of this pit is not only levelled
and filled up, but a mount also raised upon it, by the Law of life which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. If our forlorn of ministerial accommodations be
scattered and defeated, by the hand of death, or otherwise, our reserve in
Heaven will advance, and bring us off from the world with honor and peace
howsoever. The great and precious promises of life and salvation unto those who
believe, for the making good whereof Jesus Christ himself with all his glory,
are given in pawn and pledge unto the world, are not suspended upon the
presence of a mortal man, one or other, but glory in the truth,
faithfulness, and power, of him who has made them, and are ready to swallow
up into victory, whatsoever shall threaten, or oppose their performance.

Not withstanding, as the great Apostle, though (as he says) he know how to be
hungry, as well as to be full, and to suffer want as well as to abound, yet
acknowledged to his Philippians, that they had done well in communicating with
his affliction Phil. 4. 12, 14.
. In like manner however the great and glorious God, knows as well how to want,
as to abound, in respect of ministerial dispensations, and is able without his
earthen vessels, to convey his vessels of honor, into their blessedness and
glory, yet there is little question to be made, but that he graciously,
accepts the diligent and faithful service even of these his earthen vessels,
in making one shoulder with him to advance and carry on this great and blessed
design. And for you though I am upon grounds of soberness and truth abundantly
confident (at least of many of you) that your anointing is such, that you stand
in as little need of any man's teaching 1 John 2. 27.
, as any other people, yet I know also, that no people whatsoever will more
thankfully relish and accept of the labor and travel of any man's soul,
either for their edification, or establishment, then you.

Upon these two considerations in conjunction with the great and longing desire
of my soul, that your whole spirit and soul, and body, may be preserved
blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 1 These. 5. 23.
. I shall endeavor, whilst I yet remain with you, to prevent as much as may
be, any supposed or feared inexpediency in my departure from you. And this (I
judge) I shall attempt upon the best terms of likelihood of success, by
seeking to leave as much of my spirit with you, as I know how, when my bodily
presence shall be disposed of otherwise. In order hereunto, not knowing how
near the laying aside of this earthly tabernacle may be at hand, I have thought
it meet not only to leave the ensuing treatise, for your perusal after that
general manner, wherein it is left for other men, but to incorporate with it,
the express mention, and that dear remembrance of you, which I have in my
soul; that so in one and the same monument, the whole and entire spirit of your
Pastor, as well for morals, as intellectuals, may be preserved for your
converse, and to make company for your minds and spirits, when you please.

You are my present joy; and will be (I hope) my future crown: for neither has
your faith hitherto, through any bewitchings of the flesh, presumed to ascend
into Heaven, to bring downsome other Jesus, besides him whom Paul preached, nor
have you suffered your minds to be corrupted from the simplicity of the
Gospel: nor your selves to be baptized into any other spirit, then that which
speaks (...), i. expressly in the Scriptures. You have neither presumed to be
wise above, nor yet been satisfied to be ignorant beneath, what is written.
Whilst many professors have compassed themselves with sparks of their own
kindling, you have warmed your hearts with faith and love at that fire, which
Jesus Christ himself came from Heaven to kindle on the earth Luk 12. 49.
, and so have kept your selves out of the dint of the sore judgment of God,
which the Scripture calls a delivering up unto an injudicious mind.

Thus I recommend you to God, and to that word of his grace which he speaks
in the Scriptures, both unto you, and to the world, and which is able (so you
pervert it not with mystical and forged interpretations, thus making it to
become your own, in stead of his) to build you up and to give you an
inheritance among them which are sanctified, and implore with all humble and
unfeigned ardency of soul, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, so to prosper you
in the hand of that poor under-Shepheard whom he has set over you, that you
may be found of him at the great day.

Yours according to all Pastoral affections and engagements in the Lord, John
Goodwin.
From my Study in Coleman street, Dec 9. 1647.
To the Reader.
GOod Reader, The observation cannot lightly but do good service in these
times; That as God has his times to try the world, with his rare and
unexpected mercies, so has he his seasons also, to make a further and
different trial of it likewise, by his strange and unexpected judgments. Who
would have said unto Abraham (said Sarah, when time was) that Sarah should have
given children suck? for I have born him a son in mine old age. Genesis 21. 7.
The Kings of the earth (said Jeremy at another time) and all the inhabitants
of the world would not have believed, that the adversary and the enemy should
have entered into the gates of Jerusalem Lam. 4. 10.
. When England lay covered with the shadow of death, with that profound
ignorance of God, and of Jesus Christ, which, under the reign of the Romish
interest amongst us, was little less then fast bound with the iron bands both
of Church and state laws and decrees, upon the faces of the minds,
understandings, and consciences of the generality of the nation; who would now
have said unto England, yet a little while, and life and immortality shall be
brought to light in the midst of thee? and thou shall be full of the knowledge
of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea Isa. 11.
. Notwithstanding the zeal of the Lord of Hosts for the good of this nation,
did (as we all know) perform it: the people which sat in darkness have seen a
great light, and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death, light is
sprung up Mat. 4. 16.


This has been the great and unexpected application of Heaven unto this
nation, for the trial of it on the right hand. And on the other hand, when we
were full, when we were rich, when we reigned as Kings in the knowledge of
Jesus Christ, when we had the powers of the world to come, attending upon us
daily, as a lifeguard to our souls, who would have said, that ever such men
should be found in the midst of us, who should call the Sun, a sackcloath, and
say to the Oracles of God, you are deceivers: and to the Scriptures, prophecy
no more your vain things unto us: for ye are fables devised by men? And yet we
know that the righteous God has said unto the spirit of this most dreadful
abomination, go forth into the land, prevail, and persuade many; yea it is
somewhat more then to be feared, that the cloud arising out of the sea, which
is yet little, and but like a man's hand, will in a short time cover the Heavens
with blackness. For how great is the generation amongst us, who deny, the
divine authority of the Scriptures, in their works: and if in their works, then
in their hearts also; And they who deny it in both these, want but a slender
opportunity to deny it even with their lips. This is a strange and unlooked for
judgment come upon the nation for the trial of it on the left hand: and let
Capernaum which has been lifted up unto Heaven, take heed, that she be not
suddenly brought down to hell. For doubtless God having thus tried the
nation, first on the one hand, and then on the other, will, upon the behavior
of it after both, soon determine, and know what to do with it.

That which has been the snare of death to those lost men (if yet they be
lost) who have not only themselves lost the sight of God in the Scriptures, but
endeavor to persuade all those, who say they see God here, that they have lost
their senses, and call darkness, a vision, is (doubtless) this: they
sometimes pretended a sound belief of the Divinity of the Scriptures, and put
forth their hand to the plough of a Christian profession, but have looked back;
and hereby are become (...), unmeet, or illdisposed for the kingdom of God Luk
9. 62.
, being set off at a further distance in their affections from God, and grown
into a secret dislike and distaste of the ways of religion. And the consciences
of those who distaste the ways of holiness and religion, have no other
Sanctuary to flee unto for security and peace, but an exauthorization of the
Scriptures, or a denial of their descent from God. A competent, yea or
tolerable belief of their divinity, in conjunction with a like proportion of
knowledge in them, must needs make an irreligious heart and life, burdens
intolerable. So that men who suffer, either the wisdom of the flesh, or the
pleasures, or profits of the world, to disengage their hearts from the love of
religion, and ways of holiness, wherein sometimes they walked, put the iron
yoke of this sad necessity upon their own necks, even to indulge and favor
their consciences to the uttermost they are able, or know how, with a
supposall, that the words of the Scriptures, are but wind, and God only the
pretended, not the natural, or real Author, and Father of them. Now feeling
this iron yoke we speak of, ever and anon galling, and wringing, and paining
them, for their case, they are constrained to travail far and near with their
minds, and understandings to enquire after, and gather up, all and all manner
of grounds, reasons, arguments, colors, intimations, insinuations, pretenses,
how superficial, light, empty and un-concluding soever, which do but shadow
in the least that divine luster of the Scriptures, and overture but so much as
a possibility of their non-origination from God. And as Solomon takes notice
(Prove. 27. 7.) that to the hungry soul, every bitter thing is sweet; so when
men are laboring and toiling under that sad and hard engagement of proving the
Sun to be a sackcloth, and the Scriptures, not from God, the shadows of the
mountains seem armed men unto them; stubble and rotten wood, are turned into
iron, and steel unto them: yea that which is weak, and sometimes that which is
not, is mighty in their imaginations to throw down the foundations of the
Scriptures, and to confound the strong and mighty things of God.

Nor is it only that hard necessity, which lies upon these men, to make
something of every thing, yea and of nothing, for their purpose, that makes
them so credulous, yea and confident in their way; the hand of heaven is
stretched out against them, and takes from them even that natural force or
spirit of discerning (in respect of spiritual things) which sometimes they had
Mat. 25. 29.
, delivering them up into an injuditious mind, and (...). Romans 1. 2^.
sending them strong delusions, that they should believe lies. 2. These. 2. 11.
He that is the true light, inlightent every man (...) i. coming, or as he
comes, into the world Ioh. 1. 9.
; meaning, that Christ out of the treasury of his grace and merit, furnishes
every man whatsoever, who lives in the world to years of discretion, with a
stock of light, reason, judgment, conscience, memory, understanding. etc.
whereby to make him capable of those terms, of that great and blessed treaty,
about the things of his eternal peace and wellbeing, wherein God addresseth
himself unto the world. Now whilst men move, and act according to the true
ducture, and commonstrations of this light, without any palpable or wilful
deviation, or habitual neglect of them, God (in the Scripture phrase) takes a
kind of pleasure in them, blesses and increases their store, according to
the import of what our Savior promises, and asserteth in the Gospel: viz.
that unto every one that has (i. that by a regular course, and tenor of
actions, declares that he has light given him by Christ: for a man in law, is
then reputed to have a thing, when it some ways or other, appears, that he
has it) shall be given, and he shall have abundance Mat. 25. 29.
(i. by means Non esse, and non apparere, equipas rantur in sure.
of the blessing of God upon his regular and conscientious walkings, the eye of
his reason, judgment, and understanding, shall be more opened and cleared, and
fortified from day to day) But when men shall turn their backs upon that candle
of the Lord (as Solomon calls it) which by the hand of Christ is lighted up in
every man's soul; especially after the light and shining of it, have been
augmented and enriched by the additionall light of the Gospel; and shall follow
the irregular and crooked dictates and leadings of their lusts and sinful
propensions; God now ordinarily does not only suspend the influence of his
former blessing, by which those soul-abilities we spoke of, had flourished and
prospered until now; but also in process of his most just severity and
indignation, curses that tree of light within them, saying to it (as Christ to
the fig tree, finding no fruit on it) never fruit grow on thee more. Nor is
this any thing, but what the Lord Christ informs the world of before hand, in
the words immediately subjoyned to those lately mentioned. But from him that
has not, shall be taken away, even that which he has, i. (according to the
line of the interpretation given of the former words) when men shall cease to
give a reasonable account, or proof, of those impressions of light and knowledge
which Christ had planted in them, by ways and practices answerable to the
nature and guidance of them, God usually blasteth them with the breath of his
displeasure; so that afterward the place of the former abilities in these men
in reference unto spiritual things, is no where to be found, nor shall any
man, duly comparing the after engagements and actings of their judgments
about matters of Religion, with the former, be able to say, These are the men.
This also is but that, which the Apostle expresses in the name of God, Heb.
10. 38. But if he (i. the just man, spoken of in the former part of the verse,
not any, or any man, as our translatours give it us) shall draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him (...).
, meaning, (according to the emphasis and force of the expression Apud Hebrew,
adverbia negandi-contrarium significant ejus verbi, (...). Mede. Apocol. p. 172.
that his soul shall be highly displeased with him: and that such a person must
expect to receive from him in judgment accordingly. Thus I have showed thee
(good reader) the dangerous and corrupt seed, of which the generation of
Anti-scripturists amongst us, is immediately begotten; a declining in religious
affections and ways.

Give me leave to search this soar nearer to the bottom, and (in a few lines
more) show thee, what is the only, or at least, the predominant cause, of this
declining in men. This I conceive to be, the embracing of a dead, in stead of a
living Faith, of the Divine Authority and heavenly Original, of the
Scriptures. It is the saying (as I remember) of Quintilian, that many might in
time have attained unto wisdom, had they not thought they had Multi ad
saplentiam pervenire potuissent, nisi se ^am pervenisse pu^assemi.
attained it already. In like manner it may be truly said, that many might have
attained a solid and sound belief of the Scriptures, and of their Relation unto
God, had they not anticipated, the belief it self, with a loose supposition, or
imagination of it. Now there had been no place in them for such a supposition
or imagination as this, had not something in them like unto such a belief,
prepared it. Similitude is a Great Deceiver in the world; and the same in
color, frequently entertained, for the same in substance. And to a solid and
sound belief of the Scriptures, there is no semblance, but an ill-grounded and
superficial belief only. Such a belief as this, though it be good for little,
but to afford men an opportunity to dally and play fast and loose with God, and
to turn hell and Heaven into a pastime, yet strange is the contentment of men
and women, who sit under the shadow of it. A dead faith makes them believe they
are alive, even whilst they are dead in sins and trespasses: yea sometimes it
inticeth and draws men on to so much sin and wickedness, that God in an holy
and just revenge takes even it also out of the hearts of men, and so leaves
them faithless altogether. And let this be carefully remembered; that to be
faithless altogether after a dead faith, is a condition a thousand times more
hopeless, then before it. God no where says, If a man has not drawn near
unto me, my soul shall have no pleasure in him: many times his soul has so
far pleasure in such a man, as to bestow the unvaluable gift of a sound Faith
and repentance on him. But what says he? we have already heard it: If the just
man (any man, say our Translatours) shall draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him.

We are not yet at the coar of the ulcer: the springhead of the great Sin and
misery proportionable, of our Anti-Scripturist, lies yet lower in the ground.
If there be a reason or cause assigneable of his dead Faith, this is like to be
the root that bears it. What the reason or cause is of a dead faith in any
man, will easily be conceived, if the nature of this Faith be but taken a
little into consideration, and understood. A dead Faith is not therefore so
called (I mean, dead) only because it acts not, or brings forth no fruit,
at all: there is no Faith at all, dead in such a sense: the Faith of Judas,
Simon Magus, Demas, of the second, and third ground, etc brought forth fruit,
and this like unto the fruit of a living Faith (as far as men were able
positively to judge of it) yea, probably, in as great plenty, as a living Faith
it self is wont to bear. And yet the respective Faiths of all these, were dead,
in that sense and signification of the word, Dead, wherein we now use it.
Indeed the Apostle James concludes that Faith to be dead, which is without
works Iam. 2. 1^.
: but he speaks emphatically, viz. of such works, which are essential unto,
and universally found to accompany a Faith, that is living: and does not
suppose a possibility of any Faith whatsoever, without works in one kind or
other, suitable to it. Therefore by a dead Faith, I mean (with the Scripture)
such a Faith or credulity, which Solomon ascribes to the simple or foolish,
Prove. 14. 15 The simple believes every word, viz that he hears, or that is
spoken to him, without any act of dijudication between word and word, without
any rational and substantial inquiry, whether there be any competent and
sufficient ground to judge that word, or saying, true, which he believes. So
by a dead Faith, the Scripture (doubtless) means such a Faith or consent
unto supernatural Truths, which is hastily, and without due consideration
raised in the soul^ and which is able to give no substantial, rational, or
solid account of it self, either to it self, or unto others. Of this kind, is
that Faith, which is merely built either 1. upon the credit, authority, or good
opinion of our Teachers: or 2. upon some great and plausible concurrence of the
judgments of men supposed learned and Orthodox: or 3. upon the persuasion and
profession of our Ancestors and forefathers: or 4. upon the determinations,
injunctions, of the State, where we live: or 5. upon the general profession
and practice of that Nation, or commonalty of persons, amongst whom we live: or
6. upon light and undigested apprehensions of grounds, though in themselves
never so demonstrative, weighty and substantial: or 7. and lastly, upon
whatsoever is not sufficient in a rational way to poyse or ballasse the
judgment and conscience with such an assurance of truth, in what is in this
case believed, or assented unto, but that they shall still remain obnoxious and
liable to be removed, and taken off, from their present belief, by the gusts
and blasts of contrary apprehensions, in case they come in their way. The
reason why such a Faith, which is built only upon some, or more, or all, of
these foundations, may well be called a dead faith, is because it has no other
root, but what is rottenness; it lives by no other principle of life, but what
may be quenched, or taken from it, every hour, and consequently may properly
enough be said to be dead, even whilst it lives.

So then the Reason why the Faith of the Anti-Scripturists amongst us, which
now is not, was dead (in the sense declared) even whilst it was, is clearly
this; their negligence and unfaithfullnesse unto their own souls, either in not
inquiring after, or in not seriously and studiously digesting, such
considerations and grounds, which are proper and potent, against all
oppositions of contrary reasonings, arguments, and inducements whatsoever, to
establish, root, ground, and build the judgments, souls, and consciences of
men, in assurance of the truth of the Gospel, and of the issuings of the
Scriptures from God. I well know that faith is (in Gods sense) the gift of
God; but know withal, that the reason why the seed, which fell in the stony
ground, was scorebed with the heat of the sun, was, because it had not much
earth Mat. 13. 5. ^^
, i. the main reason, why the doctrine of the Gospel, in the belief of it, in
the persons represented by this ground, miscarried, and came to nothing upon
inducements haling and pulling a contrary way, was, because neither upon, nor
after the hearing of it, they ever bestowed any labor of mind, any competent
consideration upon it; nor ever took care or thought, to inquire so far after
the truth and certainty of it until they came to such grounds and reasons, by
which they might be insured, and secured hereof. By reason of this
carelessenesse and neglect, they never came to have root in themselves Mat 13
21.
(as our Saviors expression is, in his interpretation of this part of the
parable) i they never came to be established or built upon any solid
foundations or proofs of the Truth of the Gospel, which they had heard: and so
when the argument or motive of declining persecution, did but encounter and
attempt their Faith, it soon yielded, and gave up the ghost. The Germans have
somewhat an unhandsome Des Deus (...) bonum; sed non per cor^ua ta^um.
Proverb, which yet carries a savoury and pertinent truth in it: God (say
they) gives every good thing, but not by the horns of bulls. Their meaning is,
that though God be the bountiful and blessed Author and giver of all manner
of blessings and good things unto men, yet he does not ordinarily give them, at
least many of them, but upon suitable applications and addressements of men
themselves, for the attainment of them respectively. Solomon affirms it to be
the blessing of the Lord, that makes rich Prove. 10. 22.
: and yet had said a little before, that the hand of the diligent makes rich
verse. 4.
also. The pacification of the one saying toward the other, is as obvious, as
the reconciling of the masters eye (in the proverb) with the servants hand, in
making an horse sat. It is true, God sometimes by an hand of Providence not
much used, casts riches upon men, without the diligence of their own hand:
nor is it to be denied, but that semblably he gives Faith also, without, or at
least upon very slender engagements or applications of men, for the obtaining
of it. But as the diligent band is the way of his Providence most occupied, for
his enriching of men with the silver and gold of this world; so is the
thoughtfull, studiously bent, and inquiring soul about the things of eternity,
his standing method, for his enriching of men with the true treasure, and
making them great through a sound Faith, in the Kingdom of Heaven. And he that
will not strive to enter in by the strait gate, is never like to be forced or
thrust into it by God. But here is neither place, nor opportunity for a just or
through debate of these things.

Thus (good Reader) I have briefly drawn up for thy perusal, the sad History,
of the original, progress, and catastrophe or end of that generation, or vein
of men amongst us, who are fallen from a dead faith, to a lively denial of the
divine authority of the Scriptures. The ensuing discourse will (I trust) prove
like Aaron when with his censer, having incense and fire from off the altar in
it, he stood between the living and the dead, and stayed the plague from
spreading further Numb. 16. 48.
; though he could do nothing for the raising again from the dead, any of those
that were already fallen by it. Yet if God be a debtour to any gracious purpose
or intention in himself, of the recovery of any of these men, out of that snare
of death, wherein their foot is taken, and fast held (for the present) I make
no question but the present Treatise, notwithstanding the image and
superscription of the Author so fully stamped upon it in deficiencies and
infirmities, may be a commodious instrument in his hand for such a purpose.

Concerning the subject it self of the Treatise, the Demonstration of the
finger of God in the Scriptures, I shall not need either to commend, or to
demonstrate, the necessity of it, no not in respect of those also, whose foot
has not as yet so much as begun to slide into the way of that abomination,
which gives away the glory of the only infinitely wise and holy God in the
composure of them, to sinful, weak, and contemptible men. As there is much
counterfeit and clipped coin abroad in the world; so is there much Faith and
belief of the Authority of the Scriptures in the hearts of men, which being
touched, will be found base, and weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary,
light. The heart of a man is so dangerously, yea and desperately deceitful,
that, to save it self a labor, and the sweat of the brow in being constrained
to believe indeed, by strength of argument, and evidence of demonstration, it
will with much heat of confidence and importunity, violently persuade him that
he believes already: and angerly demand of him (in Judas his dialect) what
needs this waste of time, in writing, and reading long discourses,, to prove
that, which thou approvest already, and beleevest abundantly? Reader, it may be
thou have heard of the Latin proverb, which tells thee that proffered ware
stinketh. Doubtless that belief of supernatural and Divine things, which thy
heart, unconstrained, uncompelled, unconvinced, and this by an high hand of
argument and solid demonstration, in one kind or other, profereth and
commends Meux ultroma putet.
unto thee for good, for want of salt, can hardly be savoury, or sound, or
such, wherein either God, or men, will much delight. But (reader) I would not
have thee have sorrow upon sorrow, a long Discourse upon a long Preface, or
Epistle.

I have now but only a little mint and anise to tith, two or three particulars
of lighter consequence to impart further unto thee, and so thou shall no longer
suffer in the bands of an Epistle.

1. I desire to give thee notice, that according to the tenor of my first
thoughts, only four or five of the first sheets of the Treatise (wherein,
being thereunto compelled by the importune and un-man-like clamours of some, I
attempt that otherwise needless piece of curiosity, (...), as the Greek
proverb well expresses it, i. to make somewhat straiter, then that which is
strait) together with the Epistle Dedicatory, were intended for the press. In
which respect, there are some passages, both in the said Epistle, and within
the compass of these sheets, which, being calculated according to the
exigencie and posture of things amongst us so many months since, as the coming
of them forth was projected, and expected, may now, by occasion of the
disadvantage of so long-delaied a publication, seem somewhat incongruous, and
less seasonable. In this behalf, I desire the Readers courtesy for my
accommodation; and that he will please for my relief herein, to borrow of his
memory, if that be able to supply him herewith, the state and tenor of his
thoughts and apprehensions about the latter end of March last, as far as they
related to the contents of those papers, when he reads them.

2. When upon the persuasion of some friends, I had taken up this additionall
purpose, of enlarging the forementioned proportion of the discourse only with
a summary and brief proposal of the heads of those considerations, which I had
more largely insisted upon in the course of my Ministry, in order to the
Vindication of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures; yea and had satisfied my
self accordingly, in the proposal and setting down of one or two of the first
of these considerations; yet going on to the rest, I clearly perceived, that
their strength and efficacy for the great service intended, would have
suffered much loss and disadvantage in reference thereunto, if they had been
confined to any narrower compass of explication, then that which is now
assigned unto them. In which respect, I was necessitated, to print them (at
least the greatest part of them) as largely, as I Preached them; they who heard
them Preached, and shall read them Printed, will bear witness, that very
little alteration has been made.

3. (And lastly) my desire to thee (and that more for thy own interest and
benefit then for mine) is; that since the main body of the treatise, consists
of many arguments, and demonstrations, to evince one and the same great
conclusion and truth, viz. that the Scriptures are from God, though thou
read them singly one by one, and every one apart from his fellows, yet in
order to thy satisfaction about their strength and sufficiency to evince the
said conclusion, thou will look upon them all together, as one and the same
entire demonstration, and not consult thine own dis-satisfaction or discontent,
where there is no just ground, or occasion of either, as viz. by finding
weakness and unsatisfactorinesse (possibly) in any one or more of them, taken
out of their conjunction, which indeed is their strength. Solomon gives this
reason, why two are better then one, because (says he) if they fall, the one
will lift up his fellow: but woe to him that is alone, when he falls. etc.
There is the like advantage in variety of arguments, ^ Eccles. 4. 9.
for proof of one and the same conclusion^ if one be weak, or doubtful in
some particular belonging to it, and so less satisfying, one or other of its
fellows may very possibly relieve and supply the defect; and then it becomes
valid and serviceable, notwithstanding. A cable may be strong and sufficient to
hold a good ship down laden against the stiffest gust, and strongest tempest of
weather that can blow; and yet some one or two of the smallest threads or twists
of it, may be brittle and half rotten. In like manner a discourse, or body of
arguments, raised for the demonstration and proof of some important truth, may
perform the engagement with power and authority, and be sufficient to establish
the doubtful, yea and to convince the gainsayer; though every thing delivered
and asserted herein be not greater then exception, yea though some thing be
obnoxious, and lies open to the disputes and contradictions of some men. To
reject an author, or book, because not every ways approveable, is, being
interpreted, to presume himself to be a God. The Heathen Poet had more of a
Christian temper in him then so, when he said,

Verumubi plura nitent in ca^mine, non ego pauci^
Offendar ma^ulis, quas aut inc^ia s^dit,
Aut humana porum cavit narura --
i. Where much does shine, a little not so bright
Shall not offend me, which some oversight,
Or humane frailty, well occasion might.
But (Reader) whether I have quitted my self, like a workman that need not be
ashamed, or no, in my undertaking, and whether the divinity of the Scriptures,
be yet in the dark, or no, notwithstanding all that I have done to bring it
forth into the light censure, and determine thou if thou please Certain I am,
i. that he that is about to come as a theife in the night, will b^ing a day
with him, which shall open the eyes that are now shut, and astonish the world
with the brightness of the demonstration of this truth, which with strength of
affection and desire (I am certain) with what weakness soever in performance,
I have in the ensuing discourse labored to evince and assert. The Heavens
which have been faithful keepers of that great treasure of the world, even
since it was committed unto their custody, Jesus Christ, will show themselves
as faithful in delivering it back again unto the world, in the time appointed.
In that day the mouth of that ungodliness which is now opened against the
glory of the Scriptures, will be shut, yea and sealed up, never more to be
opened to the days of eternity. The great Lord of this day, make thee and me
worthy to stand before him therein, by a real belief, and fervent expectation
of it, according to the Scriptures.

Thine to serve thee with whatsoever is his, in the things of Jesus Christ,
John Goodwin.
From my Study in Coleman-street London, December. 1647.
The Contents of the ensuing Treatise.
Offenses, whether given or taken, from whence commonly they proceed. page 1.
The Authors clear intent, in the 28. Section of his Hagiomastix displayed,
etc. p. 4, 5, etc. The sense of Protestant writers concerning Scripture
translations. p. 5, 6, 7. The English Translation, not in every sense, nor yet
in a proper sense, either the word of God, or foundation of Christian Religion.
p. 7, 8, etc. The Authors judgment concerning Transcripts of Scriture in the
Originalls. p. 14, 15. Concerning Translations. p. 16, 17, etc. What properly
is the Word of God, and foundation of Christian Religion. p. 17, 18, The
Authors opinion concerning the imputation of Faith, and the righteousness of
Christ, in justification. p. 27. Concerning the power of the civil Magistrate:
the estate and condition of the soul between death and the resurrection. p. 29.
Arguments proving the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, Intrinsecall,
Extrinsecall. p. 30, 31. The first Intrinsecall Argument; the manner, or
property of their style, and phrase. p. 31, 32. The second; the spirituality,
or admirable workmanship seen in their joints, or connexions. p. 32, 33, 34.
The third; a certain Authoritativenesse, or God-like speaking unto the world,
etc. p. 34, 35, 36, etc. The fourth; their strange composition, or
constitution, being made up of depths, and shallows, etc. p. 36, 37, etc. The
fifth; their Antiquity. p. 41, 42, etc. The six,; the manner of the Gospels
bringing in into the world, in respect of the growth, and graduall discoveries.
page 48, 49. etc. The seventh; a Majestique kind of security under many
seeming contradictions. p. 55, 56, etc. The eight (and last of this head) an
holy and humble ingenuity and candor in the Penmen. p. 60, 61, etc.
Intrinsecall arguments of the latter head, drawn from the matter, and import of
the Scriptures, being ten in number, propounded. p. 64, 65. The first of these;
That excellent spirit of holiness which breaths out of the Scriptures upon the
world. p. 65, 66, etc. The second; a potent tendency in them to advance
godliness in the world. p. 84, 85, etc. The third; their Authoritaetive and
loud call upon the world, for self-denial. p. 104, 105. The fourth; that
heart-searching property, which is so frequently, and with so much power, found
to be in them, p. 116. 117, etc. The fifth: A glorious and mighty power, which
sometimes they exert and put forth, in raising and lifting up the hearts of
men. p. 133. 134. etc. The sixth: A like power sometimes exercised by them in
terrisying and shaking the souls and consciences of men. p. 138. 139. The
seventh: A great and mavelous transforming power frequently exerted by them.
p. 148. 149. etc. The eighth: The heights and depths of that wisdom and
understanding, which are found in the transaction of the Gospel. p. 157. 158.
159. etc. The ninth: The mysteriousnesse of the said transaction. p. 218. 219.
etc. The tenth (and last of this head) The transcendent importance of the
Gospel, by way of benefit and blessing upon the world. p. 223. 224. etc. Two
kinds of Arguments extrinsecall, proving the Scriptures to be the word of God:
The first, such passages, or acts of Providence, by which God owns the
Scriptures, as his. The latter, such either doings or sayings of men, which are
so far confederate with those providence of God, as to join in testimony with
them on the behalf of the Scriptures. p. 227. 228. The first, of the former of
these kinds: The preserving of the body of the Scriptures entire, and free
from corruption, or maim, for so many generations, as have passed over them. p.
228. 229. The second: The high hand of success, wherewith the Gospel, even in
the infancy of it, and soon after it went forth into the world, was attended.
p. 267. 268 etc. The third: An exact and punctual fulfilling of the prophecyes
contained in the Scriptures. p. 305. 306. etc. The fourth: The great and
wonderful effects, which God daily produces in the world by the Scriptures:
and particularly by the Gospel, p. 320. 321 etc. The fifth: The consideration
of the tenor or manner of the Government of the world, and of the workings of
the hearts and spirits of all kinds of men in it. p. 332. 333. etc. The sixth
(and last of this head) The remarkable judgments inflicted by God upon the
enemies of the Scriptures. p. 360. 361 etc. The first of the latter sort: the
consideration of some things, which have been, and are daily acted and done by
men: as viz. first, such by which the predictions and prophetical carriages of
the Scripture (at least some of the most considerable) are fulfilled. Secondly,
such by which the doctrinall or sententious passages thereof, are verified and
asserted. p. 367. 368. etc. The former of these opened. p. 368. etc. The
latter. 370. etc. The latter (of this latter sort) is: The consideration of
such sayings of men, whether in their writings, or otherwise, which reflect the
light of divine Authority upon them. p 371. 372. etc.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable;
IT is a memorable saying of an ancient Heathen; He is the bravest man, that
knows best how to be injured (...). Menander.
. The lightest working of the Spirit toward a revenge, though upon the
sharpest provocation, being discovered, suffers not a man to be seen in his
glory. In the mean time it is a crown of glory upon the head of men in place,
and of Divine parallel, to suffer such men to be least injured, who best know
how to suffer; that is, to suffer alone, and without the least damage or
danger, of any other man. The Anointed ones of God, especially his Prophets,
know how to suffer far above the rate, either of the wisdom or patience, of
other men: and yet, of all others these must not be touched, or put to suffer:
Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm Psalm. 105. 15.
.

This my most humble address unto you, rejoices in this; that it is
altogether ignorant, at least in point of affection, of any wrong done to the
Author: and yet presents you witb an opportunity of being seen in the best
of your glory. For upon a late conjunction of the Providence of God, with the
improvidence of men, there has issued from the Pulpit (as I hear from many
hands) an undue representation of me and my pen, into your ears, and that upon
the day of your late solemn humiliation for the prevailing of Heresies and
Blasphemies in the Land, (besides what of this ill air I have cause in
abundance to suspect, has been breathed upon many of you at other times.)

To me (I speak the Truth, and lie not to your Honors) it is more easy to
suffer, then complain: and had not my desire to make all your apprehensions
(with other men's) thoughts of Honor and Truth, as far as lies in me, been
stronger, then either of any reparations for my self, or of any disparaging
reflection upon the offenders, I had not lift up so much as a thought toward
this Apology, or explication rather of my self. Yea so tender am I of the
reputations of those who have mistaken me (to qualify an hard action with a
soft expression) that I am scarce free in my self to desire of your Honors so
much as a perusal of the ensuing Explication, l^st hereby they also may
possibly suffer. Only herein (I must confess) sorrow fills my heart, and I
look upon the thing as little less then requiring another day of humiliation
by way of atonement; viz. that in a day of so solemn a fast amongst professed
Christians, Barrabbas should again be released, and Christ crucified; I mean,
that many Errors and heresies, which really are such, and reign to the great
damage and danger of the Truth, (yea and some of them to the disturbance of the
peace) amongst us, should be dissembled, and passed by; sound assertions, and
harmless expressions being in the mean time spread and arraigned before God,
and men, and your Honors particularly, as the great Incentives of the
displeasure of God against the Nation, and so destructive to the peace and
happiness of it.

I am not conscious to my self of the least wrong I have ever done, either to
man, woman, or child, in word or deed; nor of any refusal of subjection to
any just Law or imposition of men: if either my memory, or conscience, herein
deceives me, I here stand forth, and humbly offer my self before your Honors,
and all the world, to make satisfaction with the best of my substance, or
otherwise, as far as I am, or ever shall be able, upon any reasonable
evidence or conviction of the fact. If I have, either in any of my writings, or
Sermons, or Discourses otherwise, uttered or asserted any thing erroneous and
unsound; I here offer and submit my self in like manner, to sit at the feet of
those, whom either of your Honorable Houses shall appoint to instruct me in
the truth; being a thousand times more willing to offer sacrifice to the Truth,
then to be a servant to any supposition under Heaven (...).
. For I know that it is Truth which sanctifies Joh. 17 ^7.
, whereas error defiles Nec quis error turpitudine caret. Aug. Labi autem,
errare, nescire decipi and turpe, and inhonestum ducimus: Ci^. Offic.
. Only I crave leave to make it my humble request unto you, that I may not be
compelled to seek the living among the dead, Truth (I mean) amongst the
presumptions, and infirm suppositions of men; but in the Scriptures, which are
living, and where others say they both seek, and find it. Strong Conclusions
coming forth into the world leaning upon weak premises, have in all ages
bereaved the world of the use and benefit of the one half (at least) of that
reason and understanding, which God with a liberal hand bestowed upon it for
its own advancement in happiness and peace. I call God for a record upon my
soul 2 Cor. 1. 23.
, that I have not the least touch of a desire to be wise (in the things of God)
either above, or besides, what is written [in the book of God] nor have I the
least hope of rising up in wisdom to the due height of what is written herein,
whilst the encumbrance of flesh and blood hangs on me: only my desires are,
that in my conscientious endeavors to ascend this mountain, I may neither be
thrust down by those that are above me, nor pulled backward by those that are
beneath. It would be (I conceive) an entrance in abundance into a better world,
if men generally could be content to possess their souls in patience, when
they meet with others either weaker, or wiser, then themselves. Augustine
speaking of the sense of a difficult place of Scripture, says thus: It may
seem one thing to me, and another to another: but neither do I impose upon him
what I shall say upon it, for the better sense; nor he upon me Potest mihi
aliquid videri, alteri aliud. Sed neque ego quod dixero, praescribo alteri ad
meliorem intellectum, neque ille mihi. Aug in Euar. Psalm. 36.
. Scultetus also reports it for a saying much esteemed by Luther, and which he
professes that he first heard from Judocus (sometimes his Master.) Solis
Canonicis libris deberi fidem; caeteris omnibus judicium. i. that present
belief is a debt due only to the Canonical books of Scripture, but judgment
or consideration, to all others.

I make no question but that your Honors know, that not only men's manners, but
their Judgments and Doctrines also are apt in time, to warp, and to
degenerate, unless God should ever and anon be stirring up some, who by
dealing faithfully with them, should necessitate them to a recollection and
survey of themselves in both. When the Priests complained of Luther to the
Emperor Charles the fifth; he plainly told them, that if they had been good,
they should have stood in no need of such a Censor, or Corrector of manners, as
Luther was Vita Religiosorum ita faetebat ad vulgus, ut Carolus V. Imperator,
Ecclesiasticis de Luthero conquerentibus in Comitijs Augustanis responderit: Si
vos sacrificuli pij ^ssetis, non indiguissetis Censore, and morum Correctore
Luthero. Scultet. Annal Dec. 1. p. 15.
. And it was the ingenious confession of an Abbot living in these times, that
if Luther had not come amongst them, they should have persuaded the people to
have fed upon hey Jam superstitionibus ita erant omnia oppleta, ut celebris
Monasterij Neuhusani in Vangionibus Abbas dixerit (vera narro) Si Lutherus non
venisset, se persuasuros fuisse populo, ut foeno latrantem stomachum
placassent. Ibid.
. I wish the observation taken up long since by Minutius Felix, received not so
large a testimony as it does, from our present times: Many (says he) out of a
loathnesse to weary themselves in seeking out the Truth, turn in to the errors
next at hand. For my self, my love is such to the precious souls of men, that I
cannot knowingly suffer any suspicious Doctrine, or loose opinion in the things
of God, to pass through the world near unto me, unexamined, especially when any
Multi taedio investigan^ae veritatis, ad proximus ^ver^unt (...).
considerable numbers of men are like to suffer: which, though it be a
thanklesse engagement, and very obnoxious to those, who love either ease, or
honor, more then cleanness of judgment, and pureness of mind and
understanding; yet is it a proper and effectual course to preserve the
Doctrine of the Gospel, if not absolutely free from all, yet from that
intermixture of error, which commonly issues from between the feet of a
supine incogitancy and sloth in those, who are entrusted with the ministry of
it.

But I reverence the Great concernments of the Kingdom in your hands: wherein,
as from the beginning I have served you with all faithfulness and simplicity
of heart hitherto, so am I unwilling now to make my self a Trespasser, so much
as by an impertinent diversion of your Honors from your attendance thereon.
The great and blessed God, whose is the Kingdom, power, and glory, fill your
Assemblies from day to day with the presence of his glory; by keeping your
judgments in a due distance of precedencie to your affections; and both
judgments and affections in a due proximitie and neernesse to himself, that so
the whole Nation may yet rise up before you as one man, and call you blessed,
and your Name be, The repairers of the great breach, and the restorers of paths
to dwell in Isa. 58. 12.
, thorough many generations. Such is the prayer of

Martij 26. 1647. Your Honors most humbly and really devoted to serve you, in
your Interests in both worlds, JOHN GOODWIN.

THE Divine Authority OF THE SCRIPTVRES Re-asserted.
BRethren (says the Apostle) be not children in understanding: howbeit in
malice be ye children, but in understanding, be men 1 Cor. 14. 20.
. If the voice of this exhortation were in both the branches conscienciously
remembered by those, who are most concerned in it, it would be as a tree of love
and peace in the midst of the Paradise of the Churches of God. There is scarce
any offense either given, or taken, but proceeds, either from strength in
malice, or weakness in understanding, or both. When our Savior, being adjured
by the High Priest, to tell him whether he was the Son of God, or no, made this
answer; Hereafter ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of Heaven; did he give the least occasion of
offense unto him? and yet this High Priest rent his clothes, saying, he has
spoken blasphemy: what further need have we of witnesses? Behold now ye have
heard his blasphemy. And that of the Prophet Hosea then taking place, And there
shall be like people, like Priest Hos. 4. 9.
, the people also voted with their Priest, He is guilty of death Mat. 26. 66.
. If the High Priest, and his fellow-Priests, had justified our Savior in his
words and actions, which, had they not been men in malice, instead of
understanding, and children in understanding, instead of malice, they would
(according to their duty) have done, doubtless the common people also had
joined with them in a concurrent suffrage for his justification. But the
observation taken up by Augustine long since, is nothing but the experience of
all ages. Some men (says he) of competent understandings, had rather quarrel
with Nonnulli intelligentes citius volunt ex agitare, quod non intelligunt, qua
^ quaecere ut intelligant: and non fiu^t ^umiles inquisitores, sed superbi
calumniatores. Aug. de temp. Ser. ^. 72.
what they understand not, then seek out the true understanding of it: and so
instead of modest inquirers, show themselves proua slanderers. He himself was
so hotly pursued by the clamours and outcries of some of the understanding ones
of his age, that he was a man infected with errors, and poisoned the world
with false Doctrines, that he was constrained to flee for refuge, to a public
declaration of himself in the particulars, which were to his disparagement
charged upon him: and upon this occasion wrote that Tract, which is found in
the 7th Tome of his Works, entitled, Augustins Answer to certain Articles
falsely fathered, or charged upon him Ad articulos aliquot ^ibi fal^o impositos,
Augustini Respon^io.
; beginning thus: Some men out of a forgetfullnesse of Christian and brotherly
love, are so importunely bent, by all ways and means whatsoever, to mischief
my reputation, that being blinded by a desire of doing harm, they perceive not
how they overthrow their own. For they frame, and gather together, and make up,
in such sayings or sentences as they can, prodigious untruths of certain most
fond and foolish blasphemies: and these they carry about, to show and inculcate
into many, both publicly and privately, affirming, they are the same, in my
sense and meaning, as they are expressed in their diabolical catalogue: which
opinions or Te^ets, we might readily and sufficiently prove to be thus carried
and tossed up and down, for no other end, but to stir up a spirit of envy
against us, by anathematizing them all at once; would not the malignity of
those, to whom it is a burden that we should be thought well of, make it
matter of suspicion, if we should take so brief a course for our vindication
Quidam Christianae ac fraternae charitatis oblit^, in tantum existimationem
nostram quoquo modo student laedere, ut suam se evertere nocendi cupiditate non
videant. Contexunt enim, and qualibus possunt sententi^js comprehendunt,
ineptissimarum quarundam blasphemiarum prodigiosa mendacia, eaque ostendenda
and ing^renda multis public privatimque circumferunt, asserentes talia in
nostr, esse sensu, qualia diabolico indiculo continentur, Quae fal^o in nos ad
excitandam invidiam jact^tari, facile and sufficienter subscriptione unius
probaremus anathematis, nisi malignitas ^orum, qui se gravari putant, si de
nobis been sentiatur, ipsam subscriptionis nostrae brevitatem suspectam esset
habitura.
. I see the common saying is not yet like to fail: Sicut nunc, sic and olim, As
it is to day, so was it yesterday: and (as Solomon says) there is no new thing
under the Sun.

Most certain I am, if I understand what plain English words signify, that
there was no more cause given by me in the 28th Section of my late Discourse,
entitled, Hagi^mastix disployed etc. why any man should either think, or say,
that I deny the Divine Authority of the Scriptures; then was given by our
Savior in the words lately cited from Matthew. 26. 63. why either the High
Priest, or people should accuse him of blasphemy; or in these, Destroy this
Temple, and in three days I will raise it up Joh. 2. 19.
, why the false witnesses, spoken of Matthew. 26. 60 61. should charge him with
saying, I can destroy the Temple of God, and build it in three days. Somewhat
indeed there was in what our Savior spoke, of what these witnesses informed
against him; but because they quite altered the nature and import of what he
intended in his words, the Holy Ghost himself brands them with the infamous
character of false Witnesses; which brand of infamy will never be gotten out
of their foreheads to the worlds end. But he that has commanded me to
recompense unto no man evil for evil Romans 12. 17. Immensae virtutis est, non
sentire te esse percussum. Sen.
, has graciously opened the ear of my heart and soul to hearken unto my charge
in that behalf, and has made me strong to bear the burdens, whether of the
weakness, or wickedness of men. Therefore I shall without the least
reflection in way of disparagement upon any the persons of those, who have
unworthily sought to make my savor stink in the sight of men, with a composed
spirit address my self to render an account, as well of my judgment touching
the Authority of the Scriptures, as of my intent in the said 28. Section of my
Book. When that saying of Christ to Peter, concerning his beloved Disciple, If
I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? was generally
misunderstood by the Disciples themselves, who by a common misprision, made
them to import, that that Disciple should not die Joh. 21, 23.
, the holy Ghost himself thought it good, by the pen of the Evangelist, to
rectify the error, only by setting down the words, in opposition to the
interpretation, or mistake; Yet Jesus said not unto him, he shall not die: but
if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? sometimes, not only
a spirit of enmity and envy, but of love it self, may through an inadvertencie,
and neglect to engage second thoughts, misapprehend the genuine intent of what
is spoken; yea and this in such cases, wherein the very repetition of the word
spoken, is sufficient to evict the misapprehension. But

1. To clear the said Section of any thing, either intended, or said, against
the Authority of the Scriptures; evident it is,

1. That it was no part of my intent in the said Section, nor any ways
relating to the business I had in hand, to declare mine own judgment, either
in the affirmative or negative, concerning the Authority of the Scriptures; nor
yet to put my Antagonists upon it to declare theirs in this; but only to engage
them, to declare plainly and distinctly, what they mean by the word,
Scriptures, when they affirm and maintain the denial of them to be the word of
God to be an error justly punishable with death. The Reason why I desired to
draw my adversaries to this Explication of themselves, was, because I
apprehended (and do apprehend still) that when they shall give a fair and
reasonable account of what is herein demanded, the unreasonablenesse of their
assertion, wherein they maintain it as a matter worthy of death, to deny the
Scriptures to be the word of God, will thereby more manifestly appear.

2. Because I desired that their explication in this kind might be pertinent
and proper, not frivolous, I judged it not amiss to attempt by argument, to
put them by, or take them off from two explications, which I conceived they
were most likely to pitch upon, either one, or both; both of them being
impertinent to their occasion. The former of the two from which I desired to
take them off, was; that by Scriptures, they meant the English Translation; the
later, the Original Hebrew and Greek copies. From the former of these, I
conceived I should take them off upon this ground or consideration; viz.
because I suppose it is no foundation of Christian Religion, to believe that
the Scriptures in this sense or consideration, are the word of God, i. (as I
presently explain my self) that God spoke to his Prophets or Apostles in
English; I now add, much less that he spoke unto either, in those very words,
phrases, and sentences in the English tongue, of which the systeme or body of
our English Translation is made up. Who could have imagined, that such an
expression, especially in conjunction with such an explication as this, would
ever have been obnoxious to a sinister interpretation? much less be forced
into any such sense, which should imply a denial of the Divine Authority of
the Scriptures? Have not men of the most eminent learning and worth amongst
Protestants, expressed themselves upon the like occasion in terms far more
liable to exception, then mine, and yet are blameless? We (says learned
Doctor Whitaker) acknowledge no edition [of the Scriptures] authentic, [i. of
Divine Authority,] but the Hebrew, in the old, and the Greek in the new
Testament. As for Translations, if they agree (viz. with the Originalls) We
approve them: if they disagree, we reject them Nullam nos editionem, nisi
Hebraicam in veteri, and Graecam in novo Testamento, authenticam facimus.
Translationes, si convenient, ptobamus: si discrepant, rei^cimus, Whita^in
Contr. de Scrip Qu. 2. cap. 7.
. Now most certain it is, that our English Translations (for they are many)
take the very best of them (as suppose the last, or any of the former) do in
very many things disagree from the Original; and therefore, according to the
judgment of this Grave and Orthodox Writer, (at least if his words be
rigorously dealt with) ought to be rejected: which is a saying 7 times more
commodious for left handed Interpreters to work upon, then any of mine. And yet
this Author has this testimony from the pen of Presbytery, that he never
held any opinion that was counted erroneous: nor any private peculiar opinion,
but what was commonly held in the Church of God M. Edw. A^tapol p. 40.
.

Chamier, a learned and faithful Advocate of the Protestant cause against the
Papists, and Bellarmine in particular, concerning Scripture Translations,
writes thus: We (says he) though we approve of other [Editions or
Translations] more or less, yet we acknowledge them to be made but by a
private spirit, as far as every man's judgment, skillfullnesse in Languages,
diligence and sincerity, were able to reach and attain. -- Therefore there is
none, whether in our own tongue, or in any other, unto which we think meet to
subject either our selves, or other men. And a little after: As for
Translations; the sense of Protestants is this: that all of them, of what
standing, name, or credit soever they be, with what diligence, sincerity,
learning soever they were made, are only so far certain, as they agree with
the first context, I mean, as far as they express that sense, which is
certainly manifest to be the sense of the Hebrew and Greek words. But if they
vary or swerve never so little from hence, that sense which they give or
express, we judge, neither to be Divine, nor authentic, nor canonical, but
merely humane, etc. Nos vero, etsi alias alijs plus, minusve pr^bemus, tamen
non negamus confectas esse omnes privato spiritu, quantum contendere potuit
cujusque and judicij acumen, and l^nguarum peritia, and cum sinceritate
diligentia, etc. and paulo post: Itaque nulla est, sive nostrorum, five aliorum
hominum, cui vel nos ipsos, vel alios, addicere velimus. Et rur sus paulo post.
Quod attinet ad versiones, Catholici sic sentiunt, eas omnes, cujuscunque fint
aut temporis, aut nominis aut dignitatis, quantalibet diligentia, sinceritate,
doctrina factae sine, eo tantum certas esse, quod cum primo contex^u
conveniant, quatenus, inquam, eum sensum exprimunt, quem certo constat esse
Hebra^corum and Graecorum vocabulorum. Quod fi inde discedant vel t^ntillum,
tum quem ille sensum reddunt, non esse divinum, non Authenticum, non canonicum,
sed mere humanum. Chamier. Panstr. Tom. 1. l. 12. c. ^. 3. 5.
(with much more of like importance:) So then the sense of this Author clearly
is, that no translation can be any further certain unto any man (viz. that it
is, or, that it contains in it, the word of God) then as far as the sense
which is therein expressed is certainly manifest unto him, to be the sense of the
Hebrew and Greek words; and consequently can be no foundation of Religion unto
him. Which, whether it be not a saying 10. degrees harder then any of mine, let
men, who have not sacrificed their judgments upon the service of their
affections, judge. Certain Veteres, quamvis linguarum cognitione, ac presertim
Hebraicae, destituerentur, ingenue tamen semper agnoscunt, nihil esse melius
quam ipsam consulere, ut inde verus germanusque sensus hauriatur. Calvin in 2.
Decretum 4. Sess. Syn. Trid
I am, that there is not one of many thousands amongst us, to whom it is
certainly manifest, that any sense at all expressed in the English Translation,
is the sense of the Hebrew and Greek words: and consequently to whom it can be
certainly manifest, that the said Translation is the word of God: and how then
should it be a foundation of Christian Religion unto him? The ancient
Christians (says Calvin) though they wanted the knowledge of tongues,
especially the Hebrew, yet they allwaies ingenuously acknowledged it best to
have recourse thereunto, that from thence the true and genuine sense of things
might be had. From whence it evidently appears, 1. that these ancient
Christians, made use of Scripture-Translations; 2. that notwithstanding, they
did not judge them to be the word of God, or the foundation of Religion;
because then they had had no need of making recourse to any other word of God,
or writing whatsoever, for their regulation. Doctor Featly, in his late
treatise, entitled the Dippers dip^t, page 1. and 2. has these words. For no
Translation is simply Authentical, or the undoubted word of God. In the
undoubted word of God there can be no error: But in Translations there way be,
and are errors. The bible translated therefore is not the undoubted word of
God, but so far only as it agrees with the original. And how few are there
amongst us, that are able to say, how far It seems that is good Divinity
against the Anabaptists, which is blasphemy against the Presbyterians.
the English Translation agrees with the Original? This Treatise was lately
published by Authority, and has been printed and reprinted, 5. or 6. times, no
man, that ever I heard of, making the least exception against, or taking the
least offense at the said passage. Hier^me of old, called Translations of the
Bible, coenosos rivulos, Quibus si displicet unda fontis purissimi, coenosos
rivulos bibant Hieronymus. Epist. 102. ad Marcellam.
muddy streams or rivolets, in comparison of the Originalls. And Augustine
affirms, that men skillful in the Latin tongue, have yet need of two tongues
more, namely the Hebrew and the Greek to attain the knowledge of the Divine
Scriptures. Latinae linguae homines duabus alijs ad Scripturarum divinarum
cognitionem habent opus, Hebrae a scilicet, and Graeca. Aug. de Doctr. Christ.
l. 2. c. 11.
But if Translations were these Divine Scriptures, men need no more tongues for
the understanding of them, then that only wherein they are translated. It were
easy to add many more testimonies from the pens of learned and Orthodox men,
wherein they express themselves concerning Translations, in words by many
degrees more obnoxious to an obelisque, then any used by me. But it is one part
of my present design, to plead my cause with as much brevity, as the long
furrows, which the ploughers have made upon my back, will any ways admit.

Therefore having thus the bush of Authority at our backs (in the next place)
let us try it out with our Accusers by the dint of a few compendious arguments
whether the English Translation of the Scriptures, be in every sense, yea or in
a proper sense, the word of God, or any sufficient foundation of Religion unto
men. If upon cleernesse of debate it shall appear, that there is a sense, and
that obvious and plain enough, especially if proper also, and most precisely
corresponding with the term, wherein the English-Translation of the Scriptures,
is not the word of God; then have those men quitted themselves most unworthy of
men, and much more of Christians, who having put an adulterate sense of their
own upon the said Assertion, have laid the bastard at my door; attempting with
both their hands to build up their own Interests and honors, with the ruins
and scattered stones of my reputation; and have abused the ears both of
Magistrates and people, with shameless outeries and suggestions against me, as
if I were a man of strange opinions, an Asser^our of dangerous Doctrines, a
spreader of I know not what absurd errors and heresies, and in every point like
unto themselves; when as in deed and in truth (I speak as in the presence of
God) the whole root of the matter, Job 19. 28.
and entire cause of all this dust, is nothing else but the turbulent and
irregular motions of their own fancies, working and beating and tearing
themselves this way and that, to catch some live sly or other in my writings,
which they may kill, and so put it, being dead, into my ointment; that that
savor of truth which it sends forth, being a savor of death to their unworthy
opinions and practices, may be made to stink in the nostrills of men. I never
denied, but have a thousand times over affirmed, and by many Arguments and
demonstrations evinced the Scriptures to be the word of God; nay, I never
denied, but now affirm, that in a sense (which I shall afterward explain) even
the English Scriptures, or English Translation it self (and much more the
Originalls) may be called the word of God. But that in strictness and
exactness of speaking (which is the dialect I speak in the said controverted
Section) the English Translation is not the word of God, I presume will be made
as clear in truth, as the Sun is in light at noon day, by these ensuing
demonstrations.

First, If our English Translation be the Scriptures or word of God, or the
foundation of Christian Religion, I desire to know, whether our last and newest
Translation, or that which was made at Geneva, or that of our old
Church-Bibles, or that, set forth long since by M Tyndall, or any other
particular Translation in the English tongue (for there are several others,
especially of diverse pieces of the Bible, besides these) be these Scriptures,
this word of God, this foundation of Christian Religion? To affirm that they
are all and every one of them the word of God, and foundation of Christian
Religion, is to make the word of God to disset from it self, yea to make it
incoherent, and in some things inconsistent with it self. For that every one of
these Translations respectively, differ from other, yea and in some places very
materially; is a thing so well and generally known, to those who have compared
them; and so easy to be known unto others also, who will please but to take a
little pains to inquire, that I judge it needless to insist upon any proof of
it. To single out any one of these Translations, as suppose the last, and to
set this crown of glory upon the head of it (with the rejection of it is
fellows) this is the Scripture, the word of God, the foundation of Christian
Religion, and none other, is of dangerous consequence many ways; and (I
presume) will not be justified by any considering man.

Secondly, If the English Translation be the word of God, the foundation of
Christian Religion etc. then was there no word of God, no foundation of
Christian Religion, before the Scriptures were Translated into English: for
certain it is, that nothing is, or can be, before it self or it is own being.

Thirdly, If the English Translation be the word of God, and so the foundation
of Religion; then all professors of Christianity thorowout the world, who are
ignorant of the English tongue, and do not build their Faith upon the English
Translation, build besides the true foundation, the word of God.

Fourthly, If the English Translation be the word of God, and foundation of
Religion, why not the Dutch, French, and Spanish Translation, as well as it
(with all others?) If every of these Translations be the Scriptures, the word
of God, etc. as well as the English, then do the Scriptures and the word of God
really differ from themselves: for there is nothing more evident, then that
these Translations really differ one from another, the respective languages
wherein they are framed, really differing one from another.

Fifthly, If the English Translation be the word of God, the foundation, etc.
then may there be, yea and are, many errors in the word of God, and in the
foundation of Religion. For that there are many errors and mistakes in all and
every our English Translations, is a thing undeniable.

Sixthly, If our English Translation be the word of God, the foundation, etc.
then the Original. Hebrew and Greek copies, especially wherein they differ in
sense and import of matter from our English Translation (as in many places they
do) are not the word of God, nor foundation of Religion. For the word of God
admitts no difference in it self, nor are the foundations of Religion divided
in themselves.

Seventhly, The word of God, which the Apostle command's Titus to hold forth in
his preaching, is called (...), i. a sound word, which cannot be condemned or
reproved, Tit. 2. 8. But our English Translation, is not (...), every way
sound, or irreproveable, or so sound that it cannot be reproved. Therefore it
is not the word of God.

Eighthly, The word of God (properly taken) is that word, which all Ministers of
the Gospel ought to preach; and to be instant (viz. in preaching it) in season
and out of season (as the Apostle injoines Timothy) But all Ministers of the
Gospel, are not bound to preach the English Translation (nor indeed any
Minister at all, at least by any order, or injunction by God) Therefore the
English Translation certainly is not the word of God in a proper sense.

Ninthly, The word of God, is that word of Truth (as James calls it Jam. 1.
18.
) and that incorruptible seed (as Peter 1 Pet. 1. 2^.
,) of which the whole generation of the Saints are begotten again, and new
born. But the whole generation of the Saints are not begotten again or new born
of the English Translation. Ergo.

Lastly, If no Translation whatsoever, nor any, either written, or printed
copy whatsoever, be the word of God, or foundation of Religion, certainly our
English Translation cannot challenge this honor; but rather those Hebrew and
Greek copies, whether written, or printed, which are called, Original. Now
that these are not properly the word of God, nor foundation of Religion, is
evident, 1. Because the word of God had a being, and was extant in the world,
viz. in the hearts and consciences of men, before there was any copy of this
word extant in writing, either in the one language, or the other. Now that
which is in being, or has a being before another, cannot be said to be that
other thing which follows after. Moses is generally acknowledged by us to be
the first penman of the Scriptures, or word of God; and that the world had
continued more then 2000. years before he was born. But to affirm that there
was no word of God, in the world, no foundation of Religion, for the space of
2000. years and upwards, is to contradict that which is plainly, and in many
places asserted, in the written word of God. Besides, the Gospel it self was in
the world, and believed on in the world, before any of the Evangelists put
forth their hand to that blessed work, of putting into writing the sum and
substance of it. Therefore their writings cannot properly be called the Gospel,
because the Gospel had a complete being and existence in the world, whilst as
yet they were not. 2. Because there are many differences, and might possibly
have been, and yet may be, many more, in, and between those Hebrew, and Greek
copies themselves, which yet are indifferently and with equal reverence on all
hands, all termed, the Originalls; yea the best, and truest, and most genuine
of them, may in time, either thorough the ignorance, or negligence, or malice,
whether of Scribes, or Printers, or overseers of presses, or all, be
corrupted: but the word of God, properly so called, is always pure,
universally true, and incorruptible. 3. And lastly, because no man can have any
assurance, that either the Scribe, or Printer, of any of the Original copies,
now extant in the world, whether Hebrew, or Greek, was either infallibly
directed, or extraordinarily assisted from Heaven, either in the transcribing,
or in the printing of them. Now no writing, or systeme of words and sentences
whatsoever, which a man cannot reasonably, and upon good grounds judge and
conclude, to have been committed to paper by special direction and warrant
from God, can or ought to be a foundation of Religion unto him, or looked upon
as the indubitable word of God. And this (I trust) will abundantly serve to
clear and justify, that expression (so much quarrelled at) wherein I deny the
English Scriptures or Translation, to be the foundation of Christians Religion,
or the word of God: which was the former explication of the two, from which my
desire was, in the forementioned Section, to divert my Antagonists (as before
was signified.)

2. For the latter explication, which I also conceived they might very possibly
have chopped upon, the tenor of it was this, That by the word Scriptures, in the
said opinion made punishable by the Ordinance with death, they mean the
Original Hebrew and Greek copies, out of which (it is said, and I believe) our
English Scriptures or Translations, have been taken and made. From this
explication of themselves, I thought I might readily, and with abundance of
conviction, take them off, by this consideration; viz. that there are very few
men in the Kingdom, not one of a thousand, that understand either of these
languages; I now add, no, nor yet know so much as whether there be any such
languages or no, but only by hearsay, and upon the credit of men; and
consequently, cannot know, but upon the same terms, or ground of belief,
whether there be any such Original Copies or no; much less can they know, but
still upon the same fallible grounds, that the matter, or substance of things
expressed in the English Translation, was taken out of, or is contained in, the
said copies. Now to make it a crime punishable with death, for men to deny such
writings or books to be the word of God, which they have no more reason or
ground to judge to be so, but only common report, or the bare assertions of
men, will (I believe) upon due consideration be found altogether inconsistent
with those principles of equity, which ought to rule in all legislation, or
making of Laws. For very possible it is, that he may truly, and cordially, and
savingly believe the Scriptures, that is, that which indeed is the word of God,
to be the word of God, who yet shall deny any Original copy, whether Hebrew,
or Greek, now extant in the world, to be the word of God, at least, properly
and emphatically, that is, so to be the word of God, as to have no mixture of
corruption, or of that which is not the word of God, in it. Yea the truth is,
that in this sense, they, who both have the greatest skill, and insight into
the Original languages, yea and who believe the Scriptures unto salvation,
cannot upon any sufficient, at least not upon any infallible ground believe any
Original copy whatsoever under heaven, whether Hebrew, or Greek, to be the
word of God: yea, I have yet to add, that which is more then all this; Suppose
the very (...), the very same copies, which were written with the hand of the
holy penmen of the Scriptures themselves, were yet extant; yea and were
infallibly known, to be so; yet except it were infallibly known also, that they
were no ways corrupted, rased, or interlin'd, since they came from the hands
of the said Penmen, no person whatsoever were able infallibly to say and
conclude, that these (in the sense specified) are the word of God. The reason
is, because the word of God (in the said proper sense) is entirely, and
universally, in all, and in every part of it, pure, and incorrupt, like God
himself; therefore such copies or Transcripts, which are in any part corrupt,
are not the word of God (in this sense) and such which are not infallibly known
to be universally incorrupt, cannot (in the said sense) be infallibly known to
be the word of God. Yea the word of God (in the sense now argued) being not
only entirely, universally, and in every part of it incorrupt, but also
proportionably incapable of corruption, simply incorruptible; evident it is,
that no writing or transcript whatsoever, though infallibly known to contain
nothing in it for the present, but the word of God, can yet (in the said sense)
be truly called the word of God, because though it be incorrupt, yet it is not
incorruptible. And this (I trust) is sufficient, yea and super-sufficient, to
stop the mouth of that weakness (that I say not, wickedness) which has been
so wide opened in proclaiming an inoffensive and most innocent passage,
speaking nothing but words of soberness and of truth, as guilty of a most foul
and horrid crime.

But secondly, to wipe off that importune aspersion of denying the Authority of
the Scriptures to be Divine, which the enemies of my peace (yet not so much of
mine, as of their own) are still in a restless manner casting upon me; I shall
plainly and briefly here give an account unto the world of my judgment, as
well in the negative, as affirmative, concerning the Scriptures, and their
Authority; as likewise concerning Translations of Scripture (in the general)
and shall further declare my sense (though very briefly also) touching the
originalls. I shall deliver my self as touching all these particulars, in
certain brief positions, or conclusions.

First, if by Scriptures, be meant the matter and substance of things contained
and held forth in the books of the old and new Testament, commonly known
amongst Protestants by the name of Canonical, I fully and with all my heart
and all my soul believe them to be of Divine Authority, and none other then the
word of God; and (God assisting) shall rather expose my self to a thousand
deaths, then deny them so to be. As for example; I fully and absolutely
believe, that these assertions (with the like expressed in the same writing
with them) 1. That Jesus Christ is God. 2. That he is the Son of God. 3. He was
made man. 4. That he died for the salvation of the world, that he rose again
from the dead, that whosoever believes on him shall be saved; that whosoever
believes not on him, shall be condemned (with a thousand more besides) all
these assertions (I say) I fully and absolutely believe, not only to be Truths,
but Truths of special revelation from God unto the world. I have lately
imparted unto many others, and that at large, the grounds of my belief and
confidence in this kind: the brief heads of which grounds, I have annexed to
this present discourse, in the close of it.

Secondly, if by Scriptures be meant, all the letters, syllables, words,
phrases, sentences, and periods of speech, expressed in the said books, called
Canonical, whether Translated, or in these Originalls (I mean in such, either
Hebrew or Greek copies, as are commonly extant, and used amongst us) I know no
ground why I should believe them to be the word of God; that is; why I should
believe, that all, and every the said syllables, words, phrases, etc. were in
any special or extraordinary way given, or appointed by God, to convey those
spiritual truths and mysteries unto the understandings and minds of men,
which he has been graciously pleased to reveal from heaven, for their
salvation. Concerning Translations, the case is more clear; there being none of
these, but which carry the manifest marks of humane oscitancie and weakness in
them. Concerning such Originalls, as were mentioned; first, though for the
Hebrew copies, it is more probable (of the two) that all the syllables, words,
and phrases in these, are the same, unto which the Original Penmen of these
writings, were in special manner directed by God; yet I know no law, either of
Reason, or Religion, that binds me to believe, that no Transcriber of them out
of their first Originalls, no Printer of them out of these Transcripts, ever
failed, or miscarried after the manner of men, in these negotiations. So that
as on the one hand, I dare not say, but that in some of these copies, there may
be all things, even to words, syllables, and letters, of divine inspiration; so
on the other I cannot be confident, that they are. As for the Original Greek
copies, it is generally known to those, who have compared several editions of
them together, that there are many differences and varieties of readings, and
some of them somewhat considerable, between copy and copy, edition and
edition. Now certain it is that God, who is the Author of peace, and not of
confusion, did not order or direct his first penmen of this part of the
Scriptures, to publish different copies of those things, which they were
respectively stirred up and appointed by him to impart by writing unto the
world. Nor is it any matter of Faith, perhaps not of prudence, where editions
and copies vary, and are at odds amongst themselves, to interpose by way of
positive umpirage between them, upon any such terms, as to determine and
conclude, that this, or that, or any other determinately, runs parallel in all
things, and without the least variation, with the prototype, or first copy it
self.

Thirdly, though I do not believe, that any Original exemplar or copy of the
Scriptures, now extant amongst us, is so purely the word of God, but that it
may very possibly, have a mixture, or at least a tincture, of the word of men
in it, yet I confidently believe, that the Providence of God, and the love
which he bears to his own glory, as well in the condemnation of the wicked and
unbeleevers, as in the salvation of his chosen, have so far interposed and
watched over the great and gracious discovery and Revelation which he made of
himself by Jesus Christ unto the world, that those books or writings, wherein
it was in all the branches and particularities at first imparted unto the
world, neither as yet have suffered, nor ever shall suffer, any such violation,
mutilation, or falsification in any kind, either thorough the ignorance,
negligence, or malice of men, but that they will be able, sufficiently, yea
abundantly to furnish the world, men of all sorts and conditions, with the
knowledge of all things, necessary to be known, either for their honorable and
Christian deportment in this present world, or for their everlasting salvation,
and exaltation in that which is to come.

Fourthly, concerning Translations, though I judge none of them to be the word
of God (in the sense lately argued against) that is, the pure word of God,
without any imbasement at all by that which is humane; nor yet in such a sense,
as the Original copies may be called the word of God, which do not only
express and hold forth the revealed will, or mind of God, as Translations (at
least in part) do, but hold them forth in that very language, and for the most
part (if not altogether) in the self same individual words and phrases,
wherein God himself directed the publication of them by writing, unto the
world, which Translations do not; yet I judge them one of the greatest
blessings that God ever vouchsafed unto the nations, and Gentile part of the
world; and conceive, that though they do not (even the best of them) express
the will and mind of God, in that language or samenesse of words, wherein God
ordered the first publication of them by writing; no nor yet so entirely,
thoroughly, purely, or emphatically, as the Originalls do; yet they generally
(even the worst and most imperfect of them, that I know) express and hold
forth so much of the mind, counsel, and will of God, by the true knowledge
and understanding whereof, men may be brought to live godlily, and righteously,
and soberly in this present world, and consequently, to that immortal and
undefiled inheritance which is reserved in the Heavens for those that believe.

Fifthly, though I judge no Translation whatsoever, either for gracefulness
of language, significancie of terms, majesty of expression (with the like) to
be equal to the Original Hebrew and Greek; yet I conceive that there is no
Translation so far degenerate or so disadvantagiously compiled, but that
carries (...), somewhat differing by way of excellency from the manner of
men, in the phrase and language thereof; yea that which is sufficient, by the
ordinary blessing of God upon a conscientious and intent reading, or
consideration of it, to evince the descent of the matter contained in it, to be
from God, as a seal of arms upon the outside of a letter, is sufficient to
discover from what person of honor the matter or contents of the letter come.
Yet

Sixthly, I conceive the matter of the Scriptures, I mean those glorious and
Divine Truths, those holy and righteous commands, those great and precious
promises, those astonishing and dreadful threatenings, contained and expressed,
as well in Translations, as in the Originalls to be of greatest pregnancie and
power both to discover and assert their royal Parentage, and descent from God.
If our Gospel (says the Apostle) be hid (1. undiscerned, or not apprehended to
come from God) it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this world
has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them 1
Cor 4 3, 4.
. In which words he clearly implies, that there is such a glorious and heavenly
luster, or brightness of divine excellency, sitting (as it were) upon, and
shining from, the face of the Gospel, that men, who are not bewitched by the
devil, that is, who are not through the just judgment of God upon them for
former sins deprived by the devil even of the natural use or actings of their
reasons, judgments, and understandings, about spiritual things, cannot but
see and acknowledge, manifest characters and impressions of the grace,
holiness, love, and wisdom of God in it; and consequently be hereby drawn to
embrace it. Therefore

Seventhly and lastly, the true and proper foundation of Christian Religion, is
not ink and paper, not any book, or books, not any writing, or writings
whatsoever, whether Translations, or Originalls; but that substance of matter,
those gracious counsels of God concerning the salvation of the world by Jesus
Christ, which indeed are represented, and declared, both in Translations, and
Originalls, but are essentially and really distinct from both, and no ways,
for their natures and beings, depending on either of them. A bargain agreed
upon, and concluded, in point of transaction, between two men, whether the
tenor or particular of it be ever drawn up in writing, or subscribed by the
parties, or no, is yet for the nature of it, and matter of transaction, a
complete and true bargain; the writing, if any be made in reference to it,
only declares the nature or tenor of the bargain, which was in reality, and
compleatnesse of being, before the writing; and consequently the writing can be
no part of it: In like manner, the gracious and good pleasure of God concerning
the salvation of the world, had in all the particulars of it, compleatnesse of
being, viz. in God himself, long before any branch or part of it was imparted
unto the world by any writing whatsoever; yea and was savingly imparted, and
revealed unto the world, 1. By immediate inspiration from God unto some men, 2.
by word of mouth, from these, unto many others, long before any part of it was
ordered by God to be set down in writing. So that no book, or writing
whatsoever, is either in whole, or in part, this word, or will of God; and
consequently, no foundation of Christian Religion; unless we shall suppose and
make some other foundation of this Religion, besides the word of God.

This conclusion is further evidenced by this consideration. The foundation of
true Religion, is not changed, varieth not from it self, by any intervalls, or
distances of times, but like Christ himself, is one and the same, yesterday,
and to day, and for ever Heb. 13. 8.
. Now certain it is, that there was a time, where neither Originalls, nor
Translations of Scripture, were the foundation of Religion, but somewhat
besides; therefore as certain it is, that neither are they the foundation of
Religion, at this day. That there was a time, when neither of them was any
foundation of Religion, is evident from what has been already said, and is
generally acknowledged. There was a true Religion in the world, all along that
great space or tract of time (two thousands years and more) which had gone over
the head of the world, before Moses was called and employed by God, to lay the
corner stone of that Divine fabrique of Scripture, which is now (and so has
been of a long time) perfected; unless we will deny, Abel, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, to have been truly Religious, with many others, who
lived within that compass of time, and have testimony from the Scriptures
themselves, that they were godly and faithful. Yea the Gospel it self, and
those further and rich discoveries of himself, which God reserved for a
glorious gift to be presented (as it were) by Jesus Christ himself unto the
world at his coming into it, were effectually preached, and believed by many
unto salvation, and Christian Religion fully established in the world, before
any part of the new Testament was written. The Evangelist Matthew is generally
conceived (especially by ancient writers) to have been the first penman, that
God was pleased to use in penning the new Testament; and that it was about
eight years after Christ's ascension, before he put forth his hand to this work.
And yet who doubts but that the foundation of Christian Religion was laid
before this in the world; yea and much of this Religion built upon it?
Therefore (questionless) no writing whatsoever whether Translations, or
Originalls, are the foundation of Christian Religion.

There are other reasons, and these in abundance, very obvious, and near at
hand, of an undeniable eviction of truth in this conclusion; but the
considering Reader cannot lightly by this, stand in need of any thing more to
be said for his satisfaction in the point.

If it be objected and said; but what ground or foundation can a weak and
unlearned man have, to build his Faith or Religion upon, if he may not safely
build it upon such a Translation of the Scriptures, as he understands? And of
what use and benefit are Translations, yea or Originalls themselves, if men may
not build their Religion on them, as upon a sure and safe foundation?

To the former part of the Question, I answer, 1. That if he who is able to
read and understand the Scriptures only in his own native tongue, has no
foundation to build his Faith or Religion upon, but only that Translation of
Scripture, which he is able to read and understand; then he that is altogether
book-lesse and illiterate, and not able to read the Scriptures, though
translated into his own language, has no foundation at all, for his. The
reason of the consequence is clear; because to him that cannot read English, an
English Bible is as much a sealed, or useless book, in respect of his
personal reading it, as a Bible Translated into a strange language, is to him,
who is able to read the English tongue, and none other. But certain it is, that
many English, both men and women, who cannot read English, and consequently not
an English Bible, find notwithstanding a sufficient foundation whereon to
build their Faith and Religion, being sound Believers, and truly Religious.
Therefore they also, who are able both to read and understand the English
Translation, and no other, either have, or may have, I am sure ought to have,
another foundation, on which to build their Religion, besides their English
Translation; viz. that Truth of God, which is indifferently contained and
expressed both in Originalls, and other Translations also, besides the English;
and on which many build their Religion, and that safely, who neither know, nor
depend upon, either the one, or the other, I mean neither upon Originalls, nor
Translations, either in one language or other.

Secondly, If unlearned men amongst us have no foundation to build their
Religion upon, but only the English Translation; then the foundation of their
Religion must unavoidably, and of necessity be, that which is the product and
fruit of the wisdom, learning, and understanding of men. For certain it is
that all Translations of Scriptures in what language soever, are none other;
the Holy Ghost never interessing himself, at least in a way of infallibility,
or any other wise, then according to the line and measure of his usual
assistance of faithful ministers in the course of their preaching, about any
Translation of the Scriptures. Therefore certainly such men (I mean, that are
unlearned) have another foundation, besides the English Translation, whereon to
build themselves in point of Religion, even the infallible and unquestionable
Truth of God; which was a foundation of like import to many unlearned ones,
before the English Translation was brought forth, or heard of in the world.

If it be yet urged; yea but is not this Truth of God, which you acknowledge to
be so just and sure a foundation of Religion, somewhat at least, or a part of
the English Translation, inasmuch as you grant, that it is contained and
expressed in it. And if so, then is this Translation, at least in respect of a
part of it, or of somewhat in it, a sure and safe foundation of Religion. To
this I answer,

First, By concession; that that Truth of God, which I assert for the true
foundation of Religion, is contained and expressed (though it be with some
disadvantage) in the English Translation. But

Secondly, I answer further (by way of exception) though that truth of God, is
indeed the true foundation of Religion, which is contained and expressed in the
English Translation, yet it follows not from hence, that therefore it is any
part of it. Wine or other liquor may be contained, presented, or held forth in
a cup; yet hereby it never the more becomes any part of the cup, which
contain's and hold's it forth.

If it be yet said; yea but is not the sense, meaning and import, of a writing,
or book, a part, yea the most material part, of either? And is not the Truth
of God you speak of, the true and genuine sense, meaning, and import of the
English Translation? and so by consequence, a part of it? I answer:

1. There is not altogether the same reason or consideration of Translations of
books, or writings in any kind, wherein only the sense and meaning of another
is expressed (or at least intended so to be) which there is of books containing
only the judgment, sense, and apprehensions of him, who is the Author. The
union between the words, and sense or meaning in the later kind of books, is
more formal and entire, then in the former: and consequently the sense or
meaning contained in them, may more properly be called a part of them, then in
the other. There is a kind of union between the cup, and the wine that is put
into it, and contained in it, as well as there is between the body and soul, in
the person of a man; but yet the former union does not, of the two things
united, constitute any thing so entirely one, as the later does. The body and
soul, by means of their union, constitute a third thing differing from them
both, which is naturally, completely, and essentially one (viz. the person of a
man) of which, as well the body, as the soul, and again, the soul, as well as
the body, may properly be called, parts. But no such third thing, viz. which is
naturally and entirely one, is raised by the other union, which is between the
wine and the cup: nor can the wine be called properly a part of any third
thing, constituted or made of it, and the cup, in conjunction with it. The
reason of the difference is, because this later union, between the wine and the
cup, is of a lower nature, more extrinsecall and loose, then to combine the two
things whereunto it relates, into one and the same entire body, or substance.
In like manner, when a man inditeth and frames a book of his own, wherein he
only expresses his own sense, conceptions, or notions of things; there is a
more genuine, natural, and entire union, between the sense and the words, then
is between the sense, and the words of a book Translated. The words and sense
in the former kind of writing, proceed jointly and with an entireness of
union, out of one and the same understanding, much after the same manner,
wherein the soul and the body come in personal union out of the womb. But in
the Translation of a book it is otherwise; the sense, matter, and import of
this, is professedly taken or borrowed from another book or writing, which came
from another understanding, not his, who is the translatour; and consequently,
is but a stranger (comparatively) to those words, or that language, into which
it is translated. From which difference it comes to pass, that the sense of a
Translation, or book translated out of another, cannot so properly be called a
part of this book, as the sense of a book, wholly raised, words, and matter,
out of the same judgment and understanding, may. But

2. Suppose it be granted, that a part, or somewhat of our English Translation,
is a just and safe foundation of Religion, as viz. the sense and meaning of it
(as has been said) yet in a formal consideration, that is, as it is part of
this Translation, it is not, it ought not so to be. For if it be in this
respect a foundation of Religion, viz because it is a part of the English
Translation, then the reason, judgment, faithfulness and skill in languages
in the Translatour, are the principal ingredients into the foundation of
Religion. For that sense, matter, and import of things expressed in this
Translation, though they be (for the most part) the Truth, or Truths of God,
yet were they not brought hither (I mean, put into, or made part of this
Translation) simply as they are the Truth, or Truths of God, but only as they
were conceived and apprehended for such, by the Translatour, and supposed to be
the true and genuine sense of the Originalls, from whence they were conveyed by
him, and put into the English tongue. So that whosoever shall build or found
his Religion upon the English Translation, simply as such, as a Translation
(which properly import's only the work, or achievement of a man) builds this
important fabrique upon the sandy foundations, of the knowledge, skill,
wisdom, and faithfulness of men. But he that builds upon the Truth and
counsels of God concerning the salvation of men by Jesus Christ, whether
expressed in the said Translation, or in the Originalls, or wheresoever, builds
his Religion (like the wise builder) upon the Rock, and upon such a foundation
which shall not be shaken; whether the English Translation stand, or fall. And
this for Answer, to the former part of the Question propounded.

To the later, which questioneth the use of Translations, in case unlearned men
may not safely make them the foundation of their Religion, I answer; first (in
the general) that the use and benefit of them is exceeding great, and that
several ways, though that use (which is indeed an abuse of them, and which
makes them of equal authority with the incorruptible word of God it self) be
denied unto them. Yea I conceive that that miraculous and glorious gift of
tongues, given to the Apostles in the day of Pentecost, (Acts 2.) though of a
most gracious and very high concernment unto the world, yet was not of that
rich and blessed accommodation to the generality of mankind, which
Translations of Scripture are. For (to descend to particulars in the second
place) there are these ensuing considerations (amongst others,) wherein
Translations of Scripture, are great benefactours unto the world.

1. They exhibit, and represent the great things of God and of Jesus Christ
concerning the salvation of men, unto the minds and consciences of weak and
unlearned men, whose education, condition, and course of life, have not
afforded unto them so much clerk-ship, or scholar-like learning, as to be able
to read with understanding, any more tongues or languages, then that wherein
they were born. By means of which representation by Translations, they have
opportunity, as often as they shall desire, to exercise themselves with more
advantage and facility, either in the meditation, or further study of them.

2. Men who have been bowed down so near unto the earth in their education,
that they are not able to read so much as their own native language, may yet
have more, and more frequent communion and converse with the great things of
their peace, being brought into a language which they understand, then they
could have had opportunity to enjoy, had they still been confined to the
Originals. Many can read the Scriptures unto them in their mother tongue, who
are not able to read, much less to interpret, the Original languages.

3. A Translation, if it suffers not, either through the unskillfullnesse, or
unfaithfullnesse, of the Translators, does not only convey the precise sense
and import of the original text to the Readers understanding, but serve
instead of a brief Commentary or explanation upon it.

4. When there is a famine of the word of God, in respect of the public
teaching and ministry of it, or when men are deprived of liberty or opportunity
to partake of it in that ordinance, the company of a faithful Translation of
the Scriptures, may be improved to a comfortable supply of these spiritual
inconveniences and defects, by the generality of men, who are not capable of
the originals.

5. A good and approved Translation in the hand of a plain, and yet considering
man (a frequent conjunction in these days) serves him instead of a touchstone
to try the Doctrine of his Teacher, whether it be gold and silver, or hey and
stubble: and so may be a means (through the blessing of God) to deliver his
precious soul, out of the snare of those, who corrupt and make merchandise of
the word of God; a seed of men, which Satan of late has sown very thick in
the field of God.

6. Many Ministers and Teachers themselves stand in awe of Translations in the
hand of their hearers, and people committed unto them, lest they should be
reproved and censured by them, in case they approve not themselves such
workmen, who need not be ashamed. The Bereans searched the Scriptures daily,
whether things were so, or no, as Paul and Silas had taught them Acts 17. 11.
: which they could not have done, had they not had that precious advantage of
the Scriptures in a language which they understood.

7. (And lastly,) Many thousands of souls, who cannot fetch the waters of life
from the fountains themselves (I mean the Originals) nor drink here: may yet
drink freely of them, and quench their thirst, when they are derived and
brought from hence to their hearts and understandings, by the pipes and
conveyances of sound Translations. Yea and by acquainting themselves with the
Scriptures privately, and in their own houses, they may be more apprehensive
and capable of the public administration of them, in the house of God.

These particulars might easily have been enlarged, and the great weight and
importance of them all respectively, more fully opened, urged, and insisted
upon; yea many more of equal concernment with these, might readily have been
added; but these I judge abundantly sufficient, to vindicate the necessity,
use, benefit, and blessing of Translations unto the world, though no foundation
of Religion be made of them.

By this time I trust the Reader will acknowledge, that labor enough (if not
complain, that more then enough) has been expended, in washing that, which was
clean before; and in making strait, that which was no ways crooked. But it is
no rarity amongst the stories and passages of the world, to hear, or see,
justice put upon her justification. If I did not know Satan to be an Ethiopian,
one that cannot change his skin, I should not fear the returning of the clouds
after the rain; I mean, the bearing of the reproach of a man denying the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures, any more.

I cannot but here take notice, of some other lying and calumniating spirits
abroad in the world against me, before the date of the Commission, which this
last and foulest of the brood, obtained, to enter the mouths and tongues of
men. Yet I perceive that that great Father, of whom we spoke before (Augustine
by name) in whom the grace of God wrought mightily, for the advancement of the
Name and Kingdom of Christ, in the world, was haunted and molested with many
more of these unclean spirits, then yet I have been. For he, in the
forementioned Tract, found himself necessitated, partly to mollify his
accusers and traducers, partly to rectify the apprehensions of those, in whose
ears those mis-representations of him had sounded, to vindicate and purge
himself, about no fewer then sixteen several points, wherein he had suffered
disparagement and disgrace by the tongues of some, as an erroneous man Unde ne
hujus querel inveniretur occasio, necessarium conveniensque credidimus, ut sive
ad calummantium animos mitigandos, sive ad eos, querum auribus tale quid
insopuit, instruendos, quantum adjuvante domino fieri potuit, plene sucideque
pandamus, quid de perversis definitionibus judicem. Propositis ergo singstiatim
sexdecim articulis, sub unoquoque eorum (...) and fidei. q^am contra ^elagi^nos
ex Apostolicae sedis Authoritate de^endim^, verba p^^^mus, etc. Aug. ad Artic.
sibi falso impositor. Tom 7.
. But Hell it self, though broke loose An idle Pamphlet lately published under
the title of Hell broke loose.
, can (it seems) out of all my own writings, and other men's, concerning me and
my Doctrine, find and forge together but four particulars, for which I must be
made to take up my cross and follow Christ, as an evil doer: and two of the
four, have been already in the precedent part of these papers, either fully
justified for truth, or else evicted of falsehood, in point of charge.

The first of the four is, that I hold, that natural men may do such things,
as whereunto God has by way of promise annexed Grace, and acceptance. A most
dangerous error! and of as sad a consequence, as that which was charged upon
Paul, when his adversaries accused him for teaching, That they were no gods,
which were made with hands. This Paul (say they) has persuaded and turned away
much people, saying, that they be no gods which are made with hands Acts 19. 26.
. For (doubtless) men, are natural men, before they are spiritual, or
supernatural; and spiritual or supernatural they cannot be made, but by
believing; and unto believing, we all confess, that God has promised grace
and acceptance. Therefore unless it be possible, that natural men may
believe; it is unpossible that ever they should become spiritual. And if it be
possible that they may believe, then may they do such things, whereunto God
has by way of promise, annexed grace and acceptance. And if this be an
error, That natural men may do such things as whereunto God has by way of
promise annexed Grace and Acceptance, Presbytery her self, in many of her most
Orthodox children (as she counts Orthodox) as well in the present Assembly,
as without, is partakresse of the infection; as I have expressly showed from
their own pens, and under their own names subscribed, elsewhere Cretensis. 16.
p. 20, 21, 22.
. But where did Hell meet with this opinion? or from what hand did he receive
it, as held, or taught by me Doubtless there is no such Doctrine as this (to
my best remembrance) asserted by me in any of my writings: nor is it any where
to be found upon my skore that I know of, but in the retinue of many more
notorious untruths, I mean in a Pamphlet, set forth somewhile since by a young
man, one Sa. Lane: unless (happily) Gangrena also in some or other of her
diabolical indicles (as Austin calls them) spit this poison too. But unto the
said Pamphlet, an Answer had been given long since, had I not judged the
engagement far beneath the consequence of those other employments, which have
taken up my time, since that occasion. But till I shall have an opportunity, to
give a more full account unto the world, of my sense and judgment about the
freedom, or bondage rather, of the will, and power of nature, in order to
salvation; I desire to declare and publish this in brief, as my clear judgment
and belief in the point: That no man since the fall, ever yet did, or ever will
believe unto salvation, but only by the assistance of the special Grace of
God. If this be an opinion heterodox, I confess I am not Orthodox in the point.

The second Error or Heresy, which the said Hell, (being brake loose)
foolishly forgeth, and falsely fathereth upon me, is, That (...) credere, Faith
in a proper sense, is imputed to justification, and not Christ's Righteousness.
First, If Hell can find any such expression, as (...) credere in any of my
writings, or can prove, that I ever used any such expression in any of my
Sermons, or in any conference with any man upon the point of justification, or
otherwise, to express mine own judgment herein, I will say that Hell can do
more then Heaven: for certain I am, that neither God, nor his holy Angels, can
either find in the one, or prove in the other any such thing. Secondly,
Whether I hold, that Christ's righteousness is not imputed in Justification,
(except happily in some uncouth and Apocryphal sense) let the 8th Section of the
third Chapter of the second part of my Treatise concerning Justification,
answer for me. Here I express my self thus: In this sense likewise, as well
the habitual holiness of Christ's person, as the moral righteousness of his
life, may be said to be imputed to those that believe in him. To say, that I
deny the imputation of Christ's righteousness in justification, because I deny
it in a baroarous, heterodox, irrational, incongruous sense, whenas I affirm
it in a sense regular, and consistent; is a fruit, either of simplicity, or
malignitie in the highest. Thirdly (and lastly) as Orthodox and learned
Divines, as any Presbytery numbreth amongst all her children, are so far from
making it, either heretical or erroneous, to affirm, that Faith is in a proper
sense imputed in Justification, that they do not only make it equally
Orthodox, and of the same import with the other expression, I mean of a
metonymicall or improper sense, and that by evidence of demonstration, but
plainly declare their judgments for it Yea even those of us who maintain Faith
to be taken in a proper sense, and not by a metonymicall trope, as well in any
one of those phrases, as in another, do not lay any more then may well be
justified: nor do they differ at all in Doctrine, so f^r^ as I am able to
conceive (and I love not to make differences where I apprehend none) that say
the one, or the other. Mr Tho Gataker. Shadows without substance. p 14.

So here in the forementioned propositions [we are justified by Faith, we are
saved by Faith, Faith is imputed to righteousnesse] the word Faith is taken for
Faith, as the word hope, for hope, in the like, etc. Idem ibid. p. 56


.

As for the reports of some others, who defile their tongues and consciences
together, by charging me behind my back, that I make Faith without an object
to justify, that I make Faith to justify as it is an act, that I make a bare
belief of the Gospel to justify, that I desire not to be found in Christ's
righteousness; with many such ridiculous forgeries as these, I look upon them
only as the essaies of Satan, or that small game which he had rather play (as
the proverb is) then sit out. For my belief and hope in the most important
business of my Justification before God, I cannot express it either with more
satisfaction to my self, or (as I conceive) unto others, then in the tenor of
the Apostles own words: I desire, and hope, to he found in him [Christ] not
having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith Phil. 3. 9.
.

The third and fourth errors (very simply and erroneously so called) which
Hell charge me with, have been already attoned, and perfectly reconciled unto
the Truth, in the former passages of this discourse. However, let us have the
sound of them, that so we may perceive with what fidelity, and skill, he that
is the Collectour for Hell, has performed his Office, in making the Extraction
of them out of my pen.

The former of the two, tenoureth thus: That as it is no foundation of
Christian Religion, to believe that the English Scriptures, or that volume, or
volume of books called the Bible, are the word of God: so neither those that
are learned, nor those that are unlearned, can know that the Original Hebrew
or Greek copies are the word of God, upon any better terms of assurance, then
the testimony, common report, or Authority of men. Does the man represent it
as an error, to hold, that the act of a man, as viz. his believing the English
Scriptures to be the word of God, is no foundation of Christian Religion? The
Lord in mercy send his Church better Tutours and Teachers then these.

The later, is but another of the same, being this: That the holding the
Scripture, i. either the Original or Greek copies (out of which the English
Bible is translated) or the English Bible to be the word of God, can with no
tolerable pretext, or color, be called a foundation of Christian Religion.
Miserable is the Religion of these men, whose foundation is, either their own,
or the act of some other man. But by the way, neither of these positions are
mine, nor can they by any regular consequence or deduction, be inferred from
that discourse of mine, to which the Collectour pretends in his margent.
Howsoever, I presume I have given a fair and satisfactory account, how, and how
far, and in what sense, I both hold, and deny, as well the English
Scriptures, as the Originals, to be the word of God.

Concerning the power of the civil Magistrate, I have in my Epistle, before my
late discourse, entitled Hagiomastix displaied, etc. not only argued and
asserted the lawfullnesse of it, but the necessity also; yea and showed the
benefit and blessing of it unto the world; yea and further have endeavored
with all my might to convince the error and sin of those, who shall refuse
subjection to it.

I know nothing more, for matter of opinion, wherein I suffer from the world as
an erroneous and unsound man, except it be concerning the estate and condition
of the soul, between the time of death and the Resurrection. My judgment
herein has been unduly represented from a Sermon of mine (the principal
engagement whereof was to demonstrate the immortality of the soul) as if I
held, that the soul sleeps until the Resurrection: Whereas, as to this
particular, I only taught (with some little enlargement of my self in the
proof and prosecution of them.) 1. That the Scriptures very frequently
represent the state and condition of the person of a man, between the time of
his death and resurrection, by the metaphor, or similitude of sleep, and 2.
That the Scriptures are very silent concerning the particular estate or
employments of the soul, during this space: and that only in the general,
they speak them blessed (if the souls of those who dye in the Lord,) If there
be either error of Heresy, in either of these assertions; I shall upon
conviction, either retract, or contentedly suffer, whether in name, or
otherwise, as an Erroneous or Heretical person.

Thus, Reader, I have given thee a sincere and cordial account, and that with
as much cleernesse and perspicuity, as my intended brevity would admit, of what
I hold in point of judgment, about those Doctrines, or particular subjects in
Divinity, wherein the tongues of many have magnified themselves so much
against me, as a man holding rotten tenets, and in that respect, dangerous to
be heard, dangerous to be conversed with. And as Paul did not so much desire a
gift from the Philippians, as fruit that might abound to their account Phil. 4.
17.
; so neither have I drawn up this brief vindication or explication of my self
in matters objected against me, so much to free my self from the clamours, hard
sayings, and thoughts of men, as to free and deliver them from such a course
and practice, which I am certain will, without repentance, be matter of sad
account unto them in that day. For I am able, through Christ strengthening me,
to be abased in name and credit, as well as otherwise. Dishonor,
disparagements, defamations, etc. are the element wherein I have lived and my
soul prospered (through the goodness of God) these many years. The yoke is
little or no offense unto me, my neck having been so long accustomed to it. Yea
I look upon my sufferings for righteousness sake (and sufferings from men upon
any other terms, I fear none) as the best earnings I can make of mortality. So
that did I not conceive it as a duty lying upon me, or were it not otherwise a
practice very suitable to my spirit, to seek the everlasting peace and comforts
of men by every good way and means, and consequently by removing, as far as I
am able, every stumbling stone out of their way; I should have been very
faintly drawn into this engagement of a vindication; my name being better able
to bear the burden of my reproaches, then my soul to want the benefit and
blessing of them. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you and persecute you,
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice, and
be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they
the Prophets that were before you Matthew. 5. 11. 12.

For a close of this present discourse, I shall make a brief presentment of the
substance or heads of those Demonstrations, by the full explication and
discussion whereof of late, in the standing course of my Ministry, I fully, and
(as I suppose) above all contradiction, evinced the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, their Parentage and descent from God.

The arguments or demonstrations, by which I asserted that Blessed conclusion
we speak of, were first, and in the general, divided into two kinds. The
first, we called, Intrinsecall; the later, Extrinsecall. By the former, we
meant such considerations or arguments, which are found in, or (as it were)
inhering in, the body of the Scriptures themselves. By the later, such, which,
though found out of the Scriptures, yet have a potent tendencie and import to
advance the same Truth with the former, in the judgments and consciences of
men. Those which we called Intrinsecall, we subdivided; 1. Into such, which
respect the penning, phrase, language, and manner of indighting, or frameing
the Scriptures. 2. Into such, which respect the matter, or substance of them:
both which kinds of argument we looked upon, as so many divine characters
printed and stamped (as it were) upon the body or face of the Scriptures,
bewraying their Original and descent from God. The later sort of arguments,
which we called Extrinsecall, we likewise subdivided, 1. Into such remarkable
passages or acts of Divine Providence, whereby God plainly own's the Scriptures
as his, and from himself. 2. Into such either doings, or sayings of men, which
are so far confederate with those Providence of God, as to join in testimony
with them on the behalf of the Scriptures.

The Arguments drawn from the penning, phrase, frame, and manner of inditing
the Scriptures (which were the first kind of those we called Intrinsecall)
were these following (in number, eight.)

First, The nature, quality, and manner of the style or phrase, wherein the
Scriptures are written, being so emphatically and signal, different from the
tenor of all humane writings whatsoever, that have yet come to light in the
world, give a clear and pregnant testimony unto them, that they come from God.
The Apostle Paul attesteth this testimony, withal assigning the ground or
reason of such a difference, when he says; which things (speaking of the
matter or substance of things contained in the Scriptures, and particularly the
Gospel) we also speak (1. utter, and publish unto the world, whether by
writing, or word of mouch) not in the words, which man's wisdom teaches, but
which the holy Ghost reaches comparing [or rather, suiting, or fitting, (...),
adaptantes, or, coaptantes] spirituals with spirituals (for so it is in the
original, (...)) 1 Cor. 2. 13.
1. matter, or things which for their nature and substance are spiritual, with
words and phrases which are spiritual also, and so suitable to them. It is (I
confess) very difficult and hard, or rather indeed unpossible, for a man fully
to explicate the differences between the Scripture phrase and expression, and
the language and phrase used in other writings. But as the palate or sense of
tasting in men, clearly tastes and discerns the difference of tastes between
meats and meats, of which difference notwithstanding (at least in many
particulars) they are not able to give an account in words: in like manner the
intellectual (...) or principle of relishing in the soul, is capable of a
discerning and distinguishing such differences between words and words,
expression and expression, which the tongue of a man's understanding is not able
to describe to the apprehension of another. And as the fruit of the vine, the
grape, is easy to be discerned from the fruit of the thorn; and the fruit of
the figtree, from any thing that comes from the thistle; so in reason, those
words, that style, and manner of speech, which are extraordinarily and in
reference to a very particular and special occasion, taught by that great
master, the holy Ghost, must needs be conceived, as easily distinguishable,
from the best and most refined phrase or style that can proceed from the
wisdom of men. The difference we prosecuted and opened so far, as to render
intelligent men fully sensible and apprehensive of some particularities in it:
but we judge the discourse too long to be here inserted.

Secondly, The spirituality, the admirable workmanship, appearing upon a narrow
and close inspection, in the joints of the Scriptures, I mean in the connexions
and dependencies, which one passage has with, and upon another; and one
sentence and period, upon another; leads us beyond all that is called man, to
find the Author and workman of them. There is no such aspect between the
conjoined sentences in other Authors or writings, which is in this. It is
somewhat hard to express this difference also (as was said in the former
point) to weak apprehensions; especially to such, as are not in some good
measure acquainted with other writers, and have not taken knowledge, how, or
after what manner their sayings and sentences hang upon another. The Apostle
himself was at a like loss upon a like occasion or concurrence of
circumstances; I mean, how well to express himself in matters of a spiritual,
and somewhat unusual importance, to capacities unacquainted with such things.
Of whom (says he, speaking of Christ) we have many things to say, and hard to
be uttered; (...), i. hard to be interpreted, Heb. 5. 1^.
meaning, to be fitted in the utterance or expression of them to your
capacities, or understandings, seeing ye are dull of hearing: or rather slow,
or sloathfull [(...)] i. backward and averse from taking pains that you may be
able to hear with understanding. But this by the way. To the point in hand I
say, that there is no such contexture or complication of sentences in other
writings, as those that are found from place to place in the Scriptures; I mean
of such an exquisite, close, and profound contrivance; or which strike and
affect the apprehensions and understandings of men with that strength and
delight of contentment, when they are clearly seen and apprehended. As there is
a great difference or variety in the skill and play of wrastlers, some close
with, and fasten upon their adversaries one way, take hold of one limb, and
some on another: So the sayings and sentences of the Scriptures take hold of
their fellows, and fasten one upon another by an art or method peculiar to
themselves, and which other writings know not. Look what manner of difference
may reasonably be supposed to have been between the workmanship of Bezaleel and
Aholiah, whom God filled with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, and in
understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship to devise
cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass in stones, and in
timber Exodus 31. 3, 4. etc.
, (as the Scripture speaks) and between the workmanship of ordinary Artificers
in the like materials; the like (yea, and far greater) difference is obvious
enough to be seen and apprehended, in the twining and twisting together of
sentences by the finger of the holy Ghost in the Scriptures, and in those which
are wrought by the hand of humane wisdom and art in other writings. Not but
that these latter are (many times) rational enough, and savor of those
discursive principles, which are the excellency of man above other creatures;
but they are nothing so spiritual, i. the reason which is in them, does not
require so much consideration of things, so much contention and streyning of
the powers of the mind and understanding to come at it, not yet the knowledge
of so many things besides to reach and comprehend it, as that which lies in
the Scripture dependencies does. Nor are they so comprehensive of wisdom as
these: i. the content or proportion of matter in them is nothing so great and
large, as it is in these; they are nothing so laden with treasure as these; yea
they are light and empty (in comparison:) You have many times great secrets,
and much mysteriousnesse of wisdom laid very close, and artificially couched
in the joints of the Scriptures; whereas in other Authors there is no such
thing. It were easy to instance in particulars: but how then should our
design of brevity stand?

Thirdly, Another particular relating to the manner and carriage of the
Scriptures, which also evinceth their royal descent with an high hand, is a
certain Authoritativenesse, or God-like speaking unto the creature from place
to place: a short, sharp, and severe turning off of things and persons;
characters and forms of speech not to be paralleled in other Writers, and
which cannot reasonably be looked upon but as the prints or footsteps of a
Divine Majesty. Of this kind of expression is that of our Savior, Matthew. 13.
9. repeated again ver. 43. He that has ears to hear, let him hear: and again,
He that has ears to hear, let him hear: and elsewhere again and again: He that
has an ear to hear, let him hear. It is as a warning Piece from Heaven let off
in thunder, to awaken and rouse the world out of their security, even Kings and
Princes, and the greatest Monarchs and Potentates of the earth, to attend with
all their might and all their strength to the great things of the Gospel. The
saying of Austin Scriptura sic loquitur ut Ititudine super bos ^rideat,
profun^itate attentos terreat, veritate magnos pas^^, affabilitate parvos
nutriat.
is memorable: The Scripture so speaks that with the height of it, it laughs
proud and lofty-spirited men to scorn, with the depth of it, it terrifies those
who with attention look into it: with the truth of it, it feeds men of greatest
knowledge and understanding: and with the affability and sweetness of it, it
nourishes babes and sucklings. It is said, that the people were astonished at
Christ's doctrine: the reason is given thus: For he taught with authority [or,
as one having authority*] and not as the Scribes Mat. 7. 28, 29.
So the Scriptures teach the world with a majestic authority, which many times
strikes the hearts of men with fear and astonishment, and not like unto the
writings of other men. And indeed such (...), the laying of such high charges
and deep engagements upon the world to hearken and to attend, as those lately
mentioned from the Scriptures, would be in other writings, but like new pieces
put upon old garments (in our Saviors Parable) they would be ridiculous and
importune, altogether unsuitable to the arguments or subjects handled in them.
For let the tenor, weight, and importance of such awakenings and addresments
unto the world, as this, Let him that has ears to hear, hear, be but seriously
considered, and they will be found to hold a due and full proportion with
things of the most glorious and transcendent importance, such as is the subject
matter handled in the Scriptures: he that shall engage the world to hearken and
attend at such a rate, as this Trumpet, Let him that has ears to hear, hear,
sounds distinctly in his ears, had need have matters of overlasting concernment
and import to speak unto the world; and such (we know) he speaks, whoever he
be that speaks in, or out of, the Scriptures, unto the children of men. But
the arguments and things handled and managed in other Authors, who pretend not
to build upon the Scriptures, being but either (...), things appertaining to
this present life, and so of inferior consequence; or if they pretend
reference to another life, being but fabulous and irrational, and not believed
by the authors themselves (as some of them have confessed) if the Authors
should summon in all the world to hearken upon terms of that deep and solemn
engagement, which the Scriptures do from place to place, they would render
themselves, and that which they have to say, but as ridiculous and weak to all
knowing, and considering men. If a great King or Monarch should send forth his
Herald at arms, or other Officer of state, to summon in his Princes and
nobles, and persons of quality from all parts of his dominions, with delegates
from all his subjects, to attend his pleasure at his Court against such a day;
and having thus drawn them together, and raised their expectation concerning
what he had to say, and impart unto them, should only discourse to them of
mint, anise, and cumin, or some such inconsiderable subject, would not this
render him very unfavourie, and contemptibly weak in the eyes of all men?
whereas in this case, if he had had any thing to communicate unto them, which
nearly concerned the peace and and safety of the whole State and Kingdom, the
solemnity of the preparations hereunto mentioned, had been comely enough, and
no ways disparaging. In like manner for God to amuse, and alarm the world with
the dreadful sound of such a Trumpet as this, Let him that has an ear to
hear, hear, having the great things of Jesus Christ, and of eternity to
entertain their attentions and expectations with, when he has thus raised
them, is nothing but what becomes the wisdom and goodness of a God: but for
men to make such an O yes in the midst of the world, having nothing to say to
men, and to inform them of, but only matters of light consequence, as how to
live a few days on earth with some carnal contentment, or the like, would be
of an apparent inconsistencie with all rules of reason and common
understanding. And upon this ground it is probable, that no man has ever
attempted to engage the world at any such rate.

There is another vein of expression in the Scriptures, which, by the
sharpness and piercingnesse of it, differing from any thing that is found in
other writers, declares them to be a writing by themselves, and that framed by
such an Author, who is God, and not man. Of this kind are these sayings: He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he that is filthy let him be
filthy still Rev. 22, 11.
. To which we may add that of the Apostle; If any man be ignorant, let him be
ignorant 1 Cor. 13 43.
. And that of the Prophet: Ephraim is joined unto Idols: let him alone Hos. 4
17.
. And that of our Savior also: Let them alone: they are blind leaders of the
blind Mat. 15. 14.
. These and such like, are terrible and high sayings, vialls full of the wrath
and indignation of a God: sayings, which as they are not fit for, so neither
are they lightly to be found in the mouths or writings of men, who have not
spoke, or wrote, in the Name of God, and as from his mouth.

Fourthly, The strange composition, or constitution of the Scriptures, being
made up of depths and shallows, of things near at hand, and things afar of,
of things mysterious and profound, and things obvious and plain. That this is
the true composition and frame of the body of the Scriptures, needs little
proof or clearing, it being nothing (I conceive) but what we all acknowledge,
and that upon sufficient evidence of Truth. There are some things in them,
which the strongest are not able to understand: and some things again, whereof
the weakest cannot lightly be ignorant. God may be said to dwell in the
Scriptures themselves, as in the Scriptures he is said to dwell. Sometimes he
is said to dwell in light, as 1 Timothy 6. 16. and 1 Job. 1. 7. Elsewhere he is
said to dwell in darkness. The Lord said he would dwell in the thick
darkness, 1 King. 8. 12. And Psalm 1^. 11. He has made darkness his secret
place. So in some places and passages of Scripture, God comes forth, and shows
himself in clear and perfect beauty unto the world, as in a vision of the noon
day: otherwhere he retires and hides himself behind the dark clouds of obscure
and difficult expressions, where we may seek him long, and not be able to find
him; as Christ said unto the Jews; ye shall seek me, and not find me: and
where I am can ye not come Joh. 7. 34.
. The mind of God in many places of the Scripture, has been in seeking, and
that by diligent and able Inquisitours, now for many generations: and yet no
man can say, so as to give any reasonable account thereof unto others, if to
himself, that he has found it. There is a path (says Job) which no fowl has
known: neither has the vultures or kites eye seen it Job 28 7.
. So there is a path of reason and understanding which leads to the discovery
of God, and of the mind of God, even where it is most retired, and hid at the
greatest distance from the thoughts and apprehensions of men. But (as the same
Author speaks) it is (as yet) hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close
from the fowls of the air Verse. 21.
. 1. Even from men that fly the highest pitch of reason, wisdom and labor,
to discover it. On the other hand, in many other places, God sits (as it were)
on the very superficies and face of the letter; where even he that runs may
discern him; he speaks plainly unto men, and speaks no parable at all.

Now such a composition and frame of the Scriptures as this, the ingredients
and parts whereof, being mountains and valleys, high things and low things,
things obvious, and things inaccessible, things earthly, and things heavenly
(as our Savior distinguishes them Joh. 3. 12.
) so exactly answer the temper, and model of the universe, or great body of
the creature, is a great argument, that one and the same workman was the
Architect, and contriver of them both. If we look into the constitution and
frame of the universe, we shall see the like checker-work (as we may call it)
here, i. things of different, yea of opposite natures and properties, set (as
it were) one against the other, yet all sweetly, peaceably, and beautifully
conspiring to render this great Fabrique one entire piece, worthy the great
workman that made it, and suitable to his wisdom. Here first we have the
heavens, a lucid, shining, and active piece, eminent in situation and place:
again we have the earth, a sad, dark, and heavy element, answering the heavens
by way of opposition, both in nature, property, and place. We have the element
of fire, hot and dry, on the one hand: and the element of water, cold and
moist, one the other. In the body of the earth, we have high mountains in one
place, and valleys and plains in another: and again, hard rocks and stony
grounds in one place, and soft and fruitful soil in another. In the sea, we
have flatts and shallows, as well as great depths; yea, in this element, we
have as well small, as great, and great, as well as small, beasts; a
disposition of divine Providence which David takes notice of; Therein (says
he, speaking of the Sea) are things creeping innumerable, both small and great
beasts. The like composition we have on earth also: ^gnatts as well as camels;
flies, as well as Elephants or Lions. It were easy to instance in more
particulars, in the frame of the universe, thus matched and paired (as it were)
by way of opposition and contrariety the one with the other.

The like constitution is observable in the Providence of God, and tenor of
his Administrations in the world. These consist likewise, of dispositions,
dispensations, passages and events, one answering another by way of opposition
and contrariety. Consider the work of God (says the wise man) for who can make
that strait, which he has made crooked Eccles. 7. 13.
? implying, that God in his Providence (for he speaks of his work in this)
makes somethings crooked, i. cross, or contrary to men's desires, as well as
other things straight, i. Commensurable thereunto, and complying with them. Job
gives another instance of the like contexture in the same work. One (says he)
dies in his full strength, being in all ease and prosperity: his breasts are
full of milk, and his bones run full of marrow. And another dies in the
bitterness of his soul, and never eats with pleasure Job 21, 23, 24, etc.
. And Solomon yet another: The rich and the poor meet together: the Lord is the
maker of them all Pro. 22. 2.
. i. in his providence disposes of riches and poverty, as he pleases; and so
is the maker both of all the rich and all the poor in the world, not materially
only, as they are men, but formally also, viz. as they are either rich or poor.

Again, If we look upon the natural part of his Providence (as we may call it)
here we shall see the same contexture and composition also. The natural day
(so called) is compounded of light and darkness, according to the wise
pleasure of God in a regular tempering and disposal of them. It is he likewise
that makes both the summer and the winter (as David takes, and gives knowledge
Psalm. 74. 17.
) and the year is compounded of these. So he makes rain and fair weather,
storms and calmes, and intermixeth them, as he pleases.

Now then inasmuch as the structure, frame, and constitution of the Scriptures,
being such as has been declared, resemble (as ye see) to the life, the
respective tempers, constitutions, and complexions of those other great pieces,
which are confessedly, and without all controversy God's, (I mean, the
workmanship of his hands) the one answering the other, as face answers face
in the waters, they cannot in reason but be looked upon as arguments of much
conviction and strength, to prove, that they also come from the hand of the
same workman with the other.

Besides this correspondency which the Scriptures hold with those other great
works of God we spoke of, in their constitution and frame, which amounts (as
has been said) to a testimony of much value, that the one is his, as well as
the other, the Scriptures his, as well as the Creation or Government of the
world, his; the composition we described, does yet in another consideration and
respect, plead their original and descent from God. Height of majesty, and
depth of condescension found in conjunction, make as perfect a character or
lineament of the face of God, as well can be imagined. Who is like unto the
Lord God (said David) who dwells on high (or, as the Original, and your
larger Bibles have it in the margent, who exalieth himself to dwell on high)
who humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and in the earth
Psa. 113. 5, 6.
; i condescendeth to interpose graciously, not only in the affairs of the
Angels, who in the order and rank of creatures are high, and next unto himself
and his Son Jesus Christ, in honor and excellency of being, to maintain and
better their condition unto them, which notwithstanding is a great
condescension unto him; but also in the affairs of the poorest, and most
contemptible, and weak amongst men, who are far beneath the Angels, to help,
and comfort, and advance them (as appears in the following verses.) Now this
Interrogation, Who is like unto the Lord our God? who being so high, looks so
low, seems to imply, that this is a composition proper and peculiar unto God,
and that there is little or nothing of it to be found amongst those that are
exalted, and dwell on high upon the earth. They seldom or never humble
themselves to look beneath them; do not interesse themselves in the affairs of
poor and mean men, to make their conditions better or more comfortable: no,
they commonly behold the poor, as God does the proud, a far off: they
despise them, and look upon their sorrows, and troubles, and necessities, as
impertinencies unto them. And as it is thus with men great in place and power
in the world, in respect of those who are beneath them in both; so it is
commonly also with men that are great in parts, learning and understanding, in
respect of those who are but low and weak in their abilities: they seldom
humble themselves to treat with them, according to that which they are able to
conceive, or understand, for their increase in wisdom: if they can come up to
their line of knowledge and understanding, and keep pace with them in their
notions and expressions, they may receive benefit by them: but otherwise the
men we speak of, have no inclination to come down from the throne of their
excellency, to minister to the necessities of weak and ignorant men. Thus then
we see, how the very (...) and temperature of the Scriptures, plead their
relation of descent from God.

A fifth particular, relating to the penning of the Scriptures, of like tendency
and import with the former, is their Antiquity, especially in those parts of
them, which bear the most ancient date, and were first laid as a foundatien of
that entire fabrique, which has since been raised, and built to it. The gray
hairs which are upon the head of the Scriptures, show them to be the
offspring of the Ancient of days. The writing we speak of, has the
preeminency of all other writings in this point; it is the firstborn amongst
all its brethren, I mean amongst all other books and writings in the world; and
may without boasting compare with them all in the honor of ancientry, as the
Lord Christ did with Abraham, when he said, Before Abraham was, I am Joh. 8 ^8.
, So may the Scriptures say, before the writings of Hesiod, or Homer, or
Orpheus, or Linus, Trismegistus, or Berosus, or any other Author that is named
under the heavens, were, we are; and that not only in respect of our original
copy, which was written without hands, and that from eternity in the mind and
counsel of God, but in respect of such a material writing also, as that
wherein we now pass up and down the world, and are seen, and handled, and
read, and understood by men. It is true, the body of the Scriptures, as now it
is completed, is not in all the parts of it, so full of days as we speak of:
there are many books and writings to be found that bear a far more ancient
date, then that part of the Scripture which we call the new Testament; yea
(possibly) then any the writings of the other Prophets (though this be denied
by Justin Martyr, Eusebius and others) but in their head quarters,) mean, in
the books and writings of Moses, wherein the sum and substance of all the
rest is comprised, they lie many years nearer the foundations of the world, and
the building of the Sunns Tabernacle in the heavens, then all their fellows.
That which was from the beginning (says John to those unto whom he writes) do
we declare unto you 1 John 1. ^.
. This is more then any other writer in all the world can affirm, I do not say,
with any sufficient ground, but, with so much as any colorable ground of
Truth, but only those who draw from the fountains of the Scripture, what they
declare in this kind, and speak the same things with them. The Gospel, as
touching the matter and substance of it, came from the mouth of God himself
unto our first parents, presently upon the fall; which, according to the best
computation, was within less then a days space of their creation. It came
infolded and wrapped up in that Oracle: the seed of the woman shall break the
serpents head Genesis 3.
And though for many generations together, it was no where written, but in the
fleshly tables of the hearts of men, and preserved only in living monuments;
yet did it get the start of all other subjects whatsoever, in the accommodation
of writing; and had a Tabernacle of Ink and Paper, or some like material
equivalent unto these, built for it, whilst all other learning and knowledge
lay yet in the open field, and had no other shelter or means of preservation,
but only the memories and tongues of men. Justin Martyr an ancient writer, who
lived within 130. years after Christ, in his Paraenetique to the Greeks,
proves, by comparing the times of all humane writers, Poets, Philosophers,
Historians, Lawgivers, esteemed most ancient, that Moses and his writings were
extant in the world, before any of them had brought forth: yea and clearly
shows, that whatsoever Orpheus, Homer, Solon, Pythagoras, Plato, or any other
of those Ancient writers of the Heathen, wrote concerning God, or divine
matters with any favor or relish of Truth, they were debtours unto Moses for
it, and borrowed their light in such things, from the lamp of his writings.
Eusebius also, who followed Justin Martyr about 200. years distance, in the
second and third Chapters of the tenth book of his Evangelicall Preparation,
prosecutes the same argument at large, and from abundance of places, passages,
and confessions out of the best, and most Authentic Heathen Authors
themselves, clearly demonstrates, that Moses was the most ancient of all the
Writers, that were known, or named amongst them. Yea and concludes thus
(assertively) therefore Moses is found to be much more ancient, then all the
Gods and Heroes of the Greeks Quare omnibus Dijs, ac Herothus G^ecorum, multo
vetustior Moses invenitur.
; admonishing withal, that it is much more reasonable to give credit unto the
elder and more ancient, from whom the juniors, and those that came after in
time, received their grounds. And (to pass by Et oportet, seniori, a quo
juniores bauserunt, ^ulto magis credere.
many other Testimonies in this kind) Tertullian, who lived between the two
mentioned Authors, in the 19. chapter of his Apologetique, (though arguing the
point with more brevitie then the former) yet triumphs over the Gentiles in
this Argument and proof for the truth of the Gospel and Christian Religion, the
Antiquity of it.

If it be here demanded, but what if it be granted, that the Scritures, and the
Doctrine therein contained, be the most ancient of all Books or Doctrines in
the world, will it therefore follow, that they must needs be true, and the
original of them from God? May not the Doctrine, which has the most gray
hairs upon it, and has had the greatest number of years gone over the head of
it, be of a carnal and unworthy descent notwithstanding, and not necessarily
from God? Gray hairs are not always found in a way of righteousness; I answer

1. There is a natural propension in most men (which seems by Gods Commandment
in the Law, to rise up before the hoary head, and to honor the face of the old
man, Lev. 19. 32. to be a relic of Adams Tabernacle, whilst it was yet
standing) to ascribe much to that which is ancient, especially to Authors, and
writings, and monuments, religious usages and observations. We know that the
antiquity of the Popish Religion, such as it is, in one thing which mainly
intoxicates and bewitcheth both the heads and the hearts of those, who bow down
their backs unto it: there is a Gibeonitish mouldinesse upon it; and therefore
they think it has travailed a long journey before it came to them in their
days. And Tertullian long since (in the forementioned place) insisting upon
the Argument in hand (the Antiquity of Christian Religion) to demonstrate the
truth of it Apud vos quoque Religionis est instar, fidem de temporibus asscrere.
against the Heathen, tells them that they themselves were great observers and
admirers of things that were ancient: It is little less (says he) then
Religion with you, to give credit or belief unto things according to their
time. But

2. The more Ancient a Religion, or Doctrine is, it has been so much the
longer upon trial; the world has had so much the more time, opportunity and
means to inquire into the state and condition of it; and so to discover the
nakedness, falsehood, or vanity of it, if it be unfound. Silver or gold, the
oftener they have been cast into the fire, and the longer they have continued in
it, before they be taken out, are like to be so much the better and more pure
metalls in their kind. Now time, as (according to the common saying) it is
edax rerum, a consumer of things, so it is index rerum too, a touchstone or
trier of things. Time will try any Doctrine, or opinion, whether it be sound,
or unsound: and so it will every kind of action, custom, or the like, whether
they be lawful and good, or no. And in this respect, the Apostle (I conceive)
compares it unto fire, which is the most severe touchstone and trier of
whatsoever is apt to be tried by it, as some minerals, and metalls, and all
such things are, whose nature is to abide the fire without damage, when they
are right, and perfect in their kinds. Every man's work (says he, speaking
particularly of Doctrines taught by Ministers) shall be made manifest: for the
day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall
try every man's work of whatsoever it is 1 Cor. 3. 13.
; meaning, that time (which he calls, the day) in the course and progress of
it, has a like searching, piercing, and separating nature and property, in
respect of Doctrines and opinions, which fire has in respect of silver and
gold, hay stubble and timber; so that as these being cast into the fire, will
easily be distinguished and discerned the one from the other, silver and gold
abiding it without damage, whereas hay, and stubble, and timber, will be
consumed by it; in like manner for Doctrines and opinions which are sound and
substantial truths, though they may for some ages together endure
contradiction and censure, as if they were erroneous and false, yet the day
will, in the process of it, restore them to their native dignity and honor
without disparagement; yea and will discover error and vanity in many others,
which for a season have rejoiced in the undue applause and approbation of men.
The reason of this fiery property in time, which the Apostle speaks of, the
Prophet David clearly assigns, where he says, that day unto day utters
speech, and night unto night shows knowledge Psalm. 19. 2.
; meaning, that there is not any day, or any night, that passes over the head
of the world, but that as well the one, as the other, bring with them a
blessing of new light, some further knowledge and instruction in one kind or
other, unto the world. By means whereof, things that were covered, come in
time, to be Quicquid sub terra est, in a pricum profetet aetas. Hor.
revealed; and things hid, to be made known (according to our Saviors
prediction, Luke 12. 2.) The same discerning or discovering property of the
day, is supposed also by the same Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 9. where speaking of
corrupt Teachers, who resist the truth, as Jannes and Jambres did Moses, But
(says he) they shall prevail no longer: for their madness shall be evident
unto all men, as theirs also was. From whence (by the way) it may be worthy
observation, that men may resist the truth, and that like mad men, after a
furious, violent, and importune manner, and yet for a time be thought well of,
and carry the approbation of the greatest part of Christians. This property of
the day also our Savior himself supposes, Mat. 15. 13. But our purpose is
abbreviation, not enlargement. Yet

3. This Argument drawn from the Antiquity, to evince the truth and goodness
of a Religion, is then very forcible, and little less then demonstrative
indeed, when the Religion, which has for a long time, from generation to
generation, been continued, professed, and held up in the world, has withal
from time to time, from the first rise and spring of the profession of it, been
still opposed and persecuted in the world; and the professors of it, by this
their profession, rendered obnoxious to the hatred, malice, rage and fury of the
world; if such a thing as this notwithstanding, this Religion shall be still
loved, embraced, professed in the world; and live, and be like still to live,
and prosper in the midst of the stormy and tempestuous proceedings of the world
against it, though there be little hope of the ceasing of these storms for a
long time; in such a case (I say) as this, the Antiquity of a Religion, is a
mighty confirmation of the truth, and revelation of it from God. The reason is,
because that property in it, to eat up it is Professors, to expose them to
troubles, sorrows, afflictions from the world, has always been a tentatation,
a kind of prudentiall engagement upon men, to inquire and search so much the
more narrowly into the estate and condition of it, and fully to satisfy
themselves whether it be a Religion worth the suffering for, or no, before they
should own in or engage themselves in the profession of it, it being a most
irrational act, and unworthy of men, to sell their precious comforts, peace,
and accommodations in the world, for such a thing, which they know not, whether
it will benefit them in the least, or no. And when men are to judge or give
sentence with relation to themselves, in matters which so nearly concern them,
in matters appertaining to the flesh, there is little fear they should be
bribed by the spirit, but much that they should be led away with partiality on
the fleshes side. So that (doubtless) did not men see somewhat like God, I
mean somewhat that commands and overawes their consciences in such a Religion,
which threatens their flesh so soar, they would never have to do with it upon
any such terms of danger, as thousands have had to do with the Religion
contained in the Scriptures, thorowout all ages.

Fourthly, The longer any Religion has continued or stood in the world upon
the terms expressed, it has tasted the spirits and judgments not only of so
many the more men, but of generations of men. Now as Solomon gives this reason,
why two are better then one, viz. because if one fall, his fellow will help him
up; in like manner, when a matter or business of so much concernment, as such
a Religion, as was mentioned, is, has passed through the hands, not of one, nor
of two, nor of a few, but of many generations, it is not lightly possible, but
that, in case one or two of these generations had had so little of men in them,
as to look no better to themselves, then to suffer their feet to be taken in
such snare, to go on with the profession of such a Religion, which threatened
them with apparent loss in the world, and promised them nothing in
compensation thereof upon any hopeful or likely grounds, yet first or last,
some one or other of these generations would have corrected the error of those
that went before them, and so have quite abandoned, and thrown that Religion
out of the world, which had so abused their forefathers.

Now we know that the Antiquity of Christian Religion (and consequently of the
Scriptures, wherein it is contained, and held forth) and Profession thereof,
has that great advantage we speak of in conjunction with it, to render it full
of Authority, and excellent in power, to demonstrate the goodness and truth of
this Religion, and consequently the Relation which it bears unto God, as the
Author and Revealer of it. The Profession hereof, ever since it was taken up
in the world, from the days of Adam and Abel, even until now, has exposed
the Professors to all manner of sorrows, troubles, and evil entreaties from
the world. This the stories of all ages successively from the blood of Abel,
unto the last sufferer for it (whoever he is, or was) do abundantly testify:
and (indeed) is nothing but what is generally granted on all hands. And yet we
see, though it has waded through so many deep waters, yea oceans of blood;
though it has passed through so many fires, and the flames from time to time
have kindled sorely upon it, yea though there be yet more flames of fire, and
seas of blood before it in the way thereof, yet it lives, and lifts up its head
in the world, and has those in abundance, who are ready still to suffer for
it. Whereas all other Religions in the world, are but punies, and as of
yesterday, in comparison of it: and besides that Antiquity which they have, is
not seconded with any such collateral advantage to make it argumentative,
wherewith the Religion of Christians, who profess the Gospel and Doctrine of
the Scriptures, is accompanied (as has been showed) and so has little force
in it to prove any truth or soundness in them. It was a true observation of
one, that the gods of the heathen were good fellows, and liked the company of
one another well enough: it was only the God of Israel, whose Name was Jealous,
and must be worshipped alone. It was never said (not yet verified by any
experience) that whosoever should be strict, or live conscienciously, in the
profession of any other Religion, should suffer persecution; but that all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus, should suffer persecution, is affirmed by the
Apostle 2. Tim. 3. 12.
, and confirmed by the experience of all ages and places, when, and where any
thorow-profession of the Doctrine of Christ, and of the Scriptures, has taken
place.

Fifthly and lastly (to this) when the Antiquity of a Religion is such, that it
is able to calculate and prove the day of its nativity in the world, to have
had the precedencie in time, before all other Religions whatsoever, in this
case the gray hairs that are upon the head of it, do fully evince it to be a
way of righteousness, a religion that is from God. The reason is, because as
God had a being before Satan, so had he a worship and Religion before him: nor
is error or falsehood in any kind, any thing else, but a mistake, or
corruption of, or deviation from, the truth. Therefore that Religion which is
most ancient, must needs be from God; and all subsequent Religions, so far as
they dissent from that, or are contrary to it, are from some base Author, and
of a delusive inspiration. Now that the Religion comprehended in the
Scriptures, was brought forth, and had a being in the world, when all other
Religions were yet beneath in the earth, is (as has been already argued and
proved) the acknowledgement of some of the greatest Prophets and Patrons
themselves of all, or of most, and of the most considerable, of all other
Religions.

Sixthly, The manner of the bringing and coming in of the Gospel into the world
by the Scriptures, I mean in respect of the growth, or graduall discovery and
manifestation of it, the body of the Scriptures still waxing and increasing
with further light, unto the just compleature of them, which now they have
attained, and wherein they rest, and have rested, these 1500. years and
upwards, is another argument or consideration effectually persuading the
descent and parentage both of the one and the other, from God. The Gospel came
not at once in the fulness of the beauty, strength and perfection of it into
the world: in the first spring and dawning of it, it was a kind of brief and
obscure Oracle, like the first dawning of the day, when there is a little
mixture of light, with a greater quantity or proportion of darkness in the
air. It was no more but this; The seed of the woman shall break the serpents
head Genesis 3.
; a saying which glimmered indeed with some light of good intended toward
mankind: but there was no distinct form or shape of that good, which was
intended, nor of the means or Author by whom it was to be effected. It was but
like the corn, when it first sprouts and peers above ground, which has nothing
that shape or body, which it comes to afterward. Being thus in the bud and
tender shoot of it, it was watered by those precepts and directions which were
graciously given by God unto Adam and his family, concerning such a worship,
and such services, as he required, especially by his command for offering
sacrifices, together with his acceptance of these sacrifices duly offered,
some ways or other signified unto those, who offered them. As often as men
offered upon such terms as these, God accepted them; and so they had from time
to time renewed acts of confirmation from God, that his heart was with them,
and that he fully intended them good; and so were more and more established in
the love and goodness of God toward them. As a Charter, or act of Grace from
a Prince, whether to a Corporation, or person, the oftener it is renewed by him,
affords the more security unto those that are concerned in it, of a full
enjoyment of all privileges therein granted and intended.

When the Gospel had been in the world upon these terms, and under this first
degree of discovery, about 1660. years, immediately after the destruction of the
world by the flood, God publishes a new edition of it unto Noah and his
family, which was then the whole world of mankind. And though in this second
edition, the Gospel came forth in somewhat more plain and distinct words, (I
mean, in words more easy to be understood) then in the former, yet the great
particularities of the mystery of it, wherein the glory and strength of it
consist, and which were afterward, though a long time after, brought forth
into a clear light, were not a whit more opened or discovered, then in that.
The Gospel, in this second impression we speak of, was published, partly in the
renewing of that Benediction and Charter, wherein the Lordship of the world had
been by God conferred upon man in his creation Genesis 9. 2.
; partly also in certain promises concerning the continuance and standing of
the world, and that upon terms of Grace and comfort unto the inhabitants of it,
for many generations ver. 10, 11.
. Both these plainly show, that God is in a reconciled posture toward the
world (and consequently have somewhat of the Gospel in them) as by a larger
consideration, as well of the one, as of the other, we made to appear, when
time was: but for the present we only recapitulate.

The Gospel, under this edition of it, continued in the world until the days
of Abraham, for the space of more then 360. years. And now God was pleased to
think of a new Edition of it, and (as it were) to dedicate it unto Abraham his
friend. In this Edition, it came forth with some further light and discovery of
some of the particularities of it, beyond what was to be found in either of the
former; as viz. 1. Of what family he should come, that should break the
serpents head; In thy seed (says God to Abraham) shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed Genesis 22. 18.
. 2. Unto what the breaking of the Serpents head, being interpreted, does
amount unto, viz. the blessedness of men. In thy seed shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed. 3. Of what extent the blessedness, which Abraham's seed
should bring upon the world, by breaking the serpents head, should be, how
far it should extend and reach: this is, to all the nations of the earth. In
thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. 4. Here was a discovery
made of that particular act or qualification in men, by which they are brought
into part and fellowship, and come to partake of that blessedness, which was
brought unto the world by the seed of Abraham, viz. Faith, or believing God,
or, in God. And he (says Moses, speaking of Abraham) believed God, and it was
counted unto him for righteousness Genesis 15. 6.
. 5. In this Edition of the Gospel, here was a picture, a lively portraicture
or type of that seed of the woman, that should do this blessed service for the
world, break the serpents head, both in respect of some personal properties or
relations, as likewise of the means by which he should do it. Here was Isaak,
an only son (as he is called, Genesis 22. 2. viz. by a lawful wife) and a
beloved son (in the same place) offered up in sacrifice unto God, by his
father. For so the Scripture speaks: By faith Abraham when he was tried offered
up Isaak; and he that had received the promises, offered up his only begotten
Son Heb. 11. 17.
. Abraham is said to have offered up his son Isaak, either because he
presented him unto God upon the Altar, which was an offering of him up; or
rather because he had fully purposed to have perfected the offering by his
sons death, had not God himself interposed from heaven to restrain him. And
as God accepts the will for the deed, so does he usually call the will, or
settled purpose of doing, by the name of the deed. 6. And lastly, He finished
this Edition of the Gospel, by adding his seal for the confirmation of it, the
sign of Circumcision; which, according to the holy Ghosts own interpretation,
was a seal of the righteousness of faith Romans 4. 11.
, i. a pledge, or confirmation, that whosoever believed in God, should be
hereby justified, or made righteous, and consequently be saved, and made
everlastingly blessed.

The world enjoyed the Gospel in this Edition of it, only with some typical
additions, as in Jacob, and Joseph, and some extraordinary discoveries from
heaven relating unto it, now and then, to revive and quicken the remembrance of
it in the hearts and minds of men, as in the ladder which Jacob saw, which
reached from Earth to Heaven, and the Angel that wrastled with him, etc. The
world (I say) enjoyed the Gospel in that edition of it, which was published in
the days of Abraham until the days of Moses, and the giving of the Law upon
mount Sinah, which was about the space of 430. years more. And now God made
fourth edition of it, enlarging the former with a great multitude and variety
of typical resemblances, wherein all, or the greatest part of those mysterious
and substantial particularities of it, were darkly shadowed, and portraitured
out, as by the Tabernacle and Priesthood, by washings, and sprinklings, and
feasts, and by Sacrifices especially of many kinds, with a great variety of
rites and observations accompanying them. This edition of the Gospel, only
with some post-scripts of types and figures ever and anon appearing, as in the
brazen Serpent, Manna, Joshua, Sampson, David, Solomon, and some dawnings and
glimerings of somewhat a clearer light shining from some of the Prophets,
continved until the days of the promised seed of the woman, until he came in
the flesh, who was to do that great charge and service for the world, viz. by
breaking the Serpents head to make the world whole. This was about the space of
1517 years more. Now he being the Lord from Heaven, and coming out of the
bosom of the Father, where the Gospel was formed and fashioned in all the parts
and members of it, and had been (comparatively) hid and kept secret from the
foundation of the world until then, brought with him a perfect copy or
extract of it, as a present from God his Father, sent by his hand unto the
world; which he in special manner recommended unto his Apostles, to be by them
published and preached thorowout the world, after that upon his Ascension into
Heaven, they had been endued with strength from on High for that purpose, and
had received the holy Ghost in an extraordinary manner, both to be a
remembrancer unto them of wh^^ in the days of his flash he had imparted unto
them concerning the Gospel Joh. 14. 26.
, as likewise an Interpreter of the more mysterious sense and meaning of many
of these things Joh. 16. 13. 14.
Being now ascended, and in full possession of glory, to let his Servants and
Saints in all generations know, that neither his love unto them, nor care for
their good, were either swallowed up in his exaltation, or impaired in the
least by the Greatness of his glory, he obtained from his Father the blessing
of that Revelation or Prophecy (as it is called Revel. 1. 3.
) for them, which he imparted unto his Beloved Disciple and Apostle John, with
a special charge and order given him, to commit the same unto writing, that so
it might be a light of consolation unto his Saints, shining in the midst of the
darkness of their tribulations and sufferings, to the worlds end. And with
this Revelation, he has taken his leave of his Churches, until his personal
return again unto them. So that this last and complete edition of the
Gospel, contains (beyond all the former, and with the rasure and
dis-authorization of many things contained in them, in reference unto practice)
those passages of Evangelicall Doctrine and Heavenly wisdom, which the Lord
Christ himself uttered on Earth in the days of his flesh, together with that
Revelation which he gave down from Heaven, after his exaltation; as also those
Historical and Doctrinall Informations and instructions, which are
comprehended in the writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, together with
those two new seals, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, for the confirmation
of the Truth of things asserted in both. This edition being perfect, the world
is to expect no more additions or post-scripts, to the end of it. Now if you
please to compute the several spaces of time mentioned in this argument, and
draw them together in one account or sum, allowing about 66 years more, for
the space between the time that our Savior preached the Gospel on Earth, and
gave unto John the Revelation mentioned, from Heaven (which is the complement,
and as it were the last page of this new and last edition of the Gospel) you
will find the whole distance or space, from the first entrance of the Gospel
into the world, in that oracle we spoke of, The seed of the woman shall break
the Serpents head, until the last edition of it completed, to amount to about
4043 years.

Let us now briefly consider, what there is in this graduall manifestation; and
growth of the Gospel, and of the Scriptures, for so great a space of time as
4000 years and upward, before they came to perfection, to demonstrate the
pedigree and descent of them to be from God.

We know it is Gods usual method in things sublunarie, and endued with life,
to raise and build them up to their respective perfections, upon the ground
work and foundations of imperfection. The corn is brought forth out of the
Earth by those degrees, which our Savior himself takes knowledge of: first the
blade, then the car, and after this, the full corn in the care Mar. 4. 28.
. Paul was first a child, and all this while, spoke as a child, thought as a
child, did as a child: but afterward, in process of time, he became a man (as
he says) and then he put away childish things 1 Cor. 13. 21.
. It is said of the Lord Jesus Christ himself, that he increased in wisdom and
stature, and in favor with God and man. You will find it thus in plants, and
trees, and Luke 2. 52.
fruits, and all things that have life in them: they increase by degrees and
grow to their maturitie and perfection, from much weakness and imperfection at
the first: and any considerable growth or increase in what is good, is
emphatically called, the increase of God: increases with the increase of God
(says Paul, speaking of that increase, which the Church, or body of Christ
makes in Knowledge, Faith, Holiness, and Love, by being knit together, and
having nourishment ministered from the head, by the joints and bands in the body
Colo. 2. 19.
.) So then this having been the express manner (as you have heard) method, and
course, wherein the Gospel has advanced, and grown to that fulness and
height of perfection, whereat it now stands, does it not carry a strength of
inducement in it, to conceive and judge, that it is a plant of Paradise,
planted by the hand of God himself, in as much as it does so (...) (as the
Scripture word is in another case) i. holds such a correspondencie with, and
resemble's so perfectly the method and disposition of God in other things?

Nor can it reasonably be objected to the prejudice of this argument, that
Arts, and Sciences, and humane inventions in several kinds, have received
additionall increases and augmentation, from time to time, as well as the
Gospel; being at this day (at least most of them) raised to a line of
perfection, far above what they had obtained in their Infancies and youth. For

1. Though Arts and Sciences, and many artificial inventions which had no
greater founders, or Authors, then men (in the sense, we argue thorowout this
whole discourse) have in continuance of time, and successively received their
graduall advancements, and respective growths in strength and beauty; yet this
has been with these 2 signal observations, and differences between them, and
the Gospel or Scriptures, First, the men who have been Sucessively employed to
raise and build up the body of the Scriptures, have only built, and never
pulled down: he that succeeded in the work, never contended with, never
contested against his Predecessor, nor found the least fault with his
work-manship; whereas the Great Architects, and builders up of arts and
sciences, have still fallen out one with another about their work; he that
followed, blaming him that went before, as defective in his way, and
insufficient for his undertaking; pretending (for the most part) to correct his
errors, and attempting to overthrow, what he asserted. So that the increase
and augmentation of Arts and Sciences, being purchased or procured, as well by
the pulling down of what either through negligence, or ignorance, had bin built
amiss, as by the superaddition of what was regular and found, carry an
express character in them of the weakness and insufficiency of those, by
whom they received them, and consequently, of those also who were the founders,
and first fathers of them, whereas the increase of the Gospel, and growth of
the Scriptures, have still advanced without the least error or shadow of
miscarriage in their way, those who were set on work to make the former
supplements or addition, being never questioned or corrected for any thing they
wrote, but attested rather and commended, by those who were engaged in the
latter.

2. Though Arts and Sciences and particular Inventions of men, have received
growth and increase, since their respective births, or first groundwork laid
in the world, yet is there none of them brought to any such perfection, but
they are still capable of further augmentation and increase, yea there are new
additions made unto them daily: yea there is little question to be made, but
that they will be still growing and increasing whilst the world stands, and yet
never come to their period of perfection; much like those silly women whom the
Apostle represents, laden with sin, ever learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the Truth. 2. Tim. 3. 6, 7. Whereas the Scriptures and the
Gospel, have had the Seal of their consumation and accomplishment upon them for
these many generations; nor has any man attempted, at least with any success,
or acceptance with considering men, since the writing of the book of the
Revelation, to indite or publish any thing by way of additament unto them, or
as any further part, or member of them. This perfection, and incapacity of any
further inlargment from men, found in the Gospel and Scriptures, attested and
acknowledged by the whole world for these 1500. years and upwards, is a
pregnant inducement to this belief, that he is both the Author and finisher of
them, who knows how to accomplish and perfect his works and undertakings at
such a rate, that neither the Wisdom nor skill of any creature are able to
make any addition unto them. I know (says the wise man) that whatsoever God
does, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it Eccle. 3. 14.
etc. Whereas that invincible imperfection, which is found in Arts and Sciences
(invincible I mean, in respect of their strength, who are, and have been,
laboring and striving from the first ages of the world to this day, to
overcome it, but have not been able) is a great argument, that as well the
Founders of them, as Benefactors, are but men.

Seventhly, There is in the Scriptures a magestique kind of security, under
many seeming (yea many seemingly bold, and venturous) contradictions, that yet
neither the Honor of their Truth, nor that unity which they have, in and with
themselves, shall at all suffer hereby. The consideration hereof is of the same
blessed confederecie with the former arguments, tending to clear the pedigree
of the Gospel, and to demonstrate the original of the Scriptures to be from
God. We shall not need to make any large collection of such places or passages,
whose faces seem to be set, and this sometimes very siercely, the one against
the other. I cannot but judge that of your selves you know many in this kind.
If we should but narrowly examine the two Genealogies which the two
Evangelists, Matthew and Luke have drawn up in their Gospels, to show our
Saviors pedigree and lineall descent according to the flesh, and compare them,
1. Between themselves, the one with the other. 2. Both the one and the other of
them with several places in the old Testament, we shall be furnished with
instances in abundance of seeming (yea many strongly seeming, seemingly
irreconcilable) contradictions. But for particulars in this kind, I had rather
(Reader) refer thee, to such expositors and writers upon the places, Who
being diligent and judicious, as they have taken notice of these friendly
(though enemy-likeseeming) contests and oppositions between Scriptures and
Scriptures, so have they interposed, and that with much felicity of success,
to compound them: amongst whom, I should abuse an opportunity of giving
honor, to whom honor belongs, if I should not recommend unto thee
Fredericus Spanhemius, In his Dubia Evangelica.
late (if not present) Professor of Divinity in Geneva, for a man, both
faithful and diligent, to take knowledge of, and of singular dexterity and
ingeniousnesse to compromise these knottie and troublesome Phoenomena in this
part of the face of Heaven. A little before my public handling this theme
concerning the Authority and original of the Scriptures, I had occasion in the
course of my Ministry, to expound the Genealogy of Matthew; in which exposition
I salved the soars of those seeming inconsistencies between the two
Evangelists, Matthew and Luke, and reconciled both the one and the other of
them with the Old Testament in such passages, wherein there was an appearance
or face of a combat Which was one reason why in laying down the argument in
hand to prove the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, I only instanced some of
these seeming contradictions, without repenting their Solutions, being so
lately delivered before.
: in which atcheivement, I acknowledge my self a debtor to the pen and pains
of the said Author.

It were easy to multiply instances of this kind, where Scripture seems to rise
up against Scripture, and saying against saying, and that not only in
genealogicall computations, but even in matters of another nature, and which
seem to be, yea and really are, of greater weight and moment; and yet one
Scripture be wrai's no manner of fear of hurting another, or of prejudicing the
Honor or Truth of another. The Scripture, Prove. 26. 4. Injoynes men, not to
answer a fool according to his folly, and yet in the very next verse, there
seems to be a quite contrary injunction: Answer a fool acording to his fully.
Also the strength of Israel (says Samuel, speaking of God) will not lie nor
repent, for he is not a man that he should Repent 1 Samuel 15. 29.
: and yet it is twice said of him in the same chapter that he did repent.
Himself tells Samuel, that he repented that he had set up Saul to be King
verse. 11.
: and afterward it is expressly said that the Lord repented that he had made
Saul King over Israel verse. 15.
. It is said, Genesis 22. 1. that God tempted Abraham: yet I am. 1. 13. men, when
they are tempted, are forbidden to say, that God tempts them; and that upon
this ground, because God tempts The consistencie of these places, with many
other (...) in the Scriptures, is sufficiently opened by many Interpreters.
no man And (to forbear any more instances) the Apostle injoyneth the
Philippians (and that again and again) to rejoice in the Lord allwaies: yea and
again (says he) I say rejoice And yet injoynes them also to work out their
Salvation, with fear and trembling Philip. ^. 12.
. It were easy to make this pile of seeming contrarieties in the Scriptures
much greater: but by these wherein instance has been given, we may plainly
discern, that there is a greater eye of such passages there, whose appearance
is as Philip. 4. 4.
if they affronted one the other, and were at open wars amongst themselves:
Yea that is further considerable, that in all the instances given (as likewise
it is, if not in all, yet in most of the rest that might be given, being of the
same consideration) the Scriptures, which carry the strongest appearance of
being contrary to their fellows, yet bewray no manner of tenderness in this
behalf. They do not stand to excuse or purge themselves, as if there were any
cause at all to suspect them for any crossenesse or contrariety unto others;
no, they speak from place to place, what they have a mind to say, with that
liberty and freedom, as if there were nothing said by them elsewhere, that
either was like to suffer the least prejudice by it, or else to cast the least
prejudice on it.

Now then, Let us consider a little, whither there be not in the consideration
held forth unto you, that which bewrayes somewhat more then humane in the
Scriptures. Of all writings under Heaven, they assume most unto themselves, as
that they are the words of eternal Life that they are inspired by God, that
they are the testimony of Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, that they shall
judge the world, that they are that immortal seed of which the sons and
daughters of God must be begotten, etc. And yet they speak and utter themselves
from place to place, as if they cared not to destroy that Interest of
Authority, credit, and belief, which in some places they labor to procure for
themselves, in the hearts and consciences of men. For that which in one place
they build up in another they seem to pull down; that which in one place they
affirm, in another they seem to deny: what in one place they enjoin and
recommend to be done, in another they seem to prohibit, and to restrain from
doing. Some of them seem to lie to the North, and some to the South: some to
the East, and some to the west; and to conflict, combat and contend amongst
themselves, as the four winds of the Heavens did in Daniels vision; upon the
Sea Dan. 7 2.
. And yet for all this, they stand before all the world, God, Angels, and men,
like Princes (as Job speak's) undaunted, untroubled, un-appald, as full of
confidence to prosper in their way, and carry the world before them, to gain
upon the hearts, and souls, and consciences of men, as if they knew nothing by
themselves, were conscious of nothing in themselves, that were like to hinder
them. So then this is that which I say, that such a Security and majestique
confidence, as the Scriptures every and a non bewray of doing great matters, of
turning the world (as it were) upside down, of being had in reverence and high
esteem with men, upon such terms of disadvantage, and reasons to fear the
contrary (as flesh and blood might reasonably judge) is a sign that their
confidence is divine, and that their security in such a case, is the security
of God; especially considering that this their confidence makes them not
ashamed; but is justified from Heaven daily by success answerable to it. If
they did not know, that God both could and would, give gifts of reason,
wisdom, and understanding unto men whereby to throw down the mountains, and
to fill up the valleys that are in them, and to make the rough things plain,
to make a clear peace between things that seem to be at variance, yea and that
he would stir up their hearts, to engage themselves, and improve these
abilities accordingly; at least if they had not known, that men would so far
reverence those beams of light, those glorious Truths, which clearly shine in
them, as for their sakes to reverence the hidden things of darkness, which are
there, and the things which they cannot understand, so far at least, as not to
reject the things that are clear, because of the things that are obscure; if
(I say) the Scriptures had not known and foreseen these things, they would
(doubtless) have been as tender of their own interest in this kind, as
provident for themselves and their own honor, as men use to be in their
writings. Men that write and make books upon their own interest because they
know not, in case they should write as knottily as the Scriptures are written
(in many places) and let such sentences or sayings pass from their pen from
place to place, which would trouble men as much, engage men as deep, to make a
consistencie of sense between them, as the Scriptures frequently do; because
they know not (I say) whether men would ever be at this cost and charge with
their writings, or no, or cast any such honor upon them, to make their
darkness, light; therefore they are very tender, cautious, and circumspect
(especially those that are the wisest, and most considerable amongst them) not
to expose themselves so much as to the least suspicion of writing
contradictions, of being inconsistent with themselves. And when they have any
occasion to say or express any thing, which carries an appearance in it of
some contrariety to what they affirm elsewhere, they still give notice of it in
one kind or other, and are careful to distinguish, and to explain themselves
with much anxiety and wariness, as being timorous and fearful, that otherwise
they should suffer loss in the opinions and esteem of men. Whereas the
Scriptures on the contrary, in many places seem to speak, as if they cared not
either to be understood, or believed: and yet otherwise express as great a
confidence of both, as if they knew nothing by themselves (as was said) why
they should distrust or question either. When they come to assert or deliver
any thing afterward, which seems to trench upon something which they had
formerly said, they are so far from giving any notice or warning of such a
thing, or from distinguishing themselves into a cleernesse of consistence with
themselves, to prevent a misapprehension in this kind in the thoughts of men,
that very frequently they express the negative, in the same word or term
wherein the affirmative was expressed before, and on the contrary; as it were
on purpose to raise and strengthen the seemingnesse of the contradiction. For
example, Luke 1. 73, 74. the tenor or import of the Oath, which God swear unto
Abraham our Father, is said to be this, (...), i. that he would grant unto us,
that being delivered one of the hands of our enemies, we should serve him
without fear etc. And yet Phil. 2. 12. Christians are enjoined, (...), i. to
work The true sense, together with the mutual consistencie of these, and other
like passages, are to be inquired, and may readily be found, in our orthodox
and learned Commentatours upon the respective places.
out their salvation with fear and trembling. So Matthew. 7. 7. our Saviors
promise is, (...), ask, and it shall be given you: yet James says to those, to
whom he writes, (...), i. ye ask, and yet receive not Iam. 4. 3.
. To pass by many other places of like consideration; our Savior professes,
that he was not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel Mat. 15. 24.
: and yet professes, Job. 10. 16, that he had other sheep also, which were not
of this fold (meaning, of the Jewish nation) whom also he must bring to hear
his voice etc.

Thus then we see what there is in the consideration in hand, to plead the
Original and descent of the Scriptures from God, and to difference them from
all the writings of men, I mean such as have been written by men, without the
inspiration and express guidance of the holy Ghost. Other writers and writings
are timorous and tender of seeming contradictions: the Scriptures, and he that
speaks in them, seem to delight in such seemings, and go on their way
rejoicing, notwithstanding.

There remains only one Argument more, arising from the consideration of the
manner how things are carried in the Scriptures, which avoucheth their
authority for divine, and is the ^ight in order. This is the holy and humble
ingenuity, candor and simplicicy, which upon occasion discover themselves in
the respective writings of those, who were the Amannenses or penmen of the
Scriptures. There is such a lowly self-denying frame and disposition, such a
sweet simplicity and submissivenesse of spirit ever and anon observable in
their writings, in publishing their own infirmities and weaknesses, as well as
other men's; yea the weaknesses of their friends, and such whom they greatly
honor elsewhere upon occasion, and both the one and the other without the
least air or touch of any complement or vanity, without ministering unto men the
least occasion to judge any such thing of them, as that they should bair their
hooks with speaking meanly or disparagingly of themselves, to catch the praises
of other men; that, as it was said of the Almuggim trees, of which Solomon made
pillars for the house of the Lord, there came no such Almug trees, nor were
seen unto this day 1 King. 10. 1^.
, so neither is there to be found any such holy ingenuity or simplicity of
heart in any other writer, or writers whatsoever, as are clearly seen in those,
who had this spirit of glory cast upon them, to be the socretaries of heaven,
to communicate in writing those blessed counsels of God contained in the
Scriptures, unto the world. How often, upon occasion, does that great Prophet,
that man of God (as he is called) Moses, who had a favor from Heaven, which
never man had but he, I mean to have God speak unto him face to face, as a man
speaks unto his friend Exodus 33. 11.
; how often (I say) does he upon occasion, in his writings, weave in the relation
of his own weaknesses and miscarriages in his history, as if he had not been
the historian himself? yea the failings and miscarriages of his house and
family in his greatest predecessors? In the third and fourth Chapters of
Exodus, how does he at large lay down the story of his infidelity, and great
averseness, to submit unto that calling, unto which he was called, and that in
an extraordinary way, by God himself? Toward the end of the fourth Chapter,
he acknowledges his oversight and neglect of the ordinance of God, in not
circumcising his child the eight day: and further relates how near he was to
the stroke of Gods displeasure by reason of it. So Numb. 11. he records the
shame of his distrustfullnesse, or at least of the carnality of his conceit or
apprehension of the power of God Number. 11. 21, 22.
. So again, Numb. 20. he ingenuously relates, how deeply he incurred the
displeasure of God, by an angry and diffident smiting of the rock, instead of
speaking to it with a composed spirit, and faith (according to the tenor of
his commission) and withal, how God, because of this his sin, pronounced
this heavy sentence against him (which not long after also he put into full
execution) that he should not bring his Congregation into the promised land.
And, the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, because ye believed me not, to
sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not
bring this Congregation into the land which I have given them Number. 10. 12.
. Yea, we may put down in account amongst the fruits of his humility and
candor of spirit, that testimony which he gives unto himself of being very
meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth, Number. 12. 3.
. For as the Apostle Paul, when upon occasion, he commended himself, or (in his
own phrase) gloried, made no question but that he exposed himself to the
disparagement of being counted a fool for so doing, and withal implies, 2
Cor. 12. 11.
that had he not been hereunto compelled by the strong desire he had of their
spiritual well-doing, to whom he writes, there should no appearance of such a
dead fly have been seen in his ointment; in like manner, Moses (doubtless)
being a prudent, sober, and grave man (as his writings testify in abundance)
was not brought but by a strong hand of self-denial, and by an excellency of
desire to accommodate the world in matters of special importance, in
succeeding generations, to stoop to this lure of folly and weakness, I mean to
rise up so high in his own praise and commendation.

Nor does he only freely and plainly relate things tending to his own
disparagement, but upon the same occasion, viz. when the glory of God, and the
after-information of the world required it, he knows neither brother, nor
sister, nor the greatest, or most honorable of all his forefathers, but
unpartially sacrifices their reputations and honors also upon the service of
the comfort and caution of the world, declaring in open and free history, how
far they acted from time to time beneath their excellency, being Saints and
servants of the most high God. The prints and foot steps of like ingenuity in
others of the same engagement, are evident from place to place throughout the
body of the Scriptures; and have been observed by others upon the like
occasion. But expedition is a great part of our present intendment.

Now then, as Nicodemus said unto Christ, Master, we know that thou art a
Teacher come from Gods: for no man can do these miracles which thou do,
except God were with him Job 3. 2.
; so have we reason in abundance to conclude and say, concerning the
Hagiographers we speak of (the Penmen of the Scriptures,) no men could have
gone so far out of themselves in so savoury and sacred an ingenuity, had not
God himself been their guide, and conductour in the way. Nor is it any ways
worthy the first fruits of a belief, that God would ever have stood by mortal
^^en with so high an hand of wisdom and grace, as to teach them that (I had
almost said) miraculous deportment with their pen, (for self-denial and
humility,) had not their employment been about his own most glorious affairs,
and their calling to the work from himself; yea had he not intended this
heavenly deportment and behavior of theirs, as a sacred character or
impression, of his own presence with them in what they wrote, and for a
confirmation of the sovereign truth in them, unto the world. But continue thou
(says Paul to Timothy) in the things which thou have learned, and have been
assured of, knowing (i. considering) of whom thou have learned them 2 Timothy 3 14.
; clearly implying, that the spirit of a Teacher, or writer, may be so
excellent and rich, that a through taste or knowledge of it, may well be a
ground of confidence, that there is a substance of truth in what is either
taught, or written by him. And (doubtless) if the spirits of humane writers
whatsoever, from the first to the last, were judiciously tasted, there would
none of them be found to relish with that inward sweetness, or richness of
contentment to the understanding of a man, wherewith the respective books and
writings of the Scriptures, do gratify the intellectual palates of their
Readers, if they be intelligent and attentive in the reading of them.
Lightness, pride, aptness to censure or exalt, according to self-interests,
or relations, an affectation of obscurities, to be counted profound, a subtle
plausiblenesse of carriage to gain Readers of the common stature for
understanding, with the like, are the ingredients most frequently predominant
in the constitution of the spirits of other Authors, and writers of books: nor
is there any thing truly noble, or heaven-like, to be found in the best, or
greatest of them all. If all that which is truly excellent and desirable in
all the spirits or dispositions of all humane writers whatsoever, could be
extracted from all their writings together, and made up into one and the same
consistence; there might from the writings, either of Moses alone, or of Paul
alone, be drawn forth an extraction, or quintessence, incomparably more
celestial and divine, then it.

We might here have presented you with another consideration or argument
(reducible to that head of discourse, from which we have argued hitherto) for
the further eviction of that great conclusion, which we desire to bring forth
into a clear and perfect light, the Divine Authority of the Scriptures; viz.
the admirable harmony and consent, for substance and truth of matter, which is
found betwixt their respective penmen and parts, from the first, to the last
of them. They march like an Army in good array, where every man keeps his
rank, and none thrusts, or troubles his fellow. But because this is a
consideration more frequently insisted upon, and opened, by others; and has
been already taken notice of (in part) by us, in a former Argument, we shall,
for the present, wave the further plea of it.

Having finished those arguments and considerations of the first sort, drawn
from the manner of the Scriptures, in their composure and frame, and which tend
with an high hand to secure the world, that they are indeed royally descended,
and know no Father, or Author, either amongst men or Angels, whether good, or
bad, but God only; let us in the next place advance such arguments and
demonstrations, for our further confirmation in the same truth, which arise
from their matter; I mean from the nature, property, and import, of the things
themselves delivered, and held forth in them. These are somewhat more in number
then the former. For 1. The glorious and absolute holiness Ten Arguments drawn
from the subject matter of the Scriptures, to prove their ^^i^^tuall divine
which they call the world unto. 2. The strong and potent tendencie in things
here delivered unto godliness. 3. The like efficacious and sovereign
tendencie of things, unto self-denial: to make men wholly forgetful and
neglective of themselves in outward things, upon occasion. 4. The penetrating
or searching nature and property of the Scriptures; I mean into the hearts and
spirit and consciences of men, to separate the vile from the precious, and to
discover the hidden things of the greatest darkness there. 5. The mighty
efficacy and power they have, by the things which they teach, to enlarge,
raise, and lift up the hearts of men, that are fallen, and sunk, and dead
within them. 6. The like power which they have, by other ingredients, to
trouble, astonish, and confound the hearts that are high, and full of
confidence and security. 7. The transforming power which they have, I mean to
change and alter the natures and dispositions and tempers of men; to turn both
the hearts and ways of men upside down. 8. That excellency of wisdom, those
heights and depths of understanding, which are discovered in that great
transaction of the Gospel, as it is presented unto the world in the Scriptures.
9. The great and wonderful mysteriousnesse of this evangelicall transaction.
10. And lastly, The glorious and most transcendent importance of this
transaction, by way of benefit and blessing upon the world; all these,
especially in a joint consideration, do, against, and above all contradiction
and fear, evince the Scriptures to be from God.

First, That excellent spirit of holiness, which breaths in the faces The
first Argument.
of the souls and consciences of men, out of many of the commands, motives,
examples, and other expressions in the Scriptures, is a fair lineament in the
face of God, and plainly bewraies his interest and hand in the framing of them.

Let me 1. (in a word) show you what I mean by that holiness, which the
Scriptures so ardently desire to advance and propagate in the world. 2. I shall
(with like brevity) acquaint you, how glorious and fearful the Scriptures are
in pressing and persuading unto holiness. 3. and lastly, We will ponder the
consideration hereof a little, and see what it contributes toward our
important design.

For the first, Holiness, in the sense we now speak of it (for there are
several significations of the word) may be described after some such manner as
this: It is an honorable impression, property, or quality in the rational
nature or being, which disposes the subject to an absolute and utter
separation and abhorrency in affection, from whatsoever is sinful, as such; (I
mean, so far as it is sinful.) And such ways and actions which proceed from
such a principle as this, may be called Holy. We shall not now stand to examine
or scan the description, it being not so proper to the business in hand.
Holiness in God, seems to be that nature, attribute or property in him, which
inclines him to move and act in all his ways and dispensations, at the
greatest elongation and distance that can be imagined, from all
unrighteousness whatsoever. In men and Angels, it imports such a principle,
which inclines them to an absolute conformity with God, in his ways and
actions. That passage of the Psalm (with many others, where we find
righteousness and holiness in conjunction) The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works Psalm. 145. 17.
, gives some testimony to the truth and propriety of the description. We shall
not (for the present) lead you any further out of the way by following it, or
by any narrow inquiring into the nature or property of holiness, or how it
differs from other graces. It is sufficient, as to the point in hand, to know,
that the holiness, which the Scriptures strive with so much importunity to
engage the world unto (as we shall see presently) is a conformity or likeness
unto God in that attribute or perfection of his nature, which inclines him to
do all things that he does, like unto himself, like unto a God, that is, not
only after the most exact and absolute manner in all points, without the
omission or neglect of the least, or least considerable circumstance, that
might add beauty and perfection to it, but all this also with the greatest
alienation of mind and affection from doing otherwise.

The next thing is to demonstrate and show unto you, how, and at what rate the
Scriptures groan, and travail (as it were) in pain, with the unholinesse,
loosnesse, and profaneness of the world: and how mightily they advance and lift
up themselves, to advance holiness amongst the sons and daughters of men; to
transform the hearts and ways of men into the similitude and likeness of that
glorious attribute of holiness, which is in God, and in all his ways.

There are three geat Engines especially (if we may so call them) which the
Scriptures use, and by which they drive on this great and blessed design of
promoting holiness in the world. The first, is made of precepts and commands:
the second, of motives or arguments of persuasion: the third and last, of
examples. It is true, all the three in strictness of speaking, and in a
general consideration, may be reduced to that one mentioned in the second
place. Commands of holiness from God, and so examples of holiness, both from
God and men, have the nature of motives unto holiness: but by distinguishing
them, we both provide the better for method and memory, and likewise follow the
example of the holy Ghost himself, who still differenceth the precept from the
motive, by which it is pressed, and bound faster and closer to the hearts and
consciences of men.

Let us first see how instant the Scriptures are upon the world with precepts
and commands for holiness. For I am the Lord your God (says he that speaks
out of them unto the world) ye shall therefore sanctify your selves, and ye
shall be holy, for I am holy. And again, for I am the Lord which brings you
out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: ye shall therefore be holy, for I am
holy Lev. 11. 44, 45.
: Injunctions expressed in the future tense of the Indicative mood [ye shall be
holy, etc.] are most emphaticall and authoritative; importing, not simply the
will or desire of the commander; nor simply the duty of the commanded; but also
the peremptorinesse of the one, and the imminent danger of the other, if
neglected. If we should transcribe, and argue, these ensuing passages, Lev. 19.
2. Lev. 20. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. Heb. 12. 14. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Matthew. 5. 48. with
many others of like consideration and import (which we leave to your private
observation) you would clearly see how strong and soar the Scriptures are in
their injunctions and commands for holiness, upon the world. So that if the
authority and interest of him, who seeks to order and umpire the world by the
Scriptures, can do any thing, men and women shall not be profane, or unclean,
but holy: these are at work with all their might, and with all their power, to
make all holy.

Secondly, Take we into consideration also, with what potency, height, and
variety of motive, and argument of persuasion, the Scriptures bow and bend
themselves, yea turn themselves this way and that, and every way that lightly
can be thought of, to commend the grace and exercise of holiness unto men; to
interesse the hearts and affections of men and women, in the love, desire, and
study of it. There are scarce any of the commands lately pointed unto, which
call for holiness, but are attended and guarded with their motives and
incitements proper to them.

1. The Scripture presses and persuades unto holiness, by this consideration,
that God himself is holy. Be ye holy, for I am holy (says he that speaks in
the Scriptures, as we heard before from Moses.) Now supposing (for the present,
being yet but upon the proof of it) that it is God himself who thus speaks,
of how sovereign an influence must this consideration, that God is holy, needs
be upon the hearts and souls of men capable of it, to persuade unto holiness?
What! a mortal man, who is by nature but dust and ashes, and by miscarriage, a
thousand degrees more imbased then so, to be like unto God? to have communion
with him in so darling an Attribute as his holiness? What? he that was
descended so low, to ascend thus high? The Heathen themselves, when they
studied and set themselves, to speak at the highest rate they knew how, in way
of honor and commendation, whether of persons, or of actions, they usually
expressed themselves, by affirming the one to be like unto God, and the other
to render men like unto God. Their great Orator Cicero, when he had in an
Oration drawn the portraicture of the Emperor Caesar, as he intended, by the
representation of a man performing such and such things highly virtuous and
rare, closes his sentence after this manner; He that shall do such things as
these, I think him not to be a man, but judge him to be Haec qui secerit, hunc
non homine^^ esse puto, sed ^millimum Deo judico.
one most like unto God. And so Plato, by way of motive unto men to be active
in doing good unto as many as might be, expresses himself thus (...), i. to be
a general benefactour, and to do good unto many, is to become like unto God.

2. The Scripture persuades and presses unto holiness upon this ground; viz.
that men and women are brought into a capacity of being holy, by so high an
hand of grace and vouchsafement from God, as the death of his only begotten
Son. The Apostle Peter having enjoined Christians to be holy in all manner of
conversation, even as he that had called them was holy, and to pass the time
of their sojourning here in fear 1 Pet. 1. 17.
; immediately he subjoyns this by way of motive, or engagement; Forasmuch as ye
were not redeemed with corruptible things, as with silver and gold, from your
vain conversation received by tradition from your Father; but by the precious
blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, and without spot etc. verse. 8.
This also is a motive of wonderful importance and power, where it is thoroughly
resented, and takes kindly upon the spirit, to persuade unto holiness. It
supposes 1. that it is a privilege, yea a great prerogative, for men that had
been in such a condition of bondage and slavery under sin, as they had been, to
be so far brought off from those terms of shame and misery, as (if they be
willing to enter in by it) to have such an effectual door open unto them,
whereby to pass into the glorious liberty of holiness. The Angels that are
fallen, have no part or followship in such a privilege as this: the iron gate
of the irreversible decree of God is fast shut upon them: they are in no
capacity of coming forth out of their dungeon of sin and misery, into the light
and blessedness of holiness. And 2. it asserteth, that this privilege, or
capacity for them to become holy, was not procured or bought, nor procurable,
or to be bought, for them, by such mean and contemptible things, as silver and
gold, for which yet we know things of greatest worth and consequence in matters
appertaining to this life, may be had, but by the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, etc. implying, that the greatness of the price, by which a privilege,
liberty, or commodity in any kind is purchased for a man, (especially by
those, who are of wisdom and understanding sufficient not to over-purchase,
not to give their silver for that which is not bread) is a proportionable
engagement upon the man, for whom this purchase is made, to improve this
privilege to the uttermost, as well for his benefit and advantage who has
made the purchase for him, as for his own. The price that has been given to
put the world into a capacity of holiness. being no less, then the precious
blood of Jesus Christ, that only sacred treasure, which either heaven or earth
could afford, or furnish the Almighty with, for such a purchase, duly
considered, is an astonishing weight of engagement upon the world, to be holy.

3. The Scriptures call upon the world for holiness, by the great voice of
this consideration; that God, when he was free, has yet made himself a mighty
debtour, a debtour of infinite sums of treasure, unto the world, especially
by those great and precious promises which he has given unto it, concerning
the life, and glory, and great things of the world to come, the everlasting
enjoyment and fruition of himself, and that upon the most desirable terms,
that it is possible for a creature to enjoy him; viz. so, as that he will
become all in all unto it; that is, not communicate himself by any means or
mediation whatsoever, or join any creature whatsoever with himself, to make the
blessedness of him that shall enjoy him, a compounded blessedness, consisting
partly of the benefit received from a creature, partly of what is derived unto
it by the creator; but will fill the whole capacity of him that shall enjoy
him, with nothing but himself; so that his blessedness shall have no
ingredient at all in it to allay or qualify it but it shall be wholly, purely,
and entirely God, all God; who as he contains all things whatsoever, per modum
eminentiae, (as the Schoolmen speak) by way of eminency, in his essence or in
himself, Angels, men, joy, strength, life, peace, glory, and whatsoever is
named not in this world only but in that also which is to come; so will he be
this all things, after a far more excellent, after a far more incomparably
excellent manner, to those that shall enjoy him, then the things themselves
would be, if they were enjoyed by him. This is the last and most complete
estate and condition of blessedness, whereunto the creature shall be brought;
and wherein, being once entered and brought into it, he shall abide for
eternity. But before his coming or bringing hither, he shall pass through the
accomplishment and sweet enjoyment of many other the great and precious
promises of God, as of being raised again from the dead, of having his vile
body made like unto the glorious body of Christ, of living and reigning with
Christ a thousand years, with many other of like glorious and blessed
importance; all which notwithstanding shall at last run into that immense Ocean
of blessedness and glory which we speak of, and there be swallowed up, and
lose themselves and their names, as the fairest and goodliest rivers do, when
once they are fallen into the main sea. But this by the way. But that the
Scriptures do (as it were) adjure the world unto holiness, by the great and
precious promises which God has made, and wherein he stands engaged unto the
sons and daughters of men, is evident by that place formerly cited, 2 Cor. 7.
Having therefire these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God Cor. 7. 1.
; implying, that, however holiness (especially in any considerable eminency
or perfection) carries a strong antipathy in it, to the corrupt natures and
vile dispositions of men; yet they who have such an advantage over their
hearts, such an opportunity to make their corrupt natures turn head upon their
vileness and corruption, as the glorious promises of the Gospel afford, ought
in reason, and well may (by the improvement of the means before them) raise,
and work up themselves to an eminent degree and pitch of holiness: Yea this
improvement of the promises we speak of by men, I mean to an excellency of
holiness, seems to be one of the main ends or intents, on Gods part, why they
were given. Whereby (says Peter) are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature,
etc. It is the richness, the exceeding greatness, and preciousnesse of the
Gospelpromises, which makes them a proportionable and apt means to communicate
or impart the Divine nature (holiness) unto men. If a King should desire to
raise a noble and princelike spirit, in a person of low and ordinary birth and
breeding, his only way were to adopt him for his son, and to declare him his
successor in his Throne. When Saul was anointed by the Prophet Samuel to be
King over Israel, it is said that as he turned himself to go from Samuel, God
gave him another heart, i. an heart thoughtfull and considerative, how to rule,
and act the part of a King; whereas the heart he had before, was but levelled to
the occasions and interests of a private man. I conceive that this raised and
princelike heart was not given unto Saul by any miraculous or supernatural
inspiration, or working, from God, but by an ordinary concurrence in the mind
and spirit of Saul with that great providence of his toward him, in calling
and anointing him to be a King. The consideration hereof striking effectually
upon Saul's heart, being now discharged from his attendance upon Samuel, and so
more free to take the impression of this great occurrence home, it seems quite
altered the frame and constitution of it, and made it Regal. The promises of
the Gospel thoroughly understood, considered and believed, cannot but fulfill
the joy of him that gave them, in making his creature like unto himself, holy,
as he is holy.

4. The Scriptures are so impatient of being denied what they call for in this
kind (I mean in point of holiness) from the world, so unable to bear the
world in an averseness hereunto, that they threaten the loss of the sight and
face of God, and therein, of all joy, and peace, and comfort for evermore, and
consequently the vengance of eternal fire, to all those that are profane, or
unhold. Follow peace with all men (says the Apostle Heb. 12. 14.
in a place formerly cited) and holiness: without which, i. without which
holiness not, without which peace (as is evident by the Article in the Greek,
which being of the masculine gender, agree's with (...), holiness, not with
(...), peace) no man shall see the Lord, i. shall enjoy him (as the word
commonly imports in Scripture) or, come where he is, to behold the glory, which
God has given him; wherein himself seems to place the great felicity of the
Saints Joh. 17. 24.
. This motive is in the hand of the Scripture as a rod of iron, to batter and
break in pieces, all that stubbornness and contradiction, which is in the
natures and hearts of men against holiness.

There are several other motives, by the meditation whereof the Scripture is
wont to urge and press hard upon the world for holiness; as sometimes, the
consideration of the beauty of it; otherwhile, it holds forth the glory of it,
yea, it often calls it by the name of glory 2 Cor 3. 18. Ephesians 5. 27. etc.
; again, sometimes the peace, sometimes the joy of it are commended unto the
world; and all to inflame the hearts of men and women with desires after it. By
all which, and especially by those that have been somewhat more largely
insisted upon, it fully appears, that the face of the Scriptures is set like an
adamant, fully set to exalt holiness in the world, to make the generation of
the sons and daughters of men, a generation of sons and daughters unto God, by
being partakers of the divine nature, holy as he is holy.

So that we shall not need to insist at all upon the third particular
mentioned; viz. the examples of persons eminent in holiness, over whose names
and memories the Scriptures rejoice so much, and seem to embalm them with
honor, on purpose that being preserved, the world by them might learn to love
and follow holiness in all succeeding generations. The stories of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, as also of all the holy Prophets and Apostles, with many
others that are upon Scripture record; speak plainly and without any parable,
that the Scripture design is, to make the holiness of these men to propagate
in the world, the men themselves being dead. So that the light of this Truth
shines clearly from all quarrers of the Scriptures, and is spread round about
us on every side; that holiness amongst men, is one of the great prizes, that
they run for, and contend and strive about with the world.

Now then (in a word) let us weigh and consider, what we have gotten all this
while, to strengthen the hand of our belief, and secure our dearest souls, that
the Scriptures preached unto us, and professed by us, are indeed from God.

If we shall but first call to mind, what that holiness is, the advancement
whereof in the world we have demonstrated at large, to be one of the great
designs of the Scriptures; and 2. with what strength and vehemency and
raisednesse of affection and endeavor, this design we speak of, is advanced
and carried on, by, or in, the Scriptures; the consideration (doubtless) will
amount to a most effectual demonstration and conviction, that the Scriptures
themselves are from God. For, 1. Let me ask; does the advancement of holiness
in the world, look like an Interest of man, or of any unclean spirit? has it
any communion with the natural temper, disposition, or desires of these? or
has it not the express image and superscription of the glorious God upon it,
and look like the design of the most holy? It is a saying in natural
Philosophy; that it is naturalissimum opus viventis, generare sibi simile; it
is the most natural act or work of every living thing, to produce another like
unto it self. It is said, Genesis 5. that Adam begat a son in his own image, and
after his likeness Genesis 5. 3.
, and Genesis 1. it is said, that God created man in his own image, and likeness
also 1. 26, 27.
. If such an holiness as the Scriptures set themselves with all their might to
exalt and propagate in the world, be the image of man, or of any lying or
deluding spirit, let either the one or the other be reputed the Author of that
doctrine or writing by which the propagation of it is with so high an hand (as
you have heard) attempted in the world: but if it be the image of God, if it
carries an absolute and perfect resemblance of his nature in it, what need we
any more witnesses? Why should we not conclude without any diffidence or
doubtfulnesse of spirit at all, that he, and none other is the author of them?

Nay secondly (that which is yet further considerable) the holiness over which
the Scriptures so much rejoice, is so far from holding any proportion or
correspondence with the nature or disposition of man; in this estate of
corruption and sin, wherein he now languisheth even unto death (much more of
any creature more abased then man) that it professes enmity, and open
hostility against it; and seeks to turn the temper and ways and course
thereof upside down. Whereas on the contrary, it is not only of the most rich
and full consistencie with the nature of God simply, but with that property,
attribute, or perfection in his nature, which is his darling, and wherein his
soul mightily delights (as was lately observed) as being that, which inclines
him to act and put forth himself in all the rest, according to the most
absolute and perfect rules for their respective actings, and with the greatest
detestation of doing otherwise. Now then (I beseech you consider it) is it any
ways like, nay is it possible, for the nature, heart, or soul of man, which
are corrupt, vile and sinful, to labor and travail (especially at so high a
rate, as we have showed you the Scriptures do) with such a pure and glorious
conception, as this of holiness? Who can bring a clean thing, out of an
unclean (is Jobs question) and his answer is, not one Job 14. 4.
. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of thistles; (says our Savior)
implying, not only or simply, that they do not so, either gather grapes of
thorns, or figgs of thistles; but that there is an absolute repugnancie in
nature, that they should do either: there being no natural principle or
aptness, either in the thorn to bring forth grapes, or in the thistle, to
bring forth figgs. Which reasoning of his stands upon this known maxim or
rule; that where there is not a propriety of cause, there cannot be a
particularity of effect. So then, there being nothing, no principle in the
nature, soul, or spirit of man, that has any compliance in point of causality,
with such a design of holiness as we speak of, and as we found driven in the
Scriptures, but all things there rising up to the contrary, evident it is, that
the design was new begotten or bred there. It is true, there was a time when
Saul also was among the 1 Samuel 19 23, 24.
Prophets, and prophesied, as other Prophets of the Lord did; upon which
occasion that interrogative Proverb first took place: Is Saul also among the
Prophets? But, that is to be considered in this case, that though Saul indeed
prophesied, yet he did it, as being more then himself when he did it; the text
says, that the Spirit of God came upon him, and that then he went prophesying:
so that all this prophetical deportment in Saul, whether in words, or
expressions otherwise, was from a cause or principle, every way proportionable
to it, I mean the Spirit of God. And in such a sense, I grant, that men,
notwithstanding the impurity and unholinesse of their natures and spirits, may
yet conceive a design of propagating holiness in the world, yea and bring
forth also: but in this case evident it is, that the design should be from
God, and not from man,

If it be objected and said: but may not men by the light of holiness, as that
which has been represented unto you in the Scriptures? Do not many Heathen
Philosophers, and moral men, as Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, Seneca, and
others, commend virtue, which they call perfection, in all a man's ways,
thoughts, words, and works, to the Heavens, exhorting and persuading all men to
it? Why then may not the Scriptures, proceed from one or more such men as
these, and so not from God? To this I answer three things.

1. Be it granted, that Philosophers and some of natures prime supposed and
granted concerning men, that they have appeared in the world in such glory as
this, have sought to make the world righteous and holy (in their sense) is not
the same much more to be presumed, and supposed concerning God, viz. that he
also has appeared for the same purpose, and upon terms much more glorious in
this kind, then they? Will God come short of men, in any virtue, in any
praise, or glory? nay as he reasons himself concerning himself in another case,
Isa. 66. (both as the former Translation, and Junius and Tremellius out of the
Original, read, and expound the words:) Shall I cause to travail, and not
bring forth? shall I cause to bring forth, and shall be barren, says thy God?
Isa. 66. 9. i. as Junius interprets it, Qui aliis sum gignendi Author, annon
ipse gignerem? I that make others to bring forth, should not I bring forth my
self? so may we say of him in this: Shall he cause others, even Heathen men,
and such as are strangers to him (in comparison) to bring forth precepts, and
directions, and exhortations unto things that are excellent for the behoof and
benefit of the world; and shall he himself be barren, and not do somewhat in
the same kind, to advance the estate and condition of the world likewise? That
it is he who originally (at least, if not immediately also) gives both wisdom
and understanding unto those heathen we speak of, and likewise that disposition
and frame of will, between which all those books and writings have been
begotten and set forth unto the world, whereby they call the world to
perfection (in their notion) is not to be questioned: for he it is that gives
life and breath, and all things unto all.

Now then, this being granted and supposed, that God, is studious and careful
as well as men, to nurture and train up the world in things that are excellent,
certainly he has his means; 1. his Laws, his Precepts, his Instructions, his
Encouragements for such a purpose, and these extant, and to be had in the
world, as well as they. If so, then questionless, those means in this kind,
those Laws, Precepts, Instructions, Encouragements, that are of the most exact
calculation, of greatest efficacy and power amongst all their fellows, for the
carrying on and advancement of this great design, I mean of carrying up the
world unto perfection, must needs be looked upon as the means of God; the means
of his immediate appointment and designation for the work. So then if this one
thing further be but granted, (which I presume no man has the least color, no
nor yet the least thought of heart to deny) viz. that the Scriptures have the
preheminencie above all other writings whatsoever, in strength, authority and
power, to teach the world all the ways of excellency and perfection, it
undeniably follows, that then these Scriptures are from God. This is the first
thing we answer to the objection propounded: though men have done the best they
can, and this possibly very considerable in the kind, to exalt a thing
somewhat like holiness in the world; yet except it should appear, that
somewhat that has been done by them in this kind, has a greater and more
efficacious tendencie hereunto, then the Scriptures; the consideration is so
far from weakening the Divine Original of them, that it rather confirms and
gives testimony to it. But

2. I answer yet further: that that moral excellency or perfection,

Holiness, which is the Scripture design upon the world, differs from that
moral excellency and perfection (so called) wherewith Philosophers were
desirous to plant the world, several ways; but chiefly these three. 1. The
holiness, which the Scriptures set themselves to exalt in the world, is a
perfect and entire holiness, it wants no limb or member to complete it: there
is never an impression of worth and excellency imaginable, whether in relation
to God or men, whereof the heart or soul of man is capable, never a strein of
action or deportment in what case, or upon what occasion soever, that is truly
comely and honorable for men, but is comprised and comprehended in that
holiness, which the Scriptures recommend unto the world: But for that
holiness (if you will needs so call it) or rather that moral perfection,
which is of humane recommendation unto men, take the fairest and most perfect
draughts that ever were made of it by any, you will find it halt and maimed,
many parts or pieces of it wanting. I have seen an end (says David unto God)
of all perfection: but thy commandment, or thy Law, is exceeding broad Psalm.
119. 96.
. A man may see from the Dan to the Beersheba of that moral perfection, which
men either have, or shall at any time, invite the world unto; a man may fadome
and comprehend it, gather it into his understanding, and be able to say, here I
have it, the whole element of it; which plainly shows the imperfection of it:
but the compass and extent of that perfection or holiness which the Law of
God, the Scriptures, call the world unto, is so vast and large, that the
reason, conscience and understanding of a man, when they have spent themselves
in travel to make a perfect discovery of this continent, and the
particularities of it, cannot yet come to the utmost bounds and limits of it:
There is a Terraincognita. an unknown land of holiness in the Scriptures, on
which no man's understanding ever set foot to this day. Who knows (says the
same Prophet) how often he offends? or (as our last Translation has it) who
can understand Psalm. 19. 12.
his error? If a man could comprehend the Law of God in the whole extent and
compass of it, he might be able to ununderstand his errors, and to know how
often he offends. The Jews have this saying, that God left nothing in all the
world, wherein he gave not some commandment.

2. The Scripture holiness, differs from that perfection which the choicest of
men have desired to promote in the world; in the purity or cleanness of it. It
has not only all the parts of holiness, all things appertaining unto the
greatest excellency or perfection, that men are capable of (as was noted in
the former difference) but it has no ingredient or mixture in it, of any thing
that is repugnant unto true holiness, or perfection; it is an holiness, which
(as we use to say of solid and compact bodies) is plena sui, it is full of it
self, and has nothing heterogeneall within it. Whereas the Philosophers
ointment, has many dead flies in it, which make the whole composition, if not
to stink rightout, yet to send forth such a savor, as by which it may be
evidently s^nted and discerned, to be the composition of men, and not of God.
Plato in that perfection or holiness which he commends unto the world, besides
many other things condemned by the Scriptures, as unlawful, allows that
unnatural pollution which they call paederastia, spoken of Romans 1. 27. Romans 1.
27.
Aristotle makes several of his virtues of such things, habits and actions,
which the Scriptures make vices and sins: as 1. He makes (...), i. grief or
indignation at the prosperity of unworthy men, to be a virtue; which the
Scripture prohibits, as a thing sinful and unworthy, Psalm. 37. So again, he
makes a virtue of Psalm. 37. 1, etc. Ephesians 5 4.
that which he calls (...), i. a disposition to jesting, or lightness of
discourse, which the Scripture expressly prohibits in the very term, Ephesians. 5.
So he makes his (...), which he defines to be, the judging of a man's self
worthy of great things, when he is so, another of his virtues; a disposition
which we know the Scriptures do not allow in men of the greatest worth and
excellency under heaven. So likewise ye (says our Savior to his Disciples)
when you have done all those things that are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants: we have done that Luke 17. 10.
which was our duty to do etc. If you look into Seneca, you shall find indeed
many excellent precepts of morality, with motives and arguments very
considerable, to persuade to them; but you shall find many a dead fly in this
man's box also; and among others, you shall find him commending that as a
virtuous resolution in Cato, rather to lay violent hands upon himself, and
destroy his own life, then to fall into the hands of his enemy Caesar, though
there was little question but that he should have had his life, yea and honor
too, from him; A practice which the Author of the latter book of the
Maccabees, commends likewise in one Razis a Jew (2 Mac. 14. 2 Mac. 14. 41.
ver. 41. to the end) by which character (among some others of like nature)
Protestant Divines have unanimously concluded, that those books are not
Canonical, or of divine inspiration. If you search into all the greatest
masters of morality that ever nature set up to teach the world perfection, you
will find even in those of the greatest and choicest accomplishments amongst
them, many things taught under the names of virtue and perfection, which are
imperfections, and things truly dishonorable to the nature of man. This is
that which the holy Ghost himself seems to take notice of concerning them, Romans
1. Romans 1. 21, 22.
They became vain in their thoughts, or reasonings ((...)) and their foolish
heart was darkened; professing themselves wise, they became fools. Professing
themselves teachers of perfection, they taught the world imperfection, and
things unworthy of them. But if we look into the Scriptures, we shall find
that they teach holiness and perfection so, and upon such terms, that they
teach nothing else; they teach no unholy or imperfect thing with them. As
Solomon has a saying, Prove. 10. The blessing of Prove. 10. 22.
the Lord it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. So the Scriptures
endeavor to make men holy, and they add no unholinesse, nothing that defiles
with it. The Law of the Lord (says David, speaking of the Scriptures,
according to their growth in his days) The Law of the Lord is perfect: and
presently after, the Commandment of the Lord is pure: and again, the fear of
the Lord is clean, and endures for ever. The fear of the Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9.
Lord is clean, i. that reverence and fear of God which is taught in the
Scripture, or, which is conceived and begotten in the souls and consciences of
men according to the tenor of Scripture commands, leads a man to no impure or
unclean action, nay restrains him from all such: and therefore it endures for
ever, i. prepares and qualifies a man for a blessed eternity. For as sin and
death, i. the loss of being, are of kin, the one making way for the other: so
are righteousness and life, or perpetuation of being, the one is a foundation
proper for God to build the other upon. But this by the way. You see then a 2.
plain difference, between that holiness which the Scripture teaches, and that
which is, or can be taught by men, otherwise then by the Scriptures; the one is
pure and clean, the other adulterate, and mixed with unholinesse.

3. (And lastly, to this particular) That holiness or perfection which the
Scriptures so much magnify, and seek to adorn and bless the world withal,
consists (the greatest and most considerable part of it,) in the due
deportments and carriages of the heart and soul toward God immediately; in
such inward impressions, or dispositions, which make a man meet for the
enjoyment of God in a way of friendship and delightful communion and converse:
the knowledge of God and of his will, and counsels; the love of God,
confidence of the love of God toward him, upon rational and solid grounds;
hope or expectation of good from him, dependence upon him for the receiving of
all good in ways of righteousness and honor, with many more of like
consideration; all which qualify and furnish the creature for communion with
God; put him into such a posture, that God may take a pleasure and holy
contentment to hold correspondencie with him; and without which men were no
more capable or meet either for communion with, or enjoyment of, God, then the
wild beasts of the wilderness, are for the society or acquaintaince of wise
and sober men. Whereas, if we peruse the best models and draughts of that
perfection and excellency, which have come from men unto the world, and shall
consider the particularities of them, you will find very little, very few
things directed or enjoined of any such tendencie as this; the main body or
bulk of their writings consisting of such precepts and Instructions, whose
constitution and frame stand either for the regulating of men in their civil
and moral deportments in the world, one toward another, and amongst
themselves, or else for the composing and ordering their natural affections
and inclinations, in reference to themselves, partly that they may receive a
testimony of honor from the world, as of being virtuous, wise, and worthy men;
and avoid the shame and dishonor of the contrary: partly to prevent those
inconveniences, in their estates, bodies, friends, posterity, etc. which many
times fall heavy upon men of dissolute and disordered lives; partly also, to
nourish and maintain a certain calmnesse and tranquillity of conscience within;
which they found by experience was troublesome and tormenting unto them, when
they had been wicked and vile in any way or practice of sin against the light
and dictates of it, as the Apostle himself intimates, Romans 2. 15. Rom, 2. 14,
15.
In the writings and works of such men as we speak of, you may find many
things worthy consideration, in reference to their ends: but as for either
rules or directions, or much urging or pressing any thing, of any proper and
direct tendency to prepare and sanctify men for the immediate worship of God,
or for any special and comfortable communion with him, there is not the
proportion of a gleaning after the vintage, nor of the shaking of an olive
tree, after the gathering of olives is past. Two or three berries (says
Isaiah) in the top of the uttermost bough; Isa. 17. 6.
and four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof: so there may be
here a little, and there a little, a few scattered notions of such a tendencie
as we speak of, to be found here and there in these writings: but what they do
in this kind, they do as if they did it not: nor is it much considerable what
they do. This for the third (and last) difference, between that holiness, the
advancement whereof is the darling design of the Scriptures in the world; and
that moral perfection, or vice-holinesse (as we may properly enough call it)
which nature has engaged some of the most towardly of her sons to propagate,
as they were able, in the world. And so much also for the second thing by way
of answer to the objection propounded: that moral excellency which
Philosophers and learned men of the world, have labored in their writings to
promote amongst men, is quite another thing, of a far inferior nature and
worth, to that holiness, which he that speaks out of the Scriptures unto the
world, would willingly breath into the hearts and lives of men. So that the
Divine Original of the Scriptures, is no ways prejudiced in the evidence and
clearness of it, by any such consideration as this; that men either have, or
may desire and endeavor, to set the same plant in the world. But,

3. (And lastly) though the plant of holiness we speak of

1. Men do not, cannot with any show or color of truth, plead any such
engagements lying upon the world, by reason of any such love or kindness that
they have shown to it, why the world should hearken unto their voice in this
kind, or hearken unto the Law of their mouth, as he both can and does, that
teaches holiness in the Scriptures. Plato cannot say, nor can Aristotle or
Seneca, or any other of the great Philosophers of the world, say (nor do any
of them say) that they so loved the world, and that when it was their enemy,
that they gave their only begotten sons for it. They have no such golden
cords as this, wherewith to draw the hearts of men against their native
dispositions and desires, to comport with their instructions or exhortations
unto virtue. This Scepter of love, wherewith the hearts of men most delight to
be commanded and overruled, is one of the royalties appropriate to his throne,
who by the hand of the Scriptures imposes the tax (or benevolence rather) of
holiness upon the world.

2. Nor do they, that summon and invite the world to excellency and perfection
in other writings, propose unto men any such prizes, any such crowns, such
Kingdoms, to engage them to run the race of holiness, as he does, who makes
his addressements unto the world in this behalf out of the Scriptures: if they
should, the world would laugh them to scorn, as knowing them unable altogether
to make good their engagements in this kind. Will the son of Jesse (says
Saul to his servants, standing about him) give every one of you fields and
vineyards, and make 1 Samuel 22. 7.
you all Captains of thousands, etc. Plato and Aristotle do not so much as
pretend to the Lordship of life and immortality, nor to the right of disposing
the great things of the world to come.

3. (And lastly,) Nor have the sons of men, who plead the cause of that
excellency which they hold forth unto the world, any such prisons, or torments
to threaten: they have no worm that never dies, no fire that never goes out,
no pit without a bottom, no lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever,
wherewith to punish those, who shall rebel against the Laws of their
discipline and instruction. Sometimes they speak of the miseries and torments
which wicked men are like to suffer after death; but at mere peradventure, and
Poet-like, so as more to delight the fancies, then to strike or trouble the
consciences of men. The Hell of Philosophers, is but like the Hell of the
Poets, which is an Hell to play and make sport withal: it is the Scripture
Hell, that makes the hearts, and souls, and consciences, and all that is in
men, to quake and tremble.

This then is the first demonstration that the Scriptures are from God, arising
from the nature or property of the subject matter thereof, viz. the holiness
of the commands: together with the ways and means wherein they address
themselves unto the world, to procure obedience unto their commands.

A second consideration springing from the same root, and tending to a further
demonstration of the same truth, is the strong and potent tendencie unto
godliness, which is found in many of the main carriages and passages of the
Scriptures, and Gospel it self. The Scriptures as they drive a glorious design
of holiness (and that with an high hand of means and engagements) upon the
world (as we have heard) so are they every whit as much bent and intent upon
another, viz. the advancement of godliness in the world. Insomuch that the
Apostle Paul describing the nature and property of the Gospel in a kind of
periphrasis, calls it a doctrine according unto godliness. If any man teach
otherwise, and consents not unto the wholesome 1 Timothy 6. 3.
words of our Lord Christ, and to the doctrine which is according unto
godliness, he is puffed up and knows nothing, etc. By the doctrine according
unto godliness, he clearly means the Gospel, that body or frame of truths,
precepts, promises, and threatenings, which is generally known to us by the name
of the Gospel. Now this he calls a doctrine according unto godliness, because
the nature, constitution, and composure of it is such, as if he that framed it,
had intended, the exaltation of godliness by it in the world; it every ways
so suits and answers such a design as this. As God called David a man after
his own heart, or according to his own heart, because he was willing to fulfill
all his will or Acts 13 ^2.
pleasure; So supposing godliness were a person, endued with reason and
understanding, the Gospel might be called a doctrine after the heart thereof,
because it is set and bent to fulfill all the will and pleasure of it, 1. To
do whatsoever such a person would wish or desire, for its exaltation and
advancement in the world. And in this respect also it is called the mystery of
godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. And without controversy, great 1 Timothy 3. 16. Ti^. 1.
^.
is the mystery of godliness? and Tit. 1. 1. it is called, the truth which is
after godliness, or, according to godliness (in the sense declared.) Now the
Gospel is called a mystery, or, the mystery of godliness, and the
mysteriousnesse of it affirmed to be great, because, as it is a doctrine, made
(as it were) for the honor and dignity, and promotion of godliness, so is it
a doctrine, or pile of learning, which consists of such truths, and of such
shows, carriages, and connexions of things, that are very far remote from the
common thoughts, reasons, and understandings of men; such as the wisest and
most inquiring men under heaven would never have discovered or once thought
upon, had they not been revealed from heaven by God himself unto them. But for
the more full opening and clearing the demonstration in hand, we will observe
the same method in the further handling of it, which we observed, in the
former: And 1. Show you what godliness is. 2. How mightily intent the
Scriptures are, to lift up the horn of it in the world, to propagate and
magnify it in the hearts and lives of men. 3. (And lastly) We will briefly
ponder and weigh the consideration, that we may the better apprehend what there
is in it to prove the truth of that conclusion we seek after, viz. that the
Gospel is from God.

For the first of these: That godliness which the Scriptures bend themselves
with all their might to set up and magnify in the world (as indeed there is
none other but this, truly so called) is a kind of heavenly impression, or
propension in the heart and soul of a man, which inclines, and is apt to carry
it in all the motions and tendencies of it upon God, or toward God. 1. To
cause it to remember God and his glory in all the actings and workings thereof,
and to raise, frame and order these in a regular and due proportion thereunto.
As we see there is a natural impression or quality of heaviness in a stone,
and in all other heavy bodies, which directs and carries them in their motions
in a straight line to the center of the earth, when, or as far as,
impediments unto these motions are removed out of the way: and so again, there
is a contrary impression of levity or lightness, in fire, whose property is to
carry this body in the tendency and motion of it toward the circumference: so
there is in some men's hearts and souls, a gracious and heavenly propension,
which makes them hang and lean God-wards, and in their actions and motions to
look toward him, and his glory, and to comply with them; And this propension
or inclination in the soul, we (together with the Scriptures) call godliness.

That godliness is a grace or gracious disposition in the soul distinct from
holiness (in the nature, though not in the subject of it) appears, 1. In that
holiness, is often ascribed unto God, yea more frequently (I conceive) then
any other Attribute, at least as frequently as any: but godliness is no where
attributed unto him. He is often said to be holy; but never said to be godly.
It is true there is a nature or disposition in God, which inclines him in all
his actions and motions to comply with himself and with his own glory, as well
as with the good of the creature; as there is in godly men, besides that
principle of godliness we speak of, there is a natural impression which
inclines them also to comport with themselves, and with their own blessedness
and glory, as well as with God and his glory: but as this disposition in men,
would very improperly be called manliness or menlinesse; so neither does the
holy Ghost, take any pleasure to call the disposition in God we speak of, by
the name of godliness; but rather chooses to express and discover it some
other way. Now if it were altogether of the same import, or the same thing with
holiness, there can hardly any reason be given, why holiness should be still
so frequently and familiarly ascribed unto God, and godliness not at all. 2.
That there is a difference between them, appears by this; that they are
exhorted unto, or enjoined by the holy Ghost as two several graces. Seeing
therefore (says the Apostle Peter) that all these things must be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation, and godliness.
So that holiness of conversation, and godliness, or godliness of
conversation, are two distinct things: otherwise we must say, that the holy
Ghost in one and the same sentence exhorts twice to one and the same thing, and
that in difference of words, as if there were two: which I suppose cannot be
showed in all the Scripture besides.

The difference between the two sister graces, godliness and holiness
(because some may desire to know this by the way) may be thus conceived.
Holiness (in the most proper, and ordinary acception of the word) is a
gracious disposition, inclining the heart or soul, where it resides, unto
actions and ways eminently righteous and just, with a real abhorrency of the
contrary, or whatsoever is sinful. Godliness is a disposition, which inclines
the person, in whose soul it takes place, to act for God, and to make the
advancement of his glory, the supreme end of their ways and actions. Holiness
may be compared to the luster, or brightness which is in gold: godliness, to
that weightinesse, or that propension in it, which, in the motion of it,
carries it toward the center. Holiness respects the nature and quality of the
action, and ingageth to a serious and zealous rectitude in these: godliness
respects the end of the action, and carries the Agent in his intentions herein,
upon God; so that though their natures differ, yet the difference is such, that
it plainly shows, that they are never divided in their subject, but that
wheresoever the one is, the other must needs be also. God never stirs up the
hearts of men, truly and seriously to desire, or embrace, ways that are
excellent indeed, but he stirs them up also to make him and his glory the
sovereign end of them: yea he seldom or never stirs up men effectually and
upon the terms specified, to desire such ways, or things as we speak of, but
he does it by putting the propension of godliness first into them. When we
find a desire in them to act for God and his glory, then, and seldom or never
till then, will men bethink themselves to purpose, of doing things that are
excellent indeed. Reasons hereof might be given, but the digression would be
too burdensome to the discourse: This little that has been said concerning
the difference, between holiness so much spoken of in the former argument, and
godliness in this, is rather too much on the bye. This then for the first
thing propounded, what that godliness is, which the Scriptures seek to fill
the world withal.

The second thing, was, briefly to consider how, and after what rate of zeal
and endeavor, and to what height the Scripture seeks to build up the world in
that heavenly affection we speak of, and call godliness. 1. It urges and
presses upon the consciences of men for it, by way of precept and command: yea
2. It presses for it upon these terms, universally, I mean in all their ways,
works and doings. I put these two together, because I find them together; 1
Cor. 10. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God. Ye see 1 Cor. 10. 31.
here 1. Godliness charged in the nature of a duty upon men: do all to the
glory of God. Now to do a thing to the glory of God, requires these four
things: 1. That the thing or deed which is done, be such for the nature, kind,
or substance of the act, that it be apt to yield matter or opportunity unto men
to glorify God; as all such acts are, which are done according to the Law and
commands of God, either general, or special, and no other. 2. That actions
thus qualified as touching the nature and kind of them, be further qualified
with dunesse of circumstance in time and place. It is true, there are some
kind of actions which cannot lightly suffer, or degenerate, through any defect
in these, or either of them; as the inward acts of the love of God, remembrance
of God, etc. but there are few outward actions, but may. There is no external
act whereby love unto God may be expressed, but that the proportion which it
has in the kind of it for the glorifying of God, may be dissolved and
destroyed by a mistiming, and misplacing of it. A third thing necessary to be
done by him that would do any thing to the glory of God, is; that first he
consults with the glory of God, and steadily informs himself what that would
have, or what it requires for the exaltation of it; as a Taylour first consults
with the body, for which he is to make a garment, by measuring the proportion
of it in several places, that so he may know how to cut and fit the garment to
it, and make it sit comely. In like manner, he that desires to advance the
glory of God by any action, or course, must be careful to inform himself, what
steerage and deportment in all particulars will render them most advantageous
for, and comporting with, such a design. The fourth and last thing (which is
the chief of the four) required to the doing of a thing to the glory of God,
is, that the heart and soul of a man, in, or before the doing of it, makes a
secret deed of consecration or dedication of it to this end; raises and
produces it for this end, and with this intention, that God may be glorified
by it. It is true, there may be such a deed of consecration as we speak of,
made through ignorance, of such an action, (one or more) which has no more
aptness in it to afford glory unto God, then a stone or a scorpion have to
nourish a child withal, in case the parent should give them unto him: such a
deed our Savior himself speaks of, Joh. 16. where he tells to his Disciples,
that the time Joh. 16. 2.
would come, that whosoever killed them, would think he did God service: Such
actions as this, devoted and consecrated unto God, are no fruits or expressions
of that heavenly impression in the soul, which we call godliness, which
always requires a true and sound knowledge of God, but the fruits of such a
devotion, whereof ignorance is the mother, and the Prince of darkness the
father; offered indeed and consecrated to the devil for his glory, under a
notion or conceit that he is a true God; as the Apostle clearly expresses, 1
Cor. 10. The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, 1 Cor. 10. 10. Acts ^7. 23.
they sacrifice unto devils, and not unto God: and yet they thought that they
sacrificed them unto God, and so intended, not unto devils, as appears by that
inscription upon an Altar at Athens, which Paul met with, Act. 17. 23. compared
with his answer, or doctrine upon it: The inscription upon the Altar was this:
To the unknown God. Therefore their intent was to serve, and sacrifice to the
true God, though unknown: which yet more plainly appears, by what the Apostle
speaks to them upon the occasion: Whom therefore (says he) ye ignorantly
worship, him do I declare, or make known unto you. Now certainly Paul did not
declare or make known the devil unto them (except happily by accident, and by way
of consequence) but the true God; as appears by the declaration he makes of him
in the following verses, God that made the world and all things therein etc. So
that evident it is, that however they intended and meant to serve and worship
the true God, yet in deed and in truth they served the devil.

If you ask me, how can this be, that they should be said to serve the devil,
and not God, whenas they yet intended to serve God, and not the Devil; nor had
they any whit more knowledge of the devil (as it seems) then they had of God?
To this

I answer (verbo) upon that ground which the Apostle lays, Rom 6. 16.
Romans 6. Know ye not, that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to
obey, his servants ye are, whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness. To which we may add that of the Apostle Peter
(of affinity with it) For off whomsoever a man is oververcome, of the same is
he brought into 2 pet. 1. 19.
bondage; or, is made a servant, (...) (in the original) now the gentiles we
speak of, being overcome by the devil, i. being persuaded to take up rites and
ceremonies in their worship, of his devising and prescribing unto them, with
the neglect of that worship which God prescribed, may very truly and properly
be said to worship or serve the devil, and not God; because they obey the one
in their worship, and not the other. And so it may be as truly and properly
said of many ignorant persons in the land, and of Papists generally, that
worshipping God (as they think) but after such a manner, with such a worship,
with such rites and ceremonies, as the devil has devised (to be sure, God has
not) and not with that worship which God has prescribed, that they also
worship and serve the devil and not God; because they obey the devil and not
God, and therefore according to Paul's rule, are his servants. Yea even of those
that know God savingly, and are truly godly (in the main) it may truly be said,
that they also serve the devil, and not God, when, and as far as, they fulfill
the devils pleasure, and are led by that learning which he has taught the
world, in and about the worship of God: as viz. when men join with polluted and
mixed assemblies (mixed I mean with openly profane and scandalous persons, and
such of whose interest in Christ, they have no ground or proof at all) in the
service of the Lords table: So again when they submit to the precepts and
commandments of men, in matters of worship; I do not say, when they submit to
the things enjoined and commanded by men (for this in many cases may be
necessary, and matter of duty to do, viz. when men enjoin the same things
which God enjoyneth:) but, whether in this or in any other case, when they make
the injunction or precepts of men, the reason and ground why they submit unto
them; in what case soever (I say) they do this, so far as they do it, they
serve the devil, and not God, because it being the precept or command of the
devil, and not of God, that men should submit to the wills or injunctions of
men in the Isa. 66. 5. Joh 16. 2. Romans 10. 2.
worship of God, they that do it, obey the devil, and so serve him.

If it be here yet further demanded; But is it possible for ignorant and
carnal men, truly and really to seek or intend the glory of God in what they
do, though they be mistaken in the nature and quality of their action, as men
truly godly sometimes are. Or if they do clearly and really intend the glory of
God, though that which they do, has no tendencie thereunto, but rather to the
contrary, may not this disposition or propension in them which thus inclines
them to act for God and his glory, be called godliness? I answer,

That for men to think they please or honor God, in such and such actions, is
one thing; and truly and really to intend to please him, is another. There is
no question but that the men we speak of, ignorant and carnal men, may think
that they please and honor God in the course of their lives and ways, and
more particularly in some spiritual actions; our Savior acknowledges as much
as this, in that Joh. 16 2. (before mentioned) and the Scripture in many places
confirms it: but that they truly or singly intend the glory of God, either in
the one kind or the other, is no where affirmed. If it be objected and said,

But does not Paul (speaking of the Jews) bear them witness, that they had a
zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. Can men be said to have a zeal of
God, or for God, without intending his honor and glory, and that earnestly,
and with strength of intention?

To this I answer, by distinguishing, men may be said to intend the glory of
God two ways, or in a double consideration; either, 1. Singly or simply, or 2.
with relation, viz. to themselves, and some end or ends of their own. Now men
that are carnal, and hateful unto God in their ways, may intend to glorify
God in relation to themselves, and some good they desire and expect from him or
by him: and thus the Jews were zealous for God and for his glory. They
pretended for that, and that very zealously, which they verily thought was for
the glory of God, as viz. to have the righteousness of the law established in
the world: because they supposed, this would be an honor to them and to their
nation, to have the honor and dignity of the leviticall worship, and
ceremonial law, which had been delivered by God unto them and their
forefathers, and whereby they had been separated as a people of excellency,
from all the world besides, for many generations: and withal thought, that if
the doctrine of the Gospel, which the Apostles taught concerning justification
by faith, should prevail, they and their law together should be despised; and
the rest of the world be brought in to be a people of God, and so their
privilege and dignity, which they had a long time enjoyed, viz. of being the
only people of God in all the world, should be dissolved and come to naught.
And in this sense many carnal and ignorant men now, may (and doubtless do)
intend the glory of God; they intend, i. purpose and mean to serve, please and
worship God, and so to glorify him, in such and such a way as they fancy to
themselves to be pleasing to God, hopeing to fare the better at his hand for
it. But this kind of intention to glorify God, does not necessarily, or
always proceed from that gracious disposition in men which we call Godliness,
because it may proceed out of a natural affection of self-love, and a mere
desire to accommodate and benefit themselves. If a man has any kind of notion
or apprehension of God, as of one that is able to do him good, or evil in one
kind or other (as men that are very ignorant of him in the Gospel, may) much
more, if he conceives of him, as one able to do him the greatest good, and
withal the greatest evil; he shall but act according to the most common and
ordinary principles of humane prudence, to seek to make him his friend; and if
he apprehends no other way for this but only the glorifying of him (which is no
such spiritual or deep speculation but that he very well may apprehend it,) he
may very well intend and purpose this glorifying of him. He that should intend
the glory of God upon such terms as these only, does no more, no greater thing
then a prisoner should do, in intending to please or gratify his jaylour or
keeper, knowing that he has power to make his imprisonment, either more easy
and comfortable, or else more grievous and irksome to him. And as the
gratifying of a man's keeper upon such terms as these, would argue no truth of
affection or love to his person, or any virtuous disposition in him, but only
love to a man's self, and his own ease. In like manner, to glorify God merely
out of relation to a man's self, and some end of his own, does not argue any
propension of affection or good will toward God, but to a man's self only.

But now singly and simply to intend the glory of God is another thing. It does
not indeed necessarily exclude the seeking of a man's self or his own good, in a
regular and due manner; a man may singly and simply, and with sincerity of
heart, intend and seek the glory of God, and his own good and peace also; but
it always includes a truth of affection unto God, and that grounded and built
upon sound apprehension and serious consideration of the infinite worth, grace
and goodness of God. So that though a man's own good might be separated from
his glorifying of God, and either be attainable by some other means, or else be
unattainable altogether, yet the heart of such a man would lean and hang
toward God, and be still seeking his glory. As suppose the center were not the
proper place for stones, or heavy bodies to rest, and to be preserved in upon
the best terms; yet the apprehension, or quality of weight or heaviness which
is in these bodies, would carry them thereunto after the same manner that now
they move thither: In like manner, though the creature should not apprehend or
conceive his own comfort, peace, or glory, to be wrapped or bound up in his
glorifying of God, yet nevertheless, if he were godly, this disposition or
impression upon his heart and soul, would beget and breed intentions and
desires of glorifying God in him, yea and act, and carry him out accordingly.
Whereas he that intends or seeks the glory of God merely out of a desire to
gain or get something by him, if he were not partaker of some such hope and
expectation as this, would have no inclination or disposition at all within him
to mind his glory. This for answer to the question or demand, how its possible
for ignorant and carnal men, truly and really to seek and intend the glory of
God, and how this may be done without godliness. And thus much to let you
understand, what the Apostle means, by injoyning men to do things to the glory
of God. But

2. He does not simply enjoin men to do things to the glory of God, but
universally, to do all things to his glory: Whether ye eat or drink (says he)
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. The Scriptures you see are
so zealously intent and bent upon the exaltation of godliness in the world,
that they allow nothing to be done in the world, no action whatsoever to pass
the hearts or hands of men, though of the smallest and lightest consequence
otherwise, but what godliness shall order and direct to be done. Our eating
and drinking, yea and less matters then these, must be formed and fashioned
(as it were) by the hand of godliness. Again,

3. The Scriptures do not content themselves to advance godliness in the
world only by commanding the practice or exercise of it, and that universally
in all things; but further seek the promotion of it, by making promises unto
it, and to the practice of it, and those many, yea and these great and
precious. The Apostle informs us, that godliness is profitable unto all
things, having promise, or the promise of the life which now is, and of that
which is to ceme. And what can a man or woman ^ Tim. 4. 8.
wish or desire more, then to be well provided for, comfortably apaid in this
life, and to be assured of the enjoyment of that which is to come? And we see
that God in the Scriptures has annexed the promises of both these unto
godliness. It were easy to insist upon particular promises in either kind,
out of other Scriptures. But the Apostles authority is sufficient to build upon
in this case. With how high an hand then do the Scriptures seek to lift up the
head of godliness in the world, when as they lay down both heaven and earth at
the feet of it? The greater and richer the price is, that is held forth to
those that shall be willing to strive or try masteries, and shall obtain; it
is so much the more like that greater numbers will engage in the race. And in
reason, the promise or offer made both of heaven and earth together unto
godliness, should make the tents of ungodliness desolate in one day, and
bring in the world from all the four winds of the heavens, to inquire after
the laws, and to learn the statutes and judgments thereof.

4. The Scriptures are not yet satisfied with all this, to make the crown of
godliness to flourish upon the head of it: they further threaten terrible
things, as that fire, and hail, storm and tempest shall be their cup to drink,
who shall cast the care and study of godliness behind their back. All these
arrows of Psalm. 1. 4, 5, 6. 1 Pet. 4. 18. 2 Pet. 2. 6. 3. 7.
the fiery indignation of the Almighty levelled at the face of ungodliness,
are pillars and supporters of the honor of godliness, and render it so much
the more lovely and desirable in the world.

5. The Scriptures in order to the advancement of godliness in the world, do
not only oppose and seek to suppress and keep down her adversary,
ungodliness, by threatening to stay her and her children with death, but
presents and holds forth examples of the dreadful execution of such
threatenings upon some. And spared not the old world (says Peter) but saved
Noah the eight 2 Pet. 2. 5, 6.
person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of
the ungodly. And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes,
condemned them with an overthrow, making them an example unto those that after
should live ungodly.

6. (And lastly) The Scriptures yet further desirous to lift up the throne of
godliness to the highest in the hearts and affections of men, speak one
glorious thing more of her, ascribe one excellency to her, wihch is apt to
commend her greatly in the eyes of some; they ascribe a potency, or power unto
her. The Apostle Paul (2 Timothy 2. 5.) speaking of a generation of men that
should rise up in the last and perilous times, among other characters, by
which he there describes them, gives this for one; that they should have a
show, or form of godliness, but would deny the power thereof. So that here is
asserted a certain might, or power, i. a principle of doing great things, unto
godliness. We must not now stand to explain or open this power; or show either
wherein it consists, or unto what actions it extends. But very powerful
certainly it is, where it is in its just growth and stature; and inables those
in whom it is upon such terms found, to do things very strange and wonderful
in the eyes of men, and such as all the world besides can hardly tell how to
turn their hand unto. But that which we have to take notice of for the present,
is this; that this power which the Apostle speaks of, residing in it, and
accompanying of it, is a thing very proper to commend it in the eyes of men,
and to set the world on fire with love and desires after it. The mighty
strength or power which is in God, is very usually called his glory; and men
(we know) Romans 1. 1^.
are apt to boast, and glory much in their strength.

This for the second thing propounded; how, and with how high an hand, and upon
what terms, the Scriptures rise up to magnify that heavenly disposition in the
soul, which they call godliness, with the ways and fruits of it.

The third (and last) follows, which is this; to weigh and consider what there
is in all that has been said, to bring forth this hidden treasure into a clear
light, to evince the truth and certainty of this conclusion, that the Gospel
is indeed from God. This you will easily apprehend to be exceeding much, if you
please but to call to mind and consider the two particulars that have been
opened and insisted upon; as 1. What godliness is: and 2. How mightily the
Scriptures labor and travail with the promoting of it in the world. The
design it self proclaims the great and glorious God, the author and
projectour of it, but the manner and high hand of the prosecution of it, is a
further confirmation of it, and that in abundance.

For the design it self (in the first place) the exaltation of godliness in
the world. Who can with any likelihood, or color of reason, be imagined to be
the designer, the founder or projectour of such a design, but God alone? who
could ever have thought of cutting such a channel through the midst of the
world, as godliness is, to gather all the streams and currents of all the
thoughts, speeches, actions and ways of men into it, and here to appoint them
such a course, as to cause them all to fall into that great ocean of the glory
of God? Can any good come out of Nazareth (says Nathaneel to Philip) Joh. 1.
46. So may we well ask here: can any such good as this, the projecting of the
glory of God, come out of the dark, sinful, and corrupt heart of man?

But secondly, you will (I presume) conceive it the less possible, if together
with the nature of the design, you will please to take into consideration,
after what manner, and with how high and glorious an hand it is driven and
carried on in the Scriptures. For though it should be granted, that some one
man or more, by the help and advantage of his natural endowments or parts,
being larger and richer then other men's, and further raised by industry and
contemplation, might attain to such a notion and resolution as this; that it
were a thing just and meet that men should plead the cause of the infinite
excellency, worth and perfection of God in the world, and seek to persuade all
men to prefer him and his glory in all their ends and ways, and should give
out himself accordingly withal his might and strength to do it (though this be
no ways probable, either that ever it has been, or will be done by any man,
as we shall further show presently;) yet that he should manage, or attempt the
carrying on, and making good this his design, by such a magnificent and
God-like method, at such a rate of power and authority, as we have showed you
the design of godliness to be carried on by the Scriptures, exceeds all
belief much more. To instance in some of the particulars: was there ever any,
or is it any ways like that there should have been any mortal sinful man,
that would take upon him to promise the glory of heaven, and the great things
of the world to come, whereof the Scriptures speak, and undertake in his own
name, and by his own strength to make good, and that with a majestic
confidence, such a promise, to what service or work done whatsoever, which we
know, and have heard, he does, who pleads the cause of godliness in the
Scriptures? Doubtless no man's heart, at least no considering or wise man's
heart, would ever serve him to do it. Again was there ever any man, or any man
like to be, or to have been, that should threaten the vengeance of eternal
fire, against those that would not hearken unto his voice in any of his
commands, yea and threaten the execution of his threatenings in this kind, by
the strength of his own arm, as we heard he does, whoever he be, that
threatens ungodliness, and ungodly ones in the Scriptures? nay, was there ever
any man, who assuming unto himself the name and power of a God, commanded
godliness unto the world in his own name; as he does who gives commands
thereof unto men out of the Scriptures? The Apostle indeed says of the man of
sin (as he is called) that he opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called God: So 2 These. 2. 4.
that he as God sits in the temple of God, showing (or vaunting) himself
that he is God; i. he assumes a power every way equal to the power of God, as
viz. in dispensing with his laws, and prescribing laws of worship, and articles
of faith unto men, and it may be thought, that he in this posture, commands
godliness in the world. But 1. this man, whosoever he is, is discovered and
made known in the Scripture to be an impostor, and deceiver of the world: and
therefore certainly he was not the author of the Scriptures; if he were, he
would never have writ his own name in such black characters of infamy and
reproach. And 2. these marks or characters of him, that he should sit in the
Temple of God as God, and show or vaunt himself as God, are descriptive and
appropriate unto him; and consequently imply, that there are no more men in the
world of the like pride and impiety, but he. 3. And lastly it is evident that
he was not the author of the Scriptures, because they prophecy of his coming
into the world, some ages after they were finished and completed.

Others there have been, who to procure the more reverence and authority to the
laws which they had a desire to commend unto, and to establish amongst a
people, pretended and gave out, that they had familiarity and conjunction with
some Deity from whom they received them, as Numa Pompilius, the founder of the
Roman state, Mahomet with some others. Again, some likewise there have been,
who out of a diabolical pride, and vanity of mind, would needs be
acknowledged and adored for Gods, as Alexander and some others. But for these
latter, by such a ridiculous presumption as this, they rather exposed
themselves to contempt and scorn, and lost the honor of being esteemed men of
wisdom and worth, then any ways gained any opinion with men of being Gods
indeed. As when Alexander the great sent to the state and city of Athens,
commanding them to apotheise, or make him a God, they obeyed him, but with an
ironicall obedience; drawing up their act for his Deification in these terms;
Quoniam vult Alexander Deus esse, Deus esto. i. Since Alexander will needs be a
God, let him be one. Nor were these men, I mean that would needs be Gods, any
great Patrons or advocates of godliness. As for the former, those who only
pretend, and asserted a divine original unto their laws; hereby plainly
acknowledged and confes't themselves not to be Gods. Nor doubtless has there
such a thing ever been heard of since the foundations of the world, that a man,
especially a sober man, and of a capacity to write the things contained in the
Scriptures, should in the presence of the world proclaim himself to be the
great God that made heaven and earth.

If any man be not yet satisfied with the demonstration in hand, but shall
still question and doubt, whether a mere natural man, exercising himself in
the book and law of creation and providence, night and day, may not by such a
study and search as this, come to a clear and perfect discovery of the infinite
perfection of God; and consequently that he is a rewarder of those who shall
diligently seek him, and the advancement of his glory: and whether upon such a
discovery as this, he may not readily come to this conclusion, that it is a
thing most reasonable, just, and equal, and worthy all men, to magnify him,
who is infinitely excellent and worthy, to whose praise and glory, all creature
interests and engagements should submit and stoop, and consequently engage
himself with all his strength and all his might to persuade the world hereunto;
especially considering (that which such a man may easily apprehend also) that
there is no course he can take, like unto this, to commend himself, to him that
is infinite in perfection, and so to advance his own happiness. If such a
chain as this be strong, and will hold in all the links of it, why may it not
be possible, yea and probable in some degree, that a mere man might compose the
Scriptures, any thing that is there said for the advancement of godliness
notwithstanding? To this I answer (and so conclude this argument,)

1. (By way of concession) That there is no question to be made, but that
natural men, by an industrious and diligent culture and improvement of their
natural endowments and abilities, may go very far in making such
discoveries, as are mentioned in the objection; and particularly may come to
take hold of this conclusion, and that with cleernesse and confidence, that God
is infinitely perfect, perfect above all created perfection whatsoever, from
which all the rest of the particulars mentioned in the objection, seem clearly
deducible, without any reluctancie, or gainsaying of reason, in any of them.
This the Scriptures themselves do plainly acknowledge and suppose in very many
places: but most plainly, and beyond all dispute or question, Romans 1. 19, 20.
Because (says the Apostle) Romans 1. 19, 20
that which may be known of God, is manifest in them (i. unto them, or amongst
them, speaking of natural men,) for God has showed it unto them. It is
manifest unto them; for God has showed it unto them; i. this (...), that which
may be known of God, God has written it in fair and legible characters in the
works of creation, and withal has given them eyes of reason and understanding
sufficient to read. Not (I conceive) that God by any extraordinary revelation
or dispensation had discovered, or manifested this unto them; nor that they had
actually attained a manifest knowledge or discovery of it. This interpretation
is confirmed by that which follows, v. 20. For the invisible things of him (i.
of God) from the creation of the world, i. ever since men were, and had a
being, are clearly seen, i. are clearly to be seen, may clearly and plainly
enough be seen (the Greek tongue wanting gerunds, as the Latin Grammarian
calls them, still uses the passive voice in stead of them, as we have often
heretofore, upon the like occasion, given notice) are clearly seen, being
understood (...), apprehended, or considered by the things that are made,
meaning, that by means of the understanding which is in man, engaging it self,
duly to consider what the works of creation do necessarily suppose and import,
the invisible things of God, viz. his eternal power and Godhead (as the
following words explain them) may clearly be seen, known, and acknowledged by
men. So then the infinite perfection of God, being one of his invisible things,
and somewhat of that, which may be known of him, or as appartaining to him:
yea, and a necessary and essential attribute of his Godhead, evident it is,
that a natural man, by a diligent exercise and improvement of his abilities,
may attain the certain knowledge of it. But yet,

2. I answer by way of exception, that though a natural man, may very possibly
attain to a certain knowledge, that God is infinitely perfect, yea and possibly
go along with this knowledge as far as it is able to carry him, and
particularly be led by it unto all those conclusions, resolutions and practices
mentioned in the objection; yet notwithstanding it is the firstborn of
improbabilities or unlikelyhoods, that ever such men will do it, I mean, go
along with, and follow this principle or conclusion, that God is infinitely
perfect, in all such practical ways and engagements, which that is apt and
proper to lead unto; and more particularly, that ever they will be brought to
the engagement (chiefly insisted upon in the objection) viz. to persuade the
world, with all their might and all their strength, whether they eat, or
whether they drink, or what ever else they do, to do all to the glory of God;
I say it is a thousand times ten thousand to one, that no natural man will
ever be brought to engage himself in any such engagement as this. The Scripture
affirms a general averseness and indisposition in men (yea in the best of
natural men) to such a thing: and we know that where there is no disposition,
no will to do that which is our duty to do, any power or ability to do it
serves for little, but only to leave us without excuse (as the Apostle speaks)
and to justify God in our condemnation. The Apostle speaking of the best and
most considerable amongst the sons of nature, the Philosophers and wise men and
disputers of this world, in the forementioned chapter (Romans 1. 28.) says thus
of them. And as they did not like to retain God in knowledge (the word their,
in a different letter in your Bibles, inserted by the Translatours, were much
better out then in; for it much darkens the Apostles sense in the place) God
gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do things that are not convenient,
etc. Romans 1. 28. They did not like to retain God in knowledge. (...), i. they
did not make trial, they did not put themselves to it, they regarded not (as
the former translation had it) or, they had no mind to it: (...) i. (word for
word) to have God in acknowledgement, i. to bring him forth in his glory, to
the sight and view of the world, that so he might be verily acknowledged, for
such an one as he is indeed. They were so near to themselves, so pestered and
encumbered, so bewitched and charmd with self-love, and self-seeking, with
desires of promoting their own interests and ends in the world, as pleasures,
profits, honors, etc. that they had nothing of their hearts left to engage or
act them for the advancement of Gods glory; this was not once in all their
thoughts. And no great marvel, that poor heathen and natural men should make
shipwreck at this rock (I mean, a neglecting of the things of God and his
glory) through an inordinate desire of accommodating themselves, when as the
Apostle takes up this complaint against the generality of Christians
themselves, All seek their own, not the things of Jesus Philip. 2. 21.
Christ. So that though there was, and is in natural men, a power of laying
out themselves to the uttermost for the advancement of godliness in the world;
yet this being a bare logical power (as we call it) i. a power accompanied
with no manner of inclination to act according to it, nay incombred and
compassed about with a thousand sinful distempers and dispositions, which all
oppose and rise up against the due exercise and actings of it, it is no ways
likely, nay it is next to an absolute impossibility, yea every whit as much as
a moral impossibility, that any man should ever be found to rise up, in the
due and just imploiment and improvement of it; or consequently, should be the
author of the Scriptures. But

3. And lastly, Suppose there should such a man be found amongst the many
millions of Adams posterity, in whose eye the glory of God should be so dear
and precious, as that the desire of the advancement of it should be predominant
in his soul, and overruled and put to silence, all those contrary risings and
reasonings that war against the utmost improvement of that power, which such
a man may possibly be conceived to have, for the glorifying of God, or
promoting godliness in the world; yet could not this man be reasonably judged
or looked upon as the enditer, or composer of the Scriptures. One reason
(amongst others) is this: because he that in the Scriptures, presents and makes
himself the author and founder of the Scriptures, and pleads the cause of
godliness with so high an hand, avoucheth himself for God (as we showed
before) now if a man should pretend, or undertake to plead the cause of
godliness with never so high an hand, and perform accordingly, and in the mean
time affirm himself to be God; he should most notoriously and desperately
prevaricate with the cause he undertakes, and plead for the advancement of the
glory of a sinful and corruptible man, under a show and pretense of pleading
for the glory of the incorruptible God; and so could not be said to advance
godliness.

If it be yet said, but may not, or might not such a man, take the name of God
unto himself in the Scriptures, with uprightness of heart, and much prudence
for the advancement of his design? Might he not conceive and think, that such
a doctrine, as the Scriptures hold forth for the advancement of godliness,
would be more authoritative and taking in the world, if it should come unto it
in the name of God, as composed and framed by God himself? If so, then is his
assuming the name of God in the Scriptures, no prevaricating with his design
of lifting up godliness in the world, but rather a wise and prudent expedient
for the furtherance of it. To this I answer (and so conclude.)

1. That it is no ways likely (scarce a thing possible to imagine) that a man
so far raised in zeal and fervencie of spirit, for the advancement of
godliness as to engage and act in it and toward it, according to the
proportion and measure of the Scriptures, should not understand and apprehend,
that for any man to intend or propose to himself the advancement of Gods glory
by any lie or untruth, is to sin with an high hand against godliness, and to
take a direct course to overthrow that, which he pretends to build up. For when
that lie, which is made the base or corner stone of the building, shall be
discovered and found out (as all lies are in danger of being discovered every
hour) the world will so much the more abhor the superstruction, and that
which was built upon it.

Nor 2. Does it stand with the honor of the holiness and purity, of the
wisdom and power of God, for so many thousand years together, as the
Scriptures have now served him, to suffer that great and sacred affair of his
glory, his dearest interest in the world, to be managed and promoted, by the
unsanctified hand, and polluted agency of a lie. Will you speak wickedly (says
Job to his three friends) for God? and talk deceitfully for him? and verse. 9.
do ye mock him, as one Job 13 9.
man mocketh another: in the former translation it was; will you make a lie for
him, as one lies for a man? q. d. it is a most dishonorable thing unto God,
unworthy his holiness, his wisdom, his power, to think that he stands in
need, or will accept with the least approbation, any man's lie, any man's deceit
for the building up of his glory; being so abundantly provided with wisdom
and power as he is, to serve himself in this kind, yea to procure himself to
be served by men with truth and holiness. Doubtless if he that framed the
Scriptures, had been conscious to himself, of speaking so deceitfully, of
making such a prodigious lie for God, as to say that he himself was God being a
man; he would never have put such a sharp reproof against his own practice,
into the mouth of so just and holy and virtuous a man as Job was, and that
according to his own report and account of him. But we have (I suppose) driven
this argument so far, that there is little or nothing left to oppose it with
any color of reason, which has not been answered; or at least that said,
which is a sufficient ground of answer to it.

A 3. Argument from the matter of the Scriptures, to evince their original
from God, is, their standing up with that great authority and power, to call
the world, even all the inhabitants thereof to that which they call, a denial
of themselves, to conjure them with that high hand of importunity and motive,
into a self-denying frame of heart and soul, with ways and practices
answerable thereunto. Such an attempt as this upon the world, especially so
prosecuted, and followed with means so proper and likely effect it, as the
Scriptures represent the matter unto us, is a strong and potent inducement to
any man that shall duly and diligently consider it, to believe that God and not
man is the great architect, builder and contriver of them. Let me (according to
the method we observed in handling the two former demonstrations) show you (in
a word) what that self-denial is, which the Scriptures so much commend unto
the world, and we now hold forth unto you, as a testimony of their proceeding
from God. Secondly, how and after what manner, by what arguments and motives,
the Scriptures deal and treat with the world to cast it into this heavenly
ecstacie of denying it self. Thirdly, and lastly, we will consider what weight
of reason or proof there is in the one, and in the other, to make good the
claim of the Scriptures, wherein they avouch God for their father.

For the first, that heavenly plant of self denial, which the Scriptures seek
to furnish the world withal, and to plant in the hearts and lives of men, may
be considered, either in the root, or in the fruit of it. By the root, I mean
the inward principle or frame of heart, out of which a man is not only enabled,
but inclined also, and sweetly disposed to deny himself. By the fruit, I mean
all those outward expressions, and deportments in a man's life and conversation,
which flow from such a principle, and answer the nature of it. Now this
self-denial, in the principal or root of it, may be thus described: It is
such a disposition or frame of heart in a man, which inclines him, i. makes him
willing and ready, to neglect himself in all personal and self-accommodations
especially in outward things, when, and as the glory of God, and general good
of men require it for their furtherance and advancement. We shall not now stand
to examine this description in all the particulars of it. The nature or main
property of self-denial, lies in this; to make a man ready and willing to
submit and subject himself and all his ends, interests, and enjoyments
whatsoever, unto the glory of God, and good of men, according to the occasions,
and exigencies of these. So that when a man has a call and opportunity to do
some special service unto God, or men, but yet he cannot do either, but
either with the hazard, or certain loss of some private and personal
accommodation of his own, whether matter of pleasure, profit, credit, liberty,
life, or the like, if in this case he shall resolve to do the service however,
whatsoever it costs him out of his own interests, or how cross soever the
doing of it proves to to his natural inclinations or desire, such a man may be
said to deny himself in that action or service. And if a man be inwardly
principled and uniformly disposed to act upon such terms as these, he may
properly be said to be a denier of himself.

The reason of the term, I mean why such a gracious habit or principle as we
speak of, is called, the denial of a man's self, I conceive is this: because he
that does things contrary to his own interests, and to the disaccommodating of
himself, does (as it were) deny that there is any such person in being as
himself. As he that acts contrary to the interests of God in the world (I mean
his honor and glory) is said to deny him (in works,) in works they deny him
(says the Apostle) i. they do Tit. 1. 16.
such things, and live after such a manner, that men are tempted (at least) and
have an occasion thereby ministered unto them, to think there is no such nature
or being, as God; even as they have, when men express themselves in words
against the being of God, and say, there is no God: so likewise when men shall
do things which are (or seem) contrary to their being or well being in the
world, they may be said (in such a sense) to deny themselves; i. to go to
work, as if they would persuade men, that there are no such persons of men in
the world, as they. As on the contrary, men are said to confess God, or
confess Christ in the world, not only (nor indeed so much) when in words they
say, there is a God, or there is a Christ in being; as when they either do or
suffer such things, which were no ways reasonable for men either to do, or
suffer, but only upon this supposition, that there is a God, and there is a
Christ, and that such, both the one and the other, as the Scripture represents
and affirms them to be. In the same manner of phrase and expression, men may be
said to confess themselves, in opposition to a denying of themselves, when
they act merely according to their own interests, and for their own benefit and
pleasures, especially at such times and in such cases, wherein the glory of
God, and the good of men, do in a way of reason and equity challenge a waving
of all self-respects, and self-seeking at their hand. If in such cases as
these, men instead of their not minding, not regarding themselves and their own
concernments, shall despise the interests of God and men, acting for themselves
as if there were neither God, nor any man or men besides themselves, they may
according to the honor of the Scripture phrase we speak of, be called
self-confessours or avouchers of themselves. This for the first particular:
what that denial of a man's self is, which the Scriptures call the world unto;
which call of theirs, we affirm to be that perfect and distinct voice of the
glorious God himself, speaking out of the Scriptures, as from a throne of
holiness unto the world: So that these Scriptures may hereby also (amongst
other signs and means of discovery) be known to be from God.

In the second place, let us with like brevity consider, how and after what
manner, by what arguments and motives it calls the world unto that denial of
it self, which has been described.

1. By express precept or command. Let no man seek his own; but every man
another wealth. i. another good, another comfort. Let no man seek his own
wealth, but every man the 1 Cor. 10. 24.
wealth of other. i. let no man mind, regard or seek his own interest or
wealth, apart from, much less in opposition to the wealth and comfort of other
men. He commands, that no man suffers his own wealth, or contentment in any
kind, to interpose between him, and his faithful endeavors to promote the
good of others. Not but that it is lawful for any man or woman, to seek their
own good; but it must be with a tender eye had to the good of others, and with
subordination thereunto. If at any time there falls out a case of competition,
our own personal and private benefit and good must give place to the good of
many: as the Lord Christ said of himself, and of the end of his coming into the
world; that he came not to be ministered Matthew 20. 28. Mark 10. 45.
unto, but to minister, and to lay down his life aransome for many. So the will
and command of God is, that men should so live in this present world, as if
every man were dead unto himself, and alive unto another; i. had no wisdom,
strength, care, time, will, necessary occasion, to act for himself, and his
personal concernments in the outer man, but could find all these in good
proportion to act for the public good, and for 1 John 3. 16.
other men.

2. As the Scriptures command that self-denial we speak of, so do they
encourage and press unto it by the great example of the Lord Christ himself,
they hold forth this pattern in the mount, and cry aloud unto the world,
commanding every man to do likewise. We which are strong (says the Apostle)
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. i. not
to seek the ease or contentment of the flesh or outer man, with the discontent
or neglect of any. For otherwise if the promoting of the good of other men, be
a thing pleasing to us, (as indeed it should) we may very lawfully, yea and
commendably please our selves: and yet this pleasing of our selves in that
excellent and worthy thing we speak of, should not be the chief Romans 15. 1.
end neither, why we do it. In the very next words the Apostle extends the
exhortation beyond those who are strong, and charge the same duty (in effect)
upon every man: Let every man please his neighbor in that which is good (or,
for his good) to edification. i. let him subject his own ends, and desires to
the spiritual good (especially) of other men. And to bind this exhortation
yet closer to the consciences of all men, he makes use of the golden cord of
the example of Christ himself, in the next words: For even Christ pleased not
himself, but as it is written, the reproaches of them that reproached thee; or,
the rebukes of them that rebuked thee, fell on me. Even Christ pleased not
himself. As if he should say, since Christ himself, who above all the men under
heaven might in reason have been dispensed with, and excused in this behalf, I
mean from submitting his own pleasure, ease, comforts and peace, unto other
men, yet was willing to sacrifice all the interests he had in the world, upon
the service of the pleasure, peace and comfort of others, even of those that
had reproached, or rebuked God, that is, of sinful men; sin being a
reproaching, or rebuking of God; a dishonor or affront put upon him. This
motive unto 1 John 3. 16.
self-denial, drawn from the great example of the Lord Christ, is elsewhere
made use of by the Scriptures, for the advancement thereof in the world.

3. To show that the example of the Lord Christ in this behalf, though it is
true, he was not (in a sense) (...) as James speaks, subject to the like
sinful passions or infirmities with us; yet is not altogether unimitable by
us, the examples of the Saints, are held forth in the Scriptures also to
persuade the world into a like denial of it self. For though I be free 1 Cor.
9. 19.
from all men (says Paul) yet have I made my self servant unto all men. He was
free from all men, as touching any engagements upon him, as from them: not but
that God had engaged him unto all men, as he acknowledges else where;
confessing that he was a debtour both to the Gracian^, and to the Barbarians,
to the Romans 1. 14.
wise, and to the unwise; viz. because God had honored him, with making him a
feofee in trust for them, by putting that great treasure of the Gospel into his
hands for their benefit and use. In this sense he was not freo from men, but a
debtour to them; yet in the sense he means, he was free from all men; but
however, he made himself a servant unto all: i. he did not mind or act his own
work, his own business in the world; he did not drive any design of making
himself great, or rich, or honorable, with the greatness, riches, or honors
of the world; but minded the business of other men; when he did work for
himself (I mean upon his occupation of tent-making) he wrought rather for
others, then for himself: his hands (as somewhere he speaks) ministered unto his
necessities, yea to the necessities of those that were with him, that he might
not be chargeable unto others. He subjected all his own temporal and carnal
things, to their spiritual things; he built up their inner man, as it were,
with the ruins and spoils of his own outer man. And this example of himself,
he declares and holds forth to the world, to invite others into the same spirit
and practice of self-denial with him. You may at your leisure peruse another
passage much of the same import (Col. 1. 24.) concerning the same man. And
another of Epaphroditus not much unlike, Philip. 2. 30.
Philip. 2. 30. besides some others.

4. The Scriptures do not only command and enjoin that denial of men's selves
we speak of, do not only invite, press, and persuade to it by the glorious
example of the Lord Jesus Christ himself (which a man would think were alone
enough to propagate the disposition and practice of it throughout the world,)
and by the examples of the Saints; but they further set themselves to draw the
world by the heart and soul into this blessed business, with the great promise
of life and salvation, and the glorious things of the world to come. Jesus
answered and said (says Mark when Peter had begun to say unto him, Mar. 10.
29, 30.
Lo we have forsaken all and followed thee) Verily I say unto you, there is no
man that has forsaken house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive
an hundred fold now at this present, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to come,
eternal life. A like passage you have, Matthew. 19. 29. And elsewhere you have
this Matthew. 19. 29. Matthew. 10 39.
promise from the same hand: he has loses his life for my sake, shall find
it, and proportionably, whatsoever else a man shall lose for Christ's sake,
besides his life, he shall find that also; i. a full and rich consideration
for it, in the life or world to come. Now a man may be said to lose his life
(and so any other thing) for Christ's sake, not only by suffering death, rather
then renounce his Christian profession; but likewise when he exposes himself
unto death, or come's to taste of death, for the performance of any duty or
service in what kind soever, which Christ has commanded him. The Apostle
speaking of Epaphroditus, says, that for the work of Christ he was nigh unto
death, not regarding his life to supply that service which was lacking on
Philip. 2. 30.
the Philippians part toward him. Now in case Epaphroditus had lost his life,
through his zeal and faithfulness to stand by Paul in his distress, and to
minister unto him, he might as truly have been said to have lost his life for
Christ's sake, as if he had died, because he would not deny, or renounce the
name of Christ. And so whatsoever a man suffers loss of, or deprives himself
of besides, for keeping any of the words, obeying any the commands of Christ,
he does in true account suffer loss of it for Christ's sake. This is a fourth
method, or way whereby the Scriptures labor to cast the world into that
heavenly ecstacie of self-denial; viz. by provoking men to drink their fill of
the hope and expectation of the glory and great things of the world to come.

5. And lastly, They have yet another formidable engine whereby to bow and bend
the world unto a denial of themselves, or else to batter and break them in
pieces; viz. the threatenings of the wrath and vengeance which is to come, of
the worm that never dies, and of the fire that never goes out. I shall only
insist upon two places for this purpose: The one is, Matthew. 10. 37, 38, 39. The
other, Matthew. 5. 29. 30. In the former Mat. 10. 37, 38, 39.
place our Savior expresses himself thus. He that loves father or mother
more then me, is not worthy of me. And he that loves son or daughter more
then me, is not worthy of me. And he that takes not up his cross and
follows after me, is not worthy of me. He that will find his life shall lose
it, etc. First, What is it to love father or mother, son or daughter, and
other things proportionably, more then Christ? It is to prefer the enjoyment
of them, or our contentment in them, before the enjoyment of Christ, or (which
is the same) before our subjection and obedience unto the will and commands of
Christ: So that when it comes to a case of competition, between doing the will
of Christ, and pleasing a father or mother, gratifying a son or a daughter,
we choose rather to please or gratify these, then to do the will of Christ.
verse. 8. We know it is the will and command of Christ, that men should labor,
not so much for the meat that perishes, as for that which indurent to eternal
Joh. 6. 27.
life. Now in case we have parents that are carnal, and covetous, and worldly,
and would have us to be like unto themselves, and shall be offended at us, and
perhaps threaten to cast us off, or the like, in case we shall apply our selves
in any serious or intense manner to the means of grace and of salvation, as in
frequenting religious exercises, conversing much with good company, etc. if in
his case, we shall neglect the best means of salvation we can enjoy, or abstain
from holy exercises, and refrain good company, to keep our interests in the
affections and good will of our parents, we may be said to love, father, or
mother, more then Christ. So we know it is the will of Christ, that those that
are rich in this world, should do good, and not simply so, but that they be
rich in good works, ready to distribute, 1 Timothy 6. 17, ^8.
willing to communicate, etc. Now if men that are rich, and have full estates,
and are forehanded in the world, to gratify their children, and make them
great on earth, as either by matching of them, or stocking of them, or leaving
them so many hundreds, or so many thousands when they die, shall neglect that
commandment of Christ whilst they live, and be penurious and pinching, and poor
in good works, backward to distribute and to communicate unto those that want;
these may truly be said to love sons or daughters more then Christ. There is
the like reason in other things.

But what does our Savior mean, by that expression, is not worthy of me? This
is a figurative expression, wherein the antecedent, is put for the consequent,
or the cause for the effect; a propriety of speech very frequent in Scripture
(as heretofore upon occasion, we have taken notice of) His meaning in it is,
that such an one, viz. who love's father or mother, more then him, shall have
no benefit by him, shall not be saved by him. He expresses this, by laying
down a plain ground or reason for it; viz the unworthiness in such a person of
him: i. the unsutablenesse and incongruity that would be in the action, to the
equity or wisdom of God in case God should give of that salvation, which
comes by me, to such a man: In regard of which incongruity, most certain it is,
that God will never do it. As on the contrary, when there is a worthiness, i.
a meetnesse or capacity, as it were, in a person to have any such act of grace
or favor as we now speak of conferred upon him, God will in that respect
confer it accordingly. You have this passage from the mouth of our Savior
himself, now in glory, Rev 3. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have
not defiled their garments: i. they have walked answerable to their Rev. 3. 4.
holy calling by the Gospel, or profession: these shall walk with me in white:
i. shall be partakers with me in my glory, why? For they (says he) are worthy:
i. there is a decorum in it, there is a rational proportion between such men's
ways, and such a reward; not in respect of any exactness or rigor in point of
justice, or of merit; but in respect of the goodness, wisdom, and bounty of
God; so that he may confer the glory of salvation upon such, without
disparagement of himself in the eyes of his creature, either in goodness,
holiness, etc. nay, he shall do it to the glory and high commendation of
these: and because he may reward upon such terms, he will do it. We must not
stand here to argue or resolve that question: Why are not wicked men, who
defile their garments, as worthy of salvation, or, of walking with Christ in
white, as they are of receiving grace, or the gift of conversion from God? And
if God does not stand upon worthiness in the one, but gives grace to the most
unworthy of all, from day to day, why should he stand upon it in the other?
This question we have heretofore (as I remember) given satisfaction unto; and
may upon occasion bestow some further thoughts upon it hereafter: we should
digress too far to fall upon it for the present. By what has been said upon
the Scripture cited from Matthew, it fully appears, that such persons as shall
not deny themselves in outward enjoyments and contentments in the world, shall
have no benefit by Christ, and consequently shall perish everlastingly: which
is yet further confirmed by those two following clauses: And he that takes not
up his cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me: And, he that will
find his life, shall lose it. We must not now insist upon the particular
opening of these; as neither of that other place, Matthew. 5. which we joined
with the former: we shall do little upon it, save only repeat the words unto
you. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; for
it is profitable for thee, that Mat. 5. 29 30.
one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast
into hell. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from
thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. By the right hand, and right
eye, our Savior means, all manner of desires, contentments, enjoyments
whatsoever, chiefly those that are most pleasing and contentfull unto us above
the rest. Now these are said to offend us, or, to make us to offend (as the
word signifies) when we are either apt to be tempted or occasioned by them, to
baulk any of the ways or precepts of Christ, or to walk contrary to them. And
whereas he says, that it is profitable for us that one of our members should
perish, and not, etc. He clearly implies, that the not plucking out the right
eye, or not cutting off the right hand, when they offend us, i. the not denying
of our selves in such contentments, which we cannot enjoy without faultring
with Christ in some or other of his ways, will certainly bring the vengeance
of hellfire upon us: So that clear it is, that the Scriptures strive and
contend with the world, to bring men to that self-denial we spoke of, by this
argument also of dread and terror; viz. the threatening of them with hellfire,
if they will not submit. This for the second thing propounded: How, and after
what manner, and by what means, the Scriptures bend themselves to fill the
world with the deniallof it self.

The third, and last thing we have to do, is to weigh and consider, what there
is, either in the nature of the design we speak of (viz in building up the
world in a denial of it self) or else in the manner of the managing of it in
the Scriptures (as it has been represented unto you) or in both together, to
evince these Scriptures to be from God.

First, the very nature of the design, bewrays God to be the author of it,
and consequently, of the Scriptures, wherein and whereby it is managed and
promoted. It is said, Act. 6. Act. 6. 15.
that they that sat in the council, looking steadfastly upon Stephen, saw his
face as it had been the face of an Angel. There was a divine beauty or
comeliness that appeared in it. And, my brethren, if we have eyes to see, and
shall but narrowly and steadfastly look upon that noble principle or disposition
of self denial which we spoke of, with the precious fruits and effects of it,
in which it may be best discerned and judged of, there will appear a kind of
heavenly luster and brightness in the face of it, whereby it may be discerned
and known to have somewhat more then flesh and blood in it; to be of a more
worthy parentage then from men. For what is the denial of a man's self truly
interpreted, but the making of a man's self, and his own ends, his footstool,
and the glory of God, and good of other men, his throne? And by what way can we
reasonably imagine, that ever it should enter into the heart of man (except it
came thither by Gods special sending) to teach the world to build such a
throne as this? The great masters and instructers of the world, led by the best
genius and spirit which they had to attend and to inspire them, sought to plant
the world with a quite contrary principle (upon the matter) and that under the
notion of a choice and excellent virtue (as we signified unto you, in our first
argument of this second head.) Here we informed you that Aristotle himself
amongst some other of his virtues condemned for vices in the Scriptures, set's
up that which he call's (...), i. a kind of magnificence and greatness, or
stateliness of spirit, which teaches a man to stand upon his terms: and if
he be worthy of great things, to judge so of himself, and to let the world know
it accordingly. Whereas the nature and property of that self-denying frame of
spirit which the Scripture commends (yea and commands, as we heard) unto the
best and greatest and most deserving of men, is to teach, and persuade men, to
forbear all reflecting upon their own goodness and worth in every kind; to
take heed of setting their hearts upon their wisdom, or virtuous actions when
they increase; as well as upon riches when they increase. To be as men that
know no excellency or desert in themselves, no though God has made their
faces to shine, by making them eminent and signal benefactours unto the world;
but to be as weaned children (in David's metaphor) amongst those to whom they
have been as fathers, and preservers: to give the world leave to do what they
please, even the worst, unto them, when they have done the best they have been
able, for the world: yea and to desire no other recompense from the world, for
all the good they have done for it, when they have done the uttermost they have
been able, then only an opportunity to do them more still; and to expect no
other recompense from it, but ingratitude in the highest. The voice that
teaches these things unto the world, is certainly the voice of God, and not of
men. Alas, the learning and wisdom of the wise men of the world, never
reached any such notions, or strains of true excellency as these: these things
dwelt with God in that light which is unaccessible unto men, until himself was
pleased to bring them forth into such a light which is accessible.

But secondly, if we shall add the consideration of the means wherewith the
Scriptures are furnished, and whereby they daily advance this work of
self-denial in the world, this character of their divinity, will appear more
clearly. For certain it is, that whatsoever excellency, or praiseworthy
thing, of how near affinity soever to which self-denial indeed, the wisdom,
learning, and piety of this world, have at any time recommended unto, or
endeavored to advance amongst men, they never had that outstretched arm of
means, nor any like unto it, to carry on their attempt, which the Scriptures
have, to exalt that self-denial in the hearts and souls and lives of men,
which they have abundantly exalted in all these, against all the strong
oppositions, the numerous and potent contradictions hereunto, which they have
met with, and do meet with daily, from the most inveterate corruptions in the
natures and customs, in the lives and ways of men. Never did Plato, Plutarch,
Seneca, or any of that generation of men, who sought to make the world wise
without the wisdom revealed from heaven in the Seriptures, ever lift up such
a motive to the hearts and souls and consciences of men, so likely to transform
them, to act, and work, and mould them into a self-denying frame, as that most
strange and never-enough admired humiliation of the Son of God, in the
description and demonstration whereof the Gospel so much rejoiceth. Nor did any
man, the eyes of whose soul were never bless't with the sight or enterview of
the Gospel, ever engage life and immortality, or the powers of the world to
come, to teach men how to deny themselves; especially upon those terms of
advantage on which the Scriptures employ them, for such a purpose: nor did any
man, especially without the aid of the Scriptures, ever cause hell to rise up
from beneath, after any such manner, with that emphasis of dread and terror,
which the Scripture does to carry men upon the wings of fear over that great
gulf, which lies between self-love, and self-denial, to land them here. But
this consideration we have further opened and urged, in another argument, and
therefore only give a taste of it here. Howbeit the very mention of it, is
sufficient to dignifie, and distinguish the Scriptures from all writings
whatsoever, whose authors are men, and not God.

A fourth evidence or demonstration, from the matter of the Scriptures, to
prove their original and descent from God is, that heart-searching properly,
which is found in many of the veins and passages of it, that penetrating force
and vigor which ever and anon, in the preaching and opening of them, it fel^
in the reins and consciences and inward parts of men. As David says of the
sun, his going forth is from the end of the Psalm 19. 6.
heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the
heat thereof. So do the Scriptures compass the hearts and souls and
consciences of men round about, there is nothing in the inward parts of men,
though never so secret or retired, and that is hid from the beams of the light
of them. They are as mediators to bring men and their hearts, men and their
consciences together; and to make them acquainted the one with the other, who
before lived, as it were, at a distance, and had little knowledge the one of
the other. There is not a word in my tongue (says David) but lo, O Lord, thou
know it Psalm. 139. 4.
all together, viz. whilst it is yet in my tongue, and before it be uttered. So
experience shows, that there is not a word, not a thought, not a purpose or
intention in the heart or soul of a man, but the Scripture knows it altogether,
even whilst it is yet secret; whilst it does but work in the very conception
and first gathering or rising of it, before either it be perfectly formed
within, or put into outward act or execution, the Scripture takes hold of it,
the very fountains of the great depths in men are many times as it were broken
up by it; and the foundations of the round world in the souls of men
discovered. The hidden treasures of darkness are brought forth into light; and
men come to see the invisible things of their own spirits by it.

The Scriptures themselves speak much of that property of theirs which we are
now holding forth unto you, as a proof, that they are from God: but because it
is their own cause that is in pleading, we shall not insist upon their
testimony in this kind, save only so far, as the frequent and sensible
experience of men and work concur with it, and so are a conformation to it.

Now the Scriptures may be said to search, or to discover the hearts of men,
two ways, or in two respects. 1. As they declare and show unto men, such
things in them, as they took notice of, and knew to be in themselves, before
such declaration was made unto them, but were not aware that any other took
notice of them, but themselves; thought them secrets, into which no soul had
entered but their own. 2. As they disclose and discover unto men such things in
them, which they never knew before to be in them, which they never minded in
themselves, until the discoveries we speak of came upon them.

For the first, There are many things in the hearts and spirits of men, which
do (...), i. flote and swim as it were in the top of the waters, which are
nigh unto themselves, and with which they themselves converse familiarly from
time to time; but yet they little think or consider that any other has
conjunction with them in the knowledge hereof. Thus many are conscious to
themselves of such and such fears under which they live, least such or such
wicked and foul practices of theirs, as in ways of adultery, cheating, coining
and the like, should break out and be discovered, and come to the public
knowledge of men. So again, many know well enough that such and such purposes
and intentions lodge in them; yea and that such inclinations and dispositions
work in their members (as the Apostles phrase is) Now then, this is that which
I say, that the Scriptures many times, especially in the ministry and opening
of them, meet with these secret and hidden things of the soul; challenge men
and women for them, and charge them with them; describing them with so much
particularity and exactness, and so near to the life, that men cannot lightly
but think, that either he that presents and shows them unto them upon such
terms, has been within them, and seen the things themselves, as it were, face
to face; or that he that sets them on work, and directs them to speak, has had
that advantage. The Scriptures speak of such things as these, such discoveries
as we speak of, as things very agreeable to them, and which may well come to
pass by their ministry. But if all prophecy (says the Apostle) and there
come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is
judged of all, viz. of all that 1 Cor. 14. 24.
prophecy at such a time: he is convinced of them, and judged of them; i. it
may come to pass, that he may be convinced and judged of them. There is that
in the nature of prophesying, or of opening the Scriptures, which is apt to
convince and judge men. It is a property of speech very frequent in Scripture,
to signify the aptness of a means for the doing of such or such a thing, or
producing such or such an effect, by mentioning the effect, as produced by it,
whether it be really and actually produced, or no, see 1 Cor. 8. 11. Genesis 20.
3. And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on
his face, he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. How,
or to whom, are the secrets of such a man's heart made manifest, by means of
that prophesying, or opening the Scriptures here spoken of? It seems not so
much to others, no, nor to him neither who prophecieth; but rather to the man
himself, as appears by the effect or consequent of this manifestation, in those
words: and so falling down on his face, so, i. by reason of the secrets of his
heart manifested, he will fall down on his face and worship God: though by this
effect of the discovery made to himself, they are in part made manifest unto
others also. But if the secrets of the man's heart here spoken of, be such
things as were known unto him before, how can they be said to be made manifest
unto him, by hearing the Church prophecy? I answer, they may in a five-fold
sense or consideration, be said to be made manifest to him by the means here
spoken of, though they were known unto him before.

1. Though in respect of their nature or simple being they were known to a man
before, yet in respect of their first original, and source, from whence they
came, viz. Gods heavy curse upon mankind in the person of Adam for sin: and in
this respect, viz. which concern's the shameful and dishonorable pedigree of
them, they may be said to be made manifest unto him by prophesying according to
the Scriptures, And the truth is, that sin, and things that are sinful, can
never be manifest (in the emphaticall sense of the word) i. fully manifest,
unless it be known what, or who, was the author or first founder of the
generation. This discovery or manifestation of sin, cannot be made unto any
man, by any other way, light, or means, but only by the Scriptures. Or,

2. Though the secrets of the heart of the man of which the Apostle speaks,
might (as was said) be known unto him before, in respect of their simple being;
yet in respect of their sinfulness, or the evil cleaving to them, they might
be unknown to him (or however very darkly and obscurely known) men may know
that such and such desires, and so that such and such dispositions, such and
such apprehensions, and imaginations are in them; and yet be ignorant that
these desires, dispositions, imaginations which they know are in them, are so
wicked and reprovable in the sight of God, as the Scriptures represents them.
It is one thing for a man when he has vowed a vow unto God, and not paid it,
to know that he has not paid it, and another thing to know, clearly how
sinful he is before God for not paying of it. It is one thing for a man to
know, that he was at mass, or did reverence to the host; another thing to know
that he sinned in doing either. The Papists generally know, when they are at
mass, that they are at it; but they do not know that they do evil in being
there: So natural and unregenerate men, may know that such and such desires,
as (for example) of such things as are another man's, and dispositions, as to
uncleanness, fornication, revenge, etc. are in them; and yet not know that
they are hateful in the sight of God. Now then, when the Scriptures in the
ministry of them, discover the evil and vileness of such things, they may very
properly be said to make them manifest, and that in special manner to the
persons themselves, in whom they are; because the discovery or reproof of
particular sins by the Scriptures, do nothing in that degree affect or smite
the consciences of those that are free, as they do of those that know
themselves guilty of them. And the truth is, that things which are evil and
sinful, are never manifest unto men. i. in any measure known, as they are to
be known, and as they should be known, till the Scriptures has had to do with
the judgments and consciences of men, and work about them; till they have
represented them unto men by their light. Hence you have the expression of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5. But all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the
light; or rather (according to the former treatise which is much better, here)
But all things when they are repreved of the light (meaning of the Scriptures,
or that light which Ephesians. 5. 13.
shines from them) are made manifest, for whatsoever does make manifest, is
light. q. d. As it is the nature and property of the natural light, to
discover and manifest all things, i. all visible and corporeal things, where
it shines, without which their nature shapes and forms and colors could not be
seen or known: in like manner, all things that are special, and which relate
to another world, cannot be manifested, viz. to the judgments and consciences
of men, neither in the evil of them, if they be things that be evil; nor yet in
the goodness of them, if they be things that are truly good, but only by the
Scriptures, or the light that shines from them.

Well then, this is another consideration, in which such secrets of the hearts
of men, which were in respect of their beings known before, may yet be said to
be made manifest unto them by that Scripture exercise of prophecving.

3. There is another manifestation of the things we speak of, which usually
follows upon the two former, as the effect or consequent of them, especially of
the latter: and this is a manifestation of them in their proper tendency, which
is unto death, and the everlasting destruction of the creature, with whom they
are found, if they be things that are evil; whereas on the contrary, the proper
tendencie of things that are good, is unto life and glory; and these also are
made manifest in this their blessed tendencie by the Scriptures. Men may know
that they have such and such desires and dispositions, such and such ends and
intentions within them, and may yet further know, that they are sinnefully
evil; and yet not necessarily know that they bind men over (and that with
adamantine bands that cannot be broken, but by the hand of faith in Christ
Jesus) unto eternal condemnation, and the vengeance of eternal fire. But the
Scriptures when they make them manifest in the two former considerations,
usually make them manifest in this also. I was once alive (says Paul) without
the law, but when the commandment came sin^^ revived but I died. When the
commandment Romans 7 9.
came, viz. to my conscience, in the light and power of it, discovering first
unto me the great evil of my sin: secondly, the heavy condemnation which in
that regard attended it; sin revived, i that evil principle within me, the
malignity of my nature, began to work at an higher rate of wickedness then
before, causing me to think harder thoughts of God, and of his law then I did
before, and strongly tempting me to be desperate in sinning, since all hope of
mercy was cut off from me. But I died, i. I gave my self for a child of
perdition, for a lost man. This is a third manifestation, which the Scriptures
make of the sinful secrets of the hearts of men. There is yet another
consideration

(In the fourth place) wherein they may be said to make them manifest too;
which results as it were from all the former. This you may conceive thus. The
secrets of the hearts of carnal and sinful men, being so discovered unto them
(as you have heard) in the three former considerations in their original
vileness, and guilt, must needs become so much the more a deformed, ghastly,
and formidable object, in the eye of their consciences; which appearance
answers the reality and truth of them; for things that are sinful, are out of
measure, deformed, ghastly, formidable; and when they come to be so apprehended
and looked upon, then are they manifest indeed unto them who so judge of them:
and so much the more manifest, by how much the more frequently and attentively
men shall thus look upon them. Now when the Scriptures have put their colors
upon the things that are sinful in men, and made them to appear in their eyes
like unto themselves, i. monstrous, ghastly, and formidable (as was said) the
conscience is so much the more provoked and engaged to look both frequently and
attentively upon them, and cannot lightly forbear either the one or the other.
This is a fourth sense or consideration, wherein the secrets of men's hearts may
be said to be made manifest unto them, by the Scriptures preached.

5. And lastly, there is yet another sense, wherein the Apostle may be
understood, and the secrets of men's hearts be said to be made manifest unto
them, viz. when they are clearly represented and held forth unto them in the
Scriptures, being opened and laid before them, as a man's natural face may be
said to be made manifest unto him, when such a glass is presented to him, and
held before his eyes, wherein all the lineaments and true proportion of this
face of his appears. And though it be supposed, that a man had some knowledge
of his face, as what manner of one it is, before the glass be presented to
him; yet this face of his may truly and properly enough be said, to be made
manifest, i clearly shown unto him in the glass. In like manner, though it be
supposed, that natural men know the secrets of their hearts before they come
at the Scriptures; yet this displaying, and describing them before their faces,
may very properly be said to make them manifest unto them. Now there is no man
or woman who converseth much, and understandingly, and conscientiously with the
Scriptures, especially that lives under, or frequents a lively and powerful
ministry of them, but he experimentally finds, and cannot but give testimony
unto the truth of what has been said in all the particulars insisted upon,
concerning the property which we have asserted unto them, viz. of searching the
hearts and the reins of the sons and daughters of men. As the King of Arams
servant told her master, that the Prophet Elisha made known to the King of
Israel even the Words that he spoke in his privy chamber: So do the Scriptures
ever and anon tell men and women in 2 King. 6. 12.
their ear, the words they speak in the secret chambers of their hearts; they
discover unto them, their most private and retired thoughts, their counsels,
the particular motions, debates and agitations of their spirits, in reference
to such or such a business, or the committing of such or such a sin; what
has passed, and has been argued pro and contra within them. They describe
unto them the figleaves, which they sew together to cover their nakedness; I
mean the fleshly and foolish arguments, reasons and grounds, by which they
strengthen and encourage themselves, in ways and practices of looseness,
vanity, and sin. They declare unto drunkards, and vain-company keepers, upon
what grounds they build their drunken practices; and so to the adulterer, and
unclean person, what their hope and confidence is of coming off at last without
danger from the ways of that abomination: and so to the covetous person, and
those that practice deceit, they unbosome these also to themselves; and lay
before them those snares of death wherein their feet are taken; I mean those
carnal reasonings and conceits, which are the oracles they consult with, for
the comforting of them in their way.

Let me add this one thing further under this first head: look what has been
spoken to illustrate and confirm the heartsearching property of the Scriptures,
in respect of things that are evil in men; as much is to be conceived, and
might readily be spoken on the otherhand, I mean to illustrate and prove the
like divine faculty or property in them, to discover and attest all things that
are just, and holy, and good in the hearts and spirits of good men. They
declare and show their hearts also unto them, with all the goodness, beauty,
and excellent workmanship, that the holy Ghost has wrought upon them; they
present them ever and anon with a model and draught, of that uprightness and
sincerity, of those holy affections and desires, those gracious purposes
intentions and resolutions, those spiritual and substantial reasonings and
debates, whereby they strengthen and establish themselves in the ways of life
and peace. And this for the first of the two ways mentioned, wherein the
Scriptures may be said to search and discover the hearts of men; viz. as
touching such things, which are already known in part unto men themselves, when
they come to discover them. But

2. These Scriptures have a more searching and piercing faculty then so, into
the hearts and spirits of men. They do not only search out and descrie such
secret things in men, which swim upon the face of the waters, and lie in the
uppermost parts of the soul, being known [in part] unto the hearts of men
themselves; but they dive to the bottom, and draw out even the deep waters of
the soul; such as the soul it self was not aware of, knew not of their being
there; they declare what is below, even in the nethermost parts of the earth.
Who knows the things of a man (says the Apostle) but the spirit of man which
is in him? Yea, the spirit of man which is in him, knows 1 Cor. 2. 12.
but in part the things of the man. Hazael knew not there was any such
disposition or principle in him, which would carry him to commit those
barbarous and bloody sins, mentioned 2 King. 8 as the setting of strong
Cities on fire, slaying young 2 King. 8. 13.
men with the sword, dastuing infants against the stones, tearing in pieces, or
ripping up women with child; nay he was so far from being conscious unto
himself of any such disposition as this within him, that when the Prophet
charged him with it, he replied with great disdain: What? is thy servant a dog,
that I should do this great [or strange] thing? He thought he was as far from
doing such things as these, as he was from being turned into a dog. And 1 John
3. If our heart condemn us, God 1. Joh. 3. 20.
is greater then our heart, and knows all things: clearly impliing, that our
hearts, i. consciences and understandings, are very defective in knowing and
comprehending those things in us, that are just matter of condemnation to us:
And that in case we have not the testimony of our consciences, that our
atonement is made by Jesus Christ; we have cause to fear and to expect a
proportion of wrath and vengeance from God, for much more sin and
wickedness, then we know by our selves. Yea the things of a man, which the
spirit that is in him, knows of, hold no considerable proportion with those
things of the man, that are in him, whereof this spirit is ignorant: as the
fishes of the sea which are taken and drawn out of the waters, are not the
thousand part for number, of those that are left behind. Therein (says David,
speaking of the great and wide sea) are things creeping innumerable, both great
and small beasts. So like wise it is in that great element, that vast
treasure-house of the heart and spirit of man: there are thoughts, affections,
dispositions, imaginations, with other furniture of that kind without number,
of a thousand shapes and sorts, the least portion or part whereof it is, that
ever comes to the knowledge of the heart and spirit of men, except it be by the
mediation of such discoveries, as are made by the light of the Scriptures unto
them. For God (as we heard even now from John) is not only greater then our
hearts (viz. in knowing what is in us) but is so far greater, as that he knows
all things in this kind, our hearts (i. our consciences, as was said) knowing
little in comparison. Now look what knowledge of the hearts and spirits of men,
is in God, is likewise in the Scriptures; for God has communicated this
knowledge unto them. Look whatsoever God himself knows concerning the general
frame and temper of the hearts and natures of men and women, he has transfused
and wrought it into the body of the Scriptures. So that (...). whatsoever is
knowable of the evil or wickedness of the heart of man (in general) and so
likewise of the goodness thereof too, when it is regenerate, is to be found in
the Scriptures, if we were able to search the treasury hereof. This great
truth seems to lie in the joint of those two verses, verse. 12. and 13. of the
4th to the Hebr. For the word of God is lively, sharper, Heb. 4. 12. came 13.
etc. Neither is there any creature which is not manifest [(...)] in his sight:
but all things are naked and open etc. q. d. The word of God is (and must needs
be) thus lively in operation, etc. -- because God has the perfect and through
knowledge of all things whatsoever in the hearts of men; and has levened (as
it were) and seasoned the Scriptures (his word) with this knowledge. He seemed
to take measure of the heart of man, when he framed his word, they are so
commensurable the one unto the other, in that respect. There is no man or woman
that have had any intimate and conscientious doings with the Scriptures, but
know by their own experience, that these things are so: I mean that the
Scriptures do not only declare unto them such things, as they themselves know
to be in them, when the declaration is made; but that they prophecy also of
many other things, which they knew not of, and could hardly believe were in
them indeed, which yet do appear from within, and discover themselves in their
season; as the disposition in Hazael which we spoke of, did, when the tentation
came in his way, and he made King of Syria.

Let us now briefly consider, whether there be not weight and power in
abundance in the consideration now proposed and opened unto you, to exalt the
conclusion on high, in your judgments and consciences, which we drive at: viz
that the Scriptures are the offspring and issue of God. When I consider (says
David, speaking in his meditation unto God) thy heavens Psalm. 8. 3.
the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou have ordained,
what is man, -- etc. David (we see) calls the Heavens, Gods Heavens (when I
consider thy heavens) and the work of his fingers; and one thing (it seems)
which made him so positive in his conclusion, that the heavens were Gods, i.
the work of his fingers, was the consideration of that glorious furniture of
them, the moon and the stars; these (it seems) gave light in the eyes of
David's judgment and understanding, to see and judge that God was the workman
and maker of them. But certainly the moon and all the stars in the firmament
of heaven (take the sun himself into the conjunction) do not give any such
light whereby to be led unto God, as the architect and makes of them, to
discover him in this relation unto them, as those characters and impressions of
light in the Scriptures, which answer with so much exactnes the secret and
hidden impressions of things in the hearts and spirits of men and women in the
world, do demonstrate these to be a fabric of wisdom and knowledge, whose
builder and maker must needs be God. Some that have been diligent observers of
the sun, moon and stars, have yet doubted whether God was the maker of them,
and have rather thought that they were from eternity: Yea some that have minded
them narrowly, have doubted whether there be a God or no, yea denied it, as
Diagoras, with some others of old. But (doubtless) never did any man, who in
any considerable degree, understood and minded those strains and carriages in
the Scriptures, which comprehend the darkness, and open the hid treasures of
the hearts and spirits of men, doubt or question, whether the Scriptues were
from God or no. And thus (says Paul as we heard before, speaking of the
unbeliever that should come into the Church, and hear the Saints prophesying)
Thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his
face, 1 Cor. 14. 25.
he will worship God, and report, that God is in you of a truth. The discovery
of the secrets of the heart, even nature it self teaches men to acknowledge
and resent, as that which is above the sphere of the creature, and proper unto
God. Come see a man (says the woman of Samaria to her countrymen) that has
Joh 4. 29.
told me all things that ever I did? Is not this the Christ? implying, that to
be able to tell things that are secret, argues special communion with a
supernatural principle, which is God. So verse. 18. when Christ had said unto
her; thou have had five husbands, and he whom thou now have, is not thy
husband; she presently concluded, that he was a Prophet. The woman says unto
him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a Prophet: meaning, that he had the
knowledge of such things as he declared, imparted unto him by God, Act. 1. 24.
God is said to be the knower of the hearts of all men: and the Lord Christ in
his Epistle to the Church of Thyatira dated from heaven, assumes this unto
himself, as his prerogative royal, to be he which searches the reins and the
heart; and declares that he will cause all the Churches to know it. And I will
kill her children with death (speaking of Jezabel, a false Prophetess) and all
the Churches shall know, that I am he which searches the reins and the heart.
I am he which Act. 1. 24. Rev. 2. 23.
searches, etc. Implying that he alone, and no other, is invested with this
glorious privilege of searching the reins and the heart. So then this being a
principle of truth written as it were by the hand of nature in the tables of
every man's heart, of every man's conscience, that to discover the secrets of the
hearts of men is the proper character of God, and the Scriptures having this
character so plainly, richly and visibly stamped upon them; evident it is, that
their original and descent is from God.

If it be objected and said; but may not men, especially learned, wise and
acute men, partly by observing the motions, ways and turnings of their own
hearts, partly, by observing the dispositions, humors, interests and ends of
others in the world, and partly by holding intelligence and an intimacy of
friendship with men of wisdom and understanding like themselves, and so ever
and anon comparing, as it were, notes together; be able to say as much as is to
be found in the Scriptures, concerning the secrets of the hearts and spirits of
men? To this I answer.

1. By concession; that such men as the objection speaks of, may say much upon
the advantages mentioned, concerning the inward frame, the secret actings, and
turnings, and windings of the hearts of men: they may discover abundance even
of the deep things of men: and go far in searching the hidden treasury of
their hearts and spirits. And the truth is that many of them have done much in
this kind. But

2. I answer further (by way of exception) that as Gideon said to the men of
Ephraim, that the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim were better then the
vintage of Abiezer, so say I in the Judge. 8. 1.
case in hand: that the gleanings of the Scriptures, i. a little which the
Scriptures do in breaking up the depths and secrets of the hearts of men, is
better, of greater weight and worth, then the vintage of Philosophers, then all
that ever they have done, or indeed were capable of doing in this kind. The
plough of the holy Ghost in the Scriptures, makes a deep furrow, and turns up
more of the earth and soil of the heart from beneath, then the Philosophers
plough does: yea it brings up such things, which the other never touched, or
came near. The Philosophers, having neither themselves the grace of the Gospel,
and the great things of Jesus Christ tendered unto them, nor yet any of those,
with whom they had acquaintance; and wanting the experience of the behaviors,
carriages, and expressions of men closely pursued, urged and pressed by the
Gospel, the holy commands, and terrible threatenings thereof, as also of the
confessions of such as were in time, after long resistance and disobedience,
converted by the Gospel unto God. Philosophers (I sa^;) wanting these helps and
opportunities, to know the hearts of men, could not possibly reach those
streins, nor those workings in the spirits and consciences of men, which such
occasions and provocations as these produce from time to time; and which are
discovered and made known in the Gospel. And the truth is, there is no
occasion, provocation, or tentation whatsoever besides, nor all the occasions
and tentations in the world put together, can raise such workings, motions,
streins, thoughts, apprehensions, intentions, in the spirits and consciences of
men, or draw them forth by suitable practices and expressions of themselves, as
the Gospel, effectually and lively preached unto them. This was the effect of
that prophecy concerning Christ, which Simeon uttered, Luke 2. 34. And Simeon
blessed them, and said unto Mary his Mother, Behold this child is set for the
fall and rising again of many in Israel: and for a sign which shall be spoken
against -- that the thoughts of many hearts might be revealed; implying, that
Christ being effectually preached in the ministry of the Gospel in the world,
will be a means to reveal and discover more of the hearts and inward parts of
men, then ever would have come to light, or have been taken knowledge of
otherwise; and that this was one of the designs or intentions of God, in
sending Christ upon such terms as he did, into the world. Now certain it is,
that there is no kind of thought or imagination, no motion, strein, or turning
in the hearts of men, that are either stirred up within only, or externally
drawn forth upon occasion, by means of the Gospel, but that there is some
intimation, mention, or discovery of it, in the Gospel it self. For the word of
God is quick and powerful (as we heard before from Heb. 4. 12
the Apostle, upon a like occasion) and sharper then any two edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner, of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Now the
knowing or discovering of the intents of the heart, i. of all the ends and
proposalls which the heart conceives and projecteth in it self, is the highest
pitch, and utmost period of whatsoever can be known concerning the heart of man.

Again the Philosophers, never saw the enmity between the seed of the woman and
the seed of the serpent play; never had the experience what an abomination the
wicked man is to the just, or on the contrary, what an abomination he that is
upright Prove. 19. 27.
in his way, is to the wicked. They could neither see the one, nor have
experience of the other, because the world where they lived was planted but
with the one nation only, I mean with the seed of the Serpent: or if there
were, where some of them lived, a small strinkling of the other nation, of
persons regenerate, by the incorruptible seed of the word, it is not like, that
they much minded them, or looked upon them Psalm. 37 3^.
under any such notion. Now there is no such torture and rack to the hearts and
spirits of mere natural and carnal men, to make them confess more of their
naughtiness and vileness, as the life and power of godliness and true
holiness acted by men like unto themselves (their unregeneracie, with the
fruits of it, only excepted) in their faces from day to day. The wicked (says
David) watches the righteous and seeks to slay Matthew. 5. 11.
him. The thoughts, counsels and devises of the hearts of carnal and evil
men, to work mischief in every kind against the righteous, are very strange,
and sometimes very hard to be believed, for the strangeness and
unreasonablenesse of them. Blessed are you (says our Savior himself to his
disciples) when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall speak all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. That men should revile,
persecute, speak all manner of evil of such men as the Apostles of Christ were,
who were the greatest benefactours (of mere men) that ever the world had, did
the greatest service for it that ever was done, were the most blameless and
harmless that ever men were in their lives and conversations, were unwearied
in their labors, and travells, neglected themselves and their own
accommodations, exposed themselves to dangers and deaths continually, and all
to do good unto men, and make the world blessed; that men (I say) should so
maliciously and desperately entreat such a heavenly generation of men as this,
is a strain of wickedness (expressing it self out of the hearts of men) which
the heathen Philosophers neither ever saw, nor knew; or if they did see, or
know it (as I confess some of the later of them might) yet they did see and
know it materially only; i. they saw or knew these men, or some like unto
them, as grievously entreated, as we speak of, but they neither knew the
excellency or transcendent deserts of these men, but thought them worthy to
suffer as they did; nor did they (nor could they, upon the former supposition)
look upon the practices of those that persecuted them, as matters of any great
impiety and unworthiness; and consequently not as bewraying any secret in
their hearts much considerable in one kind or other. Now the Scriptures (we
know) speak of the persecution of the Apostles (especially) yea and of the
Saints, as a discovery of the most grievous blindness, and desperate
wickedness in the hearts of men: and this judgment and censure of it (we
know) is agreeable both to reason and truth. So that the Philosophers had no
line to let down into whose waters or depths of the hearts of men, out of which
this wickedness (I mean of persecuting the Apostles and Saints) with all the
streins and shapes of it, proceeded.

3. (And lastly) the Philosophers wanting the communion and fellowship of the
Saints and servants of God, and the true knowledge of them otherwise, could not
possibly anatomize, open, or display the hearts and spirits of this generation;
could not describe or set forth the war which they sustain in their bowels
continually, the combat between the flesh and the spirit; nor yet the weapons
by which they fight the good fight of faith (as Paul speaks) The spiritual man
(says the Apostle) judges [or rather examineth, (...)] all things; [or 1 Cor.
2. 16.
every man, as the original will rather bear] but he himself is judged, [or
rather, examined, or sought into] of no man. By the spiritual man, the Apostle
does not (as I conceive) mean simply the regenerate man, or a man in the state
of grace (as we call it) but such a kind of men, who over and besides a work
of grace, have some good degree of the knowledge of the mystery of the Gospel
as by the word carnal (opposite to it,:) a verse or two after, it is evident
he means, not merely carnal or natural men, who are yet in these sins, but
men who being regenerate, are weak and low in the knowledge and understanding
of spiritual things. And I brethren, 1 Cor. 3. 1.
could not speak unto you, as unto spiritual; but as unto carnal, even as
unto babes in Christ. He could not speak unto them as unto spiritual, though
he looks upon them as regenerate (for he calls them, babes in Christ) but as
unto carnal, i. as unto such Christians, who had much of the ignorance and
weakness of their mere natural conditions yet upon them, and had attained no
considerable growth or stature in the knowledge of Christ. So then, the Apostle
saying, that the spiritual man judges, or tries, every man; but himself is
tried of no man viz. but of such as himself: for he speaks here of the whole
species or kind of spiritual men, though he uses the singular number (a
thing usual in Scripture) his meaning is clearly this; that such men as are
spiritual, any thing well grown in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ
and the Scriptures, are acquainted with, understand, and are able to discourse,
and speak of the inward condition of all sorts of men, they know how it is with
the hearts and spirits of mere natural men, what their thoughts, counsels, and
inclinations are (in the general) so likewise they know the state and
condition of young and weak Christians, that are yet but babes in Christ, how
it is with them, in the way of their hearts and spirits; and so also they
understand how it is with men that are spiritual, and like unto themselves.
They have a double advantage thus to judge, or understand the condition of
every man. 1. They have passed through, and had experience of all these
conditions in themselves, 1. they have been natural men, and therefore they
know the heart of a natural man: as God reasons with his people, Exodus 23.
For ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye your Exodus 13. 9.
selves were strangers in the land of Egypt. 2. They have been weak Christians
too, before they were strong, and therefore by the same reason they know the
hearts of these also. And 3. (and lastly) they have had experience, and have
daily, of the heart of spiritual men; and therefore they know the heart of
such men likewise. This is one advantage, or means they have to judge of every
man. The other, is the knowledge which they have of the Scriptures, and of the
word of God, which assisting their foresaid experience of the estates of all
men, and concurring with it in that respect, must needs add much unto them in
this kind, and make them very able to judge of every man. But he himself is
judged of no man. i. of no other sort of men, but his own, and such as himself
(as was said) his heart and the ways thereof, his thoughts, counsels,
purposes, intentions, dispositions, desires, hopes, fears, etc. cannot be known
or comprehended by any, but spiritual men. The reason is, because other men,
having never had the experience of such things in themselves, nor any report of
them by any relatour, whose language they understand, and whose testimony they
believe, cannot come to know whether there be any such thing in men, or no;
especially considering, that they are things of such an excellent, subline, and
spiritual nature, that though they should be reported and declared unto men,
yea and that by an author of m^th credit and authority with them, yet would
they hardly be believed. So then most certain it is, that the Scriptures, in as
much as they judge spiritual men, as well as others, i. relate the heavenly
story of their hearts and spirits from the first to the last, could not be
composed or framed by any, but either by men who were spiritual themselves, or
else by God himself. Now to say that spiritual men composed them, it being an
essential character or property of a spiritual man, not to publish or put
forth any thing into the world, in the name of God, or as from him, which he
knows to be only from himself, and not from God; this being, in effect to make
himself God; which is a deep abhorring to a spiritual soul. And besides,
spiritualnesse in men being, as it were, an extract, or express of the divine
nature, a fair resemblance, of the light and holiness which is in him, though
it should be granted that the Scriptures were made and composed by such men as
these, yet will it follow, that the original of them, especially of all that
which concerns the case and condition of a spiritual man, is from God. This
for answer to the objection propounded: and for this fourth demonstration.

A 5. Demonstration of the same conclusion, viz. that the Scriptures are from
God, drawn from the matter of them; is, that glorious and mighty power which
sometimes utters and expresses it self, out of some of the veins and passages
thereof, in comforting, raising, filling and lifting up the hearts of men. The
world now for many generations together, has had a full experiment of this
great power we speak of, breaking out of the Scriptures in the ministry of
them, like fire or lightning out of the cloud, by which their hearts and souls
have been revived, quickened, and raised, as it were, from the dead: yea and
sometimes taken up into the heavens. I make no question but that our own ears
have heard, and that some of our fathers, yea and some of our children, and
many of our friends have told us, many of these magnalia, these great and
wonderful works of the Scriptures in them, and upon them; how they have at
such a time been strangely lightened and eased in their spirits, at another
time, gloriously strengthened in the inner man; at another, filled with joy in
believing: at another, when they came in sackcloth to hear, that by the hand of
the Gospel their sackcloth was taken off from them, and they girded with joy
and gladness before their departure; when they came in darkness, and with the
shadow of death spread round about them, that the light of life shone unto
them, and scattered that darkness. Yea I make no question but many of you that
hear me this day, have in the Scriptures, tasted of the powers of the life to
come; and felt your souls, as it were, bound up in the wings of the Gospel, as
if they had been ready to have been carried up into heaven immediately; that
you have felt the iron bands and fetters of your fears and doubts loosed by the
hand of the Gospel, and falling from you; that upon the sudden turning of the
captivity of your souls, you have been as th^se that dream. My brethren these
are no strange things that I now mention unto you; they are no things, that you
had need of any, either to ascend up into heaven to know the truth of them from
thence; or of any to go down into hell, to inquire the truth of them there;
no, they are things really, sensibly, acted and done in the midst of you; yea I
nothing doubt, but that the hearts and consciences of many of you, are ready to
rise up, and stand forth to give testimony to the truth of these things. We
shall not need for our present purpose, to inquire any further after those
things in the Scriptures, or in the Gospel, by which those great and mighty
works we speak of are brought to pass; as viz. what, or which they are, or
what aptness there is in them, so gloriously to affect and take the hearts and
consciences of men: it is fully sufficient, as to the demonstration in hand, to
know and consider, that such great things as were lately mentioned, are really
effected and accomplished amongst the sons and daughters of men, by the
Scriptures, and Gospel, in their ministration. Therefore now let us seriously
weigh and ponder the tenor and importance of what has been said, that we may
be the better able to judge, whether there be any sufficient light in it,
whereby to see and discern truth in this assertion, that the Scriptures are
from God.

When John the Baptist sent some of his Disciples unto Christ, to ask of him
this question (for their own, and their fellows satisfaction) Art thou he that
should come? or do we look for another? Our Savior returned only this answer
by them unto Matthew. 11. 3.
John. Go and show John again those things which ye do hear, and see: The
blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the leapers are cleansed, and
the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached
unto them, or rather (as the word (...), may signify) the poor are
Gospellized, i. are taken with the Gospel, are persuaded by the Gospel, or (as
the former translation) receive the Gospel; meaning, that such great and
mighty, and strange works as these, being so frequently wrought either by him,
or in his name, did sufficiently demonstrate him, to be he that was to come;
the glory and repute of them, being unproportionable, and too great for any
deceiver, or false Prophet to be invested, and honored with. In like manner,
the question being whether the Scriptures (and so the Gospel) be from God, or
no; is it not sufficient to conclude affirmatively for them, that certainly
they are so, they are from God, if we be able to say, that poor souls are
mightily comforted, the weak hearts of men are wonderfully strengthened; the
dead spirits of men are raised and made to live again; men and women, that sat
in darkness, and in the shadow of death, are enlightened; many that were in
chains and fetters of fears and terrors of soul, are delivered and set at
liberty, and the world is filled with joy and gladness by them? Is it
reasonable to conceive, that a tree that bears such wonderful fruit as this,
was planted by any other hand, then the hand of God? Who can speak words, that
should be able to order the powers of darkness, when they are fallen in making
havoke and desolation in the souls of men? that shall be able to give laws to
the fears and terrors of death, of eternal death, when they have taken hold
of the consciences of sinners? who has any such rod in his mouth, but the
glorious God alone, by the smiting whereof the fiery and cruel burnings, the
fierce and furious ragings of the guilt of sin in the inward parts of soul,
will be rebuked, and give place to that joy and peace which are unspeakable and
glorious? Are these like to be the achievements or works of the words of men?
is flesh and blood like to speak those that are dead, alive? Or has God
sanctified the breath or wisdom of any mortal man, to act at this rate of
excellency and power, otherwise then in conjunction with his own? Lord (says
Peter unto Christ) Joh. 6. 68.
to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life? Men may go the
world over and over, and wait upon the lips of all the wisdom and knowledge,
and understanding under heaven all their days, and never meet with the words
of eternal life, but from the mouth of Jesus Christ (I mean originally) and
yet to speak properly, they come not originally from him neither, as he is
mediator, but from God himself. When Mar. 10 38.
the two sons of Zebedee desired of the Lord Christ, that they might sit, the
one on his right hand, the other on his left, in his glory; he made this
answer, told them, that they knew not what they asked, meaning; that surely
they did not apprehend or consider the disproportion that was between such
persons as they (at least, as they were, when they made this request) and the
excellency of that glory which they desired; implying, that if they had known
and duly considered this disproportion, and how unmeet they were for these
places which they desired, they would have refrained such a request, they would
never have lift up the least desire in their soul, to have that done, which was
so unlikely to be done, yea so repugnant unto the wisdom and equity of Gods
dispensations to do. In like manner if men shall say and plead, that the
Scriptures and the Gospel, notwithstanding all those great and mighty works
that put forth themselves in them, and are done by them (as those lately
instanced, with their fellows) may yet proceed but from men; it may very
reasonably, and most truly be said of them, that they know not what they say,
nor for what they plead: the disproportion, which lies between the weakness
and inconsiderablenesse of men, and the most transcendent excellency and
greatness of the works specified, were it duly considered, would quench the
spirit of such a reasoning, and stop the mouth of that discourse. Why should it
be thought a thing incredible with Act. 26. 8.
you (says Paul to Agrippa, and the Jews) that God should raise the dead? He
plainly grants, that if he should have preached, or asserted, the raising again
of the dead, by any other agent, then God, they might reasonably have judged it
a thing incredible, and no ways likely to be done; but since he entitles Act.
19. 13, 15.
the outstretched arm of an omnipotent God to the work, and gives them an
account withal, why God should be willing to make use of his arm and power in
this kind; he supposes that upon these terms, there is nothing unworthy the
wisdom or judgment of a considering man, in the belief of it: Because,
though the raising again of the dead, be a work of as great a difficulty, as
can lightly be conceived, and in that respect, and in it self; very incredible;
yet in relation to an infinite power, before which there is no difficulty at
all Gen 18. 14.
, it has the consideration only of what is obvious, and easy to be
performed. In like manner, those glorious and wonderful effects, which have
been, and that with the free and full consent of frequent and undoubted
experience, ascribed to the Scriptures, hold but a regular and ordinary
proportion, to the infinite grace and wisdom of God, and so may well proceed
from the Scriptures, it being supposed that these are from God; but will be
found altogether incredible, and far above the belief of an understanding
man, if the Scriptures shall be supposed to be o^ any other^ inspiration, then
divine. Doubtless there had been many strange things heard of in the world, in
our Saviors verse. 32.
days; yet was it truly said, by that sometimes blind man, John 9. that Since
the world began it was never heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was
born blind; in consideration whereof he had said a little before to the Jews;
why, herein is verse 30.
a mavelous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he has opened
mine eyes; * clearly implying, that he that did a work more excellent and
wonderful, then ever was known to be done by any man, must needs act by a
divine power, and consequently have his mission from God. So though it be
granted, that many things very considerable for the cheering and strengthening
the hearts of men have been effected by writings and doctrines of humane
inspiration: Yet since the world began it was never heard that the souls and
consciences of weak and sinful men, were so raised or filled with joy
unspeakable and glorious, by any means of that calculation, as by the
Scriptures they have been, and are yet daily, both raised and filled therewith.
In respect whereof it may well be looked upon as a thing somewhat mavelous,
that any man should not know, whence, or from whom they are. Can men gather
grapes, and yet be ignorant whether the plant they grew on, be a vine, or no?

A 6. Demonstration from the matter of the Scriptures, to prove their original
from God, is another power which sometimes discovers it self out of some other
places and quarters thereof, answering the former (in excellency and in glory)
but producing effects of a contrary nature; a power, which smites, troubles,
wounds, terrifies and shakes all the powers of the souls and consciences of
men, and sometimes like a storm and tempest of the wrath of the Almighty, bears
down all before it. The world now has had the real and sensible experiment of
this power also in the Scriptures for many generations. How many mountains have
the Scriptures in their ministry, thrown down, as well as filled up valleys?
how many sinnet of pride have they abased? how many obdurate and hard hearts
have they broken? how many secure persons have they awakened with affrighting
and horror, out of their golden dream? how many confident ones have they
shaken, and made them company for fears and doubts; as Ne^^cadnezzer was turned
out of his Kingdom from amongst his Princes and nobles, to live amongst the
beasts of the field, and owls of the desert? many a soul has these Scriptures
covered with the shadow of death, who conceited themselves to be full of light:
unto many a soul have they opened their eyes, to see themselves in the midst of
Samaria, when they thought they were in Dotham: many a soul have they thrown
down unto hell, which thought themselves in the very confines and borders of
heaven: unto many they have been as the appearance of the handwriting in the
wall, was unto Belshazzar: they have made their countenance to change, and
their thoughts to trouble them, and D^n 5. 6.
the joints of their loins to be loosed, and their knees to smite one against
another. Thus have they from day to day, made havoc and spoil of the high
thoughts in the hearts and judgments of men, which exalted themselves there
against the knowledge of God, yea and of men themselves, and of the truth.
Themselves report many great things done by themselves in this kind, which,
though they be no testimonies, considered in themselves, of the divinity of the
Scriptures, being related by themselves, yet falling in with the frequent and
sensible experience of the world in all ages, and receiving a rational
confirmation of truth hereby, they cannot in this respect but give in somewhat
2 King. 22. verse. ^1, 12, 13.
toward the building in hand, viz. the evidencing of them to be from God. We
shall mention only some few of them. * Upon Peter's preaching the resurrection,
and ascension of Jesus Christ; it is said, that they that heard it, were
pricked in Act. 2. ^7.
their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the other Apostles; men and brethren,
what shall we do? Here were a generation of men, who before they heard this
word of God preached unto them, were so far from asking Peter or the rest, what
they should do (meaning, to be saved) that they thought they could have told
Peter himself and the other Apostles, what they ought to have done, in such a
way. For the Jews generally were of this temper. But this word of the Scripture
coming in the power of it unto them, was like a sword, it pricked their hearts:
it s^^ote the pillars of their confidence, and made them tremble. The Sermon
which Stephen preached before the counsel, had this operation upon those that
heard it, that it made them burst with anger, and gnash upon him with their
teeth. In Peter's Sermon, the Scriptures fought against the ignorance, and
wickedness of men, and overcame: in Stephens Sermon, they fought also,
provoked and enraged the wickedness in men; but they did not overcome. God was
not pleased to give such a victory unto his word in the mouth of Stephen, as in
the mouth of Peter: yet it fell on very sore, and did terrible execution upon
the hearts and spirits of those that heard it: it threw them out of the
possession of their patience, and transformed them into a rage and passion. So
Act. 24. when Paul Act. 24. 25.
disputed of righteousness and temperance, and of the judgment to come, it is
said that Felix trembled. A poor prisoner at the bar pleading for his life,
by discoursing somewhat out of the Scriptures, made his Judge in the midst of
his greatest pomp, and with his guard of strength about him, to tremble. Take
that one instance more; concerning the Apostle himself, whilst he was yet a
Pharisee (as it seems) or in an unregenerate condition. For (says he) I once
was alive without the Law: but Romans 7. 9, ^0.
when the commandment came, sin revived, but I died. When the commandment
came, I died. i. when God made way for his Law, to come at my judgment and
conscience, in the life and power, i. in the holiness, spiritualnesse, and
authority of it, by removing that carnality and ignorance which had formerly
separated between the law and me, and kept it from coming at my conscience, or
taking hold on me; I became as a dead man; I was out of measure astonished, at
what the law now being come home unto me, discovered both in my person and
condition. I found nothing but carnality in my self, when the spirituallnesse
of the law appeared unto me: I thought I had stood upon a sure bottom, had
built upon a good foundation, until the law caused me to see that I was in the
midst of death, and that there was but a step between me and the bottomless
pit. Now (my brethren) let me ask you; do not the Scriptures, when they are
effectually preached in the world, ever and anon work after the same manner, in
the hearts and souls of men? are not the mighty thrown down from the seats and
thrones of their confidence by it? is not the security of many turned into fear
and horror by it? are not the consciences of many made to burn by it, as if
they were set on fire of hell? are not the souls of many made to dwell among
lions by it, amongst devouring terrors, and consternations? How frequent are
cases and complaints of trouble of conscience, and distress of soul of men and
women, brought even to their wits ends, amongst us, and that generally
occasioned, or begotten by the Scriptures. I know you are not the only
strangers of the world, to be ignorant of these things. If you have not born
any of these burdens your selves, I doubt not but you have been partakers
with, and helpers unto others in the bearing of them.

Thus then you see that the Scriptures have a spirit of power attending on
them, working in them and by them, very great and terrible effects in the inner
parts, and that rules the souls and consciences of men, as it were with a rod
of iron. Let us now consider in a word, what there is in this consideration
also, to argue their descent from God. Have thou an arm like God? (says God
himself to Job, arguing with him) or can Job 40. 9.
thou thunder with a voice like him? The voice of the Lord (says David) is
powerful: the voice of the Lord is full of majesty: The voice of the Lord
breaks the Cedars: yea the Lord breaks the Cedars of Lebanon. The Hebrews
call thunder, the voice, or mighty voices of God. Pray unto the Lord (says
Pharaoh Psalm. 29 4, 5.
unto Moses and Aaron) (for it is enough) that there be no more voices of God
(says the original) i. no more thunder. Thunder is called the voice of God,
because it is so majestique and full of power and terror; and has an
influence of awe and dread upon the minds and spirits of men: humanas motur a
tonitrua mentes: the thunders which move or shake the Ovid Met.
minds or hearts of men: Now certainly to thunder in the spirits and
consciences of men and women, as the Scriptures ever and anon are wont to do,
to make such terrible commotions and concussions there, as are from time to
time made, to fill the soul with astonishment, as if hell were risen up from
beneath, and all the powers of darkness gotten into it, cannot but argue a
power adequate to that which causes it to thunder in the clouds of heaven. It
is true in a sense (I mean in that sense, in which the Scripture affirms it)
when time was, that God was neither in the tempest that rent the mountains, and
brake the rocks in pieces, nor yet in the earthquake, nor yet in the fire, 1
King 10. v^^s. 11. 12.
but in the still voice. God was neither in the tempest, nor in the earthquake,
nor fire; i. he intended not to speak, or to reveal himself out of any of these
unto Elijah in that gracious manner, which now he was purposed to do; he was
in this respect, only in the mild and quiet sign; the still voice: but yet
he was in all the rest, the other three, by the manifestation of his power;
they declared the stretching forth of his mighty arm to produce them, and of
his presence near: So when spiritual tempests, earthquakes and fires, are
produced and raised by the Scriptures in the spirits and consciences of men, it
is a sign that the mighty power of God is there, and that he interposeth and
acts in a special manner in the raising of them. For let me ask, who should
do it besides? From whence should those grievous agonies and conflicts of
soul, so grievous above measure, as sometimes they are, even unto despair of
salvation, arise, but from God? If it be answered and said, that the devil may
tempt men to despair, he may cast in his fiery darts, and make them stick in
the souls and consciences of men; there they may remain eating, and burning in
the soul, and cause extremity of pain, etc.

I answer: It Is true, the devil has a power to tempt men and women to despair;
he has fiery darts, and a natural skill, so to throw them, as to fasten, and
make them stick in the souls and consciences of men; i. suddenly to inject or
raise such thoughts or apprehensions in men, which have a tendencie in them to
persuade, or move men to despair. But

1. God keeps a bridle in the lips of this power of his; he cannot use it when
he pleases: for then (the Saints especially) should never be free from this
tentation to despair. But now and then upon some special occasion God slips
the bridle for a while, and then Satan is at liberty; yet so, that even under
this liberty permitted to him, the Saints, if they will keep their watch and
guard strong, may make resistance. Resist the devil Jam. 4 7
(says James) and he will flee from you.

2. Though God gives the devil liberty to tempt in that kind we speak of, yea
though men do not make that resistance which they both might, and ought,
against his tentations, yet except God gives up the souls and consciences of
men into his hand to be tempted by him, I mean so be tempted, as to be
overcome, or to suffer from the tentation, nothing the devil can do by way of
tempting men, will fasten upon them, or much anoy them. It is the blessed
privilege of the creature, to be still held and kept by the gracious and
mighty hand of God, out of the reach of all evil, at least of all evil, in any
considerable degree prejudicial to the comfort and peace of it, as well that
which is sinful, as that which is penal, except only in such cases, and upon
such occasions, when God has some special design, either for his own glory,
or the creatures good, or both, in letting go this hold, and so delivering up
his creature unto either. Ye have this expression twice, Romans 1. God gave them
upto uncleanness: and again, God gave Romans 1. 24. 26.
them up unto vile affections, etc. implying, that these vile affections,
though they were in men all the while, yet they had no power over them, to
carry them forth, into vile actions and practices, till God let go his hold of
the men, and so delivered them up, as it were, into the hand of these
affections, that they might do with them even what they list. And Psalm 78. we
have the like from David. He gave up their cattle also to the Psalm. 78 48.
hail, and their flocks to hot thunderbolts: implying, that the hail might
have fallen, yea and upon the cattle too (and so the thunderbolts) without
doing them any harm, except God had let go the hold which he had on them
before, and so leaving them naked of their wonted they became a spoil to the
hail and thunder. That likewise in Isa 42. is of the same kind (to omit many
others) Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? implying, that
all the spoilers and Isa 42. 24.
robbers in the world, could not have made a prey or spoil of Israel, had not
the God of Israel, put them, as it were, out of his own hand into theirs. Thus
is it in the matter of temptation: Satan upon permission, may tempt men, as he
did the Lord Christ himself: yea temptations may fall thick upon the soul; and
yet the soul suffer no great anoiance from them, or loss in the things of the
peace and comfort of it, unless god deliver it up, and leave it in the hand of
these tentations. So that still whatsoever the devil does, or whatsoever
temptations do, in causing trouble and perplexity in the souls of men, God is
in the trouble and perplexity, as well as either of them.

3. Let me add this further; that as no man can be tempted by Satan or by any
temptations whatsoever, to the disturbance or wounding of his soul or spirit,
except God delivers him out of his own hand of safety into their hand of danger
and evil; so neither can any man be tempted by either, to any further degree of
inconvenience or trouble, then according to that degree wherein God is pleased
to take off his hand of protection from him. Gods hand of protection was taken
off from Job, in respect of his children, his cattle, his estate, his health;
and thus far the devil was able to advance his temptation, he did afflict Job
with the loss and deprivation of all these: but God keeping his hand still
upon Jobs life, the devil could not by any engine or means he could make, reach
this. So is it likewise, in spiritual and inward temptations in the soul: look
to what degree the soul is naked before him, he is able to smite and wound it,
to infest and destroy the peace of it: but as far as it is shadowed, or
covered by the hand of God, it is devilproof; nor can any temptation, though
never so fiery, kindle upon it.

4. Though the devil with his temptations may truly be looked upon, as the
efficient causes (in their kind) of many the troubles and sad disturbances
raised in the souls, and spirits of men; yet reason it self teaches, that God
is the sovereign and supreme cause of them, at least as they are penal, or
afflictive to the creature, according to that of the Prophet Amos; shall Amos
3. 6.
there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it? and whatever God does,
he does not as a subordinate, but as a principal cause. So that when the souls
of men suffer in any kind, Satan and his temptations are not so much the cause
of them, as God, who does not only permit Satan to do his do, to act his
part in them, but likewise withdraws his own presence, and hides his face from
the creature, which indeed is, as it were, the soul of the temptation, without
which Satan, and all his militia can do nothing considerable to afflict the
soul. It no ways stands either with reason or Religion, to think, that the
creature should suffer or be afflicted, especially so deep and sore, as many
times it does suffer, under some tentations, but by the special order,
providence and inspection of the Creator. Indeed for whatsoever is sinful
in any temptation, we must find out another father then God, who being
infinitely pure, cannot bring forth any impure, or unclean thing out of himself.

But 5. (and lastly) to answer home to the objection, or difficulty propounded;
the question is not concerning trouble of conscience, or perplexity of soul in
general, or whither Satan with his temptations may not grievously infest and
annoy the soul; but whether in those great effects of this kind, those deep
impressions of fear, dread, and astonishment, which are occasioned or produced
in men by the Scriptures faithfully opened, or effectually applied unto them,
it be any ways reasonable to conceive, that Satan, and not God, has
principally to do. What Satan may do otherwise, or by temptations of another
kind, does no ways encumber or concern the demonstration in hand: Indeed if
that efficacy and power which puts forth it self in the Scriptures, truly and
substantially preached, in smiting, wounding, and troubling the consciences of
men, can reasonably be ascribed unto him, this will (with more color at least)
cut the strength and sinews of it, and render it infirm. But that this has no
degree of truth, or likelihood of truth in it, may appear from hence: because
if Satan should join with the Scriptures in affecting the consciences of men
with impressions of fear, and astonishment, according to the tenor of those
things which are contained in them, he should join with them in asserting their
authority, and truth in other things: which would be a pulling down of his own
kingdom with both his hands: and Satan in such a case should be divided
against Satan (as our Scripture speaks) and then how could his kingdom stand?
For he that attests the Scriptures for true, in any one vein of the matter or
subject of them, though he does not by this testimony, as fully attest or
confirm the truth of all other things, in them, yet such a testimony as this
countenanceth the generality of them, and to a degree persuades and opens a way
likewise to a belief of the rest. Now Satan certainly is not in disposition or
will, a help of men's faith; nor yet in any such act, which so plainly and
directly tends hereunto, as that we speak of. And besides matter of faith or
belief of the Scriptures, those great effects we speak of, the shaking of the
consciences, and overawing the spirits and hearts of men, being observed and
known, are very proper to procure reverence and high esteem unto them in the
minds and consciences of men. Therefore whatsoever Satan may do to disturb
the peace of the consciences of men by his own weapons or fiery darts, which
possibly he may sometimes make of Scriptures, falsified, misargued, or
misapplied; yet certainly he will not join or concur with the Scriptures, in
a direct way toward any such effect, because he knows that his loss will be
far greater, then his gain, thereby. Somewhat further relating to this
objection, will be touched, in the answer to that which follows.

If it yet be further objected and said; but may not such effects as you speak
of, troubles, fears and consternations of soul, be engendered and caused in men,
by some mistake and misunderstanding of the Scriptures? either in the preacher
or interpreter of them, or in the hearers, or both? And can such troubles as
these, thus occasioned and raised, be any argument or proof, that the
Scriptures, by which, though misunderstood, they are occasioned, are from God?

To this I answer, that concerning trouble of conscience, it may be occasioned,
either by the misunderstanding of some Scriptures, one or more, simply and
alone, or in conjunction with the ignorance of some other Scriptures, with the
true import and sense of them. Now the truth is, that there can hardly any
great trouble of conscience be occasioned in men or women, either by the
misunderstanding, or right understanding of all those Scriptures, that are
likely to occasion trouble either in the one way, or in the other; but only in
conjunction with the ignorance or unbelief, of some others. For he that knows
and believes that Jesus Christ is the son of God; and Joh. 3. 16.
that whosoever believes on him shall not perish, but -- and shall go along in
his reason and judgment with this truth, cannot lightly be troubled (I mean
with any trouble looking, or tending toward despair) by occasion of any other
Scripture, or Scriptures, however understood, truly, or untruly. The truth of
this assertion we have argued heretofore; and may again, upon occasion. But for
the present, to the objection propounded, we say this: that troubles of soul,
agonies and perplexities of conscience, being more generally occasioned by the
Scriptures, whether rightly, or not rightly understood, and seldom, if at all,
otherways, or without them; they cannot reasonably be conceived or looked
upon, but as great intimations, yea as strong evidences, that the Scriptures
are from God. For who is it that has to do with the consciences of men, but
God? or who do men fear, in reference to eternity, but God alone? Are men
afraid of being incountred by any created power, after they are passed the line
of mortality? or do they see any creature beyond the grave, at whose sight
they have any cause to be troubled? So then it being God, and God only, who
makes the spirits and consciences of men to quake and tremble, and it being the
Scriptures and the Scriptures only (upon the matter) by which the quaking and
trembling of men's consciences are from day to day produced: is not this a clear
demonstration that these two hold intelligence the one with the other, and that
the one (God) puts forth that mighty power of his, in consideration whereof the
consciences of men are so apt to tremble, in the other (the Scriptures.)

That the consciences of men are seldom much troubled or shaken, but by means
of the Scriptures, appears from hence, that such a thing as trouble of
conscience, is seldom or never heard of, from among pagans or infidells; no
nor often out of such places, where the Scriptures are not with some efficacy
and power preached. And for those other means, by which some such effect as we
speak of, trouble of conscience, may (happily) now and then be occasioned,
without the Scriptures, they are generally such, as the Scripture speaks of,
and gives testimony unto, viz. some great expressions, either of the justice
and severity, or of the glorious power of God, etc. So that still, that great
effect we speak of, the shaking of the conscience, is occasioned, and produced
either by the Scriptures themselves, or by ways and means of a plain and
perfect concurrence with them* And if so, the consideration in hand, is (as
has been proved) pregnantly demonstrative of truth in this assertion; that the
Scriptures are from God.

A Seventh consideration, taken from the matter of the Scriptures, strongly
argumentative of their descent from God, ^^, that great and marveilous
transforming power which ever and anon, puts forth it self in them. The hearts
and spirits, the thoughts and counsels of men, the dispositions and
inclinations, the ways and courses of men; are marveilously changed, and
turned, as it were, upside down, by the nature, force and power of the spirit,
which speaks unto, and acts, in and upon, the world, by them. The Prophet
Isaiah foretells of a strange and wonderful change, that shall be found among
other creatures, in the day of that great Jubilee of the world, viz. when the
Kingdoms thereof shall be given unto the Saints (as Daniel speaks) The woolf
also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie with the kid, and the
calf, and the lion, and the fat beast together, and a little child shall lead
them. And the cow and the bear shall fled, their young ones shall lie down
together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox; and the sucking child
shall Isa. 11. 6, etc.
play upon the ^ole of the a^^: and the weaned child shall put his hand on the
cockatrice den. This will be a change indeed, strange and wonderful in the
highest, when it shall be effected and take place: And the change that shall
then be amongst verse 9
men, will be answerable unto it, as it follows, verse. 9. They shall not hurt
nor distroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. Now the Gospel in the
ordinary course of it, where it runs and is glorified, makes, as it were, a
preludium or preface to that great change, by altering the property of the
hearts and lives of many. The covetous man it makes liberal, the oppressor it
makes merciful, the earthly minded, it makes heavenly; the fearful, it
encourages; the proud, it humbles, the unclean it purifieth; the profane it
sanctifies: the powers of sin and darkness in the natures and souls of
many, flee before it. It alters many times the whole course and frame of nature
in men; and so defuceth the image of Satan in many, both men and women, that
those that knew them in the days of their vanity, looking upon their ways and
spirits after the Scriptures have had to do with, in the way o^ their change,
could hardly say, these are the m^n: it takes away the heart of stone, and
gives men an heart of flesh in the stead of it. You your selves that ^ear me
this day, cannot (atleast a good part of you) but give testimony, and that in
your own experience, of the truth and certainty of these things. How many of
you are really and fully sensible, that your old hearts have been, as it were,
taken out of your bowels, by the hand of the Scriptures, and a new put into
you, by the same hand? that the Gospel has come in and separated between you
and your old ways, wherein sometimes you walked in the vanity of your ^(...)^,
and in the lusts of your ignorance; and has guided your feet into ways of
far more excellency and honor, yea and has made them lovely, and ways of
pleasure and delight unto you? The Apostle having reckoned up, several sorts
and kinds of sinners amongst the Clarinthians, as fornicatours, idolaters,
adulterers, wantons, abuser^ of themselves with mankind, thieves, covetous,
drunkards, railers, extortioners; tells them, that such some of them had been:
And such (says he) ^^re some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified
but ye are 1 ^o^ 6. verse. 9. 10. 11.
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. They
were justified, in, i. by or through the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
believed on, and they were washed, viz. from all those pollutions and
abominations, and so sanctified, by the spirit of God. The spirit of God by
acting and working the consideration of the great grace of justification by
Christ upon their hearts and souls, overcame and slew all those vile and
sinful affections and dispositions in them, and so made them meet for the
service of God. In like manner (I make little question, but) it has been, and
is the case with many of you: you have been so and so, proud, covetous,
unclean, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, etc. out now you are a
people of another spirit, and all these ways of sin and vanity, are an
abomination unto your souls: yea whatsoever you know by your selves in this
kind, there is yet less question, but that you know many such things by
others, many such ^^erations and changes that have been made in the hearts and
lives of others, both men and women, by the power of the Gospel overshadowing
them. You know many, who sometimes were as a parched heath, as a dry and barren
wilderness, now by the pouring out of the waters of life upon them by the hand
of the Gospel, become as Eden, and as the garden of God: you know where, and in
whom that prediction of Isaiah, chap. 55. 13. is specially, or in a moral
sense, fulfilled: Isa. 55. 13.
For thorns, there shall come up [or, there shall grow] the fire-tree: and in
stead of nettles, there shall come up the mirtle-tree. My brethren, this
property or power of the Scriptures whereof we now speak, thus to transform
the minds and spirits and ways of men, has not been matter of opinion, or of
conjecture only, but of the most sensible and certain experiment unto the
world, now for many generations. And this experience so perfectly agreeing with
many things which the Scriptures report of themselves in this kind, the
mention and consideration of them, cannot but add some weight to the
demonstration in hand, and turn for a testimony unto them, that of a truth they
are from God: therefore let us mention some few of them. And many that believed
(says Luke) Act. 19. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 6. 1^. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, etc. 1 These. 1. 9.
Tit. 3. 3. Matthew. 21. 32.
came, and confessed, and showed their works: Many also of them which used
curious arts, brought their books, and burned them before all men, and they
counted the price of them, and they found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.
So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed. And such were some of you
(says the Apostle, meaning, fornicatours, Idolatours, adulterers, thieves,
covetous, drunkards, etc.) but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. See
likewise the other Scriptures noted in the margent.

Thus we see by testimonies and witnesses and evidences on all hands, and in
all kinds, that the Scriptures are mighty and wonderful in their operations
and workings upon the judgments and consciences, upon the hearts and
affections of men, even to the changing and altering, and making all things new
in them; they boast of great things, that they have already done, and are doing
daily, yea and are yet further able to do, in this kind. Let us then (in a
word) consider, whether there be not a spirit of much conviction in the thing,
to prove them the royal issue of the eternal God.

As Nicodemus said unto Christ, master, we know that thou art Joh. 3. 2.
a teacher come from God, for no man can do these miracles that thou do,
except God be with him: In the same manner, and upon the like ground, we may
conclude, that the Scriptures are teachers come into the world from God: for
they could not do such miracles, as we have heard, both in this, and in the
two former demonstrations, they could not raise up children unto Abraham of the
stones of the earth, they could not of such as were a generation of vipers,
make a generation of holy and heavenly-minded men; except God were with them.
When John sent two of his Disciples unto Christ, to ask him whether he was the
Messiah that was to come, or whether they should look for another, Christ made
them this answer: Go, and show John again those things which ye do hear and
see: The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, and Matthew. 11. verse. 4, 5, etc.
the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, etc. meaning, that the beholding and
considering of such great works as these, so familiarly, and frequently done by
him as they were, were an indubitable argument and proof that he was the long
expected Messiah, and that they had no reason to look for any other. Now (my
brethren) all these works, and miracles being in a spiritual way or sense,
wrought as familiarly, as frequently, by the Scriptures, and the Gospel, are
they not every whit as lively, as pregnant an evidence and demonstration, that
they are confederate with the Messiah, and partakers of the same original, yea
and power also, with him? yea the truth is, that to do the works mentioned (in
a spiritual way) as to give sight to those that are spiritually blind, and to
enable them (with Moses) to see him that is invisible; and so to make the lame
to walk, i. to make those able (with David) to walk in Gods statutes, and run
the way of his commandments, who before halted right-down in their obedience
unto him, or rather moved not at all in these ways; and again, to wash and
cleanse men from the noisome and contagious leprosy of sin, and to make them
clean both in flesh and spirit; to open the spiritual ears of men, and to
cause them to attend diligently and conscientiously to the great things of
their peace, who before had no ears (as the Scripture speaks) to hear such
things; and lastly to quicken and raise up those that are dead in sins and
trespasses, and to make them live by putting in a spirit of faith, and hope,
and grace into them; I say to do such spiritual works as these, requires as
great, as holy, as outstretched an arm, as the other did.

Our Savior expresses himself thus, Joh. 14. 12. Verily verily I say unto
you, he that believes in me, the works that I do be Joh. ^^ ^2.
shall do also and greater works then these also shall be do. Now Chrysostom
(who was simply the best expositour of Scripture amongst all the fathers) by
these greater works, which Christ affirms that he should do, who believes in
him, understands spiritual works upon the hearts and souls of men,
analogically, and by proportion, answering those that Christ did literally and
externally in the bodies of men: and those he affirms to be greater, i. (I
conceive) of more worth and consideration then these. And Anselme in his book
de lib^ro arbitrio, has this saying. Majus miraculum aestimo cum Deus
voluntati desertam readit rectitudinem, quam cum mortuo vitam reddit amissam,
i. I esteem it a greater miracle, when God restores unto the will of a man,
that rectitude, or integrity, which it willingly deserted and forsook, then
when he restores that life unto a dead man, which he has lost. Of which
opinion he gives this reason: Corpus enim necessitate moriendo, non peccat, ut
vitam nunquam recipiat: voluntas vero per se rectitudinem deserendo, meretur ut
illa semper indigeat. i. The body dying by necessity, sins not, that it
should never receive l^fe again, but the will, voluntarily, and of it self
forsaking uprightness, deserves to want it for ever. So then, those
transformations and changes which are made in the hearts, and minds, and lives
of men and women by the Scriptures, being so exceeding great and wonderful as
they have been represented to us, clearly argue that there is a power and
presence with them when they act at this high rate, like the power and presence
of the Almighty, and which can be none other but the power and presence of God.

If it be here objected and said; but have not such alterations to take any
thing out of the Scriptures to put into their writings? Have not many upon
their principles, persuasions, and directions, been reduced from incontinencie
unto chastity; from intemperance, unto sobriety; from prodigality, unto
parsimony: from passion and revenge, to a temper, and placablenesse of spirit
(besides many others.) And does not Horace (a Heathen Poet) give this great
testimony to practical and moral literature?

Nemo adeo ferus est ut non mitescere possit,
Si modo culturae patientem accomodat aurem.
i. The fiercest wight to meekness may be won,
By patient harkening to instruction.
Yea is there not a very memorable story, reported both by Diog^nes Laertius,
and Valerius Maximus (both authors of good credit) concerning one Polemo an
Athenian, who at first was a most dissolute and debauched young man; and
afterward, upon hearing Xenocrates the Philosophers discourse of modesty and
temperance, was on the sudden taken off from his looseness, and betook
himself to the study of Philosophy, and in time became a famous professor of
it. The story they relate of this man, is briefly this. This young Polemo,
having sat up all the night long revelling and drinking with his companions,
in the morning after the sun was risen, comes in his revelling habit and
dress, with a light transparent garment, with a garland of flowers upon his
head, and with fragrant ointments upon him, the strength of his wine being yet
in his head: in this posture he comes along by the School of Xenocrates, who
was reading a Philosophy lecture to many of his Auditors, grave and sober men:
and finding the door open, in he comes, and sits him down, with an intent to
disturb the Philosopher in his way, and to dash him out of countenance with
some drunken prank, or other. The rest being much offended at these uncivil and
rude doings, Xenocrates himself no wa^es changing his countenance, fell off
from the subject he was upon, and began a discourse of modesty and temperance:
which discourse of his, by reason of the gravity and weight of it, so wrought
upon this dissolute gallant, that he began to repent of his way, and first
pulls off the garland that was on his head, and throws that away, presently
after he draws and gathers in his arm within his cloak; and within a little
while, his countenance and carriage were composed, and no sign of a reveller
to be seen upon him, and ever after was a sober and temperate man, and fell to
the study of Philosophy, and proved famously excellent in it. I have stood the
longer in relating this passage, because I conceive it somewhat hard to find
another like unto it, to commend and set forth the efficacy, power, or
success, of Philosophical and moral learning.

But for answer both to this instance, and to the body and strength of the
objection: it is, 1. to be granted, that for such ways and practices of
extravagancie, which in the eye of reason, and of the natural conscience (I
mean, upon a little consideration and inquiry) are notoriously vile, and
unworthy the nature and dignity of a man, being otherwise likely to be
accompanied with many inconveniences and sorrows, to them that practice them;
it is easy to conceive, that men by moral persuasions and inducements may be
taken of from them; yea many are reclaimed and won from dissolute courses,
only by the advice and counsel of friends. In which cases, there is indeed a
great change in their outward course and conversation, yea and some change too
within, otherwise there would be none without. Yea

2. A man sometimes by consulting only with himself, and with his own thoughts
and understanding, yea sometimes upon a sudden motion or apprehension rising
up within him, without much consultation, resolves to make some remarkable
change Luk 15. 17. Matthew. ^1 9.
in his life and ways. See Luke 15. 17. Mat. 21. 29. But

3. Though men may by moral interests and engagements, be brought to alter
many things in the course of their lives and conversations, especially such
things as they may easily discern to be destructive to their honor, comfort
and peace in this present world, and to alter so much within also, as is simply
requisite to maintain and carry on such an outward reformation (which was the
case in the example related) Yet

1. It is very seldom seen but that men who alter and change any thing in
themselves or in their ways, by the influence of moral engagements only, or
such inducements as Philosophers are able to administer unto them, it is
seldom seen (I say) but that they do it with reservation and exception; I
mean, of many things (at least of some one thing) which they will not alter or
reform, though they cannot but know, that even these things also are evil and
therefore ought to be changed, and done away, as well as any other. As Christ
said to him in the Gospel, who thought he had kept all the commandments Luke
^8. ^^.
from his youth up, that yet he wanted one thing: So is it still found in
moral converts, who by the spirit that works in Philosophical discourses, are
reduced from ways of looseness and vanity, to more regularnesse in their
course, they are seldom so changed, but that there is some one thing at least,
and that notoriously evil, which is not changed or reformed; they rather
exchange their sins, then forsake them. Whereas those that are kindly wrought
upon by the Scriptures, and by the spirit that speaks in them, are hereby so
far changed and renewed, that (with David) they become men and women after
Gods own heart, which sympathy or conformity stands in this, that they will
(i. are made inwardly and truly willing to) Act 1^. 22.
fulfill all his will, or pleasure, i. to have such respects to all his
commandments (so far as they are made known to them,) as sincerely to engage
and devote themselves to an universal obedience unto them; yea and otherwise
then in the case of surprizall by temptation, actually to obey them. The leven
of the Scriptures is spiritfull and strong, diffusing it is alternative vigor
and property to the levening of the whole lump of the nature and frame of man:
the leven of Philosophy is weak and faint, and when it works to its utmost
activity, it leaves the lump (in the most considerable part of it) unlevened.

2. The change which is made in men by moral influences, and the spirit that
works with the greatest efficacy in the Doctrines of men, is only a gradu in
gradum, or a specie in speciem; not, a genere in genus. i. from a greater
degree of sin to a lesser, or from one species of sin to another; but not
from sin unto holiness. They return (says the Prophet Hosea) but not to the
most high. Polemo (of whom we heard in the objection) though by mingling the
words of a Philosopher with faith, was so far profited by them, as of a
debauched man to be made sober; from a reveller, to be changed into a
Philosopher; yet did he not by any change or alteration hereby wrought in him,
attain the honor of a Saint, or son of God, or come to partake of the Divine
nature. The encouragements, motives, promises, which Philosophers were able to
administer and tender unto men; were not great and precious enough to work
their hearts about unto holiness, or to transport and carry them out of
themselves unto God. Indeed the promises and encouragements by which some of
them attempted the hearts and spirits of their disciples, to make them more
then ordinary men, were great enough to have effected this; yea and more then
they projected or intended: for they also spoke of life and immortality, and
avouched the abiding of many glorious things after death, for those who should
hearken to the voice of their precepts and instructions. But though their
promises in this kind were great enough for their purpose, yet were they not
precious enough: they wanted a Jesus Christ at the bottom of them, to give
credit and authority, to give life and power, and fullness of interest in the
souls and consciences of men, unto them: thorough a deficiencie whereof they
were able only to beget a dead faith, and a dead hope in men, of the things
promised: now it must be, not a dead, but a living faith that works by love:
and so it must be, not a dead, but a lively hope, which must set men on work to
purge themselves, even as he (i. God himself) is pure. Philosophical promises
were sufficient to prevail with men to deny themselves in lusts and practices,
which were more ignoble, sensual, and vile, but left them to seek themselves
in others of a more subtle, though no less sinful, nature and import, as
vainglory, self-admiration, etc. Whereas the promises advanced by the
Scriptures, are of that strength and interest in the souls and consciences of
men, that they suffer them not to seek themselves in any thing that is terrene,
much less in any thing that is sinful; but carrying them over, and beyond all
these, prevail with them to seek themselves in God only, and his service. Thus
then we see difference in abundance, between those changes which are sometimes
wrought by Philosophical receipts in men, and those which are frequently seen
and known to be effected by the Scriptures.

The eighth argument or demonstration to evince the descent Paul has this
passage, Ephesians. 3. 8 9. 10. Unto me who am less then the least Ephesians. 3 8, 9, 10.
of all Saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles
the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all men see what is the
fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world has been hid
in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ. To the intent that now unto the
principalities and powers in heavenly places, might be known by the Church the
manifold wisdom of God. What the Apostle here asserts unto God, in respect of
the Gospel, a manifoldnesse, or an abundant variety of wisdom; is easy to be
discerned by those that will draw near to the Scriptures and to the Gospel, and
give out the Col. ^. ^. Joh. 14 26.
strength of their minds and understandings in the study and contemplation of
them.

If you ask me, but by what rule shall we be able to judge of excellency of
wisdom, and choicenesse of understanding? what is that which you call
excellency of wisdom that when we see or apprehend it, we may be able to
acknowledge it, and do reverence unto it. To this I answer.

1. That all men are not alike capable of the knowledge of wisdom; nor alike
apprehensive of the excellency and choicenesse of understanding. Some men are
by nature of low, dull and depressed understandings, who cannot rise, no not to
an ordinary pitch to conceive and reach things of a middle nature, or of any
whit more then of a common purport. Others have their lot of reason,
apprehension, and capacity assigned unto them by God, in a better ground: I
mean, they are naturally more ready and quick of apprehension, can relish and
^aste wisdom when they meet with it, sooner, and with less consideration and
fewer debates upon things, then others. Now for the former of these persons
that are slow of apprehension, it is very hard to prescribe them a rule,
whereby to judge of excellency of wisdom, that they are capable of; but only
the rule of much labor and diligence to consider the nature, and tendencie of
things proposed to them. As Solomon says, If the iron be blunt, and a man has
not whet it to an edge, he must put the more strength to it: So where nature
Eccles. 10. 10.
has not conferred an estate of reason and understanding, they must be content
to betake themselves to the hand of diligence and industry, if they mean to
live and act at the same rate of wisdom with other men.

2. Some by reason of use, habit, or custom (as the Apostle speaks) have their
wits, or senses exercised to discern both good and evil; he speaks of the
discerning of things spiritually good, and spiritually evil; and consequently
of discerning things, Heb. 5. 14.
truly good, and truly evil. These differences of things, good and evil, are
most considerable in spiritual things; and of light consequence in all others.
Now as some have their (...), their senses (he means their intellectual
senses) exercised in discerning good and evil, i. that are ever and anon,
weighing, and studying and considering matters of a spiritual nature, to find
out truth from error, and that which is good, from that which is evil; so
there are others, whose senses, in this kind, through disuse, grow rusty, and
unfit for those operations and functions, which are most natural and proper to
them. Now for those that have their senses so exercised, as the Apostle speaks,
they need no rule to be given them, whereby to discern or judge of excellency
of wisdom; the very constitution, frame and temper of their senses, or
discerning faculty, is a sufficient rule unto them in this kind: as the very
palate or taste of some men, qualifies them to an excellent degree, without any
other rule, to apprehend with all exactness the different tastes both of meats
and drinks. The excellent strains, the savor and taste of the wisdom of God
in the Gospel, is (doubtless) strongly and with much satisfaction apprehended
by such men. Yet

3. And lastly, to fix a general rule, whereby to judge of excellency of
wisdom and understanding (at least in one of the most considerable subjects
or objects of it) and herein also to show them wherein this excellency
consists; excellency of wisdom (in the general) consists as in other things,
so chiefly in this: viz. in the contrivement of such means, for the bringing of
any great and much desirable end to pass, such an end which otherwise, and
according to all rule of common apprehension, is very difficult, and scarce
possible to be brought to pass; wisdom (I say) chiefly stands in the
contrivement of such means for the bringing such an end as this to pass, which
have these four properties in them. 1. A strong, and indissolvable connection
with the end, i. when they are such, which can hardly, if at all, be defeated
or miscarry. 2. An equitablenesse or righteousness thorowout; when there is
nothing sinful, nothing unjust or unworthy in them. 3. A sweetness and
pleasantness of proportion to the end; i. when the strength of that connection,
which they have with the end, lies more in the stratagem, I mean in the manner
of the contrivance, has most of the head in it, and as little of the arm, or
right-down force, as may be. The 4th and last property, Is a certain
remoteness of the whole, or main of the projection or contrivance, from the
common thoughts or apprehensions of men: this is, when the means we speak of is
of such a nature, compounded, as it were, of such ingredients, and made up into
such a devise, which was no ways likely to have entered into the heart or
thoughts of any other, but only his, who is the contriver of it. I shall not
stand to argue any of these particulars; nor yet to prove, that excellency of
wisdom consists in them; the reason why I place wisdom, and that in the
excellency and glory of it, in these jointly taken, is evident enough by a
diligent consideration of them respectively and together. I shall (for the
present) only show you how you may by the rule now delivered unto you, be able
to discern and judge somewhat, of that excellent and choice wisdom, which
rules and reigns, yea triumphs in the frame and composure of the Gospel; this
only premised by way of caution, that we do not limit or confine wisdom in
the excellency of it, only to the contrivement of means of what nature or
property soever, or for the compassing or obtaining of what end soever. There
may be an excellency of wisdom, 1. In the election of men's ends (at least
their particular and subordinate ends) as viz. in setting up godliness, or
excelling in grace, for a man's end, before riches, or greatness in the world;
and so, in making the good, or comfort of others, a man's end, rather then
himself, or his own advancement in outward things; though the truth is, that in
propriety of speech, the choosing of such ends as these, is rather a choosing of
means, then of ends. Indeed if we speak of the great and ultimate end of men,
their summum bonum, their sovereign good, wisdom has no place in the choosing
of this, but nature only. All men naturally, without any deliberation or
consultation upon the matter, desire happiness; this is every man's end without
exception: though there be a vast difference among men in traversing, or
prosecuting this end, answerable to their different apprehensions concerning
the nature and substance of the end it self. Again

2. There is choicenesse of wisdom too in a due and diligent prosecution of
means, as well as in a choice contrivance of means. The sluggard or the
slothful man, and the fool, or man destitute of understanding, are one and the
same with Solomon; and otherwhile, the wise man and the diligent, or
industrious, the same. And this wisdom I would gladly recommend unto you (my
brethren of this Church and fellowship.) I wish your wisdom in prosecuting the
means of your spiritual welfare, were like unto the faith of the Romans,
Romans 1. 8. which was famous throughout the world.

3. Wisdom likewise is seen, and may be seen in much of his excellency and
strength, in judging of connexions and proportions between causes and effects,
whether natural or moral: as in being able to discern and foresee, what men
of such and such principles, of such and such practices, are like to do in
such and such cases, under such and such circumstances, etc. as God by means of
the infiniteness of his wisdom was able certainly to foresee, how the men of
Keilab would have dealt 1 Samuel 23. 15, 1^.
by David, had he stayed in their city, till Saul had come to demand him: and
so likewise how the men of Tire and Sidon would have acquitted themselves in
matter of repentance, in case the like works had been done amongst them, which
were Mat. ^1. 21. 23.
done in Chorazin and Bethsaida.

But however wisdom may have place to show her self, and that with much
excellency, in these and happily in some other particulars besides these, as
well as in the contrivement of means for the bringing any end whatsoever to
pass; yet I have made choice of this head rather then any of the rest, as more
commodious and proper to work upon, and prosecute, for that end and purpose
which we have in hand; viz. to make you capable (in some measure) of discerning
that transcendent excellency of wisdom, which shines in the face of the
Scriptures (and of the Gospel more particularly) and makes it glorious, even
like unto the appearance of that invisible one, whom Moses saw, though
invisible.

First then you must understand and consider distinctly, what that end, or
ends are (be they one, or more, at least the principal and most considerable
of them) which God propounds to himself in the Gospel, I mean which he
discovers in the Gospel that he does, or has propounded to himself; and which
he pursues and prosecutes by those means which are revealed therein: Because
without a distinct knowledge of these ends, you can never apprehend nor judge
to any purpose, the excellency of the wisdom in those means, by which he
intends (and is every day at work accordingly) to bring those ends to pass.
His great and supreme end, is the glorifying of himself, yet not simply this
neither; but the glorifying of himself in such or such a way, or, by such and
such means, as viz. the salvation of some, and the condemnation of others, of
that kind of creature of his, which is called, man, and him considered as
sinful or fallen. And not simply this neither, the glorifying of himself in
the salvation of some, and condemnation of others: but the glorifying of
himself like unto himself, i^ upon terms of the highest and richest advantage
for his glory. He might possibly have glorified himself at an under rate, both
in the one and in the other, without going that way to work, which now he has
done, for the glorifying himself in them. So that the salvation and
condemnation of men, as they respect the glory of God, procured and raised by
them, have the nature and consideration of means; though otherwise, in respect
of the means by which themselves are accomplished and brought to pass, they
have the nature of ends. Now when I say and affirm, that Gods great end which
he discovers in the Gospel as intended to be brought about by him by the means
there specified, is the glorifying of himself, in the salvation and
condemnation of men; I do not intend to deny, but that God has many other
means and designs on foot in the Gospel, for the glorifying of himself,
besides these (I mean the salvation and condemnation of men) but this is that I
would say; that by what means soever besides these, spoken of in the Gospel,
God intends to glorify himself, they all relate unto these, and are
subordinate unto and resolve themselves into these. So that this still remains
an unquestionable truth, that Gods great end held forth in the Gospel, is the
glorifying of himself like himself, partly in the salvation, partly in the
condemnation of men.

In the second place to give you yet some further light, whereby to see and
judge the excellency of wisdom in the Gospel, you must consider, that the
glorifying of God by the salvation and condemnation of men (at least as now
they are devised and intended by him to be effected) is an end of very high and
glorious consequence, not only in respect of God himself, but of the creature
also, both men and Angels (I mean those of either kind, whom God has, or
shall think worthy to take into part and fellowship with himself in his own
blessedness and glory.) We shall not now stand to argue or prove this; but
take it for granted, as being a thing clear, and easy to be assented unto.
Only it is to be taken into consideration, for our present purpose; because,
if that which is the chief and supreme end of the Gospel, were but some light,
ordinary, or inconsiderable thing, there were no place for that excellency of
wisdom we speak of, to be found in any means whatsoever for the effecting of
it. Yea it argues rather weakness and folly then any thing else, to be curious
and profound in contriving means for bringing that to pass, which being
effected is of little or no consequence unto any.

Thirdly (and lastly) it is yet further to be considered, concerning this end
we speak of (the glorifying of God, in the salvation and condemnation of men)
that it is an end of such a nature and consideration, that being seriously
thought of, and narrowly inquired into, it will be found to be such a thing,
such an end, as was not compassable, was not to be attained or brought to pass
by any other person, one or more, nor in any other way, or by any other means,
then by him who has now taken it in hand, and is in the pursuit of it (I
mean, God himself) and that in that way and method of means, wherein he pursues
it. Neither shall we spend time (for the present) in the demonstration of this;
it being a point which frequently comes to hand; and besides has no great
difficulty in it to be apprehended and believed. Only the remembrance of it,
is necessary for our present occasion: because, if the glorifying of God upon
the terms we speak of (viz. in or by the salvation and condemnation of men
fallen) were an end, either in it self, or in respect of any wisdom, strength,
or power of any creature, or creatures whatsoever, of an easy assecution,
obvious to be attained, the wisdom of God which has contrived the way and
means for the obtaining of it, would be less considerable, and the excellency
of it not so like to affect, or take the hearts and souls of men. For that
which every man, or men of ordinary abilities, can do, no man will much value
the doing of it, by whomsoever it be done; no not though there be more then
ordinary understanding, skill, or wisdom showed in the effecting of it. But now
the glorifying of God in the salvation and condemnation of sinful men, being
not only a thing of a most transcendent consequence and import, but of a very
difficult, and next to an impossible performance, it yields the fullest and
largest opportunity that can be imagined, for the greatest excellency of
wisdom that can be conceived, to show it self in contriving a way or means how
to accomplish it. Thus far then we have prepared your judgments and
understandings, to conceive of the excellency of wisdom in the Gospel: We
have showed you, that the great end there presented and driven at, will not
only bear or admit an excellency of wisdom, but necessarily requires, calls
aloud for an excellency of wisdom, yea the greatest excellency in this kind
that can be imagined, for the effecting of it.

In the next place then, let us consider, whether the means, which the Gospel
tenders unto us, as contrived and disposed by God, for the effecting of the
great end mentioned, has not all those four characters or properties in it of
an excellency of wisdom, formerly expressed.

The first was this; a strong and indissolvable connection with the end; when a
means is such, or so laid, that it cannot lightly prove abortive, or miscarry.
And is not the course, and means which God (according to the report of the
Gospel) has taken for the glorifying of himself in the salvation and
condemnation of men, a means of this property and commendation? First, can the
salvation of men miscarry in the hand of such a Mediator and Redeemer, so
great and glorious, every ways so accomplished for his undertaking in this
kind, as with grace, goodness, love, wisdom, power, interest with God, etc.
as the Gospel exhibits him to the world, on whose shoulder the weight of this
great business is here laid? Is not such a Savior every ways able, yea and
willing, to save those, and that perfectly, that shall come unto him? And shall
not those most certainly come unto him (and so partake of salvation by him)
whom God the Father shall draw, and persuade effectually to come? Therefore
certainly that means which the Gospel-holds forth, for the saving of men, is a
means of efficacy and power, a means that will reach the end with an high
hand, and against, and above, all contradiction. And the salvation of men, upon
the Gospel terms, in that way, and by the means we speak of, is every whit as
effectual for the glorifying of God. The glorifying of God, is but the
natural, or essential result of the salvation of men in the Gospel way, as
will further appear in opening the other properties.

Again for the condemnation of men, we need not question but that there is
place and room enough left in the Gospel, for many to perish, and to be
condemned, and that most certainly, viz. all such as shall not believe, and
continue unbeleeving unto the end. But that which is mainly considerable in
this point, is: not, that many shall certainly perish, notwithstanding the
Gospel; but that such provision is partly made in the Gospel, partly here
declared to be made otherwise, that every person without exception, man or
woman, that shall perish notwithstanding the Gospel, shall yet so perish, and
upon such terms, that God shall be highly glorified in their condemnation, and
in their perishing. His perfect hatred of sin, without the least touch or
tincture or mixture of any unrighteousness, yea or any hardness or
rigorousnesse of proceedings, shall only appear in their condemnation: they
shall perish with their blood upon their own heads; as we shall see further in
the next particular.

The second property of a means, wherein (in conjunction with the former, and
the other two remaining) the excellency of wisdom does appear, is, an
equitablenesse, or cleernesse of righteousness thoroughout; when there is
nothing injurious or oppressive unto any, nothing that bears hard upon any
principle or rule of justice or equity, within the whole course or compass of
the means projected. It is clearly repugnant to the principles of wisdom, much
more of the excellency of wisdom, to put any polluted or dishonorable
ingredient into any means whatsoever, whatsoever the end be which we desire to
accomplish by it. But when a means is strong and greater then resistance, and
yet has nothing hard, nor unequal in it, the end being excellent and of high
concernment, thus far an excellency of wisdom discovers it self, in the
election and contrivement of it. Now most certain and evident it is, that the
means contrived in the Gospel, for the glorifying of God, in the salvation and
condemnation of men, has this character upon it in the fairest and most
visible manner that can be. For 1. Whom did God injure or deal hardly by in the
least, in any thing which relates either to the salvation, or condemnation of
men according to the Gospel? The greatest appearance of hard measure offered to
any in this kind, is in the abasement and sufferings of Jesus Christ. But 1.
the common saying is, volenti non fit injurin; nothing is an injury which is
done to a man with his will, and free consent. Now Jesus Christ was most
willing to take up, and bear that great burden of the world, that lay upon his
shoulder in shame and sufferings. Therefore does my father love me (says he)
because I lay down my life, that I may Joh. 10. 17. 18.
take it again: no man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self.

If it be here said; But what though Jesus Christ was never so willing to
suffer what he did; yet might there not be some hard measure (at least) offered
unto him, in putting him upon it? Good dispositions may be wronged, not only
when they are forced upon the doing those things, which are contrary to them,
and which they are unwilling to do; but when they are wrought upon by
persuasion, and drawn into a willingness to do that, which is inconvenient or
prejudicial to them. To this I answer (in a word) goodness of disposition
when it is attended and guarded with excellency of wisdom and prudence, so
that it knows how to repair any breach, that it shall be willing to make upon
it self, for the good of others, is not at all obnoxious to any such danger or
inconvenience, as to be drawn to any thing prejudicial to it. Now this was the
blessed frame and temper of the heart of Jesus Christ; as he had goodness in
abundance, even to act him to a willing laying down his life for men: so had he
wisdom in abundance, even to teach him how, and upon what terms to lay it
down, so that he might receive, or take it again [and that indeed upon terms of
advantage] and his father (it seems) loved him as well, if not as much, for
this wisdom, as for that goodness. This I conceive to be clearly asserted by
himself, in the Scripture lately cited; Therefore does my father love me,
because I lay down my life [so, or upon such terms, of innocence,
righteousness, and will] that I may [viz in a way of justice and equity, and
without the least dishonor unto him] take [or rather, receive] it again from
him.

Again, goodness of disposition is not in danger neither to be wrought upon to
inconvenience, by those, who are tender and jealous over it, and withal
prudent and wise, to know what things are hurtful and prejudicial to it. Now
the Gospel informs us, that it was God the Father, who put his Son Jesus Christ
upon those sufferings, which he suffered for the salvation of the world: and he
(we know) was far from working in any unworthy or unkind manner, upon the
sweet disposition of his Son Jesus Christ. Nor (doubtless) would he ever
have drawn this son of his into such an engagement, of so much shame and
sorrow, and suffering, no not for the salvation of the world, if he had not
known how to have recompensed him to the full for all the labor, and travail
of his soul therein.

Again; true it is, in the course of means, which the Gospel holds forth as
projected and laid by God for the salvation of men, the troubles and sufferings
of other men also, are included, especially of the Preachers and Ministers of
the Gospel. Men cannot be saved without believing, they cannot believe without
hearing: they cannot hear without Preaching: nor can the Ministers of the
Gospel preach unto them, without exposing themselves to many troubles and
persecutions from the world for their work sake. I have sometimes opened that
passage of the Apostle unto you, Col. 1. 24. from whence we took notice of two
things as necessary for the salvation of Col. 1. 24.
men. The first, is the making of a Gospel: the second, the making known, or
preaching of this Gospel: and both these (as we showed at large, when time was)
require sufferings: the former, the sufferings of Christ; the latter, the
sufferings of those, who shall Preach and publish this Gospel in the world. In
which respect, the Apostle here calls his afflictions in Preaching the Gospel,
the filling up of that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, for his
body sake, which is the Church; i. for the actual effecting of their
salvation. But the case is every whit as clear here (if not much cleerer) I
mean in the sufferings of the Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel, viz. that
there is no wrong done unto them by God, whatsoever they suffer in this kind
from men, as it was in the sufferings of Christ himself. We shall not need
stand to argue this.

2. As there is no injury or wrong unto any person whatsoever included in the
means, which God has projected for the salvation of men, and the glorifying of
himself herein; so neither is there any thing that entrencheth upon any rule of
justice or equity, simply considered, and without relation unto persons. God
might (I mean in regard of his executive power, not his will, for this is
doubtful in the case;) he might by a strong hand have saved men, without any
injury done either to man, or Angel; and yet have seemed (at least) to have
dispensed with some main principles or rules of equity or justice, in saving
them; as viz. in case he had saved them, without any atonement at all made for
them; or without an atonement of full consideration and value; or if he had
said them, whilst they were yet impenitent, and altogether sinful, before
their minds were changed. To take a murderer, or malefactor in any kind,
immediately upon the murder, or other act of vileness committed, and without
any account given, or repentance shown for the sin, to make him a King, and
set him up upon a throne; carries a strong appearance (at least) of injustice,
or of somewhat that is as bad, in it. But suppose there were any perfect
atonement, that it were possible for a murderer to make for the murder he
has committed, and this atonement should be made by him; and further, he
should give full satisfaction, that he was now become a new man, and abhorred
any inclination unto blood; in this case, and upon these terms, if he should be
countenanced, or preferred to any place of dignity or honor, whereof he was
otherwise capable, there were no color of injustice in it, or unworthiness
otherwise. This is the case of the salvation of men, according to the tenor of
that way and means, which God, according to Scripture information, has devised
to effect it. He saves, he exempts, no sinner from deserved punishment (much
less advances any unto glory) but only such, for whose sin, or sins, 1. a
plenary atonement has been made already: 2. who have unfeignedly repented of
their sinners, and are become new creatures, and perfect haters of sin.

3. (And lastly) as to the condemnation of men, every whit as evident it is,
that there is not the least touch of injustice, nor of any thing that is
unequal or hard, in all that method or course of means, by which it is
effected, or takes place. Indeed if God should deprive men of all ability and
power to repent and to believe, and then should be still moving and persuading,
still entreating and beseeching, urging and pressing them to believe with that
patheticalnesse of affection, wherein he expresses himself in the Scriptures,
even to those that perish, as well as to those that are saved; this would seem
very hard, yea somewhat harder then injustice it self; but this is not so. As
if a King having caused a man's legs to be cut of suppose he has done it in a
way of justice, and according to the law, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth, this man having cut off the legs of another; yet if he should urge,
press and persuade such a man as this, whose legs he has cut off, to run a
race with those that have their limbs, and are swift of foot, and should
promise him, with many expressions of love, exceeding great rewards, if he
would quit himself in the race like a man, and come as soon to the goal, as
they that run with him; this would be a carriage savouring more of a bloody
and unmanlike insolency over this poor wretch in his misery, then of any real
affection, grace, or respect toward him, or of any desire of his good: in like
manner to conceive that God applies himself with such moving and melting
expressions of mercy, tenderness of bowels, love, grace, bounty, etc. toward
his creature, man, as the Scripture from place to place emphatically asserts
that he does, yea toward very sinful and unworthy men, promising unto them
life, and glory, and the great things of the world to come, if they will
believe, repent, and turn unto him; and yet to suppose withal, that these men,
to whom he makes these rich and sweet applications of himself, are wholly
destitute of all power to do what he requires of them in this case, to save
them from destruction, and to confer the great things promised upon them, as
viz. to believe and repent, is to represent the glorious God in his greatest
expressions of mercy and grace, and love unto the world, rather as laughing the
world to scorn in that great misery wherein it is plunged, then as a God any
ways truly desirous, or intending to relieve it, his glorious overtures and
professions of love, grace, and favor toward it, notwithstanding. Some indeed
imagine that they see such a face of God as this, presenting it self in the
glass of the Gospel. But, God giving life and opportunity, we shall
demonstratively show and prove in due time, that all such conceptions are most
unworthy of God, and wholly inconsistent with those things, which the
Scriptures hold forth and teach, as well concerning him, as those gracious
abilities which he has indulgently conferred upon men, in and through the
second, notwithstanding their fall in the first, Adam.

The third property mentioned of an excellency of wisdom, discovering it
self in the contrivement of a means for the compassing such an end as we spoke
of, was, when the means have a sweetness and pleasantness of proportion to
the end, i. (as we further explained it) when the strength of that connection
(formerly spoken of) which they have with the end, lies more in the stratagem,
i. in the manner of contrivance, and has most of the head in it, requiring as
little of the arm, or rightdown force for the execution of any thing, as may
be. Now that the means, which the Gospel holds forth, for the bringing about
that great end, the glorifying of God in the salvation and condemnation of men,
has this character also, or property in them, is evident upon these two
grounds or considerations.

1. Because there is nothing within the whole compass of this means, which is
to be effected by the power of God (I mean by his executive power) but what in
a way of reason, wisdom, and equity, may, yea and ought to be effected, yea
and is morally, or in the justly-moving-causes effected, before God puts forth
his outstretched arm, for the literal or external execution of it; nothing
is belayed, or spoken of, as to be effected or done by the power of God, but
what naturally, as it were, and with a rational voice, calls for this power of
his to effect it, even as grapes when they are fully ripe, call for the hand of
the gatherer, and corn when that is ripe, for the hand of the reaper. And

2. Because all other parts or ingredients in the means we speak of, which do
not stand in any executive force or power, but rather in a simple contrivement,
do in the eye of reason, and of a considerate understanding, look with a very
delightful and pleasant aspect, upon that great end. And because the Gospel
consists of such a means for the glorifying of God, in the salvation and
condemnation of men, as has been signified unto you, viz. which is effectual
and potent as to the obtaining of the end, and yet the potencie of it chiefly
consists in the wise contrivement of things in reference to the end, and not in
force; hence (I conceive) it may well be that the Apostle calls the Gospel,
both the wisdom of God, and the power of God. But unto them that are called,
both of the Jews and Grecians, we preach Christ, the power of God, and the
wisdom of God. 1 Cor. 1 24. By, Christ, he means the Doctrine of Christ, 1 Cor.
1. 24.
viz. the Gospel; which he calls the power of God; because it is so effectually
potent for the end; and withal, the wisdom of God; because this potencie
chiefly consists in the wisdom of it.

Let us begin with the former consideration. There are but four great turnings,
or transactions of things (in the general) within the compass of that means,
which the Gospel holds forth, for the glorifying of God in the salvation and
condemnation of men, that are to be effected by the unbaring of the mighty arm
of God. The first, is the raising of Christ from the dead, with the
appurtenances and consequences thereof. The second the destroying of the devil
(as the Scripture speaks) i. the cutting him off from the exercise of that
power, which he was interessed in, and possessed of, over all flesh, first, to
make men and women do his work, whilst they live: secondly, after death, to
torment them night and day for ever. Now the devil is by a strong hand,
restrained from the exercise of this power, especially in reference to the
Saints: and if it be not to all men, it is through their own negligence and
default. The third, is the casting of wicked and impenitent persons into hell,
with the things appertaining thereunto; The fourth and the last is, the
advancement of the Saints unto their estate of glory, with what is requisite
hereunto. I do not (for the present) remember any thing besides these four
(with their members and appurtenances) within the compass of the means, we
speak of, that is to be transacted, by the immediate force and power of the
omnipotent arm of God. It is true, the power of God is sometimes put forth in
drawing men unto Christ when they believe; so the Saints are said to be kept by
the power of God through faith unto salvation; but the power of God we speak
of, works in these, and such like effects as 1 Pet. 1. 5.
these, by means proportionable to them; as when he makes grapes to grow upon
the vine, and grass to grow upon the mountains, he works both one and the
other with his omnipotent power (for he has no other power, but this) but he
works by means proportionable unto the things produced by him. But when he
raised the Lord Christ from the dead, he did not put on any covering of flesh
on his arm, but wrought with it bare: and so when he shall compel the wicked
to go into hell fire, having raised them from the dead (by way of a
preparative thereunto) so again when he shall put the righteous into a
condition of perfect blessedness and of glory, having raised them also from
the dead, by way of preparation to it; he will, and must interpose with his
almighty power upon the same terms, viz. without the concurrence or cooperation
of any second cause, or causes, apt or likely to produce these great effects.
Now then this is that which we say, that for all the four particulars
mentioned, though they are to be effected, and brought to pass, by strength of
arm, yet there is such a disposition and contrivance of things precedaneous to
every of them, yea, so pleasantly introductive to them, that they will seem to
be as much (if not more) acts of wisdom, reason and equity, as acts of power;
and consequently there will no more of this executive power of God be seen in
bringing about that great end of glorifying himself in the salvation and
condemnation of men, then needs must. To run through the particulars, with as
much brevity as may be.

First, for the raising of the Lord Christ from the dead (which is a master
vein in the body of the means, which the Gospel presents unto us for the end so
often specified, and carries a great breadth in them) 1. Was there not all the
reason in the world, why God should raise him again from the dead? was there,
or is there any thing, to disparage that act of God, either in point of wisdom,
righteousness, or equity, by which he raised him from the dead? Did he not
live holily, and blamelesly in this present world, whilst his natural life
stood by him? Did he not challenge all his enemies to rebuke him of sin; and
none of them accept the challenge? yea and were not his inward parts as full of
grace and truth (as John speaks) as his life was of the fruits and
expressions of them? There was no spot or blemish of sin to be found in him,
body, or foul. So that there was not the least cause, nor color of a cause,
why God should leave him in the hand of death in respect of any thing relating
to himself, or why he should not raise him up again: yea the truth is, that
thus far there was no cause why he should so much as taste of death: much
less why he should be left in the hand of death. Again, as touching his
undertaking for others (I mean of expiating and making atonement for the sins
of the world) it is true, there was reason, why in respect of this, he should
die, or taste of death; because otherwise he could not have performed his
undertaking. But there was no reason, why having performed this, and that with
a surplussage of performance, not only dying, but remaining in the bands of
death for a longer time then was simply necessary for that expiation, there was
no reason (I say) in respect of this neither, why God should not raise him from
the dead. Nay what in respect of his innocence, and of his willingness to lay
down his life for others, and of his full accomplishment of what he intended
and undertook to do, yea or was necessary for him to do, for others; it was
no way consisting with the wisdom or righteousness of God, not to have made
out that outstretched arm of his power which he did, to raise him from the
dead. And in this respect it was, that Peter spoke, as he did, Act. 2. Act. 2.
24.
whom God has raised up and loosed the sorrows of death, because it was
unpossible that he should be holden of it, i. of death. How, or in what
respect, was it unpossible that Christ should be held by death? It was not
unpossible in respect of that nature, wherein Ch(...) suffered death (this
humane nature,) nor was it unpossib^ ^mply in respect of the Divine nature,
wherein he had communion, even whilst he suffered death, as well as in that
nature, wherein he suffered death; nor was it unpossible simply in respect of
that absolute holiness and freedom from sin, which was in him; but this
impossibility (I conceive) sprang chiefly from an utter inconsistencie with the
righteousness and goodness of God, to suffer a person so innocent and holy as
Christ was, and withal, having fully accomplished what he undertook by dying,
to remain any longer in the bands and prison of death. So that this act of God
in raising up Christ from the dead is (as was said) to be looked upon every
whit as much (if not more) as an act of righteousness, and of equity, as of
power; yea the righteousness and wisdom which together shine forth in it,
give, as it were, a gracious luster, and set off, to the power that appeared in
it. The Kings strength (says David) loves judgment, [or righteousness.]
Psalm. 99 4.


2. As there was a necessity that God should raise Christ from the dead, in
respect of the righteousness of his will, which could not suffer so righteous
a person, as he was, to remain under the power of death, without cause; so was
there a necessity also of the same act on Gods part, by way of design, or
wisdom, viz. to accommodate that great end we so often speak of, the glorifying
of himself in the salvation and condemnation of men. Neither could, either the
one, or the other (I mean, either the salvation, or condemnation of men) have
taken place, or been brought to pass upon the like terms of advantage for his
glory, had not the raising of the Lord Christ from the dead, been one
ingredient in the means of either. First, they that are saved, could not be
saved (at least upon any such terms) without being justified; justified they
could not be, without believing; believe they could not, but by and through,
and by means of the rising again of Jesus Christ from the dead. Who by his
means (says Peter speaking of 1 Pet. 1. 21.
Christ) do believe in God, that raised him from the dead, and gave him glory,
that your faith and hope might be in God: and in this respect he is said, Romans
4. to have been raised again for Romans 4. 25.
our justification. Who was delivered to death for our sins, and rose again
(or rather, was raised again, as the original^ ^^th it) for our justification:
viz. by being hereby put into a passive posture (as it were) or capacity of
being believed on by men; whereby they come to be justified. And as Christ was
raised again for the justification of those that are saved; so may he be said
(and that in a sense very considerable) to be raised again also for the
condemnation of those that perish. For were not Christ presented and preached
unto wicked men, as being in such a condition, wherein he is every ways meet
and worthy to be believed on, their unbelief, with all the sin that
accompanies it, would not be so heavy upon them; nor could God make any such
earnings of glory, as now he does, of their condemnation (as might be showed
more at large, but for brevities sake, We are (says Paul) unto God a sweet
savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish. 2 Cor. 2. 15.
The preaching of Christ, as he is described and held forth in the Gospel, in
regard of the many mighty motives, encouragements, advantages, for believing,
which of necessity must be tendered unto men in such a preaching of him, must
needs render those altogether inexcusable, who believe not. So that though
there be somewhat of the arm, and executive power, in the means which the
Gospel holds forth for the glorifying of God in the salvation and condemnation
of men; yet there is no more (at least as to that particular we last spoke of;
and we shall show the like in others) then needs must, and what the excellency
of wisdom in the contrivement, did require.

A second particular in the means we speak of, wherein the power of the arm of
God is engaged and put forth, is the destruction of the devil i. (as we
interpreted it) the forcible restraining of him, from tempting men in this life
especially above, or beyond, what they are able; and the absolute restraining
him from tormenting them afterward. Now the arm of God in this act also, is
clothed with so much righteousness on the one hand, and wisdom on the other,
that the power that is put forth in it, is hereby made every ways beautiful
and lovely. First the righteousness of God, in destroying the devil, with the
double destruction we speak of, appears as to both the degrees or parts of it,
thus. It is righteous for God to restrain any creature whatsoever from any act,
which it has no right or interest to do, or perform: but the devil has no
right or interest to tempt men (lest of all the Saints, and those that believe)
above what they are able to bear, or overcome, nor yet to torment them
afterward. Therefore it is every ways just and righteous for God to restrain
him in this kind: nor is there any thing of any hard reflection upon God in it.

If you ask me, but why has the devil no right to tempt even such men as you
speak of, and that to that degree you mention? and so to torment them
afterward? If ever he had such a right (as you seem to imply he had) how did
he lose it? what act did he, whereby he divested himself of it?

To this I answer (supposing that for brevity sake, which already should have
been showed somewhat more at large, viz. that Satan, sometimes had a right,
such as it was, to tempt men, whom, and to what degree he pleased, and was
able) but my answer (I say) is.

1. That that right which at any time the devil had to tempt men, was but a
right of permission, or sufferance on Gods part: it was not any right the devil
could challenge or claim, either by his nature, or birth, or by any heroike, or
high-deserving action; for the truth is, that that act of the devils, upon the
success whereof, God gave him, or rather (to speak warily in a business of
this nature) suffered him to take a right (or rather a power) of tempting men
(the tempting of man in Paradise) was an act, so far from meriting any thing
at the hand of God, that it was highly provoking in his sight, as may clearly
be gathered from the arraignment of the serpent, who was his instrument in it
(Genesis 3.) and the curse there laid Genesis 3. 14.
upon him: yea some Divines of great worth and learning, conceive, that the
devils eternal condemnation was not sealed, or past recovery, till he had
added this sin, unto his former; brought the creature, man, into an estate of
misery and death by his temptation (but this we leave to the assertors to
prove) So then, that right which the devil ever had of tempting men, being
nothing else but a thing permitted unto him by God, not purchased by any desert
of his, but merely out of a displeasure, and offense taken at his creature,
man; may certainly with righteousness enough, be taken away by God upon a very
slender occasion given on the devils part; yea it may be taken away at
pleasure, without any occasion at all given by him, from whom it is taken upon
such terms. Yea

2. In as much as this power of tempting men in this life (and there is the
same reason of his power of tormenting them for ever, afterward) was permitted
unto the devil by God, only out of displeasure conceived against his creature
man, and not at all for any gratification of him; whenever this displeasure
of God against man shall be taken off, and healed (which is done by man's
reconcilement to him by faith in the blood of Jesus Christ) there is occasion
and ground enough for God to recall that permission of his given unto the
devil; or otherwise to limit and restrain it, and the exercise of it, as he
shall please. And in this respect it is said of Christ that through death, he
destroyed him that had the power of death (i. Heb. 2. 14.
had a power permitted unto him, to order and manage the affairs of death,
temptations, occasions, allurements unto sin, and all which concern the
state, as it were, and kingdom of death, and so to execute torments, which may
be called, the treasures of death) that is, the devil. Now how did Christ by
death, destroy him (in the sense formerly given) who had the power of death,
the devil? Doubtless by reconciling the world by it, unto God. For all the
right and power the devil had in any consideration against man, being founded
(as was said) in that displeasure, which God had conceived against him for
sin; when this displeasure of his shall cease and fall, that right and power
of the devil standing upon it, must needs cease and fall with it. Yet

3. (And lastly) there may be somewhat conceived even on the devils part also,
somewhat done by him for which such a destruction as we speak of, might justly
be inflicted by God upon him. First, that power of tempting men, especially the
Saints, was forfeited by him, when he presumed to tempt him, who was their
head; having no right at all, nor color of right, to be troublesome to him
with any temptation; in as much as he was not in the number of those, with whom
God was displeased for sin: and consequently had no sufficient ground to
think, that God had given him any such permission, to tempt him, as he had to
tempt other men. Now we know that an abuse of a privilege or power, is
(especially so notorious, as that of Satan was in tempting Christ) a just cause
of taking it away from him that abuses it.

There is the same consideration, of the other part of Satan's power, I mean his
power to torment men after death. His abuse of this power in procuring the Lord
Christ to be cut off by a death full of pains and torment, in whom he had
nothing Joh 14. 30.
(as Christ himself says) i. had no ground at all of doing any thing against
him, was a just ground why he should be divested and despoiled of it, at least
so far, and in respect of such persons, as God should please to deliver out
of his hands. Thus you see, that what God does by a strong hand in destroying
the devil, he is lead unto it in a way of equity and perfect righteousness. But

2. God was not lead hereunto in a way of righteousness only, but likewise in
a way of necessity, in relation to that great design of his we often speak of
(the glorifying of himself in the salvation and condemnation of men) First,
except Satan had been limited and straightened in the exercise of that power,
which he has to tempt men; the Saints should have no rest nor breathing time
from his malice in this kind; he would always be buffeting them, night and
day: and consequently, they would be in no capacity, never enjoy any
opportunity, of building up themselves in their most holy faith, nor of
preparing or making themselves meet for their glory: their soul would be among
lions continually, and they lie covered with the shadow of death: they would
have enough to do, yea they would suffer sorely in bearing the devils burdens
in this kind: yea they might be brought to hanging down of hands, and waxing
feeble of knees, and to despair it self. In a word, as our Savior says (in
respect of a temporal preservation) that except those days (speaking of the
miserable times of Jerusalem) be shortened, no flesh can be saved; so have we
cause to Matthew. 24. ^^
judge and say, in respect of the eternal preservation of men; that except
Satan's power of tempting men had been shortened, in an ordinary way and course
of things, there could no flesh, nor spirit neither, have been saved; at least,
not have been saved upon those terms of advantage for the glory of God, which
now many will (as might be declared more at large; but that we are now upon the
speed,) Neither could the condemnation of men have taken place, with such
advantage for the glory of God, as now it does, in case the devil had not been
destroyed, i limited and confined in his tempting power. For the fewer and
weaker temptations men are exposed unto, and tempted with, the more inexcusable
they are if they yield, and quit their loialty and subjection unto God. And the
more inexcusable men are, who are condemned, the more is God glorified in their
condemnation: and therefore all things are so laid in the counsel of his
providence, that they which perish, shall be without excuse, Romans 1. 20. Romans
3. 19. Romans 1. 20. 3. ^9.


2. The case is yet more clear, as concerning his tormenting power. Except he
had been destroyed in this, the salvation of men could have had no place at
all. How can those be said to besaved, who are allwaies exposed to the
tormenting power of the devil? Yea the condemnation it self of men, could not
in that degree have abounded to the glory of God, which now it does. For if
Satan had not been destroyed by Christ, in respect of this tormenting power of
his, there had not been those mighty encouragements and engagements upon wicked
men to believe; and consequently, nothing that sin in their non-beleeving. If
they had been as obnoxious to be tormented by devil, in case they should
believe, as they could or should have been without believing; they had been in
a very great measure excusable, above what now they are, in their unbelief. And
look in what measure or degree men who are condemned, or perish, are capable of
excuse, the glory of God is so much the more obscure, and less conspicuous in
their condemnation. Thus then ye see, in this second particular also (the
destruction of the devil) how that forcible power of God which acts in it,
acts not only with the full and free consent of righteousness, but also by
the counsel, and at the instance of that excellency of wisdom, which has
contrived the whole method and means for the glorifying of him, in the
salvation and condemnation of men. So that all this while we neither see, nor
hear of any whit more of the arm for the advancement of this great design
then is simply necessary, and that according to the principles of the most
exquisite wisdom that is.

The 3. particular, wherein the arm of God comes in, and acts with it is
glorious force and might, toward the glorifying of him, in the salvation and
condemnation of men, is the very casting or forcing of ungodly and impenitent
persons into hell fire; with that which makes way for, and prepares to it, the
raising them from the dead, and gathering them together before his judgment
seat, to receive that dismal and dreadful sentence, Go ye cursed.

Now 1. That this act also of Gods power, whereby he forces wicked and
unbeleeving persons into hell, is led by a fair hand of righteousness, so that
there is nothing in it contrary to the greatest excellency of wisdom in that
behalf (and there is ever the most jealousy and danger of unrighteousnes,
where there is force and greatness of power) but that this act of God (I say)
whereof we now speak, is fully and clearly righteous, is evident, partly from
the demeritoriousnes or sinfulnes (as the Apostle calls it) of sin in general;
partly (and more particularly) from the demeritoriousnes of the sin of unbelief.

For the first, the wages of sin (says the Apostle, speaking Romans 6. 23.
of sin in general) is death. His meaning is, that death, i. the eternal
ruin, misery and destruction of the creature, is but a stipend or
consideration most justly, due unto, and deserved by sin, as wages, or hire for
labor, is the most just and due debt amongst debts of all kinds, howsoever
growing or accrueing. There is no more hardness or inequality in it, that God
should destroy a creture for ever, that has sinned against him, then there is,
that a man who has hired a labourer to work for him, should give him his hire
for his work. Though there is not (happily) a greater truth, yet there is a
greater plainness and evidence of equity in it, that God should destroy the
creature for sin, especailly who believes not, then that he should save him
for Christ's sake, who does believe. Is God unrighteous (says the Apostle) who
punishes (viz. sin, or for sin) God forbid. The meaning of his
Interrogation Romans 3. 5.
seems to be, is God to be thought, or judged unrighteous, because he punishes
for sin? (...), q. d. at no hand: far be it from us so to imagine or think:
implying that there is a most manifest and apparent righteousness, or equity
in it, that God should punish or take vengeance, for sin; for otherwise, the
thought of his being unrighteous in punishing, would not be so horrid and
abominable.

Again 2. As sin in the general, or as it is sin, be it what kind of
sin soever, most justly deserves death, so that God in in^icting death, is no
ways unrighteous, oppressive, or hard, so does the sin of unbelief, in
particular, and in a more peculiar manner deserve death, without which (as we
know) no man dies, or perishes, for all his other sins. The
demeritoriousnesse or sinfulness of unbelief (and consequently, the equity of
God in infflicting death upon men because of it) consists in the great
uncapablenes of it, or (which is much the same) the strong and manifest
opposition which it carries in it against the grace of God; which appears
chiefly in three things. 1. The great and formidable consequence or concernment
of it unto men: 2. In the abundant reason which men have so to judge and
conceive, I mean, that it is of that deep concernment unto them. 3. (And
lastly) in that abundant means which God has given, or vouchsafed unto men, to
believe, or to escape all the evil wherewith unbelief (especially in and after
death) is accompanied.

First, We all know, that faith and unbelief, are matters of the highest and
most weighty consequence of all things whatsoever relating to the condition of
the creature, man; a great matter of his present comfort and discomfort, well
being, and evil being, depend upon them; but the whole and entire sum of his
everlasting condition, his well being, or evil being for ever, depends upon
them. He that believes (says our Savior) shall be saved, i. shall be
everlastingly blessed; and he Mark 16. 16.
that believes not (viz. either sooner or later, first or last) shall be
damned, i. everlastingly miserable and accursed. So that this is clear:
unbelief is, amongst all the irregularities, unworthinesses, and miscarriages
of men, of the most grievous and formidable consequence unto him. As to believe
is an act of more value, worth, and consequence unto men, then a thousand
virtuous and commendable actions of another kind; so is unbelief, at least
continued and persisted in unto death: of a thousand times more sad and
grievous consequence, then the committing of ten thousand sins of the
greatest provocation otherwise.

2. I add further, that men have reason in abundance thus to judge and think
of it. First, for those that have the letter of the Gospel, the case is more
evident. For they have all the reason to believe this, which they have to
believe the Gospel, it self; in as much as the Gospel does so plainly reveal
and affirm it. Now that men have reason upon reason, reason in abundance to
believe the Gospel, has been already demonstratively proved, and may be yet
proved further. Secondly concerning those, who have only the heavens, the sun,
moon and stars, and the goodness of God in the government of the world, to
preach the Gospel unto them; these also have reason sufficient (if not in
abundance) to think the same thought, and judge the same judgment with the
other, in the point in hand. For having the Gospel (I mean, the substance and
effect of it, the willingness and readiness of God to be reconciled unto the
world) preached unto them by the Apostles aforesaid, the sun, moon, stars,
the patience, goodness and bountifulness of God in the government of the
world (as heretofore has been declared, and may be further argued in due time)
they cannot reasonably think, but that it is of great weight and moment unto
them to believe that, which is so taught them by such a glorious ministry sent
from God. This is one of the most common dictates and suggestions of reason;
that Deus and natura nihil faciunt frustra: God and nature do nothing in vain,
from whence it follows semblably, in a way of reason; that the greater and more
considerable any thing is, which God does, the end depending upon it, or
relating to it, and for which it is done, is so much the greater, and of the
more weight and consequence. Now that act or work of God, whereby he preaches
the Gospel (as has been said) unto all the inhabitants of the earth, cannot
reasonably be looked upon but as a very great and highly considerable act of
his; and so the Scriptures from place to place, reports it to be. If it be so,
so highly considerable an act of God to preach the Gospel unto men in such a
way, it follows then, in a way of reason, that for men to believe or not to
believe, that which God himself preaches, must needs be of very high
consequence and concernment unto them. Because there is no other end (I mean no
other immediate and direct end) can reasonably be imagined, which God should
propound unto himself, in preaching a truth, or a Gospel, but the believing of
it by those to whom it is preached. Thus then you see the second point clear
also: viz. that there is sufficient reason and ground, yea indeed reason and
ground in abundance, why men even heathen men (as we call them) should conceive
and judge that the believing, or not believing of the Gospel, are things of the
greatest consequence and importance unto them. And this is another thing which
tends to demonstrate the great demeritoriousnesse, or provoking sinfulness of
unbelief: viz. the reason and means, which men have to come to the knowledge
and consideration, of the dreadful consequence of it. If men had no ground or
reason at all thus to conceive or judge of it, doubtless the sinfulness of it
would be much eased and lessened thereby.

3. (And lastly) Another thing, which in conjunction with the two former,
compleats the unmeasurable sinfulness of the sin of unbelief, is, the
gracious, liberal and plentiful means, which God has vouchsafed unto men, to
bring them to believe, or, to make themselves believers.

As for those 1. Who have the letter of the Gospel, the writings of the
Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, to read and to consider of, they have all
those reasons and grounds, as means enabling them to believe, which have been
yet insisted upon, to prove the original of the Gospel to be from God, as
being drawn, partly from the style and phrase, partly from the matter or
substance of the Gospel; besides all those yet remaining of another
consideration, and which are external, in respect of the Gospel. All which
reasons and grounds diligently considered, amount to a rich and plentiful
means, whereby to believe. A thousand things are generally and confidently
believed by the world, the truth whereof stands upon no such pillars of
evidence and rational demonstration, as the truth of the Gospel does.

And 2. For those that are without (I mean, without the Gospel written, or
preached, upon such terms as it is preached amongst us daily) they also have
sufficient means (if not large and plentiful) for believing. But I demand
(says the Apostle) have they not heard? yes verily (says he) their sound Romans
^0. 19.
went forth into all the earth, and their words unto the end of the world. He
had said in the verse immediately foregoing, that faith comes by hearing: In
this verse, he shows (in an answer which he gives to a demand or question put
by him) what hearing it is, by which faith comes; or at least what hearing is
sufficient to believe upon, or to produce faith. This hearing, he says, is the
hearing of that ^und, and of those words, which the heavens, and the day, and
the night speak, and that are gone forth into the ends of the world (as appears
by the place, in Psalm. 19. from whence these words are added) If you ask me,
but Psalm. 19. 4.
what is the sound, or what are the words which the heavens, and the day, and
the night, i. the constant course of the providence of God, in the government
of the world, speak in the ears of all nations, and of all people, that faith
should come by the hearing of them? I answer: they are the words of eternal
life too, as well as those, which (as Peter acknowledges) out Savior himself
had to speak; yea and did speak upon all occasions; only they are not so
plainly spoken, as he was wont to speak: their parable is somewhat more dark,
and harder to be understood. But the sense and import of what the heavens
moving still in their natural course, and the gracious Providence of God,
jointly speak in the ears of all flesh, is, that God is taken off from the
fierceness of his displeasure against sin, and that he holds forth his white
flagge, and offers terms and conditions of peace unto the world; and that upon
their coming in to him by repentance, they shall be received into grace and
favor. And what is this but the very tenor, sum, and substance of the
Gospel? which yet is more plain from that of the same Apostle, Act. 14. to the
men of Lystra. Who (says he, speaking of God) in times past suffered all the
Gentiles Act. ^4 ^6, ^7.
to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless he left not himself without
witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. In respect of what was it,
that God left not himself without witness amongst the Gentiles, even then when
he suffered them to walk in their own ways? (viz. without admonishing and
directing them how to walk, and what to do, after any such manner as now he
does by the letter of the Gospel sent amongst them) what did the witnesses the
Apostle here speaks of, witness concerning God, or, on his behalf? Doubtless
he does not speak here of his Godhead, nor of his power, nor of his wisdom, as
if his meaning were, that God left not himself without witness of these
(though it be true, that he did not leave himself without witness, i. means of
convincing men, of these also) but the works of creation, as distinguished from
the works of providence (whereof he here speaks) are sufficient witnesses of
these, according to the tenor of Romans 1. 20. and besides, there are natural
impressions of these Romans 1. 20.
in the spirits and consciences of men, which are witnesses on Gods behalf thus
far. But doubtless, that in God or concerning God, which the Apostle here
says, that God intended should be testified or witnessed on his behalf unto
men, was somewhat more secret, more out of the way, as it were, of men's common
thoughts or apprehensions; and particularly it was that gracious and good
affection which he bears unto the world through Jesus Christ, his inclination
unto peace with men, upon their repentance (which is the substance of the
Gospel.) This appears 1. by the nature or quality of the witnesses here spoken
of, which were, Gods giving men rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, his
filling their hearts with food and gladness. Such witnesses as these, are
only proper to testify grace, and love, and desire of the good of those, to
whom they are given, in him that gives them. They plainly show, that he that
bestows them, is not extreme, uses not extremity against those that do
amiss; and consequently that he is by one means or other, taken off from the
rigor of his justice, and severity of his wrath against sinners. And 2. it
appears from hence; because Paul who was not only a diligent and faithful
Preacher of the Gospel where ever he became, but was in special manner
designed to be an Apostie to the Gentiles, preached no other doctrine but this
at Lystra (a city of the Gentiles) upon that great opportunity that was now
offered him. We cannot think that he should only preach a philosophical or
metaphysicall Sermon, concerning the essence or natural properties of God
only; but that which was Evangelicall, and savouring of the Gospel. Now the
holy Ghost recording either the whole, or (at least) the sum and substance of
what he preached in this place, reports nothing Evangelicall as spoken by
him, except this be acknowledged for such. So that clear it is from the
Scriptures, that all the world, even those that are most straightened and scanted
in this kind, those that have not the letter of the Gospel, have yet
sufficient means of believing granted unto them; of believing I mean, 1. that
God is, 2. that he is a rewarder of those that deligently seek him: which is
all the faith or belief that the Apostle makes simply and absolutely necessary
to bring a man unto God, i. into grace or favor with him, Heb. 11. There are
several other Scriptures that speak home to this point, besides Heb. 11 6.
those argued; particularly, that Romans 2. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of
his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, Rom 2 4.
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? The long
suffering and goodness of God are said to lead men to repentance, because they
testify, according to a rational and clear interpretation, a willingness and
readiness in God, to receive all such into grace and favor with himself, who
shall unfainedly repent of their sins. There is no other consideration, but
this (at lest, none without this) in respect whereof, the patience or
bountifulness of God, can be said to lead, i. to persuade or invite, to
repentance. There is no motive or persuasive whereof sinners are capable unto
repentance, without hope of pardon upon repentance. But this Scripture we shall
find occasion to argue further some other time. In the mean season, you see it
clear from the Scriptures (and the Scriptures as ye have seen, run parallel
with evident and clear reason all along in this point) that even heathen men,
and those that want the history of the Gospel, have yet a sufficiency of means
whereby to believe, and so to prevent the wrath and indignation which is to
come: in which regard, they are altogether unexcusable, if they do it not. We
will not here incumber the tenor of our present discourse, with arguing or
deciding the question, whether, or how any man can be said to have sufficient
means of believing, who does not actually believe: this dispute we shall respit
till some better occasion. In the mean time, most certain it is, that they who
are destroyed and perish by the hand of God for unbelief, had means, and those
sufficient, whereby to have believed; otherwise they would not be unexcusable;
no, not though they should be found negligent in improving those means, which
they had. For he that certainly knows, that all that ever he can do, should he
put forth himself to the uttermost, is not able to compass his end; is in a
great measure excusable, though he attempts nothing at all. But we shall not
now stand upon this. Thus then you have the third and last thing, which makes
the sin of unbelief, so exceedingly sinful, so abundantly demeritorious as
it is; viz. the voluntarinesse of it, men having plentifulnesse of means
vouchsafed from God, to keep themselves from the defilement of it. Put all the
three now together, and you will clearly see the great unworthiness and
demeritoriousnesse of it rifing up from them all jointly. 1. The sin of
unbelief, is (above all sins whatsoever) of the most dismal and dreadful
consequence unto men. 2. There is light enough for men, to come to the clear
knowledge of it, I mean that it is of that dreadful consequence. 3. (And
lastly) men have a sufficiency of means, a price put into their hand,
wherewith to redeem themselves out of the hand of it. Now then that man or that
woman, that in the face of three such considerations as these, shall either sit
still, or quit themselves but loosly and carelessly to recover their souls out
of the snare of unbelief, commit a sin (doubtless) of the greatest and most
desperate opposition to all principles of reason that can be; and consequently,
a sin of the greatest demerit, and highest provocation, in the sight of God.

Thus you see, what between the demerit of sin in the general (I mean, of
all other sins wherewith men defile themselves) and the great demerit of
unbelief in particular, the righteousness of God in punishing and destroying
wicked and ungodly men, appears in perfect beauty: there is nothing hard,
nothing unequal in it: yea there is nothing in it, but what commends the
wisdom of God it self, as well as his righteousness, or perfect hatred of
sin. For as it would be an unsavory thing, and contrary, as well to
principles of wisdom and prudence, as of justice, in a civil magistrate that
bears the sword, and tending to his great disparagement and dishonor, if
either he should not punish those that transgress the laws, which he is to
execute, or if he should punish them with punishments unsuitable, and
unproportioned to their offenses, whether on the right hand, or on the left: in
like manner, it would reflect dishonor upon the ever blessed and glorious name
of God (and so be contrary to the excellency of wisdom) if he should either
not punish wicked and ungodly men, the transgressors of his law, at all; or if
he should punish them, and not somewaies (at least) proportion both the nature,
and degree of their punishment, to their sin. So that all things considered,
this act also of the powerful arm of God, whereby he casts sinners into hell,
is no more then what necessity requires of him; is an act as well of
righteousness and of wisdom, as of power.

The 4. and last great act of the power of God to be put forth and exercised in
bringing about that great design we have often mentioned (the glorifying of
himself in the salvation and condemnation of men) is that whereby the Saints
shall be advanced, or put into an actual possession of their glory, with all
things requisite hereunto, as the raising of them from the dead, the changing
of their vile bodies, etc. Now that this act also of his power is drawn forth
by principles of reason, equity, and of the most excellent wisdom, is evident
thus; by these and such like considerations.

1. That God should reward his friends and faithful servants that have done
his will and sought his glory (as the Saints have done) is reasonable and
equal in the eyes of all flesh: such an act as this, is no ways obnoxious to
any ill resentment, or interpretation whatsoever. Nay if God should not do it,
there are thousands of his creatures that should (in such a respect) be more
excellent then he. There is no man of ingenuity, and that savours the things of
his honor, but that will remember and consider proportionably to his power,
the faithfulness of friends and servants showed unto him.

2. When men have erected and set up any kind of exercise, or trial of
masteries, as by running, wrestling, or the like, and have made their orders
and laws for those that shall exercise, and thus have drawn men of activity and
worth in that kind from several parts, to try their strength and activenesse,
by engaging themselves in the exercise; it is but reason and equity, that he
that striveth, and striveth lawfully (as the Apostle speaks) i. observing all
the laws and orders of the exercise, and overcoming, should be crowned, or
receive the bravium, or price, that is held forth, for the conqueror. Now God
in the Gospel propounds (as it were) a noble exercise of faith and holiness;
he has appointed his laws and orders for this exercise; he has designed a
crown of life, and of immortal glory, to those that shall overcome; he draws
persons from all quarters of the world, whose hearts will serve them, to engage
in his exercise. Now then it is but just and reasonable, that those that do
strive, and strive lawfully, and overcome, should receive the reward that is
promised, and consequently should be by a strong hand put into possession of
eternal life.

3. When soldiers have stood by their General, induced much hardship, and
ventured their lives with him, and for him, in any hard and hot service; in
case the day goes on their side, and their General triumphs, it is but equal
that such soldiers should partake according to their measure, of the joy and
honor of the triumph with him. Now the Saints are good soldiers of Jesus
Christ: they stand by him in this present world: they undergo much handship
from the world for his sake; they are partakers with him of his sufferings, as
well by mortification, as by persecutions by men; therefore Jesus Christ
himself triumphing in eternity of life and glory, it is but equal that they
should partake of the same triumph with him. This the Scripture it self
acknowledges for equal. Now if we be Romans 6 8.
dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him. We believe, i.
we have cause or reason to believe it, viz. because of the equitablenesse of
it. So in another place: If we be dead with him, we shall also live with him:
if we suffer, we shall also 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
reign with him. The Apostle does not argue these consequences (as he does many
others) because they are so natural, and evident in, and of, themselves. Yet

4. And lastly, there is not only an equitablenesse in the thing (I mean, that
the Saints shall be highly honored by God) but there is an excellency of
wisdom in it also, yea that they should be honored with the height of honor,
that (according to the Gospel) shall be conferred and cast upon them by God;
and that in a double consideration.

1. Because great and excellent recompenses and rewards given by men for
services done unto them, being within the compass of their means, or abilities
to give, without any sensible prejudice to their estates, are much for their
honor, and for the advancement of their interests in the opinions and
estimations of men. A great and bountiful reward, is a kind of artificial
and pleasant picture of a man's worth, drawn by himself, or with his own hand.
For he that is liberal in recompensing services done unto him, seems to be
conscious of some special worth in himself; and that which he does in this
case, above the usual rate of others, to do out of conscience; as conceiving,
that he that has done any good office to him, has done a better deed, and so
deserves a better reward, then if he had done the same, yea or a greater, to
another man. For certainly to save the life of a good man, and who is like to
be a benefactour unto many, is a better act, and more worthy a reward, then the
saving of the life of an ordinary, or undeserving man: and so it is
proportionably in other services done, or to be done respectively, to such
persons: whereas such persons, who having means and opportunity to deal
bountifully by those that serve them, and yet should reward them poorly; they
do by such sparingnesse (in effect) acknowledging themselves to be persons of
little worth or value; and that they that served them, had done only that
which was next to nothing; and therefore a slender consideration was reward
enough for them. So then the great and glorious God, in rewarding those that
have served him, with crowns and kingdoms, and the great things of eternity,
draws, as it were, a lively and happy portraicture of his own infinite worth
and goodness; and declares in the sight of heaven and earth, and hell, at what
an high rate he values himself, and his own glory, by showing himself so above
measure bountiful unto those that serve him.

2. There lay a necessity upon God to lift up his Saints as high in
blessedness and glory, as now he intends to do, in respect of that
foundation, which he has laid to build this fabrique or building upon, I mean
his only begotten Son Jesus Christ; that so there might be a comeliness of
proportion, a correspondencie, between the foundation, and the superstructure,
or that which is built upon it. If men shall lay either silver or gold, or
precious stones for their foundation, and build nothing but a little hay, or
stubble, or wood upon it, would not all men laugh at them (as our Savior
speaks in a case not much unlike) and say; they began gloriously, but they
finish shamefully. So, God having laid the foundations of the blessedness of
his Saints, in his Son Jesus Christ and in his blood (as indeed he had none
other foundation to lay for that building) if he should not build somewhat
proportionably thereunto, the glory of the foundation would be a shame and
dishonor to the rest of the work, and swallow up all the beauty and
excellency thereof. The truth is, that (to speak after the manner of men, as
the Apostle speaks in some cases) God will have much ado to find materials,
stones sumptuous or magnificent enough, either in heaven or in earth, or in all
his dominions, to build up the glory of the Saints, upon any such terms, but
that the glory of the foundation will be a kind of overshadowing to it, when
he has done. In other buildings the superstructure sometimes charge, and
overchargeth the foundation: but in this building we speak of, it rather is,
and will be contrary; the foundation is, and will be, too weighty in glory for
the superstruction; yea though this be as weighty in glory, as glory it self
can make. For even that which was made glorious (says Paul, speaking of the
ministration of the law) had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory
which excels (meaning, in the ministration of the Gospel.) In like manner,
though the blessedness, which shall be vested in the Saints, shall be
glorious, yea excellently glorious, in it self; yet being compared with that
excess and super-abundance of glory in the foundation, there will be found as
little glory in it, as could reasonbaly be expected; though as much also, as
the capacity of the subjects will well bear. And therefore to be sure, the
wisdom of God (mark, I do not the goodness, the love, the bounty of God, or
the like, but) the wisdom of God will put him upon searching out whatsoever is
rich, whatsoever is precious, whatsoever is excellent, whatsoever is glorious,
whatsoever has the least ingredience of happiness in it, whether in heaven or
in earth, to build up the blessedness of his Saints with, to salve, as it
were, it is own glory. Consider whether that of the Apostle does not rise as
high as all this: He that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us
all; how shall be not with him also freely give us all things? The
interrogation, Romans 8. 32.
How shall he not, etc. is marveilously emphaticall and conclusive. It is as if
he had said; If we do but grant or suppose, that God has given up his Son
unto death for our sakes, and for our good; we cannot reasonably imagine,
should we study never so seriously, with never so much intensnesse of mind and
thought, to raise and form such an imagination within us, how it is possible,
or any ways consistent with the wisdom of God, to give us any thing less then
all things, for the completing of our happiness. Thus we have showed you how
that all that power, all those acts of power to be performed by God, within the
compass of that means, or any part of that means, which he has projected for
the glorifying of himself in the salvation and condemnation of men, are both
all clothed with wisdom, and that they are no more, none other, then what are
simply necessary to the accomplishment of his end.

We signified unto you (in the second place) that all other parts or
ingredients in the means we speak of, viz. which do not stand in any executive
force or power, but in a simple cortrivement, do in the eye of reason, and of
a considerate understanding, look with a very pleasant, delightful, yea with a
divine aspect, upon the great end, so often, and lately mentioned. To take all
particulars in this kind into consideration, would be a long work, and require
much time, and (I fear) prove wearisome unto you. We shall only touch some of
the most considerable of them. Gods end being (as has been still said, and
once proved) the glorifying of himself like himself, in the salvation and
condemnation of men, it was necessary for him so to provide for the effecting
of the one, and so to make way for the execution of the other, not only that
none of his glorious attributes or perfections might suffer, or be disparaged
in either; but that by means of the one and the other jointly taken, the glory
of them (I mean of those attributes of his) might be discovered and made known,
and that to an excellent degree of manifestation. For the bringing to pass the
former of these (the salvation of men) upon the terms mentioned; three things
were necessary for God to do (in the general: the two former whereof make way
likewise for the latter, I mean, the glorifying of himself like himself in the
condemnation of men.) But it was necessary (I say) for God, in reference to
both these great transactions, as well the salvation, as condemnation of men.
1. To put himself into an honorable capacity of treating with man about the
great things of his salvation. 2. To make him capable of such terms, upon which
he might, with the safety of his own glory, save him. 3. (and lastly) If he
meant to make sure work of the salvation of man, it was further necessary for
him, to provide, not only that men might be capable of those terms, upon which
he might honorably save them, but that they should actually yield unto, and
accept of them. In all these you shall see strains of wisdom indeed, such as
are enough to make all the wisdom under heaven abased.

For the first of these: Necessary (I say) it was that God should put himself
into an honorable capacity of treating with man about his salvation. For man
being a traitor and a rebel, by reason of sin committed against him, and so
standing as a guilty person before him worthy of death, unclean, unholy,
unrighteous; it was no ways agreeable with the infinite holiness and purity
of Gods nature, and that district severity against sin, which is in him, to
fall immediately, and without any consideration at all intervening, upon a
treaty with him, about the great affair of his salvation and glorification. And
though it is true, he might have saved men without any preceding treaty with
them about it; yet he could not have glorified himself in this salvation of
theirs, upon those rich terms, which now, as he has contrived matters in order
thereunto, he may, and will do. It is a saying in natural philosophy, that
natura non conjungit extremae, nisi per media: and again, that natura non facit
saltum. i. nature, [i. God, in the course of nature] is not wont to join
extremes together, but by somewhat of a middle nature between them: and again,
nature does not leap. Nor would it have stood with the wisdom of God,
considering the infinite holiness of his nature, and the transcendent
excellency of his majesty and glory, to have clozed in such a treatise as we
speak of, with that polluted and imbased dust and ashes, called man, after that
grand rebellion of his, without some mediatory consideration or other, yea and
that of such weight, which might render this act of his, in treating with such
a creature, every ways honorable to him. Now what other consideration can
there be imagined, so proper and full, to justify the glorious God in
admitting that most unworthy creature of his, man, to a treaty of grace with
himself, as that his own Son Jesus Christ, should be made man, and in this
nature of man, suffer death, and that by way of atonement, for the sin of
man? Now to judge (in part) of the proportion or meetnesse of the consideration
we speak of, for that great end and purpose mentioned, viz. the making way, and
that with honor, for God to condescend to a gracious treaty, with his guilty
and sinful creature, man, we must conceive after this manner. Suppose a
subject or person of mean quality has injured and provoked his Prince, let the
injury be supposed never so great, and the provocation never so deep and just,
yet in case any thing shall be done by any of the kindred of him, that has so
injured this Prince, and in relation to his offense, every ways as valuable
for the accommodating, or repairing the honor, or to the benefit of the Prince
otherwise, as the injury or provocation was in dishonor or discontent in any
kind unto him, this Prince has now a consideration before him, upon which
with the safety of his honor (I mean, even as men count honor) he may send to
that subject of his, and be so far pacified toward him, as to treat with
him, and offer him conditions of pardon and reconcilement; because in this case
he is no looser by him; and if he will be persuaded to change his mind, and to
vow loyalty, and love, and faithfulness unto him, he has honorable grounds
to forgive him, and to be friendly unto him afterward. In like manner, God
having received that service and that obedience from the hand of such a person
as Jesus Christ is, being of the nature or kindred of man, and that in relation
to the sin and provocation of man, which is every ways as considerable in
matter of glory to him, as the sin of man was in dishonor and provocation;
he may upon this consideration, without the least touch of disparagement to his
holiness, purity, wisdom, or any other attribute whatsoever, offer terms of
reconciliation and peace, to him that has provoked him. The reason is, because
now he is no looser by him: and therefore if he will be persuaded and won by
offers and terms of grace, such as are meet for God to offer, to change his
mind, and to swear homage and fealty, love and faithfulness unto him for the
future, he is at perfect liberty to receive him unto grace and favor; and to
do further unto him whatsoever his soul desires, in any way of goodness and
bounty. Not as if God were bound, presently to forgive men their sins, and to
take them into his special favor, upon what, or, because of what Christ has
done, or suffered for them (which seems to be the sense of many) no, Christ did
not satisfy for any man's sins in such a sense, or upon such terms. But
therefore Christ is said to have satisfied for the sins of men, or (which is
the same, in Scripture, and therefore in better and more proper, language) to
have made an atonement for men, or for the sins of men, because he has so
far pacified and reconciled God unto the world, that he is willing, not
withstanding their great sin, and unworthiness, and affront put upon him, to
beat a parley, and to condescend to offer propositions and terms of life and
peace unto men; yet so, that they who will not condescend (or rather indeed,
that will not ascend) first or last, to the conditions and terms offered by
him, i. that will not believe, shall have no further benefit, by any thing he
has either done or suffered for them. Nor will it follow, that they for whose
sins Christ has satisfied, must needs by virtue of this satisfaction, be
presently justified, and saved; or, that God otherwise should be unjust, viz.
if having received satisfaction, he should condemn men for those sins, for
which he has been satisfied. The reason is because the satisfaction of Christ,
being an ordinance of God, I mean, a means of, and for the justification and
salvation of men, merely arbitrary and depending upon his will and pleasure, as
well in the operation, as in the being of it; it cannot be conceived to extend
any further, nor to produce its effects in any other way, or upon any other
terms, then his will and pleasure is, that it should produce them. Now the
Scriptures are very clear and pregnant in this, that the satisfaction, and
sufferings of Christ, do not justify or save any man simply, or by
themselves, but by and through a man's believing, as on the contrary, that they
are satisfactory and justificatory in abundance, to all without exception, in
case they shall believe. So God loved the world (says our Savior) that he
gave his only begotten Son; not Ioh 3. 16
simply that men, or any man should have everlasting life by him; but that
w^osoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life.
Notwithstanding the love of God, notwithstanding the gift of Christ unto the
world, yet without believing, there is no escaping eternal death, no obtaining
everlasting life. Why? viz. because the love of God and the gift of Christ,
being both voluntary, they justify, they save, no further, no otherwise, upon
no other terms, then the w^ll and good pleasure of God is they should. Now the
will of God touching salvation by Jesus Christ unto any man, is none other, but
that he should be saved by Christ, through believing. Fully consonant hereunto,
is that of the Apostle, Romans 3. Being justif^^d freely by his grace, through
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God has set forth to be a
pr^pitiation Romans 3. 4, 2.
[ i. an actual, or personal pr^pitiation] through faith in his blood. Though
justification be free, though through the grace of God, though through the
redemption which is by Christ Jesus; yet no justification, by any, nor by all
of these actually accrues unto any man without believing.

If it be objected; but if men be not completely justified by Christ, or by the
satisfaction of Christ without believing, then believing adds somewhat to
Christ, or to the satisfaction of Christ; makes this efficacious unto
justification, which (it seems) in it self is weak. I answer (briefly.)

No; Faith does not add in the least to the nature, value, or efficacy of
Christ's satisfaction, it only interresseth men in the value and efficacy of
it; both which were in it in as ample and full measure, before men believe, as
they are after. The fire whilst a man keeps at a distance from it, does not
warm him, when he comes near it, it does: yet his coming near, does not make
the fire any whit hotter, then it was before; only it gives him interest and
communion in the heat of it, which he had not before. So the applying of a
plaster to a sore, does not add any healing virtue to it, nor make it any whit
more healing in the nature of it, then it was before; only it interesseth him,
that has the sore to which it is applied, in that healing virtue which it had,
before it was applied. Thus then you see how men's sins may be said to be fully
satisfied for, and atoned by Christ, yea as fully as it is possible for them to
be; and yet men remain under the guilt of them, and perish everlastingly
because of them, and that without the least touch or shadow of disparagement to
the justice of God. But we may have occasion to speak further into this point
some other time: where we may further clear the difficulty; how it may stand
with the justice of God to accept Christ's satisfaction for the sins of men, and
yet destroy men for them notwithstanding: and indeed it is a point well worth
our inquiring into; because generally we do not understand the counsel and
mind of God in it aright. If we did, it would set us at perfect liberty from
some of the most ensnaring intanglements in the Antinomian way; and quite break
the credit thereof: and the very truth is, that Antinomianisme (as we call it)
is nothing else, but a systeme or body of the due and lawful consequences of
their opinions, who most fiercely oppose it. But this only by the way.

Thus then you see, as to the first of the three particulars mentioned, how God
has put himself into an honorable capacity of treating with men, though vile,
sinful, and rebellious, about the great things of their salvation, by giving
his own Son, Jesus Christ to be made man, and by gaining his consent, in this
nature, to make an atonement by his death for their sins. And the truth is
that there was no other way or means for him to do this (or at least none like
unto it) but that which has been declared, nor was it (as has been said) for
the glory of God to have done it, to have saved men, otherwise then by way of
treaty first had with them; as might be showed at large, if it were necessary;
The Apostle himself implies as much, as all that has been said in the point
hitherto, 2 Cor. 5. 19. saying, that God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself, not imputing their tres^asses unto them. First, God 2 Cor 5. 9.
intending to save the world, intended to do it by the way of reconciling
those to himself, whom he meant to save, before he saved them: he did not
intend to take them in the midst of their enmity and hatred, whilst their
hearts were yet f^dl^ of wickedness and rebellion against him, and so put them
into heaven: no, his method and design was, first, to slay that enmity in
their natures against him, and to reduce them to terms of friendship and love;
which was necessary to be done by a way of treaty and capitulation with them in
this world. But secondly, how or which way should God come at a treaty with
man, with honor? It was not (as we said) agreeable to the infinite holiness
of his nature, or greatness of his majesty (nor did his wisdom so apprehend
it) to offer treaty or terms of peace unto man being in actual rebellion
against him, without some consideration mediating and leading thereunto, and
that such as was meet to sway in a business of that high and great import. Nor
indeed was he as yet provided of such terms, or capable of making such
propositions or offers unto man, which were like to take with him, or to bring
him over in love unto him. How then did he go to work? what did he, to prepare
himself a way, to treat with his wretched creature, man, with honor? He was in
Christ (says the Apostle) he went, and got, or put himself into Christ, [God
and man] having first contrived and disposed of him for the purpose, i.
prevailed with him, after a few years spent holily and blamelesly in the flesh,
to yield to die for the sins of men. Now God having thus put himself, as it
were, in Christ, thus prepared and wrought for his design, being now provided
for a treaty, in him he comes forth, invites the world to a treaty, and offers
such rich and gracious terms of love and peace, which are most effectual and
likely to take the world off from their hatred and enmity against him, and to
bring men over unto him in love, and with all affections of loyalty and honor.
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; but how? by what engine
does God attempt such a piece as this? by not imputing their sins [or
trespasses] unto them (says the Apostle) i. by proposing and promising unto
them a free pardon of all their sins, with all the rich and blessed
consequents of such a grace as this is, as purchased by Christ, and ready for
them, if they will but love him, and disavow and abandon, that sinfulness in
their hearts and lives, which are enmity to him. Now the glorious God, though
he has an heart infinitely larger then the sand upon the sea shore (which was
the measure of Solomon's 1 King 4. 29.
wisdom) my meaning is, though he be infinite in wisdom, yet doubtless he has
not another word to speak unto the heart of the world, so proper, or so
effectual for the gaining in, and reconciling the world unto himself, as this;
that their sins are pardoned, and shall never be imputed unto them, if they
will believe. The root of all that hatred and enmity which is in the natures of
men against God, is the want of a sense of that love of God toward them, which
he has abundantly manifested, by providing for them free pardon and
forgiveness of all their sins, if they will but accept of it. Make men but
truly apprehensive and sensible of this, and you shall without any more ado
reconcile them unto God, and heal that root of bitterness, I mean that hatred
and enmity against him, which is in them.

Now in the preparation unto, and carriage of this great transaction of God
described and opened unto you from the Scriptures, his putting himself (as I
call it) into an honorable capacity of treating with his creature, man, there
are many particular streins and passages of an excellency of wisdom, the
consideration whereof would require much more time, then I believe you would
willingly allow upon this occasion; as about the incarnation, conception,
birth, circumcision, baptism, the life, death, resurrection, ascension of
Jesus Christ; the carriage of all which in that variety of circumstances, which
the Gospel relates, is full of wisdom, and looks with a very pleasing face in
them all upon that great and blessed transaction we speak of, the treaty which
God has at this day on foot with the world, about the great things of their
peace: But we must not now insist upon any of them. Again

2 As it was necessary, in reference to the great end, of^ specified, for God
to put himself into an honorable capacity of treating with his creature about
matters of salvation; so was it no less necessary for him, to make this
creature of his, capable of such terms, I mean of yielding or condescending to
such terms, upon which God might not only with the safety, but with the
advancement of his own glory, save him, in case he accepts of them; or
otherwise condemn him, if he rejects them. If you ask me, 1. What are the
terms, which the creature must be made capable of, that God may be glorified
like himself, either in the salvation, or condemnation of it; I answer, the
terms are, only believing in God through Jesus Christ with a says unseigned,
and which works by love: the creature must be made capable hereof, that God may
be glorified, either in his salvation, or condemnation.

If you ask me in the second place) but what necessity is there, that the
creature should be made capable of these terms, that God may be glorified in
his condemnation? We grant it necessary, in respect of his being glorified in
his salvation, but we conceive no necessity of Gods glory, in his condemnation.

I answer briefly (for the present, hoping ^re long to give you a further
account of what I shall now say) there is this necessity of it: if God should
not make men capable of believing, I mean, indue men with such principles,
abilities, or gifts, of reason, judgment, memory, understanding, by the
diligent improvement whereof they might come to be convinced, of a willingness
or readiness in him to receive them into grace and favor, upon their
repentance and turning to him (upon which conviction, that repentance and
turning unto God we speak of, always follows) they which are condemned would
have their mouths open against Gods proceedings with them thereunto, and
furnished with an excuse. Now look whatsoever men shall be able with reason to
say for themselves, or in their own defense, why they should not be condemned;
it will be so much out of the way of the glory of God, in their condemnation,
in case he should condemn them. And therefore the Scripture tells us, that God
has dealt so with men, and means to do so still, that if they be condemned,
their mouths shall be stopped, and all manner of excuse taken from them. For
the invisible things of him, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen
being understood by the things that are Romans 1. ^0. 21.
made, even his eternal power and God^ead, so that they are [or, may be]
without excuse. And again, Romans 3. Now we know chap. 3. 19.
that what things soever the law s^ith, it says to them that are under the
law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become [^^NR^^] i.
obnoxious, or subject to the judgment of God; clearly implying, that men,
though wicked and sinful, yet would not be ob^oxious to the judgment of God,
[i. sinful and wicked enough for him to destroy] if they could plead any
tolerable excuse for their sins, or why they should not be destroyed. Now of
all, and all manner of excuses in the world, that ever were alleged, or can be
alleged by any man, for not doing what he was commanded to do, there is none
more plausible, none more reasonable or fair, then this, to say, that he was
not able to do it, neither mediately, nor immediately, or that it was a thing
impossible for him to do: yea to be able to say this with truth, and out of
knowledge, it is not properly to make an excuse (as we commonly take the word)
but it is to speak that, which according to the strictest rules of reason and
equity, ought to exempt a man from all censure and punishment, though he does
not that, which was commanded him.

Besides, if God should offer and promise unto men life and peace and salvation
(as we know he does to thousands, who never accept of his offer, and so perish
everlastingly) yea and press upon them with many expressions of love,
tenderness, and great compassions, even beseeching them by his Ministers (as
the Apostle speaks) that they would be reconciled unto him, having taken away
(though justly) that power from them, whereby they might have been able to have
done themselves good by accepting those offers of grace, if ti had not been
taken from them, and should confer none other upon them in the stead, this
would be a very strange dispensation or deportment toward poor miserable
creatures, altogether unworthy that God, who is the father of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and in him, the father of mercies, and God of all consolation, Suppose
a Prince had in a way of the most regular justice, and according to the laws,
by which he rules, and ought to put in execution, and for some offense
deserving such a punishment, caused a man's tongue be cut out of his head; and
afterward should come to this poor creature, and make such a proposition or
offer as this to him (and withal bear him in hand, that he did it out of much
love, and tender respects to him) that if he would give him a clear answer by
word of mouth, to such a question as he should ask him, he would confer great
riches upon him, and make him honorable in the state, etc. could such a
deportment as this, be looked upon as savouring in the least of any love, or
desire in the Prince to do this miserable creature any good, and not rather of
a most tyrannical and cruel spirit, taking a delight to deride and insult
over persons in misery? It were easy to show many other necessities, besides
these, which lay before God to render men capable of yielding or assenting unto
his propositions and terms of grace, if he meant to glorify himself like
himself, in their condemnation. But the fuller examination of this business we
shall refer to a further occasion: where we shall answer likewise the
objections usually brought against it. As to that objection wherewith this
opinion (perhaps) is burdened in the thoughts of many, as viz. that it is an
Arminian doctrine, and maintains free will, with the like: we shall answer no
more for the present, but this; that if it be a doctrine asserted by Paul and
Peter (as most assuredly it is) it ought to suffer no disparagement for being
found amongst the tenets of Arminius. It is a faithful saying, and never the
less worthy all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, though it was (in effect, and for substance) the saying, and sense of
the devil, when he affirmed Jesus Christ to be the holy one of God, Mark 1. 24.
But it is a common Papisticall trick, to nickname truths and opinions, which
rise up against the interests and honor of the sea of Rome, and to bethink
themselves of some heretic or other, who asserted them. And I wish that too
many of those who are called Protestants, and who as ambitiously as they,
affect the name of Orthodox, did not too much praise such their sayings, by a
frequent imitation of them.

In the mean time the excellency of wisdom in God is highly considerable, in
framing and tempering a creature, so, which shall be endued with a sufficiency
of strength and power to believe, and yet this strength and power
notwithstanding, never shall, never will believe, without a further supply from
God; yea and this as certainly in the eye and knowledge of God, as if he had
deprived him of, or denied unto him, all manner of strength and power to
believe. And yet we have an instance or example of this wisdom in God, we speak
of, in the framing of the first Adam; and that by the general confession of
all Divines, as well Protestants, as Papists; all concluding, that Adam
received from the hand of his bountiful creator a sufficiency of power, or
spiritual strength, whereby to have stood, and made good the possession of his
innocence, against all assaults and temptations whatsoever, had he pleased to
have improved the same accordingly; and yet that God did withal foresee that
he would fall, and that with as much certainty and infallibility of knowledge,
as if there had been a necessity of his falling, and he invested with no
possibility, or sufficiency of power, whereby to stand.

The third (and last) particular mentioned was, that if God meant to make sure
work of the salvation of men (as doubtless he did) and withal to make
earnings of glory to himself, in, or out of their salvation, it was simply
necessary for him, to provide, not only that men might be capable of those
terms, upon which he might with the safety, yea and with the advancement of his
own glory, save them, but also that they might and should, actually yield unto,
and accept of them; yea and that with certainty, and infallibly, and yet
without any inforcement, compulsion, or constraint, or otherwise, then by
opening the eyes of their minds and understandings, to see, apprehend, and
consider those things, which should effectually incline their hearts to yield
up themselves unto God in believing. Now that God, according to the tenor and
current of the Gospel, has made such a provision as this, cannot l^ghtly be
unknown unto those, who are so much as competently acquainted therewith. When
the Lord informed Paul by a vision in the night that he had much people in the
city of Carinah, his meaning doubtless) was, that he had many souls there, to
whom he intended the grace of faith, and conversion, and that by the Ministry
of Paul: yet Paul's way and method of converting souls to the faith, was none
other, but by opening their eyes, and turning them from darkness unto light,
and [hereby] from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 6. (to
pass by other places without number of like import.) But into this point we
may have opportunity otherwise further to inquire.

Thus we have found the third character or property we mentioned of an
excellency of wisdom, fairly stamped upon the Gospel; fully appearing in that
devise, that glorious projection of God, to glorify himself in the salvation
and condemnation of men. There remains only the fourth and the last character
of this wisdom, which we shall now briefly open unto you; and show it you in
the Gospel also.

This character or property, we said was a certain mysteriousnesse in the
means, which shall at any time be levied and advanced for the bringing of some
great end to pass: when the model and whole projection thereof is of such a
nature and contrivance, that it does not sympathize with the ordinary
projections of men; is of such a strain and carriage, that the reasons and
understandings of men, when they come to apprehend it, are ready to fall down
before it, to admire, and adore the rarity of it; and to confess and say
concerning it, that according to the rate of their speculations and workings,
they should never have come near it; it lies a thousand degrees beyond the line
of all those discoveries, which they had been ever like to make. Now that the
means which the Gospel holds forth, for the effecting of that great end (so often
named) is of this nature, mysterious in this sense which has been declared, is
evident, and that in respect of sundry particulars, and veins (as it were) of
dispensation, running along in the body of it. We shall insist only upon that,
which is the very basis or foundation of the whole work; the incarnation of the
son of God. This is mystery upon mystery, and all is mystery. Who would ever
have said to Abraham (says Sarah) that Sarah should give children suck? But
how many thousand degrees G^n 21. 7.
further, from all rational expectation or belief was it, that the Son of God,
who being in the form of God, i. actually known, acknowledged, worshipped, and
adored, as God: yea and counted it no robbery (as the Apostle speaks) to be
equal with God, i. to claim an equality with God, being indeed himself God
blessed for ever, should become man; and that upon such terms as he did? Who
would ever have said unto the world, that the Son of God should become the son
of man, and dwell in a tabernacle of flesh, to give salvation to it? There are
several things relating unto, and depending upon this incarnation of the Son
of God, which are all mysterious (in the sense declared) First, that God should
have a Son, consubstantiall and coessentiall with him, and yet personally
distinct from him, is a great mystery it self; i. is a conclusion or truth,
which all the sagacity and quickness of all the reason and understanding of
men under heaven, was not likely to have brought out of that darkness, wherein
it is hid, into the light; had it not been revealed, and that in visions of the
noone day, from heaven: yea, notwithstanding that clear and perfect revelation
which is now made of it from heaven, yet how many thousands have there been,
and are at this day, not only of Heathens and Infidels who reject the whole
body of the Scriptures, but even of those, who have subscribed unto the truth
of the Scriptures, as being from God (I say) many thousands of these, yea many
of them, men of great abilities, parts, and learning, have not acknowledged
this for a truth, that God has any such Son as we speak of, who is
consubstantiall, with him; For denying him whom the Scriptures hold forth under
this relation, viz. as being the natural or consubstantiall Son of God, to be
any such son of his; they must needs be supposed to deny, the being of any such
son at all; this being the main why they deny Jesus Christ to be the Son of
God (in any such sense) viz. because they cannot, or at least do not,
conceive, that there is any place or possibility for God to have any such Son.
And this shows the truth, or conclusion we speak of, to be very mysterious;
viz. that God has a son coessentiall and consubstantiall to him.

2. That this Son of God (supposing his being) should come to be incarnate, or
made flesh (as the Scripture expression is) is without controversy (as the
Apostle says) a great mystery also, i. such a dispensation, or transaction, as
the thoughts of men, had they been all engaged for a thousand years together,
compassing heaven and earth with inquiries after truth, or probabilities of
things, would in all likelihood never have come near, nor so much as look
toward it: and that in regard of these two considerations. 1. The manner or
strangeness of the way, or means, how it should be done. 2. The strangeness
of the grace, or condescension in the Son of God to do it, or to suffer it to
be done.

1. The reason or thoughts of man would never have expected, or thought of the
personal uniting of the Son of God, and the nature of man, in regard of the
strangeness of the way, or means how such an union as this should, and must be
effected: as a man would never expect or think that the reasonable soul of a
man should be personally united to the body of a pismire or fly, because the
means how it should come to be thus united is very difficult to be conceived.
The unlikelyhood of means, whereby any thing is to be brought to pass, and
must be effected, if ever it takes place, is very apt, especially if it be
great, and drawing near to a supposed impossibility, to turn men aside, and
take them off from all expectation, yea and thought, that ever the thing should
be effected. What was the reason that made Sarah to conceive, and speak (as we
heard, she did) viz that no man would ever have said unto Abraham (viz. as
being a thing no ways likely to come to pass) that Sarah should give children
suck in her old days? Doubtless her reason was, because she thought there was
no probable means that any man would apprehend or think upon, how she should
conceive, and bring forth children, after is had ceased to be with her after
the manner of women. So what was it, that turned the thoughts and expectations
of that noble man aside, on whose hand the King of Israel leaned, from the
fulfilling, or taking place of what the Prophet Elisha had prophesied,
notwithstanding 2 King 7. 1.
he had the advantage of this Prophets word and prediction, to keep them to it;
viz. that by tomorrow, a measure of fine slower should be sold for a shekel,
and two measures of barley for a shekel in the gates of Samaria? what was that
(I say) that took off this noble man from all expectation or thinking that any
such thing would be? but only that there was no means in his eye likely to
bring it to pass, as is evident, verse. 2. Though the Lord (says he) would
make windows in the heavens, could verse. 2.
this thing come to pass? In like manner, if there had been nothing else in
the way, to put the incarnation of the Son of God quite out of all the
thoughts, and clean besides all the expectations or imaginations of men, but
only the unlikelyhood of any proper means to effect it, this alone according
to the common course of the actings and workings of the minds of men
otherwise, had been enough to do it.

If you ask me, but what means needs there be for the effecting of the
incarnation of the Son of God, or, the uniting the two natures, the divine, and
the humane, into one person, but only the will of God, acting in the potencie
and power of it? And if so, this means might easily have been apprehended by
men; and consequently, the want of the knowledge of such a means as you speak
of, can be no reason, why men might not probably have expected or thought of,
this great act of the goodness and power of God, the incarnation of his son.
To this

I answer, It is true, the will and power of God, are causes sufficient to
bring any effect whatsoever to pass; so far as efficiencie (properly so
called) is able to produce an effect. But

1. Though they be sufficient causes in respect of any effect whatsoever (with
the limitation mentioned) yet they are not probable causes of any effect, save
only in conjunction and concurrence with such second causes, which are proper
to produce the effect with them; or else of such effects, as they produce
constantly, and without ceasing. As for example: the will and power of God are
probable causes of the preservation and continuance of the universe, though in
respect of these effects, they are in no conjunction with secondary causes, but
perform them by themselves alone. But why are they probable or likely causes of
these effects? not because of their p^tencie or sufficiency to produce them;
but because of their long accustomed and experienced imploiment in producing
them: They have supported the creation in being for so many generations;
therefore it is probable and likely they will do so still. But in respect of
contingent effects, and which are produced but now and then, though they be as
sufficient causes of these effects as of those other, yet they are no probable
causes of them, except they be joined with particular and proper causes, and
which have a natural tendencie to produce these effects also. As for example,
the will and power of God, or, the powerful will of God, is able to make a
poor man, who to day is destitute of daily food, rich, and worth many
thousands, before to morrow: but it is no probable cause of such an effect; it
is ten thousand to one, that it will not effect it. The reason is, because such
an effect as this is contingent, and there is no means or second cause in view
likely to join with the powerful will of God therein. Now the incarnation of
the Son of God, was an effect of this kind: it was contingent; yea and most
rarely contingent; never any like to it, or near to it, effected or brought
forth, from the days of eternity. Therefore the will of God, though it be
granted to be a sufficient cause of it, yet was it no probable or likely cause
of it; and therefore the knowledge of this cause in men, did no ways incline
or accommodate them, to expect, or so much as to think of it: the eye of the
reasons or understandings of men, were no ways like, ever to have fastened
upon this cause, as likely to have produced the effect we speak of. Again,

2. Though the will and power of God be causes sufficient in respect of any
effect whatsoever, as far as efficiencie, properly so called, i. the virtue
of that kind of cause, which we call efficient, can possibly contribute
toward the effect; yet they are not sufficient without the concurrence and
mediation of some other cause, or causes, in respect of such effects, which
stand in need of other causes besides efficient causes, to produce, or give
them being. For example, the will and power of God are causes abundantly
sufficient to make a man; but they are not sufficient to make a man without a
reasonable soul; because a reasonable soul is an essential requisite to the
being of a man; and whatsoever God should make without a reasonable soul, is
not that kind of creature, which we call, man, whatever else it may be. The
rule of the Schoolmen is most true, D^^^ ipse non potest supplere vicem causae
formali^: God himself cannot supply the place or stead of the formal cause; he
cannot make a wall white, without whiteness, nor a man wise without wisdom,
nor learned, without learning, etc. It is true he is as able to produce these
formal causes, as well as any other kind of effect, and so to give a complete
being to things, as he pleases: but he is not able to give a complete being
unto things, without producing that, which is simply necessary to make them
complete. Now then, be it granted, that men might very possibly apprehend the
will and power of God to be sufficient causes of producing such an effect, as
the incarnation of his son, as well as of any other possible effect whatsoever;
yet there being other causes, or at least another cause, as necessary to the
actual production of such an effect as this (I mean, the making of the son of
God, man, or, the son of man) as the will and power of God themselves; and this
cause, or causes, being no ways such, as were ever like to enter into the
heart or thoughts of men, evident it is, that this great effect we speak of,
the incarnation of the son of God, must needs be a mystery to men, a thing
which they were no ways likely to have thought of, or to have expected,
notwithstanding they did, or might, apprehend the will and power of God
sufficient causes to produce as great and difficult matters, as this.

If you ask me, but what cause, or causes, were there further necessary or
requisite to the incarnation of the son of God besides the will and power of
God, which were so unlikely to have occurred in the way of the minds and
thoughts of men, in all their traveils and enquiries.

I answer, the two natures, the divine and the humane, being hypostatically or
personally united in the Son of God being made flesh, do necessarily require
some band or tie, or means of such an union: and this band, cause, or means of
the union we speak of, is that further cause we mean, which is required to make
the Son of God, man, besides the power of God, and which we affirm to be a
thing altogether unlikely to have ever been thought of by men. We said before,
that God himself could not supply the defect, or place of the formal cause of
any thing, but must of necessity create or produce a formal cause in being, if
he means to make the thing it self: so in this case, intending to unite his own
divine nature, and the nature of man in one and the same person, and to make
one Christ of both, he must of necessity create, or make some band or other, by
which the two natures, being in themselves not only distinct, but infinitely
disproportioned the one unto the other, might become so intimately and entirely
one, as an hypostaticall or personal union imports. This, evidence of
reason, yea almost sense it self teaches, that two things of different
natures, or beings, cannot come to combine to make a third thing, which shall
be entirely and perfectly one in it self, and different from them both, but
that first, there must be some efficient cause or other, so to unite and
combine them together: and secondly, there must be also somewhat in the nature
of a band common to them both, by which, 1. all two-nesse (as it were) or
plurality of beings between them, must be either disolved, or prevented; and 2.
such a relation founded between them, whereby one must be looked upon as a part
of the other, I mean, as a fellow part with it, and so both of them as together
entirely constituting one and the same thing, or being. The bringing or putting
of two things together simply, though it be with never so much neernesse of the
one unto the other, does not presently make them one and the same thing, or one
and the same being, does not make one to be a part of the other; but there must
be somewhat of another nature raised between them, which must give them another
manner of a mutual entireness and relation, then any local situation or
neernesse of place can do. The body and soul in a living man, are truly and
properly one, i make one and the same person and being: but a spirit, good or
bad, Angel, or devil, joining it self with, or putting it self into, whether a
living, or dead body of a man, and acting out of it, or by it, as the soul it
self does, as by speaking, walking, or the like, does not make one and the same
person with that humane body, or person, which it thus acts, or possesses.
The spirit in this case, is no fellow-part with that body, where to it is
joined, but remains a distinct being by it self, notwithstanding any such union
as this. The reason of the difference is; because there is a personal band,
between the body and the soul in a living man; which there is not between a
spirit, and the body or person of a man, notwithstanding the one be possessed
and acted by the other: In like manner, that the Son of God should be incarnate
or made flesh (in the Scripture sense) i should personally be united to the
nature of man, so that one and the same person, who is called Christ, should be
the result, as it were, and product of both thus united; it was absolutely
necessary, not only that he should act, be essentially, present with, or in,
and so show his divine power, out of, this nature, but further, that a
personal band should intercede between him (I mean between his divine nature)
and this humane nature assumed, which should take hold of both; and raise
another manner of relation between them for entireness and oneness of being,
then is between him (or his divine nature) and all the holy men that ever were
in the world; in many of whom notwithstanding he acted, and showed forth his
divine power, by sundry acts of the same nature with those, which he acted in
that very part of the humane nature, which he had personally assumed unto
himself. Now then this is that which I say; that same personal band (as I call
it) by the mediation whereof those two natures, so infinitely distanced and
differing the one from the other, the divine and the humane, became one person,
and without which, it were, and had been simply unpossible that ever they
should have met, or combined in such a way (I mean, to make one and the same
person) is even now, the ^^NR^^ of it (as they call it) being known, so
mysterious, so difficult and hard above measure to conceive what it is, or may
probably be; that certainly, if there had not been a clear revelation from
heaven, that such a thing was in being, it would never have entered into the
thoughts or minds of men, ^^^^r to have inquired into it, or to have expected
it; least of all would they have been either able, or indeed desirous, to
apprehend it. And thus you have the first consideration opened, in regard
whereof, the incarnation of the son, was never likely to have come into the
minds or thoughts of men, had it not been revealed; viz. the exceeding
difficulty or strangeness of the manner, way, or means, how it should be
effected and brought to pass.

2. The latter consideration was this; the strangeness and incredibility of
the grace or condescension in God, and in the Son of God, to yield unto it,
and to effect it. It is true, the whole earth is full of the goodness of the
Lord (as the Psalmist speaks) i. of the fruits and expressions of his
goodness; and men by consideration, and a diligent contemplation of the works
of Providence and government of the world, may come to know much of the
goodness, and bounty, of the patience and long-sufferance of God, and to make
their souls fat herewith: yea for God to take knowledge of what we stand in
need of (as our Savior faith he does) or (as David speaks) to Matthew 6 1^.
^^al. 11^ 6.
behold the things that are on earth, is a great and gracious humility (as is
there said) and condescension in so glorious a God, that has his dwelling so
high (as the Psalm expresses it) and there are none like unto him amongst the
great ones of the earth, those that are called Gods, in such condescentious
expressions of themselves, as these, to those that are beneath them: they do
not consider, what, or how many, the wants, necessities, distresses, miseries,
of poor creatures are, nor do they engage, or employ themselves any ways to
supply, or relieve them. But that humility, or condescension to the creature,
which God shows in such aspects of his Providence, and in such a tenor of
dispensations as these, belong unto him, as he is the governor of the world;
and much in such a sense, vengeance is said to belong unto him. But that grace
and condescension in God, and in his Son Jesus Christ, in his incarnation, in
vouchsafing to assume the nature of man into the same person with him,
especially upon those terms on which he did assume it, viz. with such poverty
and contempt, with such, and so many sorrows and infirmities, with such bitter
and reproachful sufferings, etc. duly considered, is a condescension of
another kind, and strain, and measure, far differing from the other; and
that which was a thousand times less credible, or to have been expected from
God, then the other. Now to make some kind of estimate of the strangeness and
wonderfullnesse of this condescension, it will be necessary to take into
consideration, to weigh and ponder these circumstances; 1. The sublimity, the
transcendent excellency of the divine nature. 2. The depth, I mean, the
weakness and vileness of the humane nature. 3. The small encouragement he had
by way of engagement from that nature, to yield to such a condescension, as to
be personally united to it. 4. The small encouragement he had from any hope of
gain or benefit likely to accrue to himself, by such a condescension as this.
5. (Lastly) the great abusements which he knew he was further to undergo and
to abide in this nature assumed, over and besides the assumption it self of it.
For the first, the supertranscendent excellency and sublimity of the divine
nature, is such, that it is an object, proportioned only unto, and
comprehensible only by, it self. And as the beating back of the eye by the sun
with a kind of indignation and disdain to be (directly) beheld or looked upon
by it, argues a marveilous strength and fullness of light in it; so does that
constant sending-empty-away of the reasons and understandings of men by God,
when they come to fasten, and feed upon the contemplation of his essence and
being, abundantly argue and prove, a strength, fullness, glory, and perfection
of being in him, which disdaineth all proportion, or commensurablenesse, with
any creature whatsoever, yea with all of them put together. 2. For the
weakness and vileness of the humane nature, especially since infested and
embased by sin, quot homines, tot testes; there are as many witnesses, what,
and how great it is, as there are men. And though the Son of God did not assume
it with any defilement or embasement of sin; yet (as the Scripture says) God
sent his Son in the similitude Romans 8. 3.
or likeness of sinful flesh; i. in such flesh, in that flesh, which to the
eye, and in outward appearance, differed nothing from that, which was sinful
indeed (no, the sinfulness of it it self, not excepted) yea which was charged
with all those natural weaknesses and infirmities, which that flesh, which is
really sinful, is universally exposed, and subject unto. 3. He was so far
from being under any engagement whatsoever, to that nature, which with such an
infinite condescension, he did assume (I mean, unto men) that as far as evil
entreaties, injuries, provocations in the highest, could interpose and prevail
with him, he was likely to have stood engaged and bent in his resolutions and
desires, upon the ruin and destruction of it. 4. Nor could he expect, being
truly and substantially God, that any matter of gain, advantage, or addition of
good in what kind soever, should, or could accrue unto him, by such a
condescension; that which is infinite, can have nothing, either added to it, or
taken from it. 5. (And lastly) nor could he but know, even before he put on,
and ware that garment, or clothing of flesh, which we speak of, how it would
be rent and torn, and a thousand ways abused, before he should come to put it
off again. These circumstances (with some others of like consideration, which
might be added to them) duly considered, must needs render the condescension of
the Son of God, in his incarnation, hyperbolically strange, wonderful, and
mysterious.

Thus have we at last fully and clearly demonstrated unto you (though in some
what a more general way, and in the main carriages of it only) that
transcendent excellency of divine wisdom, which shines in the Gospel; and which
we laid down in the eighth place, amongst our arguments or considerations of
the second sort, to prove the Scriptures, and so the Gospel, to be from God. As
for all the particularities of this wisdom we speak of, they are like the
stars in the firmament of heaven for their multitude, which no man can
number, or call by their names, but only he that made them. Let us now (in a
word) weigh and consider attentively, what there is in the consideration
argued, to demonstrate, or prove the Gospel to be from God. With him (says
Job, speaking of God) is wisdom and strength: he has Job 12. 23.
counsel and understanding. So Daniel, wisdom and strength are Dan. 2 ^0
his. And the Apostle Paul, To God (says he) only wise, be praise, through
Jesus Christ for ever: Where he seems to make Romans 16. ^7.
wisdom an incommunicable property in God. To God only wise; i. who only, or
who alone, is wise. Amongst the Heath^^, ^y^h^goras an ancient Philosopher, and
who was the first that gave the name of Philosophers to men studious of
knowledge (a word which signifies lovers of wisdom, whereas before such m^n
were called, ^^NR^^ wise;) gave this reason, why he contented himself with the
name of a Philosopher, or lover of wisdom, and thought it was a term high
enough for men; because he judged no man wise, but ^od only. So that wisdom,
properly so called, was by the light of nature it self, adjudged a perfect
distinguishing character between God and man, or, of God, from man. David
finds this character of God in the frame and making of the heavens. To him who
by ^sal. ^36. 5.
wisdom made the heavens: and so again in the whole course and tenor of his
Providence: O Lord, how mani^^ld are thy works: Psalm. 104 24.
in wisdom have thou made them all. Solomon also, the wisest amongst men, takes
notice, not so much of the power or omnipotency of God, as of his wisdom, in
laying the foundations of the earth, and stablishing the heavens. The Lord by
wisdom Prove. 3. 19.
has said the foundations of the earth, by understanding has he established
the heavens. So that a choicenesse or excellency of wisdom found in any thing,
has still been acknowledged and looked upon, by the wisest and most
considerate of men, as a clear impression of God, and has been a sufficient
ground unto them to conclude such things to be from God, or of his doing,
wherein it has been found. Now he that shall diligently contemplate and behold
that face of wisdom, which has been presented unto you in the glass of the
Gospel, will easily perceive that the beauty and luster of it is more sublime,
ravishing, and God-like, then is any where to be found in all, or all manner of
the works of God besides. So that well might the Apostle call Christ, as he is
contrived in the Gospel, or the doctrine of Christ (as the word often signifies)
the wisdom of God. But unto you that are called (says he) both of Jews and
Crecians, we preach Christ, the power of God, and the 1 Cor. 1. 24.
wisdom of God: we preach Christ, i. the doctrine of Christ's Gospel, which is
the wisdom of God, i. a piece of admirable and divine wisdom, worthy of God,
or, wherein God himself is clearly to be seen. And to this purpose the same
Apostle in the latter Epistle to these Corinthians, chap. 4. verse. 3, 4. has
this passage. If our Gospel then be hid, it is hid to them (or 2 Cor 1 verse 3,
4.
amongst them) that are lost, or (^^NR^^) that are in a way of being lost, that
are in the loosing, or ready to perish, or to be lost; meaning, that it is hid,
i. the truth of it, or, the descent of it from God, undiscerned and
unacknowledged, only amongst, or unto, such: The reason whereof he gives in
the next verse, thus: In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of
those who believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is
the image of God, should shine unto them; clearly implying, that there is such
a glorious light or luster in the Gospel (which must needs be in respect of the
wisdom thereof, at least principally, in respect of this: because this is that
which as Solomon says, makes a man's face to shine) such a glorious luster (I
say) or brightness of wisdom the Apostle Eccles. 8. 1.
supposes to be in the Gospel, that except the God of this world, i. the devil
(whom our Savior in John calls the Prince of this world) had through the just
judgment and permission of God, bewitched men (as the Apostles phrase is
elsewhere) or blinded their eyes (as here he says) i. made them incapable and
in-apprehensive of things otherwise notoriously, yea and gloriously, manifest,
they could not but see and discern it plainly. Where 1. (by the way) we have
that objection against the point now asserted, fully answered and cleared; viz.
that if there were such an excellent luster or brightness of wisdom in the
Gospel, why should not the wise and prudent, the rational and understanding
men of the world, come to see and embrace it, rather then others? yes (says
the Apostle) there is a clear reason for this; the God of this world, the devil
more generally practices more upon such men as these, then upon others; and
that through the just judgment of God; because such as these (commonly) are
proud and high conceited of themselves and their own wisdoms, or otherwise
wickedly given; and so in respect of their knowledge or natural indowments
they are more exposed to the stroke of Gods displeasure, and consequently to
the devils blinding of their eyes, then other men. Now as the common saying is,
that corruption optimi est p^ssima, the corruption of the best, is worst; so
when men of great parts and indowments are spiritually blasted and bl^nded by
Satan, they become more froward and perverse in their reasonings and motions
about spiritual things, then others; and more averse then any men, as to any
regular and unpartiall dijudication of such things, which in themselves are
proper and sufficient to convince them of the truth and certainty of the
Gospel. And

2. That is observable also from the last recited passage of the Apostle, that
where the devil has not had to do with the minds and understandings of men,
where men and women have not so far provoked God, as to cause him to deliver
them over to the effectual working of Satan, there they are in a capacity to
close with the Gospel as a doctrine of truth, and from God. Our Gospel (says
the Apostle) if it be hid, it is hid to those that are lost: and who are these?
such whose eyes, i. the eyes of whose minds, are blinded by Satan, lest the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God should shine
unto them: clearly implying, that it is not men's being in their natural
conditions, but in their hardened, or further blinded condition, that utterly
disables them from submitting to the Gospel by faith. If so be that men
naturally, and before the committing of such sins, for which God gives them up
unto Satan, to blind their eyes, were in an utter incapacity of believing, the
not- shining of the glorious Gospel of Christ in their eyes, could not
reasonably be attributed to Satan's blinaing of them. If men be born blind,
their blindness, or non-seeing of things, cannot be ascribed to any accident
that shall befall them afterward. But this only by the way: and that in
reference to somewhat lately delivered, and for the strengthening and
confirmation thereof: otherwise there are many other things, observable in the
verse. But (as to the business in hand) you clearly see, that either the holy
Ghost himself, or whosoever it was, that framed the Epistle, wherein the
passage late mentioned stands, judges that excellent light of wisdom, which
shines from the face of the Gospel, to be an evident and undeniable character
of the royal parentage and descent of it from God. Let all the books, and most
accurate writings of men, be drawn together, those that are of greatest
observation and name, let them bring forth and show all their treasures of
wisdom and understanding; the Gospel will, or at least well may, be as clearly
distinguished and known from all the rest, by those heights and depths of
wisdom that are here, as the heavens are from the earth by their height, and
the sea being fadomed where it is deepest, from the flatts and shallows of
smaller rivers* yea the sun is not more easily discerned from the stars of
the night by that superabundant excess of light which he carries about him,
then the Gospel may be from all humane writings whatsoever, by that
predominancie of wisdom and understanding, which is seen in it above them all.
The gleanings of the grapes of the wisdom of the Gospel, are better then the
whole vinta^e of all other writings. The Apostle having mentioned only that
one particular of the Gospel, the crucifying of the Lord of glory, comments
upon it thus: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither 1 Cor 2 9.
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him; it may well be further added; no nor any other thing like unto
these. Never was there any such strain of wisdom heard of as this: so to
qualify and allay the divine nature, as to make it capable of dying; to put on
mortality upon him that was immortal, that so that which was mortal might
come to put on immortality, and wear it for ever. All the subtle stratagems,
and wise projections, and profound policies of men, that are read or heard of
from any other hand whatsoever, are but like devices how to catch flies, or to
make bubbles in the air, such as little children use to sport withal, in
comparison of that unfadomable, incomprehensible design, by which God has
projected, not the saving only, but the glorifying also of a lost world. This
for this eighth demonstration.

The ninth argument arising from the matter of the Scriptures, to evince their
derivation from God, formerly propounded, was the great and wonderful
mysteriousnesse of the Evangelicall transaction, delivered and laid forth in
them. Of this mysteriousnesse of the Gospel, and of the many contrivements
whereof it consists, we spoke somewhat largely in the former argument, and
therefore shall add little or nothing of it here. When we affirm the great
Evangelicall transaction, by which God has plotted, and brought about the
salvation of the world, to be mysterious, we mean only this (as was formerly
touched) that it was a projection, contrivement, or devise, which was as far
from any way, or path ever occupied or walked in, by the reasons,
understandings, or imaginations of men, as the cast is from the west, or the
heavens from the earth, and which was altogether unlikely ever to have come up
into the minds and thoughts of men. Now how, and upon what grounds and
considerations, and wherein, this mysteriousnesse of it appears, was argued
at large in the foregoing point. Let us only (in a word) weigh the
consideration of this mysteriousnesse we speak of, and see what strength there
is in it, to prove the Gospel it self to come from God. That which is born of
the flesh (says our Savior) is Joh. 3. 6.
flesh: and that which is born of the spirit, is spirit: meaning, that each of
these births, answers their original, in nature, properties, inclinations,
dispositions, etc. In like manner, whatsoever proceeds from man, suppose in a
way of reasoning, discursive invention, contrivement, or the like, does but
answer the genius, or that line of reason, wisdom and understanding which is
humane, and that which is, or very possibly may be, found in other men. It is
true, the sphere wherein some men's apprehensions and understandings move, and
work, is much larger, and more comprehensive, then other men's; some by reason
of the vigor, strength, and activenesse of their reasons and understandings,
are able to travail further in inquiries after truth, then others, and to make
discoveries of things, that lie at a far greater distance, then they: some
men's capacities and wits are only made and serve them to travail their native
country and places near home, being capable only of things near at hand, and
which all men generally know, or may know with ease: others, are made for long
voyages, with abilities and inclinations to coast terra incognita; unknown
countries, and to make discoveries and reports of things there. But as it was
in the Israelites gathering of Manna, he that gathered least, had no want; and
he that gathered most had no overplus: so in the case we speak of; as the
workings, contrivements, and debates of the meanest, and most ordinary
understandings of men, want not altogether the savor of that which is common
to men (I mean, reason) they have some taste, more or less, of what is proper
to men: so neither have the theories, contemplations, and achievements of the
richest and most sublime understandings of men, any overplus (I mean, any thing
more excellent) then what is humane, and what upon a due search into, and
consideration had of it, may be clearly known to be but from men. Therefore,
when any such piece of wisdom, or projection of a business, shall be presented
to us, wherein upon diligent inquiry made, there plainly appears aliquid
augustius, that which is more adorable, mysterious, and divine, then what is
any ways likely, yea or indeed possible, to fall within the compass of the
largest sphere of the understanding of men, as to the contrivement of it; there
is a sure foundation to conclude and build upon, that doubtless a greater
wisdom then any that is humane, was interessed in the framing and composure of
it. Now that the Gospel, or that great Gospel transaction (as I called it) is
of that consideration we speak of, a piece of wisdom, a projection, which
carries a fuller and more majestique luster of wisdom in the face of it, then
ever was known to appear, or is any wa^^es likely to appear in any doctrine,
project, or devise of man, has been sufficiently argued, and made good in what
has been already said. I shall only add, the consideration of those words,
who is the image of God, in that passage of Scripture lately cited (and in part
opened) 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. I^ whom the God of this world has blinded the minds
of those that believe not, lea^^ the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
who is the image of God, should shine unto them. Who is the image of God: It
is, as if he should say, it is scarce possible, but that men should see and
acknowledge, the truth of the Gospel, and the descent of it from God (as we the
Apostles preach it) if ^atan and not marveilously blind their minds, and so
make them very incapable of such things; in as much as the Gospel, is the
glorious Gospel of Christ, i. displaies and sets forth Christ gloriously, and
like unto himself; and Christ is the image of God; i. a person, in whom, the
nature, and being of God, and all his attributes, wisdom, grace, holiness,
justice, power, are clearly to be seen, as far as they are discernable by
men; which is far enough, to enable men to put a clear difference, between
him and his image, and likeness, and between any created being whatsoever, and
the likeness thereof. So that if men were not under the power of Satan, and
justly delivered up by God unto him to make fools and sots of, in respect of
the great things of their peace, they could not but see the very complete image
and likeness of God himself in the Gospel, as being that which is most
manifest, and most plainly and palpably discernable, from the similitudes or
likenesses of all creatures whatsoever; and consequently subject themselves in
faith and obedience to it. Great mountains when they are before us, are easily
discerned from little mou^^-hills, or from pins heads; if men have but any
tolerable use of their eyes. So (says the Apostle, in effect) is the image and
likeness of God, when it is presented before men, as it is in the Gospel
(where Christ is gloriously presented) easy enough to be distinguished and
known, from the superscription or likeness of any other being whatsoever, if
men be not either smitten with spiritual blindness by the hand of Satan, or
willingly shut their eyes against it. Where the sight is but weak and dim,
yet if the object be full of visibility, and very easy to be discerned, it is
able to apprehend it; if a man has but a glimmering of a seeing faculty, he
will be able to discern an house from a man, or from a tree, near at hand; so
though men's reasons and understandings be naturally slow, and dark, and dim,
etc. yet such an object as God is, so full of intelligility, or of that which
may be apprehended and understood, being in a clear glass proposed and brought
near to them, certainly may be discerned by them, and known from other objects,
if the God of this world has not breathed upon them, and blasted them. Indeed
if Christ were only the image of some creature, as of a man, or an Angel, and
not of God; the Apostle seems to suppose, that though he were presented in the
Gospel to the utmost line and lineament of his beauty and perfection, yet the
light of the Gospel might not have shined unto them, though Satan had not
blinded their minds: because such an object as this, would have had but parum
de ratione formali, little of that in it, which makes an object intelligible,
and apt to be distinguished from other things, by the understanding; all
created beings being empty of entity or being, and consequently of
intelligibility, comparatively in respect of God. But now, Christ being the
image of God, who contains all perfection and fullness of entity and being, and
consequently of whatsoever is intelligible and that may be apprehended and
understood; and withal, being so excellently and fully set forth, as he is in
the Gospel; if men do not see the light of truth in it, and that it is from
God, it is a certain sign, either that that evil one (as John calls him) has
touched them in the eyes of their understandings, and made them blind; or else
that they wilfully shut their eyes against the light of it, and do not see it,
merely because they will not, or care not to do it. And so the same Apostle
writing to the Galatians, asks them, who had bewitched them, i. hindered and
bound, as it were, their reasons, judgments, understandings, Ga^ 3 1.
that they should not believe the truth [of the Gospel] clearly implying, that
if some such strange thing, as a spiritual bewitching be not fallen upon men,
if they be but free, and have their reasons and understandings at liberty, to
act that which is proper for them to do, they cannot lightly but acknowledge,
and submit unto the Gospel, as a truth. If you ask me, why so? the Apostle
himself answers you in the case of the Galatians (in the place mentioned) where
he gives this reason why they must needs be bewitched, in that they did not
obey the truth of the Gospel; viz. that Christ had been plainly described unto
them: before whose eyes (says he) Christ has been evidently set forth,
[delineated, or described, as the word signifieth] crucified among you. Whereby
he plainly insinuates, that the image or portracture of Christ, being so drawn
to the life, as it is in the Gospel, by the hand of the holy Ghost,
(especially) if it be but well and clearly showed, and presented unto men in
the ministry thereof: is such an object, or image, which is sufficiently
convincing of its own verity and conformity, 1. to the person of Christ; 2. to
the nature of God, where the eyes of men's reasons and understandings have not
been shut up, or at least dazzled and made unserviceable for such a purpose, by
the devil. If the truth of the Gospel were such, or so conditioned, that men by
nature, I mean, before they receive any secret and penal stroke upon the eyes
of their minds from the devils hand, were no ways capable of it, and of
consenting to it; the Apostle would never have asked the Galatians, who had
bewitched them, that they did not obey it. But this by the way. As to our
business in hand; this is that which I desire you will take special notice of
upon occasion of the former passage of Scripture (the interpretation whereof
given, has been cleared and strengthened by this latter) that the great and
profound mysteriousnesse of that blessed transaction in the Gospel, wherein the
salvation of the world works with so high an hand, is one of the fairest and
most discernable lineaments of the image of God that is to be seen there; and
consequently is very pregnant and demonstrative, to evince the Gospel to be
from God.

The tenth (and last) argument from the matter of the Scriptures, that was
proposed to satisfy the soul and conscience about their original, and to
prove that they are from God, was this: the glorious, and most transcendent
importance of this transaction of the Gospel, by way of benefit and blessing
upon the world. Amongst many others, there are these eight great benefits and
blessings, which the Gospel is set, and seeks to bring upon the world; yea and
which it actually brings upon the heads of all those, who unfainedly desire,
and seek after them. The first, is our reconciliation with God, or unto God.
Secondly, our justification, or righteous-making in the sight of God. Thirdly,
our adoption, or sonship unto God. Fourthly, the mortification of the body of
sin and death in men. Fifthly, the quickening unto, or the inspiration of, a new
life, to live holily, and unto God. Sixthly, peace of conscience, with God, or
toward God. Seventhly, our redemption or deliverance from the wrath and
vengeance which is to come. Eighthly, (and lastly) the bringing of us to glory;
or the investing of us with a glorious and blessed eternity. It is well known
to u^, that the face of the Gospel is fully set to possess the world of all
this treasure; to invest the sons and daughters of men, with all these blessed
privileges (besides many others.) And because this is a thing so generally
known, we shall only touch the particulars, and that very lightly.

1. Our reconciliation with God, or unto God; i. the ^laying, or taking away
that enmity against God, and those hard thoughts of him, which before lay
burning, and working in our hearts and inward parts, together with the kindling
of a spirit of love toward him, and the raising of a good and honorable
opinion in us concerning him, in the stead thereof, is fully expressed, and
asserted, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. Romans 5. 10. Colos. 2 Cor. 5 18, 19. Romans 5. 10 Col.
1 2.
1. 21, etc.

2. Our justification, or righteous-making in the sight of God; i. the rendering
or setting of us free from all guilt, demerit and imputation of sin
whatsoever, and that in a way of the greatest equity and righteousness,
without the least reflection upon his most district justice, perfect hatred, and
deepest severity against sin, is clearly testified in these, and many other
Acts 13 38, 39. Romans 3. 21, 22, etc.
passages of Scripture, Act. 13. 38, 39. Romans 3. 21, 22, etc. Romans 5. 9, etc.
Rom 5. 9.


3. Our adoption, or relation of sonship unto God by faith, is with no less
evidence and frequencie of assertion held forth in the Scripture. Let these
texts, with many others of like notion, be perused for satisfaction herein,
Joh. 1. 12, 13. Romans 8. 14, Gal. 3. 26. Gal. 4. 5, 6, 7.
15. Gal. 3. 26. Gal. 4. 5, 6, 7, etc.

4. The mortification of that body of sin and death (as the Apostle calls it)
which is in us, is a glorious privilege, benefit, and blessing, which we
receive by the Gospel. The Gospel ministers unto us wisdom and strength
wherewith to do it, yea wherewith to make us willing to do it, The two great
Apostles, Paul and Peter, give knowledge of this Evangelicall Romans 6. 3, (...),
5, etc.
blessedness also. The former, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. and again, Col. 3. 3, 5. Col. 3.
3, 5. 1 Pet. 4. 1.
The latter, 1 Pet. 4. 1, etc.

5. A vivification, or quickening unto a new and more excellent life; an
inspiration of a new principle of vital motions and actions, far more
honorable and august, then our former, is a Gospel benediction also unto, and
upon, the world. Ephesians. 2. (...), 5. James (...). 18. Romans 6. 4.
This grace is visible in these Scriptures (with their fellows) Rom 6. 4. Jam.
1. 18. Ephesians. 2. 1. 5, etc.

6. Peace with God, or peace of conscience with God, or toward God, is another
great blessing that accrues unto the world by the Gospel; and depends upon, and
flows from that other privilege and blessing we spoke of, our justification.
Let that great oracle of divine knowledge (the Apostle Paul I mean) be
consulted about this, Romans 5. 1. Therefore (says he) being justified by faith,
we have peace with God, through our Romans 5. 1.
Lord Jesus Christ. The meaning is not only, that God is at peace with us, in
himself, and intends no acts of hostility against us, we being fully acquitted
and discharged from all matter of offense, which might justly provoke him
hereunto; but further that we have this peace with him, i. we enjoy, or may
enjoy this interest of peace with God; we have sufficient ground of injoiment
of it in our justification. F^^^ (we know) has torment (as John says) whether
there be any cause of fear or no: and they that fear trouble, or war from
any, cannot properly be said to have peace with them, though nothing but peace
Acts 10^, 6. Romans 10. 15. Ephesians. 2 17.
be intended toward them. See yet more of this, Act. 10. 36. Romans 10, 15. Ephesians.
2. 17, etc.

7. Redemption, and deliverance from the wrath and vengeance which is to come,
is a pr^viledge or blessing, without which most miserable were the condition of
those that are called happy (yea, even the firstborn of this denomination) in
this world. But for this great blessing also on the worlds 1 These. 1. 10. E^h.
1. 7. C^l. 1. 14. 1 Cor. (...) ^0.
behalf, see whether the Gospel undertakes not, in these and other-like places,
1 Cor. 1. 30. Ephesians. 1. 7. Colos. 1. 14. 1 These. 1. 10.

8. (And lastly) the Gospel also, does not only raise and lift up the world,
with the hope and expectation of a redemption or deliverance from the wrath
which is to come: but of an investiture and possession also of the glory which
is to come: yea it carries on those who believe, so far in the ways of
righteousness and of peace, until they be ready to enter into the city of the
great King: it makes ^is meet (as the Apostle speaks) to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light (Col. 1. 12.) yea and is able to give us an
inheritance amongst those Col 1 12. Act ^0 31.
that are sanctified, Act. 20. 32.

Now then these being the known benefits wherewith the Gospel undertakes to
bless (yea and wherewith it really does bless) the world, some of them
actually, yea and sensibly enjoyed by the Saints, as the mortification of that
body of death which we speak of, the dying of the old man within them, the
quickening and raising up of the new, that peace of conscience, which they enjoy
with God, etc. let us briefly consider, whether, I do not say the actual
collation of these things upon men, or the grounds and reasons upon which this
Gospel undertakes to secure men of the real enjoyment of them all in due time:
but whether the very treaty with men about such things as these, being so
spiritual, and holy, and of that high and glorious concernment unto the world,
is not a rich and pregnant demonstration, that the Gospel is from God. As one
of those that were in the high Priests Hall, with Peter, discovered him by his
speech or language, to be none belonging to the high Priest or his family, nor
of those that came against his Master, but to belong unto Christ, and
challenged him upon it; surely also thou art one of them; for thy speech
bewrays thee: in Mat. 26. 73.
like manner, the very nature and subject of the discourse of the Scriptures;
especially upon, and about the subjects mentioned, clearly discover them, to be
none of the writings of the wisdom or learning of this world; because there is
not a lip of such excellency, not a pen that ever advanced such a magnificent
and sublime discourse, that ever so much as faced the world, no not with the
least mention or overture of things so super-transcendently rich and glorious,
to be found amongst all the scribes, or wisemen, of this school and order. And
as the Lord Christ gave this account to the disciples of John, who were sent
unto him, to inquire whether he was the Messiah, or no, to prove himself to be
the Messiah indeed: The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers
are cleansed, the deaf Matthew. 11. 5.
hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor receive the Gospel; meaning,
that these great and wonderful cures, and blessings, so abundantly wrought,
and given unto men by him, were a great argument that he was the Messiah
indeed, the great benefactour of the world; in like manner, when we hear of the
enemies of God reconciled to him, of sinners justified, of aliens and strangers
adopted for sons and daughters unto God; of sin and corruption mortified,
where sometime they were alive; of men quickened, and made alive unto
righteousness, who before were dead in sins and trespasses; of men redeemed,
who were the worst and most miserable of bond men and vassalls; of men
glorified, and made like unto the Angels, who were the children of shame,
vileness, and contempt; I say when we hear of all these great and marveilous
things, partly already brought to pass, partly undertaken, and this, with all
possibly-imaginable likelihood to be brought to pass, in the times and seasons
assigned hereunto, by a piece of wisdom or learning; may we not without any
fear or doubting conclude, that certainly this wisdom, this learning, which
advances the blessedness of the world to this height, is not from men, but
from God? For what greater things then these can God himself, if he should
engage himself with all his divine wisdom it self, though it be infinite, what
greater things then these can he project, or by his power bring to pass for
the sons and daughters of men? This for our tenth and last demonstration,
taken from the substance, or subject matter of the Scriptures.

We have now finished our first kind of arguments, or demonstrations, to
evince the divine origi^all of the Scriptures, which were such, as we called
intrinsecall, and are found in the Gospel it self; which we subdivided again,
or differenced under two heads; some of them were taken from the manner; the
other, from the matter of the Scriptures. We now proceed to the second general
head, or kind of argument, to demonstrate the same truth (I mean that the
Scriptures are from God) these we formerly called extrinsecall, because they
are the considerations of such things, which do not inhere in the Scriptures,
nor properly result from them; but yet they face them, and relate to them with
such a kind of relation, which takes hold of the divinity of them, as the
former did, and demonstrates the same parentage, and descent of them, with
those other. The particulars of this kind of argument, or consideration also,
which we call extrinsecall, may be ranged under two subordinate heads likewise.
The former are such passages or acts of providence, whereby God plainly owns
the Scriptures as his, and from him: the latter, are such, either doings, or
sayings of men, which are so far confederate, with those providence of God,
as to join in testimony with them on the behalf of the Scriptures.

For the former of these; those great actings, and workings of providence,
which relate unto the Scriptures, by way of testimony, that they are from God,
are chiefly five. 1. The wonderful preservation of the Scriptures: 2. the
manner of the plantation of the Gospel when it first went forth into the world,
with the strange success which attended it: 3. the exact and punctual
fulfilling of the predictions contained in the Scriptures, in their season: 4.
The great and wonderful effects, which God has formerly, and continues still
daily to produce and work by the Gospel, and ministry of it: 5. (And lastly)
the government of the world, carried on and managed with such a sweet
conformity to the Scriptures, and according to the tenor of the Gospel, and
the high things thereof. To which you may add (if you please) the remarkable
judgments, that have been executed and inflicted upon their chief enemies.

For the first of these; that great hand of providence which has appeared in
preserving of the body, or books of the Scriptures, for so many generations
together, as have passed over them, since the first writing of them, in the
midst of so many dangers, and against so many endeavors to root them out of
the world, is a great argument that they belong unto God, as the author and
parent of them. It is a common saying in natural Philosophy. Eadem est cause
procreans and conservans. The procreating, and preserving, cause of things, is
one and the same. And as the Scripture seems to make that dispensation of God
toward Christ, his not suffering him to see corruption, though he were in the
grave, and so (as it were) in the very hand and power of corruption; an
argument that he was his son, his holy one; thou will not suffer thy holy one
to Act. 2. 27.
see corruption; so is that hand of protection and preservation, which God for
so many years (or rather ages) together has constantly held over the
Scriptures, not suffering them to see corruption in one kind or other, when as
the world, and the enemies thereof, who sought their corruption and
destruction, seem to have had them under their power, and that they might have
done to them, as Christ said they did unto John the Baptist, even what they
list; that God (I say) has all this while preserved the Scriptures in the
midst of so many dangers, and likelyhoods of miscarrying, is a very strong
presumption (at least) that they have some peculiar interest in him, and are
holy unto him with a more endeared holiness, then other writings.

There are three kinds of corruption, or perishings, whereunto books and
writings are obnoxious; and so the Scriptures themselves also, so far as they
partake in the nature and infirmities of other writings. The one is, by an
utter loss or perishing of all, and every part and parcel of the writing;
when there is not so much as a fragment, fragments, or broken piece remaining.
The second is, when they are much dismembered and maimed, so that the beauty and
comeliness of their structure and frame is wholly defaced, and some, or more,
of the more considerable and principal things at first contained in them,
wholly lost, or perished from the world. The third and last kind of perishing
is, when their body or bulk is not diminished, nay perhaps this may be
augmented; but the spirit and life of that knowledge, or of those truths, which
were at first plainly and clearly held forth in them, is much infeebled, if not
quite dissolved and destroyed, by falsifications, additions, substractions, and
alterations in one kind or other. Now from all these kinds of corruptions or
perishings, God has, if not by way of perfect miracle, yet by a very high and
remarkable hand of providence, preserved the Scriptures: and shall we not then
think that they are his?

1. It is a matter of marveilous consideration, if we look downwards, and
toward the earth only (I mean, only upon second causes) that the whole body of
the Scriptures, rush and branch, they and their memorial with them, are not
long before this perished from under the heavens: considering, 1. what numbers
of enemies they have always had, who have sought their extirpation and ruin:
2. with how perfect and unplacable an hatred, these (at least many of them)
have sought their suppression: 3. how potent many of their enemies have been,
furnished with power in abundance (in the eye of reason) to wreck their hatred
upon them in this kind: 4. what opportunities they have had, and advantages,
in conjunction with their power: 5. (and lastly) what has been attempted by
some of them in this kind. These circumstances taken into consideration, render
the providence of God little less then miraculous, in the preservation of them
to this day; especially without any maim, or loss of limb (as it were) yea or
corruption or falsification in any part of them (as we shall add in the other
particulars) but let us (for dispatch sake) run over the particulars mentioned
very briefly; which otherwise might be much enlarged from history.

1. I say the Scriptures, and the doctrine contained in them, have very many
enemies; as 1. all the devils in hell: and 2. all wicked, ungodly, and profane
persons on the earth. First, all the devils in hell, yea and out of hell (if
they be not in hell, whilst they are in the air, and compassing the earth to
and fro) but the whole host of this accursed kind of creature, which we know
is numerous above measure, are certainly enemies to the Scriptures, and seek
their ruin. The enmity and hatred which the devil bears to the Scriptures, is
discovered several ways. 1. in that he watches the seed of the doctrine
thereof, when it is sown by the hand of the spiritual seedsman in the hearts
of men, and catches at it immediately, and many times snatcheth it away, as
soon as ever it is fallen upon the soul; which shows, that he is not willing it
should remain there, no not for the shortest season. And if he be not willing
it should remain in the heart of a man, surely he would not have it have any
place of being in the world. But that disposition and practice of his we speak
of, you shall find clearly asserted by our Savior himself, in his explication
of the parable of Matthew. 19. 1^.
the sower.

2. The devils emnity against the Scriptures, and the doctrine thereof, appears
in this; that they are still casting blocks in one kind or other, in the way
of those, that are most able and willing to propagate the knowledge of them in
the world; to prevent them of their opportunities, and hinder them from the
work. Thus Paul complains, that when he was resolved, and endeavored
abundantly to have gone to Thessalonica, to strengthen and edify the Saints
there, Satan hindered 1 Th^s. 1. 18.
him.

3. In that he attempts the discouragement, and molestation, both temporal and
spiritual, of those that are the professors and upholders of them in the
world. Thus Antipas, a faithful Martyr, is said to have been slain, where
Satan's seat or throne Rev. 2. 13.
was, and where he dwelt; to imply, that Satan was the chief stickler to
procure his death. And our Savior signified in his Epistle to the Church of
Smyrna, that Satan would cast some verse 10.
of them into prison, and that they should have persecution ten days, viz. by
his means, and instigation of men to persecute them. Again, that he is still
attempting the spiritual disturbance and discouragement, of such as hold forth
the Scriptures, and the doctrine of them, unto the world, appears from many
places. Resist the devil and he will ^lee from you, Jam 4. 7. Jam 4. 7. 1 P^t.
5 8. Ephesians. 6. ^6.
And again: Above all, taking the shield of faith, whereby ye shall quench all
the fiery darts of the devil, Ephesians. 6. 16. In which passages with many others,
there is plain information given of Satan's diligence and desire, to disturb the
inward peace of the precious souls of men.

4. The devils hatred against the Scriptures, and the doctrine thereof, appears
in this; that he endeavors all he can to blind the minds of men, that the
light of them should not shine 1 Cor. 4. 4.
unto them. As far as lies in his power, he labors to keep the world in
darkness and in the shadow of death; the light of the Gospel, is to the devil,
as the light of the morning to the thief and murderer in Job, i. as the shadow
of death. When it Job. 24. 17.
shines in the eyes of men's minds, it is as a sword that passes through his
soul; yea when men are lifted up into heaven by it, the devil is thrown down
from his heaven, into his hell. When the seventy Disciples, having been sent
forth by our Savior, to work miracles, and preach the Gospel, returned back to
him, relating with joy what great success they had had in their expedition,
against the devils; our Savior made them this answer; I beheld Satan, as
lightning, falling from heaven; q. d. I Luke 10. 18.
was a spectatour of the combat between Satan and you, whilst you were in the
engagement, about which I sent you, and knew before you came to relate to me
your success, how that great enemy of yours, and of men, the devil, fell
before you: I saw him (says he) like lightning falling from heaven, ^^NR^^ out
of the heaven, wherein he was before your coming against him; i. I saw him with
extreme regret and torment quitting the possession, which he had before, both
of the souls, and bodies of men; which possessions were as a second heaven unto
him: but (says Christ) I saw him falling from this heaven after the same
manner, or upon the same terms that lightning sometimes falls, or rather is
forced, from the material heavens, or the clouds of heaven (as the Scripture
usually calls them) i, by a motion very contrary to his nature and disposition;
as the descent or falling of lightning, from the heavens, to the earth, is
contrary to the nature and proper inclination of it, which being of a fiery and
light nature, desires naturally to ascend, and to be above, in the
circumference, not to descend and fall downwards toward the center. But this
by the way, to show the main ground and reason, of the devils enmity and hatred
against the Gospel; viz. because it is an engine in the hand of God to batter
him down from his heaven upon earth, to dispossess him of that interest and
hold, he has in the hearts, and judgments, and lives of men.

5. (And lastly) his enmity against the Scriptures and main doctrine thereof,
the Gospel, appears in this, that he tempts, persuades, and ingageth men from
time to time, to invent and substitute other Gospels, and other doctrines, and
other Christ's, as near, and with as much affinity and similitude, to the true
Gospel, and true doctrines, and the true Christ, as he knows how: and so to
hold them forth unto the world, on purpose to trouble and confound the minds
and thoughts of men, and to put the world into a maze, to make men at a loss,
which, or what to call the Gospel, or what the truth, or who the true Christ;
yea and to make them question whether there be any Gospel, any doctrine, any
Christ at all, able, or likely to bless them. Such wiles, and methods, and
stratagems as these put upon the world, are (I conceive) called the doctrines
and depths of Satan, by our Savior himself, in his epistle to the Church of
Thyatira. I shall not need to instance in particulars Rev. 2. 24.
in this kind; it is two well known, and two commonly found (and it has been
the devils sieve of vanity, to sift all ages and nations withal, where so much
as the sound or mention of the Gospel has come) that there are false Gospels,
and false doctrines, and false Christ's, ever and anon putting forth into the
world; yet as near, and as like the true Gospel, and true doctrines, and the
true Christ, as the devil can teach his prophets and workmen to shape them;
only providing, that yet there may be so much dissimilitude or unlikenesse
between them, as may be sufficient to deceive with danger, and if it be
possible, to destroy with death. Now as Jannes and Jambres, 2 Timothy 3. 8.
the Egyptian Sorcerers, are said to have withstood Moses, because by working
false miracles, yet in appearance and show the same with those true and real
miracles, which Moses wrought, they opposed and obstructed that convinction in
Pharaoh and the Egyptian^, of Moses his being sent from God, which otherwise
could not lightly but have been effected, by the miracles which Moses wrought,
and so the deliverance of the children of Israel out of Egypt (which was Moses
his design) have been obtained: in like manner they who preach false
doctrines, and another Jesus, besides him, whom Paul preached, yet with such a
semblance of those that are true, that they are sufficient to entangle and
confound the judgments of men, are as dangerous opposers, and withstanders of
the able and faithful Ministers of the Gospel, as any other sect of men
whatsoever.

Thus we see (in the first place) that Beelzebub, with all his host of
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses, are professed, yea and
engaged enemies against the Scriptures: ye have in part also heard the reason
of it.

2. I add further, that all wicked and profane men in the world, are enemies
to them also. He that does evil (says our Joh. 3. 20.
Savior) [ i. whosoever does evil] hates the light; neither comes he to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved. And those two witnesses (as they are
called, Revel. 11.) i. those that held Rev. 11. 10.
forth the light of the truth of the Scriptures unto the world in the times of
that great Antichristian darkness, which overspread (in a manner) the whole
face of it, are in respect of that engagement of theirs, said to have vexed, or
tormented them that dwelt on the earth. So that the light of the truth
contained in the Gospel, is a vexation and torment to all earthly minded men;
and who is there but hates their tormentours? Wicked and ungodly men, may for
some by respects, and out of some carnal ends, come to hear the Scriptures
preached; and possibly now and then, by the overruling hand of Gods Providence,
may speak a good word, or do a good piece of service for them. But as Solomon
says, that even in laughter Prove. 14 13.
the heart is (sometimes) sorrowful; and that the end of that mirth is
heaviness; so it may truly be said of such men, as we speak of, that whilst
they are blessing the Scriptures with their mouths, or with their hands, they
curse them in their hearts, as if they were their very enemies. But evident
enough it is, that all the wicked and profane persons in the world, hate the
light and purity of the Scriptures. Thus then you see the tenor and truth of
the first circumstance. The Scriptures have enemies in abundance; far more
for number, then those Saints spoken of, Revel. 7. whose multitude,
notwithstanding is R^v. 7. 9.
there said to be such, that no man could number them. Doubtless, if the
devils were numbered, from the Dan to the Beth^^^^ of hell, and wicked men from
the first edition and coming forth of the Scriptures into the world, until
now, from the Dan to the Bethsheba of the world, the account of this list would
rise to a double and treble, if not to an hundred fold proportion above that
other.

2. But though the Scriptures have always had many enemies, yet if they have
been any thing qualified in their enmity or hatred against them, so that they
have rather despised them, then opposed them, or sought their destruction (as
the story says that Herod did by two of the brethren of Christ, when they were
brought before him, because they were poor) the preservation of them from ruin
by God, were so much the less considerable; nor would it be an argument of
that strength and power, to evince that relation of them unto him, which we
labor to assert and prove, which it is, and upon due consideration will be
found to be, in case it appear, that these enemies of theirs, are, and still
have been (at least the greatest part of them) full of wrath, deeply and
inveterately set in hatred against them.

1. For the devils, there is little question but that they bear a tyrannous
hate against them, hate them with a perfect hatred, as being their greatest
enemies. If they that dwell upon earth be tormented by them, doubtless they
that dwell in hell seven times more; and proportionable to the torment or
damage they receive, or fear to receive from them, such must their hatred to
them needs be conceived to be. Though some ignorant and inconsiderate men and
women, may possibly rather despise and neglect the Scriptures, and the doctrine
thereof, then positively hate them, or trouble themselves with making any
opposition to them; yet doubtless the devils know them better then so; I mean,
they know them to be of another manner of concernment to them, and their
kingdom, of a more formidable importance, then to pass them over with
contempt, or neglect, But I hate him (says Ahab, one of the sons of the devil,
concerning Michajah) for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil; In
like manner, the devils 1 Kings 22. 8.
knowing that the Scriptures prophecy no good, but evil, only evil, and that
in abundance, concerning them, it is not to be thought, but that they hate
them, yea and this in abundance also.

2. That many (at least) and generally, those that are most considerable, among
that other sort of enemies, which the Scriptures have, and always have had (I
mean, evil and ungodly men) are enemies to purpose, traveiling (as it were) in
pain with the suppression and extirpation of them (at least, of that, which is
the life and soul of them, the truth of the Gospel) is every whit as evident as
the former. The Kings of the earth (says David) set themselves, and the rulers
take counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying; let
us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Psalm. 2 2, 3.
These bands and cords of the Lord and his Christ (or, his anointed one) which
Kings and rulers set themselves, and take counsel together to break asunder,
and so to cast away from them (far enough) are nothing else but those laws
and commandments from heaven, which bind them unto subjection to the Gospel,
and the will of Jesus Christ therein: or, the entire rule, or doctrine of the
Gospel; This the Kings and rulers of the earth, with their subjects, would have
to be broken in pieces, i. suppressed, extinguished, extirpated out of the
world; that so they might be out of all danger, of being impeded or troubled in
the way of their lusts, and earthly designs by it. As the Lord Christ was
sought by Herod, to be slain as soon (almost) as he was born; so was the
slaughter and subversion of his Gospel, whilst it was yet in the infancy of it,
attempted by men. Those exhortations of the Apostles to Christians in the
primitive times, to contend earnestly for the faith, which was once delivered
to the Saints, Jude 3. and so, (...), to strive Jude 3. Philip. 1. 27.
together with (rather then, for) the faith of the Gospel, with the like,
clearly imply, that the powers and wisdom of the world were bent against that
faith and doctrine of the Gospel, which they professed and held forth. It were
easy to enlarge in this point. But

3. Though the Scriptures should have, and have had never so many enemies, and
those never so full of wrath or hatred against them, yet if they had been
contemptible in their power, and had not had wherewithal to have endangered
them, the preservation of them, had been but a providence of an ordinary
character, or line; or however, had argued no such singular affection, or care
in God toward them, as now it does; considering that these enemies, were not
an heap of angry men, without horns, of naked, weak or unarmed men, destitute
of power to make any considerable attempt upon the Scriptures; no, there have
always been amongst those enemies of the Scriptures we speak of, men that have
been abundantly furnished and provided with weapons of all kinds, to make
war against them, whether with the one kind of warfare or the other (I mean,
whether by force, or by skill, either by slaying the Gospel only, leaving the
men alive, as sometimes the sword is melted by lightning, when the scabbard is
not hurt, or else, by destroying both together) and who have been, in the eye
of reason, and according to the ordinary course of things in the world, able to
destroy them from off the face of the earth.

1. For the devils, who are the captains and leaders, under Beelzebub, the
Generallissino, or commander in chief, of all the forces that ever were levied,
or up in arms against the Scriptures; these are known, to want neither wiles
nor methods, stratagems, nor delusions, whereby to circumvent the world (if it
were possible) of the Scriptures, by representing of them, fabulous, weak, no
ways worthy to be believed; nor yet power or strength of arm for execution,
if there be any thing to be done against the Scriptures in that kind. Paul
speaking of the opposition and danger, which might arise unto them from men, or
from flesh and blood (as he calls it) makes light of it, in comparison of what
was to be expected from the devils. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood
(which is but a dull and contemptible enemy, in comparison) but against Ephesians.
6. 12.
Principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses in high places; meaning, against an
innumerable company of devils, and these of the chiefest ranks and orders
amongst them, and consequently, so much more devils, i. fuller of rage, malice,
subtilty, activenes, power, etc. then their fellows.

2. For men, who have been enemies to the Scriptures, yea, and have professed
it; amongst these also there have been, both lions, and foxes: many who have
had strength of arm in abundance, and been great in power; and many also who
have had strength of brain; and great provisions of the wisdom and subtilty of
this world. So that if God had not preserved the Scriptures, as well against
the one, as the other, there was neither of these kinds of enemies, but might
easily have destroyed them from the face of the earth.

1. How great a part of the powers of this world (I mean of the Kings and
Princes of the earth) who have been formidable in their days for their power,
and made the earth to shake round about them, far and near, whose hand found
many enterprises, (as David speaks) i. performed many exploits of far more
difficult performance in the eye of reason, then the demolishing of the
Scriptures, have been enemies unto them? Were they not the Kings and rulers of
the earth, who (as we heard before from David, Psalm. 2.) set themselves, and
Psalm. 1 2, 3.
took counsel together, against the Lord and against his anointed; saying, let
us break their hands asunder, and cast away their cords from us? i. in effect
(as we interpreted) let us destroy that law, that doctrine, that Religion,
whereby they engage the world unto them, and are troublesome unto us in our
way, and would make even us also subject unto them. Those great and famous
Kings (as David calls them) which God vanquished Ps. 136 17, 18.
and slew by the hand of his people, in their passage to the land of Canaan,
because they opposed them therein, were professed enemies to the Scriptures
which then were, as well as to those, that professed and held them forth in the
world. So were the great Kings of Assyria, and Babylon afterward; the great
Monarchs and Potentates of the world. Antiochus, who reigned (or rather, raged)
in the times of the Maccabees, and whose rage and cruelty against the Jews and
their Religion were prophesied of by Daniel many years before, had power to
do, yea and did greater things in appearance (of which you may read in the
second book of the story of the Ma^cabees, chap. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.) then the
defacing of the Scriptures and the Religion of the Jews; upon which
notwithstanding his heart was as much set as any other design whatsoever.
Afterward the heathen Emperors of Rome, who were Lords in a manner, of the
whole world, as one of their own Prophets said, Romanae spacium est urbis, and
orbis id^m; i. the City of Rome (meaning in her dominion) and the world, are of
one and the same compass and extent; were known enemies to the Scriptures, to
the doctrine and Religion of Christ, and fell on persecuting, especially some
of them, as if they had been resolved to leave neither root, nor branch, nor so
much as any mention or memorial, of Christ, or Christian Religion in the
world. I pass by the mention of all those Kings, and Nations, who have been
(...) to the Scriptures, and the doctrine thereof, since the time of these
Roman Emperors (though in simple consideration, many of them were very
considerable in power) because they were yet far inferior in this kind to
those others. Thus then you see (in the first place) that the enemies of the
Scriptures, whether devils or men, have allwaies had a great and formidable
arm of flesh, strength and power of hand in abundance; so that the difference
in this kind, between them, and the Scriptures, has been like that which was
(at least, was apprehended) between the old inhabitants of the land of Canaan,
and the Israelites; the one were as giants, the other as grasshoppers, in
comparison of them. And yet as these grasshoppers, overthrew those giants; so
have the Scriptures, which have been but as grasshoppers in comparison of their
enemies, from first to last, had the better of them; and may say with the
Church of God, in the like case (speaking of her enemies) Psalm. 20. They are
brought Psalm. 20 8.
down and fallen; but we are risen and stand upright. The Scriptures never
stood so strong and upright in the world, in respect of outward strength to
support them, as they do at this day; whereas their enemies fall before them
daily.

2. The enemies of the Scriptures, as they have been armed with strength of
hand to work their ruin in that kind; so have they been furnished with
another strength too, every whit as proper, as advantageous, and as likely to
prosper in an attempt against a doctrine, an opinion, a Religion, as that other
kind of strength is; I mean, with wit, subtilty, parts, gifts, endowments, as
of eloquence, knowledge of arts and sciences, etc. It was said of one of the
Grecian orators ( Carneades by name, as I remember) that he never pleaded any
cause but that he carried it. My brethren, parts of wit, eloquence and
knowledge, as they may be raised, and as they are found in some, what is it
(almost) in that kind we speak of, but they are able to do? The Heathen
Orator spoke (doubtless) out of experience in part, as well as out of
judgment, when he said, that there was nihil tam dictu incredibile, quod
dicando non fiat probabile; i. that there was nothing so incredible in the bare
speaking of it, but that may be made very probable by pleading and anguing for
it. And it is (in many cases at least) as true on the other hand; that there is
nothing so credible, or like unto truth, in the bare affirming or proposal,
but may be so disfigured by reasonings and arguments brought against it, that
it may be made to look like a palpable error. Especially this incrustation or
palliation of truths and errors by strength of parts, as of wit, eloquence,
etc. is most likely to do execution upon, and to beguile persons of lower
parts, and weak understandings; and most of all, if they be single, and
plain-hearted withal. Now then this is that which I say; that men of the
greatest abilities, and natural parts and endowments, for wit, learning,
eloquence, etc. have been opposers of the Gospel (which indeed is the sum and
substance of the Scriptures) and have labored with all their strength and
might to overthrow the goings of it in the world; and on the other hand, those
that have believed it, and stood up to plead the cause of it, have (for the
most part) been persons of inferior gifts and parts, and such as were little
raised or helped by education; and withal persons of plain, open, and single
spirits. The Scriptures themselves give testimony of both these; and the
testimony of other writers do in this fully accord with them. For ye see your
calling brethren, how that not many 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28.
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: But God
has chosen the foolish things of the world to verse. 20. Act. 17. 18. Colos. 2.
8.
confound the wise, etc. See the other Scriptures in the margent.

For the testimony of other authors; it is well known to those that are
acquainted with the Church story, and the writings of Justine Martyr,
Tertullian, Lactantius, and others, that Porphyrie a great Philosopher, an
acute and subtle man, with Lucian, Libainus, and many others not much
inferior to them, were professed enemies to the Scriptures, and to the whole
doctrine of Christian Religion; and sought with all their heart, and with all
their soul, with all their might, and with all their strength, to lay wast the
honor, interest, and authority of the Scriptures, and to make the doctrine of
Christian Religion an abhorring unto the world; a loathing to the souls and
consciences of men. And yet we see that God has carried these Scriptures and
the Religion we speak of through this fire and water also, without suffering
either the flames to kindle on them, or the floods to drown them; and their
feet now stand in a wealthy place, they are in as much, or more honor, and
acceptance in the world, then ever; yea and this without any diminution of
their substance, without any impairment or violation of any sentence therein
(as we shall have occasion to show afterward) So that as it is said of those
three servants of God, whom Nebuchadnezzar caused to be cast into the midst of
an hot fiery furnace, because they would not worship his golden image, that
though they had been in the fire, yet there was not so much as an hair of their
head burnt, nor their garments singed, nor any smell of fire upon them; so may
it be said of the Scriptures, though they have been cast by Satan into the
midst of so many fiery oppositions and contestations of men in all ages, yet
have not these oppositions or contestations, had the least power over them;
there is not the least hair of their head fallen to the ground by means of
them. Are not these then the Scriptures of God? And as a father pleaded the
cause of this relation of his, to one that doubted it, by this argument, Et
patrio pater esse metu probor, I am sufficiently proved to be thy father, by
that fatherly care or fear I have of thee: In like manner, Gods fatherly care
to preserve the Scriptures in the midst of all dangers and enemies, is a
demonstration of his fatherly relation to them. Especially, if we shall
consider how many books and writings besides, which have been the darlings of
the world, and which have had no enemies, no opposers (at least none
considerable) are yet perished out of the world, scarce so much remaining of
many of them, as there did of Jezebel, when there was nothing of her to be
found, but only her skull and feet, and the palms of her hands (2 King 9 35.)
and that within a less compass of time, then the Scriptures have continued,
at least since the first edition of them by Moses into the world? To mention
only those writings or books of Solomon (mentioned, 1 King. 4. 33. compared
with chap. 11. 41.) wherein he wrote (doubtless) a more complete story of
nature, and natural things, then ever was written either before or since, even
from the cedar in Lebanon, to the hysop that springs out of the wall; as
likewise concerning beasts and fouls, and creeping things, and fishes; these
writings I say of his, though they had no exemie, none to oppose them (nor was
there any pretense or color for any to be enemies unto them) nay in reason it
cannot be thought, but that men generally made great treasure of them, and
highly valued them; yet these long ago, for may generations by past, have seen
corruption, and are as if they had not been: whereas those writings of his,
which by the providence and spirit of God, were imbodied with the Scriptures,
as the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Canticles, though they have had enemies
in abundance, and have been opposed in all the oppositions, which the rest of
the Scriptures have been opposed withal, yet they live; yea they are like unto
those that are planted in the house of the Lord, they bring forth fruit in
their old age, they are fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92. 13, 14. But

4. Suppose the Scriptures should have had never so many enemies, and these
never so inveterate, and full of wrath and malice; yea and never so completely
furnished and armed with strength and power in every kind to execute their
wrath upon them; yet if they never had had an opportunity to have acted, or
made use of their power in this kind, if the Scriptures had never come in
their way, or where they had to do, upon such terms, as that there was a
likelihood they might have ^rushed them, and made them sure from lifting up
their head any more in the world; the preservation of them in the world, would
be nothing so pregnant and lively a testimony of a special interposall by God
on their behalf; and consequently no such eviction, that he himself is the
author and father of them. But if it can appear, that these enemies of theirs
have had that opportunity we speak of from time to time, so that in all outward
appearance, they have been as much in their hand and power, as John the Baptist
was in the power of his enemies when they did to him, even what they listed; or
as the Lord Christ himself was in the hand of his, when they put him to death;
their preservation upon such terms as these, cannot reasonably be looked upon,
but as a consideration teaching with authority their descent from God, and
relation to him, as a father.

First then, it is to be considered (in the general) that look at what
advantage the enemies of the Scriptures we speak of, have at any time had the
Church and people of God, who have been at all times the only keepers of this
treasure, at the same advantage they have had the treasure it self (I mean, the
Scriptures) so that what opportunity they have had at any time to destroy and
root out the one from the earth, the like they had to destroy the other also.
The Church of God is 2 Timothy 3. 15.
said to be, the pillar and ground, or settlement ((...)) of truth, or of the
truth; meaning, of the Scriptures, or word of God, which by the Lord Christ
himself, is affirmed to be the truth: Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word
is the truth. Joh. 17. 17.
Now the Church of God is said, 1. to be the pillar of truth, because they are
that body and society of men in the world, which hold forth that writing or
book (I mean, the Scriptures) wherein the great truth of heaven, and of God, is
contained. The expression (doubtless) is borrowed, from the manner and custom
of those times; which it seems by the records of history more ancient then
they, was received by them, and continued, from the first times and ages of the
world, before books made of paper, parchment, or any such kind of material,
were invented or known. In these times (say some) it was the manner of those
that were learned, and had knowledge of things any ways secret, and yet worthy
to be known, to ingrave them in great pillars, or monuments built for that
purpose, either of brick or stone, that so they might be for the use of the
present, and likewise preserved for the benefit of posterity in future
generations. But whether this custom of writing in or upon pillars, were either
so ancient, as is pretended, or ever in use at all; certain it is (and there is
frequent and clear mention of it in authors of best credit) that it was an
usual custom in Rome, about the times of the Apostle Paul, for those that
were desirous to publish any thing by way of writing unto the world, to fasten
or set up their books upon pillars in public places, for people to read; much
after the same manner, as we see bills, and writings, and titles of books,
pasted upon pillars in the Exchange. Now look what office or service those
pillars did, to those authors, who set up their books or writings upon them,
or to the books themselves; which was to hold forth the contents of such
writings unto public and open view; the same does the Church of God, unto God
himself, and to his book, or writing, which he has put therein (the
Scriptures) it holds forth the Doctrine, and all the truth, and truths
contained in this book, unto the world. Again, 2. This Church of God is called
(...), the ground, firmament, or firm* settlement, or seat of the truth;
because God has not only appointed it, to hold forth the Scriptures unto the
world, after the manner of a Pillar, which in time may decay, and become
ruinous; and then whatsoever depends upon it for public representation, is
from thenceforth disappointed in that kind; but has made it a pillar, in the
nature of a foundation; which usually is the strongest part of the building,
and remains, when all the building besides is ruined: he has made it as a firm
and grounded seat for the Scriptures, or the truth (as it were) to sit and rest
upon for ever. So that now there being, by the will and appointment of God (as
you see) such an absolute dependence between the Scriptures and the Church of
God in the world, that these cannot be held forth unto the world, but by it;
nor yet have any place of abode, or being in the world, but in it; evident it
is, that look at what advantage the enemies of the Church, or of the
Scriptures, have had the Church it self at any time, what opportunities they
have had at any time, to make havoc, and utter desolation of this; the same
advantages, the same opportunity they have had to make the Scriptures a
desolation also. Now it is (I presume) a thing generally known unto us all (and
so we shall not need to spend time in proof of it) that that company, or
fellowship of persons in the world, which are the Church of God, have been from
time to time (yea perpetually almost and without any lucidum intervallum,
without any interim at all of any better posture or condition) obnoxious, in
outward appearance, to the wrath, rage and power of her enemies; and no ways
able to have made resistance, or to have defended her self, in case they had
come forth against her, and assaulted her, with all that strength and power
which they might easily have levied and raised up in the world against her. It
is true, the Church of God has had some critical days and hours, wherein
for one moment, she has been in greater danger then ordinary, of being ruined
and swallowed up at once; and immediately after, upon a miraculous deliverance
or escape from the danger, has been upon terms of more security and safety
then ordinary; but let her case and condition even in her greatest glory of
outward strength, be diligently considered; and there will scarce be found at
any time, any more distance (in appearance) then a step, between her soul, and
death, between her present standing, and falling in the world.

But more particularly (in the second place) Satan, and the rest of the enemies
of the Scriptures have had them at a greater advantage to suppress them, and
to cause them to cease from the world at once, at some times, then at others.
It seems that in the days of King Josiah, there was but one copy 2 King. 2^.
8.
or transcript, if not of the whole body of the Scriptures, which then were,
yet of the principal and most material part of it (I mean, of the law, and
all the writings of Moses) and this (as appears by circumstances in the story)
very likely 2 Chronicles. 34. 14.
to have been quite lost, and never seen more. For first, if there had been any
more copies of this part of the Scripture we speak of, then that, which was
casually found by Hilkiah the Priest in the temple; it is not like, but a King
so zealously and piously given as Josiah was, would by one means or other have
furnished himself with one: especially the injunction of God upon the Kings
being so express and strict as is to be seen, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. And secondly,
the deportment of the King Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.
upon hearing the book read, being so extraordinarily affected, and afflicted
in mind about it, as to rend his clothes, and weep, with some other
expressions, clearly show, that the very contents of the book were strange, and
before this, unknown to him. Thirdly, the carriage of the Priest, who is said
to have found the book, in sending it as a choice present, by the hand of such
a messenger as Shaphan (a chief officer of state) was, evinceth the same thing;
viz. that it was a rarity indeed, and that there were no more copies or
transcripts of this writing. Fourthly (and lastly) by the strangeness of the
contents of the book (as they appeared both to the Priest himself, the Scribe
that carried it to the King, and the King that heard it read) it seems that
there had been no copy of it extant for a long time before, and that the
tenor, substance, and contents of it, were matters altogether unknown, not to
the generality of the people only, but eve^ to the Priests themselves, upon
whose lips it lay (in special manner) to preserve knowledge; yea and to the
king also. It is conceived by some, that it was purposely conveyed out of the
way, and intended to have been buried in perpetual darkness, by some
idolatrous King or other, some Priest, one or more, being of the same accursed
counsel, and complying with him therein; that so it might have been suppressed
for ever. So that during all the time, that the book we spoke of, was lost, and
laid up in the chambers of darkness, Satan (at least) had an opportunity to
have avenged himself of it, had not his hand been restrained and held back by
one stronger then himself. And if that conjecture of some which we spoke of, be
true (and there is much probability in it) that the book of the law was hidden
by some idolatrous King or Priest, or both, in some uncouth and obscure hole in
the wall of the Temple, with an intention, that it should there have perished,
and never been found more; the providence of God is so much the more remarkable
in and about the preservation of it; as it was in permitting Satan to smite Job
with a very Job. 2. 6
noisome and grievous disease, yet without suffering him to touch his life. For
if the mighty hand of God had not overruled those, whoever they were, that hid
the book of the law, with an intent wholly to suppress, or to destroy it, and
to have it never more seen; they might in reason, as well have secretly burnt
it with fire, or cut it in pieces with a penknife, or the like, and so have
made sure that it should never have come to light, nor been seen more, as to
throw it into a by hole, where, though it were not very probable that it would,
yet very possible it was, that it might, be found before it was consumed. When
the City Jerusalem was sacked, and burnt with fire, and 2 Chronicles* 36. 19.
the Temple it self burnt likewise, defaced, made little other then a ruinous
heap, and so all the while, during the seventy years captivity, there was a
large opportunity before the God of this world, to have bound up the Scriptures
in the same bundle of common calamity and destruction with the City, house, and
people of God; had not the God of heaven put his hook in his nose, and said
unto him, destroy them not. Again, in the days of Diocletian the Emperor, who
set on foot the last and most grievous of the ten primitive persecutions (as
they are commonly called) about the year of Christ, 302. there being this edict
set forth amongst many others, for the rooting out of Christianity from the
earth; to injoin all Christians that had Bibles, or books of Christianity,
under pain of most grievous torments, to deliver them into the hands of those,
that were sent about by the Emperor to gather them, to be burnt with fire;
there was an opportunity for Satan and his agents, to have put an end and
period to the reign, yea or being, of the Scriptures in the world: Especially
considering, 1. that the number of Bibles, copies of them being then far more
chargeable, and harder to be gotten, then now, by reason they were then all
written (which was very costly, in comparison of Printing) could not be
proportionably so many to the number of Christians, as now they are; partly
also, that many of those Christians, who had Bibles, through the weakness of
their faith, and for fear of the torments threatened, did deliver them into the
hand of the inquisitours to be burnt (for which they were in after ^imes,
branded by Christians with the disgraceful name of Traditores, i. traitors, or
deliverers) which yielding in some, was of very dangerous consequence, to have
weakened the hand of others also, and so to have caused an utter surrender, or
delivering up of all the copies of the Bible in the world, to have been burnt
with fire. But God, as it appears at this day, watched over this book (the
Scriptures) in this dangerous exigent; and would not fell them into the hand of
the enemy, at any rate; but strengthened the hearts and hands of some in the
very face and p^esence of the fiery rage of the Emperor, and torments
threatened, to value the lives of their books above their own. For the doctrine
of Christianity (more properly so called) and the books of the new Testament,
what an opportunity had that great enemy of God and good men, with his
instruments, either to have prevented their rising up, and coming forth into
the world, when the Apostles and Evangelists, who were the penmen and
publishers of them, were so inconsiderable, both for their number, and quality
also, or power in the world, and might in reason, and according to the course
of other things, have easily been taken out of the way, before they had been
delivered of those writings; or else, to have prevented (at least) their
continuance, and propagating in the world, by laying out, and making search for
them, when the copies extant were yet but few. These opportunities, and some
others (possibly) like unto these, the enemies of the Scriptures have had for a
total suppression, or quenching of the light of them in the world. Several
other opportunities also they have had, for the adulterating and corrupting of
them, for the mangling and maiming of them; more especially these two: The
first, all the while the Christian world lay under a deluge or inundation of
Arrianisme; the latter, when it lay under the like inundation and overspreading
of Antichristian apostasy, and idolatry; which was lower down toward these
present times, and not many generations past. Under both these estates or
conditions of the Christian world, Satan had a marveilous advantage, to have
procured a depravation of the Scriptures, at least in those places and
passages, which rise up with greatest evidence and strength against those
errors, wherewith the whole body (in a manner) of Christian profession, was
now infected. What might not the faction of Arrius, being so numerous and
potent, having not only the generality of ordinary Christians, but the nobility
and great persons in the Empire, yea the Emperors themselves for their
abettours, have done, to deprave and falsify all such places, which plainly
hold forth the Divinity, or Godhead of Christ? In like manner, when Antichrist
and his apostatizing party had all the Christian world (in a manner) both
Princes and people wondering after them, and by this means had the sole
interest in correcting and setting forth all the new impressions of the
Scriptures from time to time, what might not they in all likelihood have done,
to have compelled the Scriptures to speak plainly for the Religion of Rome,
which now they oppose with cleerest evidence and demonstration? But we see,
that God by a mighty providence, and by a strange overruling of their spirits,
has not suffered the Scriptures to feel so much as the weight of the little
finger of either of them, in this kind.

5. (And lastly) Suppose the Scriptures shall have had never so many enemies;
and these never so full of wrath and envy against them; yea, and armed withal
manner of power to have wrought their ruin; yea further, that they had had
opportunities from time to time to have effected their ruin; yet if they had
been negligent and slept away their opportunities, and done nothing at any time
to effect it, the preservation and protection of them had not been altogether
of that wonderful consideration, which now it is; considering, that some of
these opportunities have been improved by a very high hand, and with much
diligence and vigor, to such an end. And for those, which such persons as we
speak of, have overseen waking, or else have hoped to carry on their design
against the truth, without attempting any thing by way of alteration, or
depravation of the letter of the Scriptures, the divine interposall is as
evident in either of these, as it could have been, in causing the highest
attempts in this kind to miscarry.

But that several things have been upon advantage and opportunity, attempted
with the deepest engagement of heart and hand from time to time, either
directly or indirectly against the Scriptures by the enemies thereof, to
overthrow them, is evident by what has been already said. Pharaoh drove as
furiously as Jehu, after the Church of God, to overtake and destroy them (and
consequently, the Scriptures with them) when he had them in a body together in
the wilderness, until the wheels of his chariots were miraculously taken off
by the hand of heaven; and then he slaked his pace, and (as the text says)
drove heavily. They that hid the book of the law in the Temple wall, hoping it
would never have been found there, did that which was probable enough to have
deprived the world of all further use of, or benefit by, it. But he that draws
light out of darkness, loosed the bands of that darkness, wherewith this
treasure of light was bound for a time, and raised it, and the world it self
together with it, from death unto life. Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, which
signifies the illustrious, or famous, whom others (with more agreeableness to
his spirit and practices, and with no great variation in the sound) called
Epimanes, i. the furious, or mad; of whom Daniel prophesies, both in his
eighth, and eleventh D^n. chapter 8 and 9.
chapters; in the former ( verse. 23.) calling him a King of fierce countenance;
in the latter, saying that his heart should be against the holy covenant, and
that he should have indignation against the holy covenant (verse. 30.) meaning,
against the law of God, the Scriptures which then were amongst the Jews; this
Antiochus (I say) did prosecute his indignation and hatred against the holy
covenant, with all extremity; and came suddenly upon the City Jerusalem, being
newly shaken, and much weakened with the factions and cruel doings of some of
her malignant citizens and Priests within her, and by a violent storm took it,
and made a most miserable slaughter, of persons of all sorts, men, women, and
children; and in special manner, by threatening and inflicting most barbarous
and cruel torments, sought the ruin and subversion of their law; as you may
read more at large in the story of the Maccabees, in the 5, 6, 7, and 8.
chapters of the second book of that history. And so the Emperor Diocletian (of
whom we spoke before) after the poor Christians, with their Religion, had been
grievously persecuted, oppressed, and wasted by nine several persecutions in
the days of his predecessors, he with a full resolution to root out
Christians and Christianity, with the very remembrance and memorial of them
(if it were possible) from under the heavens, meaning (as it seems) to do that
by wholesale, which the former Emperors attempted to do by retail; advances
a persecution against both, with a far higher hand of subtilty, cruelty, and
blood, then any of the former had been. The edicts which he commanded with
greatest severity to be put in execution against Christians and Christianity,
were these and such like: 1. ut diruerentur ecclesiae; that their meeting
places should be demolished and pulled down. 2. ut omnes Christianorum
Scripturae igni traderentur, i. that all the Scriptures, or writings which
Christians had concerning their Religion, should be delivered up to the fire.
3. Vt qui honores fuissent ad^pti, deponerentur, i. that all Christians who
were in any place of office, or honor, should be deposed, and put by them (the
copy or arch-type, as it seems, of one principal vein in the body of that
design, which lately discovered it self, to be set on foot and driven on;
against the faithful servants of God amongst us.) 5. Vt caeteri liberate
privarentur; that all others of them should be deprived, or debarred of their
liberty (another lineament of that deformed face we spoke of) 5. and lastly, ut
omnes ubique Ecclesiarum Praesides conijcerentur in vincula, i. that all the
heads or governors of Churches should be put in prison, and quibuscunque
adhibitis machinis, victimas idolis immolare cogerentur, i. and that they
should by all manner of means, both fair and foul, be compelled to offer
sacrifice unto his Idols. These, with some other such edicts as these, were put
in execution with that vigor, and success (at least as the Emperor himself
was persuaded to believe) that he thought his desire was now in his bosom; and
that he had eased himself, and the world, of the burden of Christianity for
ever. For by the merit of this worthy act, desiring to make himself famous unto
all posterity, he caused a monument or pillar to be erected with this
inscription: Diocletiano Caesari Augusto, superstitione Christi ubique deleta.
i. For Dioclesian the Emperor, having destroyed, or abolished the superstition
of Christ all over the world. Thus we see in part, not only what enemies the
Scriptures have still had, as well for multitudes, as for fierceness of wrath,
and greatness of power in every kind; not only what opportunities they have
had from time to time, to have made them as dust before the wind; wholly (I
mean) to have destroyed them; but also wha^ sore and dangerous attempts have
been made by them upon advantages and opportunities, again and again, to cause
them to cease for ever from the world. For besides those few particulars that
have been now mentioned; there have been a thousand machinations and politic
designs set on foot; not only the strongest hands, and longest arms, but also
the best wits, and subtilest heads, the profoundest learning, the most
plausible eloquence that the world could afford, have been engaged to the
uttermost line of their sphere, to outlaw the Scriptures, and leave them
neither place, nor being in the world. And yet we see that they stand; and are
as mighty, and as like to stand still in the world, as ever; all their enemies,
with all their counsels, imaginations, attempts and machinations against them,
from first to last, are fallen, and ready to fall before them: whereas many
other books and writings, which had no enemies, no opposition either from
devils, or men; nay which had friends in abundance, that loved them, and looked
after them; are wholly perished, and lost, their very memorial scarce
remaining. Do not these things, duly considered, speak plainly, and without
any Parable, that the Scriptures are the darlings of heaven, and the most high
the preserver of them? Were he not the father of them, would he have unbared
his arm from time to time (as we have heard) to deliver them?

But behold (in the second place) yet a further confirmation of the relation
asserted between God and them. The life and being of the Scriptures, have not
only been preserved, in the midst of all those deaths, that have been
threatened, and attempted against them; but there has not been so much as a
bone of them broken; neither has any limb, or member perished from of their
body, in all those sharp and fiery encounters, which they have sustained from
their enemies; I mean, there is no part, or parcel of them wanting, or that
has miscarried, to this day. It is true, that not only Bellarmine, and the
Papists more generally, but some of the ancient fathers, yea and some
Protestant and learned writers themselves, of later times, as Doctor Whitaker
by name, are of opinion, that diverse books, and parcels of writing, which were
sometimes part of the Canonical Scriptures, are wholly lost, and past
recovery; as (by name) the three thousand parables or proverbs of Solomon, and
a thousand five hundred sons (or as some read, five thousand songs) spoken of,
1 King. 4. 32. so the books of Nathan the Prophet, and of Gad the Seer,
mentioned, 2 Chr. 1 Kin^ 4, 32. 1 Cro. 29, 26. 2 Cro, 9, ^9.
29. 29. And again the Prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and the visions of
Iddo, or Addo the Seer, spoken of, 2 Chronicles. 9. So the (...)stle of Paul written
to the Laodiceans, mentioned, Col. 4. 16. (...)he place is commonly taken;
though here be no mention made of any Epistle written by him to Laodicea; but
only of one written from Laodicea) And there may possibly be the same
difficulty, or objection concerning some others.

But others again of the Ancients, as Origin and Austin by name, and the
greater part of our late learned writers, as Junius, Polanus and others,
conceive (and that doubtless according to the truth) that no book or piece of
writing, that ever was truly Canonical, i, that ever did belong either to the
old, or new Testament, as any part or member of either, was ever lost; but that
both these, as well the old as the new, and again, the new, as well as the old
Testament, are as whole, and as complete as ever. For

1. If any book or parcel of that writing, which was commended unto the Church
of God, for a rule of faith or manners, be lost, it must argue a strange
conspiracy of this whole Church in carlessenesse and negligence; and such as is
not lightly incident to this generation of men. It is true, some particular
Churches, and single persons, have rejected some parts of the Scriptures, now
generally acknowledged for Canonical; but the whole Church never has been
known to do any such thing. And besides, there is no reason to judge, nor can
it ever be proved, that any book or piece of writing, which ever, or at any
time was judged by the whole Church of God, to belong to the Scriptures, viz.
as part, either of the old or new Testament, and was afterward either doubted
of, or rejected by any particular Church, one, or more, is now lost, or
perished. As for the old Testament, against the entireness whereof the
arguments insisted upon, by way of objection, seem* to lie strongest; the zeal
which the Jewish nation have always, and do still at this very day, bear to
the ^^itings of Moses, and their Prophets, and other writings which they count
sacred (which are the very same with those which we call the Scriptures of the
old Testament) is known to be such, that there is very little ground to
imagine, that they have suffered any of them to be lost.

2. Neither do we read, that either Christ or his Apostles, who were wont to
reprove the Jews, and to tell them of the sins of their forefathers, ever so
much as intimated unto them any such sin, as either the defalcation, or
dismembring of the Scriptures, or the suffering of any part or parcel of them
to perish, or to be lost: which (doubtless) had been a sin most worthy rebuke,
had they been guilty of it. Nor is it credible that our Savior, and all his
Apostles would have kept silence of it, had they been justly chargeable with
it. Our Savior indeed charge the Scribes and Phariseees with transgressing
the commandments of God, by their tradition, yea to Mat. 15, 3. 6.
have made a special commandment of God of none effect by their tradition; and
again, that they were the children of those, who Mat. 23, 30, 31.
slew the Prophets: but he no where charge them, with being the children of
those, who destroyed, or slew the Prophecies themselves, or with abolishing the
letter or writing of any jot or tittle of the law, or of any the commandments
of God, which yet had been a far greater sin then the other, the flaying of
the Prophets. Nay he gives this testimony unto the Jews in general, that they
so far honored and regarded the Scriptures, that in them they hoped to have
eternal life. Doubtless, Joh 5, 39.
they that made such a treasure as this of them, would not be injurious to
them, in impairing them, nor yet negligent in preserving them. Yea God himself
by putting this nation and people in trust with his Oracles (which the Apostle
Paul affirms he did, and numbers it amongst the great and honorable
privileges of this nation; that they were so trusted by Romans 3, 2.
him) did judge them faithful in this kind, and meet for such a trust; as the
Apostle, speaking of himself, and of his being put into the Ministry of the
Gospel by Christ, who counted me faithful (says he) and put me into the
Ministry: So God counted the nation of the Jews faithful, as touching their
care 1. T^^. 1 ^^.
and custody of the Scriptures; and therefore trusted them with the keeping of
them. Yea their trustiness and faithfulness in this kind was such, that
Philo the Jew, an ancient, learned, and approved author of that Nation (though
he wrote in Greek) affirms, that from the going forth of the children of Israel
out of Egypt, till his days, which was above two thousand years, there was not
so much as a word changed or altered in the ^^w of the Hebrews: yea and adds
further, that there was not cry Jew, but would rather die a hundred times ^ver.
then suffer his (...) to be changed in the least: yea the care, or shall I say
the superstition, or Religious serupulosity of this people, was such, for the
preserving the divine Oracles committed unto them, from either maim, or
alteration, that some of them employed themselves to tell and take a perfect
account, how often every letter in the Alphabet was used in every book thereof.
So that (doubtless) there is nothing, neither jot, nor tittle, syllable or
letter of the Scriptures of the old Testament, that has miscarried.

3. That none of them, nor any part of them, was lost, or wanting in the
Apostles days, is evident from that of the Apostle Paul to Timothy; where he
does not only affirm, that the holy Scriptures, which Timothy had known from a
child, were able to make him wise unto salvation; but further, that they ware
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; and all this to such a degree, that the man of God (i. a
teacher or Minister of the Gospel) may 2 Timothy 3, 15.
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. So that if we shall
suppose, that any of the Scriptures were wanting, when the Apostle gave this
high testimony unto them, concerning their sufficiency, for all ends and
purposes, for which they were given or intended (at least in reference to the
state of the Church in these times) we must suppose withal, that those which
were wanting, were little better then superfluous; at least in respect of any
those great ends and purposes, for which they were given; which is little less
then blasphemous to conceive of the Oracles of God. So that there is no
question to be made, but that the body of the Scriptures was as whole and
entire in the Apostles days, as God himself had made it. And that it has been
impaired, or ^^aimed since the Apostles days, many of the Papists themselves,
who yet generally seek to make the Scriptures lame, that so they may make the
authority of their Church whole, have not (as is observed by some of our
learned Protestant Divines) as yet attempted to affirm. And Bellarmine himself,
having somewhere in his writings, affirmed, that it was certain that the
Epistle written to the Laodiceans, was certainly lost; in the first chapter of
a book which he wrote afterward, which he calls a recognition [i. a survey or
review] of his works, ^e acknowledges that it is uncertain whether such an
Epistle be lost, or indeed whether ever there was such an Epistle or no; and
cites Chrysostom, as making the matter uncertain; and besides weighing the
words in the original, from whence the conceit of such an Epistle first came,
he finds no ground for it in them. Only he affirms it Col 4
to be more certain, that an Epistle written by Paul to the Corinthians, is
lost. But 1. Suppose it shall be granted, that an Epistle written by Paul to
the Corinthians, is lost; yet it does not follow from hence, that any part of
the Scriptures, i. of those writings which God intended for the perpetual use
of his Church; or which were ever reckoned by the Church of God amongst the
Scriptures, is lost. For it is very possible, that neither all which the
Prophets wrote, nor whatsoever the Apostles wrote upon any occasion whatsoever,
might be Scripture (in either of these senses) no, nor yet of any more
inspiration from heaven, then those letters were, which David wrote to Joab,
and sent by Vriah; or then Peter's practice was, for which Paul reprooved him to
his face. Yet probable it is, that neither the one, nor the other of them (I
mean, neither Prophet, nor Apostle) wrote much, but what well became men of
that special interest in, and acquaintance with God, which was their crown;
but that whatsoever they wrote, was of equal authority, or by any order from
God, to be alike imbodied with, or molded into the Scriptures; has nothing at
all in it so much as to invite the belief of a considering man. But 2.
Chrysostem and the Greek expositours, understand that expression of the
Apostle, I wrote unto you (...), in an Epistle (as we read it) as if he said,
(...), in this 1. Cor. 5, 9.
Epistle; having a little before commanded them to cast out the incestuous
person from amongst them. Therefore

4. And lastly, concerning those books mentioned, in the old Testament, as the
book of the Prophet Nathan, of Gad the Seer, the Prophecy of Ahijah the
Shilonite, etc. There is no reasonable (much less any necessary) ground, to
judge any of them ever to have had the image or superscription of Scripture
authority upon them, unless (hapily) we shall judge concerning some of them
(as some judicious and learned men do) that they are, either in whole, or in
part, some of those books, which are yet extant, and generally acknowledged by
us, for genuine members of Scripture. As for example; some conceive, that by
the books of Nathan the Prophet, and Gad the Seer, is meant nothing else, but
such particulars concerning David and his affairs, which are inserted in the
books of Samuel, and of the Kings, and were drawn up in writing by those
Prophets, who had certain knowledge of the truth of them, as being contemporary
with David. Others think that the whole second book of Samuel, with part of the
first ( viz. from the beginning of chap. 25. where Samuels death is recorded)
as likewise the former book of the Kings, were penned by these two holy men,
Nathan, and Gad, and are therefore called, their books. But whether this be so,
or no, little question there is, but that whatsoever has at any time been
Scripture, is so still: and the perishing of other writings, holy and useful
in their generation, the Scriptures still remaining, clearly argues some such
difference between the one and the other, as the delivering of Christ from
under the power of death, or from seeing corruption, evinceth between him and
other holy men, who to this day remain in the bands and prison of death.

Thus then we see, that God has with an high hand of providence and care,
watched over the Scriptures, to keep them from that second kind of
destruction, or perishing we spoke of, viz. from being impaired or diminished
in respect of any member, or part of them.

We add (in the 3. place,) that the same God has with the like hand of
providence and care, kept them from that 3. kind of perishing (which we also
mentioned) viz. from being corrupted or depraved, that is, from any such
alteration or change in the words, whether by transposition, pointing, or
otherwise, whereby the native or proper sense of them should be impaired, or
cast out, or a sense that is spurious or unsound brought in, in the stead
thereof. What they spoke in the first day of their nativity, in the hour
wherein they came forth into the world, out of the womb of the wisdom and will
of God, the same things they speak at this day also. Paul indeed says, that
when he was a child, he spoke as a child: and that when he came to be a man, he
put away childish* things: meaning, that he now spoke and did like a man.
Certain 1. Cor. 13.
it is, that the Scriptures in their deepest infancy, spoke neither as
children, nor like men. but like God, and now they are grown to the maturity of
many generations, they have not put away their divine things; they do not
speak either like children, or like men. Look what treasures of wisdom and
knowledge they brought at first out of the bosom of God with them, the same
they present and hold forth unto the world at this day. God has suffered no
man to rob them of their silver, or to give them tin or dross in stead of
it. The words they now speak, are the same spirit and life, which they spoke in
the beginning. It is true the holy God did not guide all the pen^ of the
Transcribers of the Scriptures, with the same heavenly infalliblenesse, with
which he guided the pens and tongues of his immediate secretaries, who took
and wrote them from his mouth. This appears from that variety and difference of
readings, which is found in some words, between copy and copy; which difference
of reading, proceeded either from the ignorance or negligence, or (perhaps)
from a worse principle sometimes in those, who were employed to transcribe
them. ^or as we have a common saying, that the greatest Clerks, are not
allwaies the wisest men; so neither are the best penmen (I mean in point of
fair writing,) allwaies either the best Clerks, or the most careful and
circumspect men; nor yet the freest from corruption. So that men of this
faculty being heretofore (as is most probable) chiefly employed in writing out
copies of the Scriptures, they might easily mistake, one in one word, or in one
place, and another in another, and so manuscripts, and copies came to differ
one from another in some things. But it is one thing for God to suffer some
written or printed copies of the Scriptures to err, and to miscarry here and
there; another, to suffer the import and sense of the Scriptures to be so
defaced in all copies whatsoever, that the error or mistake should be
irrecoverable, either past finding out, or healing, by men of diligence and
understanding. The sense and meaning of many places in Scriptures may be much
obscured, and be made intricate and hard by such and such expositours
commenting upon them. Yet this does not hinder, but that the true and clear
sense and meaning of these places may be attained by consulting with other
expositours upon the places; or by a diligent inquiring into, and comparing the
Scriptures themselves. In like manner, possibly the true and native sense of a
Scripture, may through a mistake, want, or redundancy of a word in a false copy,
be past finding out, in respect of any light which the place mistaken affords
thereunto; yet what by the help of other copies or readings, where there is no
such mistake, what by the series and carriage of the context, either before or
after the place, or both, and what by the diligent pondering and comparing
other Scriptures with it, the dead may be raised to life again; the sense (I
mean) of this Scripture, which (like men) was lost one way, may be restored and
saved by another. And in this sense only we desire to be understood, when we
affirm, that God has preserved the Scriptures, as well in the integrity and
truth of their sense and meaning; as of their parts and members. Nor can any
man reasonably here object and say, But how do I know, when copies, or readings
differ, which is the genuine and true, and which the false? If the difference
be material and weighty, the truth between them is so much the more easy to
be found. For as it is in the objects of the outward senses, look how much the
more any of them have deratione objecti, of that quality or property which
makes them the objects of such, or such a sense, so much the more easily they
are discerned; as the more visibility any thing has in it, it is so much the
more easy to be seen; and so in the rest: so is it also in the two objects of
the understanding, truth and errors (especially in matters of Religion.) The
greater, and more weighty any truth is, the more intelligiblenesse it has in
it (which is that that makes it the object of the understanding) and so is
more easily apprehended; and for the same reason, the greater or broader an
error is, it is so much the more readily discovered. If the difference be
light, and less considerable, though it may be so much the greater difficulty
to find on which hand the truth lies, yet it is so much the more like that
there is no simple or direct error asserted on either hand; but only that
there is an uncertainty of the true sense and meaning of the holy Ghost in that
particular place. Now in case God should preserve all and every the particular
truths contained in the Scriptures, that none of these be lost; though true
expositions and meanings of particular places should fail us never so much, or
be inaccessible to our understandings, yet God may be said to preserve the
Scriptures pure and incorrupted. Yea though many of the truths contained in the
Scriptures, were not (for the present) stirring, or on foot in all the world
(which I am very confident is the case of many of them at this day) yea and
though the true sense and meaning of many places in the Scriptures, were not
extant in all the world (which I believe to be as true, as the other) yet may
God be truly said to have preserved the Scriptures from corruption, in case the
letter of the Scripture be so preserved, that all the truths contained at
first, or at any time, in the Scriptures, may in a rational way, and without
miracle, be found and drawn out by men. And this is that which we have now
under assertion and consideration; viz. that God has watched with that tender
eye of providence over the letter of the Scriptures, that there was no truth
deducible from thence at the first coming of them into the world, but that by
an equal light of understanding, and conjunction with a like hand of
diligence, and a like measure of assistance from God, may be also deduced from
them at this day.

If you ask me, but how does this appear? I answer;

1. (As before) It is evident that in the days of our Savior on earth (as
likewise in the days of his Apostles after him) there had been no violence
offered to the Scriptures in that kind we speak of, there had been no
falsifying of the letter of them. He that had so much to do with the Scribes,
Pharisees, Sadduces, and expounders of the law (yea and with the rest of the
Jewish nation) who must needs have been the pollutours of the Scriptures, if
any thing in this kind had befallen them; and found so many corruptions and
sins amongst them otherwise, yea and remembered them again and again, of the
sins of their forefathers; doubtless would not have gratified such a sin
as this (forgery, or falsification in the records of heaven) with silence, if
they had been guilty of it. Nay he was so far from charging, either them, or
any others, with falsifying, or corrupting the Scriptures, that he sends them
to them, to seek for him there; professing, that they gave testimony unto him.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think Joh. 5. 39.
ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me. And the Apostle
Paul several years after this, called the Scriptures 2 Timothy 3.
holy, and (...), which though we read it, given by divine inspiration, yet it
relates rather to the present constitution and spirit of them, then to the
origination of them; And the place would be read thus, All Scripture, or, every
Scripture, is divinely inspired, full of the spirit of God: and besides this,
he commends them highly from those glorious effects and services, which they
were sitted and every ways furnished to produce, and do for the world.
Therefore certainly they were not profaned, or polluted then.

2. The Jews (as we heard before out of Philo) were so zealous above measure in
preserving the letter of their Scriptures, that there was none of them but
would rather die an Joh. 5.
hundred times over, then suffer that to be changed in the least. And since (as
the Scripture testifies of them) that they thought they had eternal life in
these Scriptures, hoped to be everlastingly blessed and made happy by them, it
cannot reasonably be imagined, but that they should be transcendently zealous
and resolved, even unto death, to maintain the truth and purity of them* Will a
man rob his God (says God himself by Mal. 3. 8.
his Prophet) so that till the days of Christ, and during the times of the
Apostles, there is no color to imagine, or suspect, that the Scriptures, which
then were, were any ways falsified or corrupted.

Let us come briefly to consider, whether there be any likelihood or ground of
fear, in the least, that they should be corrupted afterward, since the times
of Christ, and of the Apostles. And first, for the space of about four hundred
years next after Christ, till the times of Hierome and Augustine (who were
contemporaries for some part of their time) that the Scriptures had suffered no
disturbance or loss, in that kind we now speak of (I mean to the damage or
prejudice of the sense and meaning in any part, or place of them) you may
receive satisfaction from these substantial and grave authors themselves.
Hierom, writing upon the sixth of Isaiah, and taking Ergo siquis dix erit, post
adventum Christi, and praedicatio nem Apostolorum libros Ebrae os fuisse
falsatos, risum t^nere non potero, ut salvator, and Apostoli, and Evangelistae,
ita testimonia protulerint, sicut a Iudaeis falsandi erant Incredibile est,
Iulaeorum gent^m, tam long lateque diffusam, uno consilio conspirare potuisse
in conscribendo mendacio: and dum alijs invi deant authoritatem, sibi
abstulisse veritatem. Absit ut prudens quispiam, vel Iud^os cujuslibe^
perversitatis atque maliti^, tantum potuisse credat in codi cibus tam multis,
and tam long lateque dispersis.
occasion to observe, from a passage there often cited in the new Testament,
how that many testimonies alleged by our Savior and his Apostles, were found
in the old Testament without any variation or change, from hence reasons thus.
If any man shall say, that after the coming of Christ, and the Preaching of the
Apostles, the Hebrew books were falsified, I can hardly for bear laughter, that
our Savior, his Apostles, and the Evangelists, should so cite and produce
testimonies from the Scriptures, as the Jews were to falsify them afterward.
In which place he cites Origin also, making the same conceit, as ridiculous, as
he himself did. And Augustine in his fifteenth book, de civ. dei c. 13. argues
to the same point thus. It is not to be believed, that the nation of the Jews,
so far scattered and dispersed some from others, should conspire together in
the same design of writing a falsehood; or that envying the authority of the
Scriptures unto others, they should deprive themselves, and their posterities,
of the truth of them. And concludes: Far be it from any wise man to believe
or think, that any Jew, or Jews, though never so perverse, mischievous or
malicious, could have any such power over so many books, especially being so
scattered and dispersed in all parts of the world. The same reason (says
Vives, upon that place of Austin) holds good against those, who [at this day]
to make men believe that the truth of Religion cannot be drawn out of the
original fountain of the Scriptures [that so they may honor the Roman
translation the more] object either that the Scriptures of the old Testament
are falsified by the Jews, or the Scriptures of the new Testament, by the
Grecians. When the profession of Christianity was once scattered far and near
up and down the world from East to West, and North to South, and copies of the
Scriptures both old and new Testament dispersed accordingly, it was next to an
impossibility, that there should be an universal con^ent of all Christians,
that had copies of the Scriptures, to agree together, to have them all
falsified, and that alike, in the same places, and with the same
falsifications: and except this be supposed to have been done, the conclusion
which we are now laboring to establish, will stand strong, viz. that God has
by a great and gracious hand of providence, protected the Scriptures so, that
no jot or tittle of the native sense and import of them is perished, but that
it is in some transcript, or other to be found. We showed you before, how, when
copies or readings differ, that which is true and uncorrupted, may be discerned
from the others.

Besides, that the originalls of the old Testament (in which the substance of
the new is contained; as the substance of the old likewise, is comprehended in
the new) are extant in their genuine and native integrity at this day, there is
this argument full of proof and conviction. If so be the Jews shall be supposed
to have corrupted or falsified their Scriptures (the Scriptures of the old
Testament) it must in reason be supposed, that they have, either only, or
principally falsified them in such places and passages, where they most favor
and countenance Christian Religion, and seem to give testimony to Jesus the son
of the Virgin Mary, as the true and great Messiah, or the like; it cannot be
imagined, why, or to what purpose they should falsify them, but only to defeat
Christians, and the assertours of Christian Religion, of such weapons for the
defense of their Religion against them, which they have been wont to fetch out
of their armoury (I mean, their Scriptures, the old Testament.) But that they
have not falsified them in such places as these, is evident by this
consideration; because the Hebrew text, as it stands, and speaks at this
day, utters it self in some places more emphatically, with more vigor and
pregnancy of expression for Christian Religion, and for Jesus Christ's being the
Messiah, then either the Greek or Latin translations themselves do. Take one
brief instance in stead of more, Psalm. 2. where the Greek translation reads,
Take hold of instruction, or discipline, the Hebrew has it (as our English
translation presents it) Kiss the Son. Now this reading comports much better
with the faith and doctrine of Psalm. 2. 12.
Christians touching the Messiah, whom they believe to be the Son of God,
then that other reading of the Septuagint does. All which duly considered, that
conceit of some Papists, to entitle the authority of the Church of Rome to a
divine interest or right, that there should be a general confluence and
meeting of the Jews from all nations under heaven in the City of Tiberias,
about four hundred and fourscore years after Christ; and that there, out of
their hatred to Christians, and Christian Religion, they should combine and
agree together to falsify their Scriptures, etc. This conceit (I say) is
ridiculously weak, and has neither substance, nor color, of truth in it; and
has been confuted, hand and foot, rush and branch, by Protestant writers. Yea
there are not wanting among themselves, men of so much wisdom and ingenuity
together, as to disclaim all part and fellowship with that conceit, and to
assert an indubitable purity in the Hebrew text, any thing that ever was
attempted to corrupt it, notwithstanding. Yea that great, learned, and famous
man amongst them, Arias Montanus, looks upon that convention of the Jews at
Tiberias, not as many of his fellows look upon it, viz. as a meeting intended
for, and managed to, the corruption of the Hebrew Scriptures; but as a meeting
providentially disposed by God (and no otherwise either intended, or managed by
those themselves that met) for the preservation, and perpetual security of the
Hebrew fountains of Scripture from corruption. But

3. (And lastly) That there is nothing disturbed, nothing perverted, nothing
corrupted of the sense and import of the Scriptures, or (at most) nothing
considerable; this consideration is to me, instead of, and above, all other
demonstrations; that whereas all things contained, and at this day held forth
in the Scriptures (yea all things that can reasonably be imagined should be
contained in the Scriptures) relate unto one of these two things, faith, or
manners; those things which the Scriptures now hold forth and speak, either in
the one relation, or the other, are of that efficacious, satisfactory, divine
and heavenly importance, that whoever shall narrowly and impartially consider
hereof, will soon be lifted up by the spirit of his contemplation above all
suspicions or jealousies, that any creature, much less, any unworthy or wicked
man, or men, has had to do in the moulding, framing, ordering, or fashioning
of any thing there. There are, for matters of faith, and what is to be
believed, mysteries so transcendently glorious and beautiful, of such a
blessed aspect to take, please, satisfy, and ravish the hearts, and souls, and
consciences of men, that a due apprehension or right understanding of them,
cannot but deliver a man out of the hand of every surmise and fear, that man,
yea or any creature, should have been the contrivers of them A man may as well,
and with as much reason, and upon as good grounds, affirm, that some smith or
founder, took a great ball of iron, or brass, red hot, or flaming out of a
furnace, lifted it up with his arm, and put it into the heavens, and so made
the sun, as say or think, that a man had any thing to do in framing the
glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the image of God, even as now it is
represented, and appears in the Scriptures. And in case the world were as wise
as it should, and might be, by the means vouchsafed unto it by God for such a
purpose, he that should say, there is any thing of men in that mystery of
says, which the Gospel holds forth and shows unto the world, would render
himself a man of weakness, one of a thousand in ignorance and simplicity unto
it. And so for that other kind of material in the Scriptures, such things (I
mean) as relate to manners, and matter of life and conversation, these are
raised to that height and pitch of excellency and perfection, that it is not
lightly (indeed, not possibly) incident to the thoughts or apprehensions of
advised men, and thoroughly seen in all the particulars, once to imagine, that
such principles, rules, and precepts of action, should ever have proceeded from
a sinful man.

If any man desires to know when, or at what time, the several pieces or books
of Scripture came to be added to the rest of the body of them; though I do not
conceive the knowledge hereof would be much beneficial unto men, especially
considering that God himself has not thought the revealing of such a thing,
worthy his spirit, nor necessary to the perfecting of the Saints, and fitting
them for their glory; yet the best and the only way I know for men of this
desire to purchase satisfaction (the best that is to be had) is to consult with
chronologers, a principal part of whose work and undertaking is, to find out
and discover, when, and in what age or year of the world, men that have any
ways been famous, and amongst the rest, the ancient Prophets and penmen of
the Scriptures, Christ, and his Apostles, when they flourished, lived, and
died. It is most probable, that the men who received the several revelations
from God contained in the respective books of the Scriptures, did withal
receive special order and direction from him to set down in writing, what they
had by way of revelation communicated unto them, and withal, to present them
unto his Church, or the chief head and governor thereof, in his name, as a
further in largement of, or addition unto, those sacred records, which he had
purposed to make a perpetual and standing treasury of divine light and
knowledge for his Church, in all succeeding generations. And this also may
serve to resolve another question, which some may possibly ask, viz how, or
upon what ground, or by what authority, those books, which are now generally
received and looked upon as so many parts of the sacred Canon, or Scripture,
came to have part and fellowship in this honor, so many others, for ought is
known to the contrary, of equal worth, and possibly given by the same
inspiration, being laid aside, and not taken into this account. For though I
do not know any particular ground in the Scriptures themselves, on which to
frame a positive and direct answer to this question: yet 1. most probable it
is, that the persons whom God made choice of, to be his Secretaries and
penmen, to receive and put down in writing those sacred dictates of the holy
Ghost, which he intended for Scripture, had not only an order and command from
him, to tender in his name what they had written from his mouth in this kind,
unto his Church and people, as that which his will was should be added to his
book (which we call the Scriptures) but were further enabled by him, though not
always perhaps with a gift of working miracles, as Moses was, yet in one
kind, and by one means or other, to convince and give satisfaction unto the
Church of God, that God indeed had appeared unto them, and that what they did,
in offering unto them what they had written, to be accepted as part of the
divine Oracles, they did by special warrant and injunction from God. And 2.
that compleatnesse and entireness of the Scriptures, that same all sufficiency
in them for all holy ends and purposes whatsoever, which we formerly argued and
proved, is a rational and clear demonstration, 1. That those writings which
are now generally received and acknowledged in the name of the Scriptures, are
from God. 2. That there needs no further addition to be made unto them by any
other immediate or extraordinary revelation from God: and consequently (in the
third place) that if there were any other pieces of divine revelation, besides
those, which now being joined together make up the body, or volume of the
Scriptures, yet it was never any part of the will or pleasure of God, that any
of them should partake in this glory, with the other.

And thus I have done with the first demonstration, taken from amongst the
great and famous acts of the Providence of God, to prove that the Scriptures
are from God, viz. that strange and high hand of protection which he has held
over them throughout all generations, far above the rate of what he has done
in this kind, for any other book, or writing, or doctrine, in the world. I
have stood somewhat the longer upon the opening of it, because being duly
considered in the compass and extent, and all the particulars of it, I judge
it to be an argument of that potent conviction, that it cannot (lightly) but on
the one hand satisfy a conscience that is scrupulous, and on the other hand
scruple a conscience that is obdurate, and bent against the divine original of
the Scriptures.

My second demonstration propounded under the former head, was this; the high
hand of success, wherewith the Gospel, even in the infancy of it, and soon
after it first went forth into the world, was attended; the mighty and
marveilous prevailings of it, where ever it came, notwithstanding the many, and
great disadvantages, which it was to encounter, and overcome, before it could
conquer, or subdue the hearts or lives of men unto it. When one of the spies
that were sent to view the land of Canaan, represented it, and the inhabitants
of it as unconquerable, affirming, that the people were of great stature, and
many of them of the race of the giants, they but as grasshoppers in comparison
of them, their cities walled up unto heaven, etc. Caleb and Joshua, in the very
face of these great discouragements replied notwithstanding; fear ye not the
people of the land: for they are bread for us: and so they were; for Numb 14. 9.
the Israelites soon overcame them, and fed themselves with them,
notwithstanding the mighty arm of flesh which they had to defend themselves;
but in the mean season, this was a great argument and proof, that they had a
far stronger arm then their own to assist them. In like manner when the
Gospel went forth to conquer and subdue the world, all things in appearance,
threatened a miscarriage, and defeature of the attempt: the world looked big
upon the Gospel with contempt and scorn, saying to it (in effect) as the men of
Sodom said to Lot. This fellow is come alone as a stranger, and shall he judge
and Genesis ^9. ^.
rule? They made account, that they being many, and he but one, and that a
stranger, and so not likely to have any party among them, they should do well
enough with him, to keep him under, and not to suffer him to have his will, and
umpire amongst them: in like manner, the world, at the first coming in of the
Gospel unto it, looking upon it as a stranger, a new and a strange doctrine,
that had never been taught in the world before, and considering how solitary
and naked it was, destitute of friends and favorers, who were any ways
likely, either for their number, or for their quality, to promote, or protect
it; made none other account but they should easily bind the face of it in the
dust (as Job speaks) and stay the course, and stop the mouth of it presently.
But all this notwithstanding, though the oppositions against the Gospel, and
the unlikelyhoods of its success in the world, were of the race of Anak, and
like unto giants, and the hopes and means of it is prevailing but as grasshoppers
(in comparison) yet the world was but bread for it; all those strong and fiery
oppositions which rose up against it (in the Scripture phrase) it licked them
up as ox licketh up the grass, and made trophies and triumps of them. And was
not God now in the still voice of the Gospel, which though like Christ, it
neither strove, nor cried, nor did any man hear it lift up its voice in the
street, though it neither brake any bruised reed, nor quenched any smoking
flax, yet did the soft words of it break the bones of the world; it brought
forth judgment into victory, the little strength it had notwithstanding; it
brought forth judgment into victory. i. it Mat 12* 19, 20.
made the world at last to acknowledge the righteousness, equity and truth, of
that cause of God, which it pleaded and maintained; the true judgment whereof
was for a time, denied, opposed, and suppressed by the world; it triumphed over
the unjust judgment, and those unrighteous thoughts, wherein the world
rejoiced, and gloried against it for a season. And in this sense Christ himself
is said to bring forth judgment into victory. My brethren, whilst the sound of
these things is in your ears, do not your hearts begin to burn within you,
with a secret sense and acknowledgement, that doubtless this Gospel, and so
the Scriptures which hold it forth unto the world, are from God?

But to give your souls and consciences their fill in satisfaction (if it may
be) from the consideration and demonstration in hand; we will in somewhat a
more particular and distinct manner lay before you, 1. the great disadvantages
and unlikelyhoods of success, wherewith that great and glorious undertaking of
the Gospel (to subdue and subject the world unto it self) was threatened to be
made null, and laid in the dust. 2. How victoriously, yea triumphantly
notwithstanding the Gospel acquitted it self, swallowing up all impediments,
disadvantages, enmities, oppositions, unlikelihods of success, into victory.

For the first; there are four things (in the general) which seemed to
threaten the Gospel with being non-suted, in that great controversy which it
went forth to plead with the world; and to prophecy nothing of that high
undertaking, but only that it would be like the untimely fruit of a woman,
which never sees the light of the sun. The first was, the very tenor, frame
and composure of the Gospel it self. The second, the deep and desperate
opposition, or contrariety in the natures, hearts, and spirits of men against
it. The third, the weak and contemptible arm of flesh, which it had to assist
or promote it in the world. The fourth (and last) that strong and potent arm
of flesh, which was every where likely to be, and for the most part, was,
lifted up against it, and the proceedings of it, in the world.

For the first of these: The very frame and tenor of the Gospel, seemed to
prophecy that little but neglect, opposition, and scorn, did abide it, in
every place where it should come. Five things more especially there are in the
frame of the Gospel, which thus threatened: 1. The forenesse and grievousnesse
of many (and those the main and principal) commands, or injunctions of it. 2.
The great unlikelihood of truth or certainty in the promises, which should
balance those commands, and make the yoke of them any whit tolerable; the
unlikelihood I say of truth or certainty in these promises, according to what
flesh and blood is likely to judge in such a case. 3. The unlikelihood
(according to the same judgment) that those sore and terrible threatenings
should ever be put in execution, with which disobedience to the commands of the
Gospel, is charged and threatened. 4. Those frequent abasings and vilifications
wherein the Gospel ^tters and declares it self ever and anon, against the
excellent and honorable things (so called, and esteemed) in the world. 5. (And
lastly) those seeming contradictions in the Gospel, by reason whereof it seems
to make war against it self, and its own acceptance, with reasonable and
considering men. These particulars in the frame of the Gospel, seemed, to write
it childlesse, and a doctrine that was not like to prosper in the days
thereof. Let us weigh these particulars a little.

First, For the commands, and solemn injunctions of the Gospel, these are like
Paul's Epistles (as some represented them) fore and high; they require such
things, which are importunely unreasonable, in the sense of flesh and blood, to
be demanded of men: they require of men the one half, yea the whole of those
Kingdoms of ease, pleasures, honors, riches and injoiments in every kind,
which they have gotten (it may be) with the sweat of their brows, and are fully
possessed of in the world; they require of men to forsake houses, and lands,
fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, yea and their own lives too, to
expose themselves to the hatred, scorn, violence, contempt, and indignation of
the world. Now what extreme hard sayings are these to flesh and blood? was it
like that the delicate sons, and daughters of the pleasures and delights of
this world, would bear them? So again, we know they command the wisemen of the
world, and all those that are such in their own eyes, to become fools, and to
believe many strange and unheard of positions and conclusions, marveilously
improbable, yea incredible, till after much debate, consideration, and inquiry;
from which too the very face, and first appearance of the incrediblenesse of
the things, seem to discourage them; as to believe, that God was made man, was
born of a virgin, suffered those indignities of being reproached and reviled,
spitted on in the face, buffeted, scourged, crucified at last on a cross
between two notorious malefactors, as a greater malefactor then they, with
the like? The Gospel injoyning wise, sober, grave, learned, acute men, to
subject their judgments to such notions and opinions as these, seems to
command them out of their senses, wits, reasons, judgments, understandings,
and to leave them nothing of men in them. So again; when it commands them, that
when they are smitten on the one cheek, to turn the other also, when their coat
is taken from them, to suffer him that takes that, to take their cloak too; to
love their enemies, to forgive injuries, to pray for those that persecute them,
etc. they are apt to imagine, that it had as good (in plain terms) command them
to turn fools, or to imagine themselves stocks or stones. This then is one
ingredient in the composition of the Gospel, which seems so to imbitter it to
the taste of the world, that it would never be digested, nor down with men. And
yet we shall see that even such commands and injunctions as these,
notwithstanding the harshnesse, sournes, and offensivenes of them unto flesh
and blood, were taken down, and digested by many thousands in the world; yea
the Gospel ran and was glorified, these notwithstanding.

Secondly, Another ingredient in the frame of the Gospel, which was like to set
off the world at as great a distance as might be, from embracing it (especially
considered and compared with the former, the offensivenesse of the commands) is
the tenor and strain of the promises thereof, especially the great and main
promises; which are they that must balance, and weigh against the commands,
and heal the offensivenesse of these, if ever the Gospel be received by men.
These promises may very possibly seem in the eyes of carnal men, to be (in
Peter's phrase) but swelling words of vanity, and to have but little spirit or
life of truth, or certainty in them. As 1. That great promise of justification
in the sight of God, unto those that believe, upon which all the other promises
are made to depend; how is the truth of this encumbered and overshadowed with
such difficulties or objections, which in the eye of reason, exercised only in
the Theories, debates and disputes of natural things, and the things of this
world, are apt to make the promise it self, not so much a matter of doubtful
disputation, as of present rejection? For 1. That he that is a sinner, should
be made righteous, or innocent at all: or 2. that he that is known to be a
sinner, should be judged and pronounced righteous, or just, by a judge of
infinite justice, and impartiality: or 3. that one man should be made righteous
or just, by the doings or sufferings of another; or 4. that many thousands
should be made righteous or just, by the doings or sufferings of one; or 5.
that such a justification as this, which is obtained by the worth or merit of
the doings or sufferings of another; should be attended with such a glorious
and royal retinue of blessings, and favors, and great things from God, as to
be made his sons and daughters by adoption, to be freed from the vengeance of
eternal fire, which shall be poured out upon all the world besides, to be
raised from the dead, to have their vile bodies made excellently glorious, to
wear crowns, and to have Kingdoms given unto them (with the like) which are
things incredible enough in themselves, simply considered; and much more
incredible, when they are asserted to spring from such a root, as the
justification mentioned is: 6. That only faith, the alone belief of a saying
reported to come from the mouth of God, should interesse a man in such a
justification, which is attended with so many transcendencies of blessedness and
glory, as were mentioned, yea and many more (all which as we know, are
comprehended in the promise of justification, as it stands in the Gospel) all
these great and strange things (I say) standing round about the great promise
of justification in the Gospel, makes it seem rather (in the eye of the common
understandings of men) as some great King or person of honor represented on a
stage, then as a promise of soberness and truth. The promise of the
resurrection, seemed rather matter of laughter, then of consideration (much
less of belief) to Philosophers themselves; yea to those of the most strict
and serious sect amongst them (I mean the Stoiques Act. 17. 18. ^2. ^6. 8.
) yea the Sadduces also, a sect of men professing a knowledge more then
ordinary in things appertaining unto God, among the Jews, made little better
account of it Mat. 22. 23.
. And (that which is more then all this) some Christians and believers
themselves, who for a season had rejoiced under the belief of it, afterward
looking (as it seems) too narrowly with a carnal eye upon the improbability of
it, took a dislike of their own belief in this kind, and reversed it 1 Cor.
15. 12.
. The promise of having our vile bodies changed, and made like unto the
glorious body of Jesus Christ Philip. 3. ^1.
, weighs yet some grains more in an unlikelihood of performance, then that of
the resurrection. It were easy to give instance in many others, as obnoxious
to disparagement and contempt from natural men, as these.

A third particular in the very frame and temper of the Gospel, which might
seem in the eye of flesh and blood to prophecy little but rejection or
contempt unto it, on every side, instead of a prevailing upon, and over, the
world, was the nature of the threatenings, whereby it seeks to terrify all the
enemies thereof, and those that shall oppose, or reject it. It threatens such
with being cast into utter darkness, where there shall be weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth; with the worm that never dies, with fire that
is unquenchable, or, that never goes out, with a bottomless pit, etc. Now the
incrediblenesse of such threatenings as these, and the unlikelihood that ever
they should be put in execution, arises from two things: partly from the main
occasion or ground insisted upon in the Gospel, why they should be executed
upon men, why men should be so punished, as the threatenings import; partly also
from the nature, kind or quality of the threatenings or punishments themselves.
To begin with this latter; the nature or kind of these threatenings is such,
that to those, who are wont to judge according to appearance only (which is a
calamity very incident to flesh and blood) they seem rather like unto the
Poetical figments, of such punishments, as they appropriate to their grand
malefactors in hell; as to Sisyphus his stone, Tantalus his apples, Titius his
vulture, etc. which are reported and asserted by them, not so much to terrify
the consciences of men from evil, as to take the fancies of men with pleasure
and delight in the reading of them; I say the threatenings of the Gospel, to men
that are apt to judge according to appearance of things, are more like unto
such fables as Jer* 5. 11. 1^. Z^ph. 3. 5.
these, then unto any thing uttered by the mouth of the living God, or which is
any ways like ever to be really performed. Now there are three things more
particularly considerable, in, and about the nature, quality, or kind of the
Gospel threatenings, which with men (as was said) were like to make them of no
authority or effect. The first is, the greatness of them. Secondly, the
strangeness of them. Thirdly (and lastly) the proportion or agreement which
they have (though it be not much) with those poetical and figmentitious
punishments which we spoke of.

For the first, The punishments threatened in the Gospel, are so above measure
exceeding great and insupportable (in case they were executed) that men can
hardly believe, that God being so full of love and goodness and mercy (as men's
thoughts generally suggest him to be) should ever deal so severely with his
poor creature, the work of his own hands, as these threatenings import
(especially for so small an oversight, or miscarriage, as the non-belief, or
neglect of the Gospel, as we shall see presently.) It is a general rule, that,
Tarda solet magnis rebus inesse fides. -- Reports of great things in their
kind, are hard to be believed. And this is one thing which (as heretofore upon
occasion notice has been given unto you) that makes the promises of the Gospel
so hard to be believed; I mean the greatness of them. But reports of great
things to be done and inflicted by God, by way of judgment upon men, have
still found opposition and rejection, in way of unbelief, from men; yea and
this from men, who were the people of God, and had his Prophets and ordinances,
and the ministry of his word amongst them. See Jeremiah 5. 11. 12. 13. Zeph. 3.
5.

2. The threatenings, or the punishments threatened in the Gospel, are strange or
new, as well as great: and this being in conjunction with the other, is apt to
harden the hearts of men with unbelief against them so much the more. The worm
that never dies, and the fire that never goes out, and the pit that has no
bottom, etc. are new, and strange names of punishments unto men; and are more
like in the asserting or preaching of them, to please men's humors, in the
nature of news, or novelty; then to shake their consciences with fear of
enduring them.

3. (And lastly) that proportion or agreement, which these punishments
threatened in the Gospel have, or might seem to have, which those infernal
punishments, which the Poets generally asserted in their fabulous relations,
and which the world had been a long time accustomed to despise, save only for
mirth and vain delight sake (for the Poets themselves, when they were serious,
professed that they did not believe their own doctrines in this kind) this
agreement (I say) as little as it is or was, might well be a preparation, as it
were, unto the world, to despise the threatenings of the Gospel, when they shall
come amongst them. And (happily) Satan inspired his Prophets (the Poets) with
such notions of punishments in hell, as were mentioned, that so he might harden
the world (I mean the consciences of men) against the fear of those punishments
after this life, which the Gospel threatens against those that are the
despisers of it. For (as we have had both lately and heretofore, occasion to
observe) the devil secretly persuades, and teaches his instruments and agents
in the world, both to teach and do, such things, as Jesus Christ himself and
his members, and agents, have taught, and done; that so the world may be
pusled, as it were, and at a loss to distinguish and know the one from the
other, or otherwise be induced through the difficulty of discerning, to reject
both the one and the other. And Satan comes to a fair market indeed, if he ^an
but procure the things of Jesus Christ to be cast out of the minds, and cares,
and thoughts of men, though his own things be cast out with them. But the truth
is, that if the things of Jesus Christ be neglected, or cast off by men, though
some particular tenets, or practices of Satan may possibly be cast off with
them, yet the principal things of Satan are retained and owned: For that which
Satan mainly intends and drives at in all his temptations, suggestions and
insinuations with men, is to allure and draw them into a contempt, or neglect
of the things of Jesus Christ; and if he can but get a man's foot into this
snare of death, it troubles him not much though he abhors all other religions
besides; his maxim in this case is, that of tyrants; Pereant amici, dummudo
and una inimici pereant. So that Christian Religion, which is his enemy, may
but down; he cares not though all other Religions, all false and idolatrous
Religions in the world, which are his friends, should down with it. But this by
the way. Thus then ye see there are three things considerable in the very
tenor and frame of the Gospel threatenings, which rendered them very obnoxious
to contempt, and neglect from men.

Add hereunto (in the second place) the slenderness of the occasion (as it is
apt to seem in the eyes of flesh and blood) upon which the Gospel threatenings
(according to the constant assertion thereof) are to be put in execution upon
men; and this will seem to disable the authority and credit of them yet much
more. We know the Gospel makes the sin of unbelief, if not the only cause of
bringing the vengeance of eternal fire, and all the rest of the fearful
threatenings of the Gospel upon men, yet a very great and main cause hereof, yea
from place to place it makes it the cause sine qua non (as they call) the cause
without which, these threatenings shall not be executed upon any man, for any
other cause, or causes, reason, or reasons, sin, or sins, whatsoever. Now
that God, being so lovingly and graciously inclined unto his creature, as to be
ready to forgive him all the rest of his sins how many in number, how
grievous in nature soever; yea and not only this, but also to confer upon him
a crown of blessedness and glory, only upon condition that he believe the
Gospel; that such a God (I say) should for, or by reason of, the neglect of
such a small service as this, execute the vengeance of eternal fire upon his
creature, and make him everlastingly miserable, and that to the height and
extremity and what he is able to suffer or endure, in misery, is a saying not
like to find entertainment in the hearts or thoughts of men. Unbelief of the
Gospel, certainly was a new, and strange kind of sin to the world, when it
was first so called and asserted by the Ministers of the Gospel; it was a sin
which men had not heard of till then: Therefore to make this the great
condemning sin of the world; or any such provocation in the sight of God,
that because of it he should bring all men's other sins upon their heads in
everlasting torments and miseries, seems in the eyes of natural men, to be a
saying no ways worthy to be received, except it be with rebuke, and scorn.

Thus you see of how little credit or authority, the threatenings of the Gospel
were like to prove amongst those, to whom the Gospel was preached, when it
first went forth into the world. Now how great a disadvantage this was unto the
Gospel, to obtain that crown, which it ran for, which was belief, and
acceptance, and subjection from the world, may easily be conceived upon these
two considerations. First, because any part or passage in a relation, or
report, which men suspect in point of truth, is to them a ground of jealousy
that the whole is of little better constitution; and to be suspected also. The
Scripture proverb takes place in this case also: a little leven, leaveneth the
whole lump. If so be the threatenings in the Gospel, be, either in their nature,
or in respect of the occasion upon which the execution of them is asserted, or
upon what ground soever, of little or no authority or credit with men, they
must needs incumber and prejudice the authority of the Gospel in all other the
parts and carriages of it. Secondly, the threatenings wherewith the Gospel is
armed against all the despisers and neglecters of it, is one part, and that not
the least considerable, of that strength which it has, and claims to have,
whereby to make its way, and to awaken the consciences of men, to hearken unto
the promises of it, and to consider and to inquire after the truth of them.
Some talk much of legal preparations, and being humbled by the law; but the
Gospel has other manner of instruments or engines for the work of humiliation,
to shake the proud and secure hearts and consciences of men with fear and
trembling, then the law has any (as some years since upon occasion, we showed
more at large, in the hearing of some of you) The threatenings of the Gospel,
which are to follow in the rear of the great and precious promises thereof, and
to cause the despisers of them, through fear to face about, and to turn toward
them (if it may be) are upon true account, and in a spiritual eye, full of
efficacy and power that way; and consequently, must needs be (as has been
said) a very considerable part of that strength, whereby the Gospel was to
prevail, and to raise up a Kingdom for it self amongst men. It is the nature
and property of men yet unconverted unto God (yea and of those too that are
converted, in a great measure; as Austin long since observed) as to desire the
enjoyment of things which they apprehend good for them, so to desire an escape
from things they apprehend evil, much more. The fear which often seizes upon
men of suffering evil, is of a more forcible operation upon them, to engage
them upon a course of means to escape it, then the love or desire of a
proportionable positive good, is to act them sutably for the obtaining of it.
The reason whereof I conceive arises from the servile and base disposition
which is in men. Persons of a slavish, and servile condition, which condition
(commonly) soon transformeth the mind and spirit also into the same image (I
mean of slavishnesse and servility) being exercised and taken up with little,
but with fears of being punished, of what they may possibly suffer and endure,
if they follow not their work the better; and having small, or no hopes of
obtaining any positive good; hence it comes to pass, that desires of such good
as we speak of, are very faint and inefficacious in them; but desires of that
negative good we mentioned, keeping their backs from stripes, these are potent
and operative enough with them, in as much as they have hope by being diligent
at their work, to compass this. So is it with the generality of men,
especially whilst they are yet merely natural, and carnal; when they hear of
heaven, and the glory and great things of the world to come, on the one hand;
and of hell, and damnation, and the vengeance of eternal fire, on the other
hand; their fears of being damned in hell, do commonly prevent and fall to
work within them, before their hopes of being made glorious in heaven; yea it
is very observable, that even the greatest part of those, who do in some
measure believe (or at least seem to do so) manage their religious
engagements, and their course of devotions, more with an eye unto and out of a
strength of desire to escape hell, or to be saved from the wrath and vengeance
to come, then out of any strength of desire to lift up their heads with the
Saints, or to reign with Jesus Christ in glory for evermore. The jaylours first
question, Act. 16. 30.
being awakened, was, what he should do to be saved (Act. 16.) And those that
were pricked at the heart at Peter's Sermon, Act. 2. though they did not
express themselves altogether so far, yet the intent of their question
certainly was the same. Act. 2. 37.
Men and brethren what shall we do? etc. viz. to be saved from destruction,
and the wrathful hand of God; as in part appears by Peter's answer unto them.
So now the great labor and travail of the souls of poor Christians, the
perplexity and distress that often is upon their consciences and spirits, is
not formally or precisely through fear of loosing the great recompense of
reward, the glorious benefit and blessing of heaven; but through fear of
gaining the inestimable damage and misery of hell. This then is a second
considertion, wherein the Gospel was much disadvantaged (as men count
disadvantage) by the unlikelyhood of any reality or truth, in the threatenings
thereof; and so that which otherwise could not but have been one very
considerable instrument, or help to it, to magnify it self in the hearts and
consciences of men, was by this means much infeebled and disabled as to action
in that kind. Thirdly, and lastly, the unlikelihood of truth and certainty in
the threatenings of the Gospel, was in another respect very disadvantagious unto
it; at least in comparison of what an apparent, yea or probable truth in them,
would have been. For had the threatenings been such, that they might readily or
without much inquiry, have been believed; then would the promises also have
hereby gained a good degree to be believed too; and that not only upon this
ground, because cleernesse or probability of truth in one part of a relation,
somewhat countenanceth and eases the relation in such other parts of it, which
are suspicious and doubtful; but much more upon this (which the Gospel it self
lays as a foundation or corner stone of its own building) viz. that there is
no middle condition for men or women to be adjudged, or put into by God, for
eternity, but either the shame and torments of hell, or the everlasting
blessedness and glory of heaven. Now of the two, simply considered, it is much
more easy to believe, that God will not everlastingly torment his creature in
hell, then that he will everlastingly glorify it in heaven. So that the more
credible or easy to be believed, the Gospel threatenings concerning Gods
casting men into hell, there to endure torment for ever, for sin, are, by
virtue of the said principle, the promises of the Gospel concerning the
eternal salvation of men, must needs be so much the more easy to be believed
also.

4. The Gospel was much disadvantaged as to matter of acceptance or belief in
the world, from the frame of it, in regard of those frequent abasements, and
vilifications of all worldly excellencies that are found in it: it poures
contempt upon the head of the world, and all the glory of it; it throws down
all the mountains of earthly honor, riches, pleasures, wisdom, and of
whatsoever is called great under heaven, and fills up the valleys with them,
and makes all but a level or plain. It takes away all difference between Jew
and Grecian, between Gal. 3. 28.
bond and free, between male and female: and so between rich and poor,
honorable, and despised, etc. making all to be but one in Christ Jesus. The
meaning is, that it invests all those, without exception, who receive and
subject themselves unto it, in an estate or condition, so super-abundantly
glorious and blessed, that nothing, any ways relating or appertaining to their
present condition in the world, whether on the right hand, or on the left,
whether convenience, or inconvenience, privilege, or dis-priviledge, honor,
or dishonor, riches, or poverty, strength, or weakness, health, or sickness,
is any ways considerable, or much to be regarded, in comparison thereof. It is
only in the time of the night, when one star differs from 1 Cor. 15.
another in glory: when the sun arises in his might, he presently dissolveth
all those distinctions of first and second of fifth and sixth magnitudes between
them, swallowing them up as it were into victory by that abundance of light,
which he still brings with him into the world. In like manner, the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ brings that excess of blessedness and glory unto men,
which drowns all consideration and thoughts of such differences in their
outward estates and conditions, which before seemed to distinguish them into
mountains and moulhills, into men happy, and men miserable: even as the
vastness of the globe or body of the earth, causes the Mathematician (who yet
uses to be very exact and punctual in his demonstrations) not so much as to
mention, or take any notice, either of the highest mountains, or lowest
vallyes, in his account concerning the figure of it; but pronounces it
perfectly sphericall, or round, these nothwithstanding. Now Kings and Princes,
and the children of the greatness of this world, who (as the Scripture
speaks) make their nests amongst the stars, and please themselves with
their prerogative estates and conditions in the world, were not like to endure
any such doctrine or spirit which were ever and anon magnifying themselves
against their beloved interests, of greatness, pomp, and power in the world;
representing also their persons as miserable, as despicable, as the poorest of
men, unless they submitted themselves, and all their earthly glory to the
Scepter of Christ which was as the shadow of death to such men.

5. (And lastly) the Gospel in respect of the frame of it, was like to suffer
neglect, and rejection from the world, by reason of those seeming contrarieties
and cross passages, which at first hearing (especially) seem to thwart, and
fight one against another. We shall not need to instance in such passages as
these; we have done it formerly, once and again upon occasion; and once (I
remember) in the prosecution of the doctrine in hand. We shall now only in a
word lay before you what disadvantage the Gospel was (in reason) like to
sustain, in point of acceptance with the world, in respect of these civil
wars which it seemed to have in its own bowels, those passages (I mean) which
seem to rise up, and to destroy one the other. We have a common saying;
mendacem memorem esse oportet. i. A liar had need have a good memory, viz.
least he interfeer in his relation, and speak one thing which does not agree
with another, and so loses the credit, which he desires should be given to
it. For there is a genius or aptness in the nature of man, not to believe any
thing reported unto him by another, who is either unknown to him, or known to
be a loose speaker, unless he knows, at least apprehends, better reasons why
he should believe what is spoken by such an one, then only the credit or
opinion he has of the speaker. And yet much more backward and averse are men
from believing upon such terms, when they either know, or apprehend, reasons
why they should not believe. Now amongst all the reasons or grounds which a man
is likely to apprehend to hinder, or take him off from believing, what is
reported unto him, there is none generally more forcible or prevailing
(especially with considering and understanding men) then when that which is
reported, is found, or apprehended, to be inconsistent with it self. That of
Solomon, Eccles. 10. is well known: Eccles. 10. 1.
Dead flies causes the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking
savor: so does a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor.
In like manner though a relation or report, has many things in it worthy
consideration and acceptance, simply considered, yet if there be a little of
the folly we speak of, apprehended in it, any thing that is incongruous and
inconsistent with its fellows, it is enough to make the savor of the whole
relation to stink in the nostrills of apprehensive and considering men. How
much more apt and inclinable are men to take hold even with greediness, of the
least appearance of such an exception as this, to reject such a doctrine or
report, which otherwise it burdensome and offensive unto them, as the Gospel
generally is unto men, who are yet but natural and merely carnal? Thus then
we see under what disadvantages the Gospel went forth into the world, in
respect of the very frame and constitution of it (and that in sundry
particulars) and how unlikely it was, in regard of these, to find
intertainment or belief amongst men. This for the first of those four
disadvantages, which seemed (as was said) to threaten the Gospel with a
general repulse by the world, when it first went forth to subdue it.

The second was the deep and desperate opposition, or contrariety in the
natures, in the hearts and spirits of men against it. The laws, and the
precepts and injunctions of it, being all holy, spiritual, and heavenly; and
the frame of men's hearts, unclean, sensual, and earthly; there must needs be a
violent antipathy, a fierce contrariety in these against it; and so much the
more, because these holy, spiritual, and heavenly injunctions or laws of the
Gospel, are backed, seconded, and strengthened with those terrible penalties or
threatenings we spoke of, and that with authority. Men, who have a long time
Jer. 2. 24.
been like wild asses accustomed to the wilderness, and to snuff up the
wind at their pleasures, have walked (as the Apostle says) in the vanity of
their minds, and done little else all their days but fulfill the lusts of the
flesh; cannot endure to hear of a yoke of righteousness and true holiness, to
be put about their neck; much less, that for kicking at it, or casting it off,
they should be everlastingly tormented; such things as these are very swords to
them, which pass through their souls. He that does evil, our Savior says,
hates the light, neither Joh. 3. 20.
comes he to the light (nor willingly suffers the light to come to him)
least his deeds should be reproved. Certain it is, that men naturally do not
love to have either their deeds, or themselves reproved; 1. because they are
jealous of their credits, and reputations; and a reproof seems to carry some
dishonor and disparagement with it. And 2. men love to have a good opinion of
their ways and practices; otherwise their consciences would be troublesome
unto them. Now the proper tendency of a reproof, is to bring men out of love
with such ways and practices, for which they are reproved: and these being
such, which they are no ways willing to relinquish, the reproof of them must
needs be a secret wound, a soar and deep cut to them; and consequently, the
Gospel must needs be hatred in the highest unto those, that walk in such ways,
because it is the sharpest and sorest reprover of them under heaven. For it
both manifests and discovers the vileness, and guilt of sin to the
uttermost, far beyond any discovery that can be made by another means, or
light whatsoever; and then also threatens it with a punishment, which in
torment and grievousnesse to be endured, exceeds all punishments whatsoever, if
it be not repented of, and reformed. Which two ingredients must needs make a
reproof of the sharpest, and least sufferable constitution, that can be. That
contrariety in the hearts and spirits of men against the Gospel, which we now
speak of, the Scriptures and Gospel it self take full knowledge of. The Kings
of the earth set themselves, and the rulers Psalm. 2. ^, 3.
take counsel together against the Lord and against his anointed, saying; Let
us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. This
combination and league, wherein the Kings and rulers of the earth conspire
against God and Christ, proceeds from nothing else, but that deep antipathy, or
contrariety in their natures unto the Gospel; as clearly appears from the
latter verse of the two; Let us break their bands, and cast away, etc. They
were, the bands and the cords, i. the holy laws, and righteous precepts, the
directions and injunctions of the Gospel, wherewith God and his Christ, and in
his Christ, sought to bind them to their good behavior, and to make them
subjects unto heaven, that thus enraged them, and occasioned this consultatio
magna, this great and general consultation, not only to break them asunder,
i. (I conceive) by laws and edicts, and cruel threatenings to forbid the
preaching of the Gospel, and to suppress it, once, and again; but also to cast
them away from them; i. to make sure, if they knew how, never to be troubled
with it more; however this they attempted, by seeking to make havoc and
desolation of all that was called Christian upon the face of the earth, by most
barbarous and bloody persecutions.

Nor did this fierce opposition and contrariety to the Gospel, work only in the
breasts and spirits of Kings, and rulers of the earth; though here (it is like)
it was boiled up to the greatest height, and strength, and showed it self from
hence with the greatest terror, and pomp of indignation; but the spirit we
speak of, wrought effectually also in persons of lower rank and quality. They
were not Kings, but Citizens (for so they are called) who plainly said, we will
not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19. wherein they clearly expressed the
absolute Luke 19. 14.
contrariety in their natures to the Gospel, by which the Lord Christ seeks to
reign over the hearts, and souls, and consciences of men. So those that from
time to time beat the servants, which the Lord of the vineyard sent to receive
of the fruits Luke ^0. 10. Joh. 19. 15. Act. 15. 24.
thereof, and at last slew his son, when they had first cast him out of the
vineyard; were not Kings or Princes, but are called husbandmen. They that cried
out against the Lord Christ, away with him, away with him; crucify him (Joh.
19.) and so they that cried out against Paul, that i^ was not meet be should
live (Act. 25.) for preaching the doctrine of the Gospel, were no Kings, but a
mixed multitude of the Jews. So that evident it is, that not only persons of
some special rank or interest in the world, but men of all sorts and
conditions, even the whole world, rush and branch, head and tail, were full of
enmity against the Gospel. And if that of the Lord and Master be true, that he
that does evil (i. whosoever does evil) hates the light; and that of the
disciple true also, that the whole world Joh. 3. 1 John 5. 19.
lay in wickedness, or evil, when the Gospel went forth into the world; and
that common saying be partaker of truth with them both, that quem quisque odit,
perjisse expetit, whatsoever a man hates, he wishes the death or destruction of
it; it directly follows from all these, that the whole world, generally,
desired the ruin and downfall of the Gospel. Now under what greater
disadvantage is it (almost) imaginable that the Gospel should attempt the
conquest of the world, then this; to have no man (to speak of) a friend to it,
or that was willing to assist it, in this great enterprise; but to find the
whole world (in a manner) up in arms to oppose it, ready to destroy the life of
it? Never was there any enterprise undertaken by man upon the like terms of
disadvantage; and yet how gloriously did this undertaking prosper in the hand
of those to whom it was committed? A great part of the world in a short time
was taken, and led away in captivity by it.

The third (and most considerable) disadvantage, under which the Gospel
undertook the reducement of the world, was the slender and weak arm of flesh,
which it had to stand by it, and take part with it, to protect it against the
rage and fury of so many potent adversaries, as magnified themselves against it
(almost in every place) and to carry on the work of it in, the face of that
fiery and puissant opposition, which was made by the world from all the
quarters thereof. Who, or what were the men with whose assistance and help, the
Gospel undertook that great and glorious undertaking we so often mention, the
spiritual conquest of the world? What were their numbers? of what family,
descent, and blood? of what educations, accomplishments, or endowments, were
they? were they a numerous, and potent host, or army, that could bear down
whole nations and kingdoms before them, and by force of arms, give laws to what
state or people they pleased? and plant their doctrine by the terror of the
sword? No, they were at first but twelve men; and if they had been twelve times
twenty thousand (especially such as they were) what had this been for the
conquest of the world? Nor were prisons, or swords, or such like weapons and
engines of the flesh, chosen by them, or by any direction from them, for Church
officers, or for a lifeguard to the Gospel (though now they have this honor
cast upon them) nor was the favor of earthly Princes, or civil magistrates
coveted by the Apostles, either for the support of the honor and dignity of
their calling, or by way of advantage for the planting or propagating of the
Gospel, though they were no more in number, but twelve men. Well; but though
their number was inconsiderable, yet this (possibly) was recompensed by the
quality, or interest of their persons. These twelve (may be) were the sons, or
else of the house and lineage of those famous Kings and Princes, who were
adored by the world, as gods, having been their great benefactours, as of
Jupiter, Hercules, or the like: and by reason of their relation in blood to
such Progenitors, as these, the world might more willingly come in unto them,
and receive the doctrine and laws, that they should bring unto them, and desire
them to accept. No, they were the most of them (if not the whole number)
persons of mean and ordinary parentage, poor fishermen, unknown both they and
their parents, and progenitors unto the world; yea they were of that nation,
and family in the world, of which neither Jupiter, nor Mercury, nor Hercules,
nor any other of their gods, either great, or small, were ever reported to have
come. But it may be they were men of choice education and parts: they had some
rare accomplishments of learning, arts, sciences above other men; and so might
take the world by craft, or subtilty of devise; by magique charms,
incantations, delusions, or the like. Indeed Julian the Apostate said that
Peter and Paul were the most expert in magique of any that ever lived: and that
Christ wrote a special book of this profession, and dedicated it unto Peter and
Paul; and that by this means they enchanted the world. But alas! the Apostles,
were children of no such education or breed: they were so far from any
excellency or depth in any humane science, or learning, that their adversaries
themselves discovered them to be ignorant, Act. 4 13.
and unlearned men (in respect of any such learning.) They were brought up in
the trade and imploiment of fishing, several of them, all their days, till
they were called to be Apostles; yea after three years converse, and more, with
Christ himself, even till his death, notwithstanding those many rich and
blessed opportunities they had of gathering knowledge in abundance from his
lips, who was ever and anon speaking the words of eternal life unto them, yet
it appears by their questions and demands, that they had learned very little of
the mystery of the Gospel; yea by some expressions that came from them, it
might reasonably have been thought, that they had been utterly incapable of the
knowledge of it. That knowledge or learning, which they had afterward, of what
kind soever it was, the world neither knew whence it came, nor whether it
went, or was like to go. Thus then you see, the Gospel went forth in that
great expedition to subdue the world, under the greatest disadvantage that
lightly could be, in respect of any collateral help, or strength from men also.

Add hereunto (in the fourth and last place: for we shall pass by the fifth
particular mentioned, viz. the seeming contradictions in the Gospel, as having
spoke somewhat to these formerly in the point) the consideration of those
numerous and potent enemies in every kind, which every where bestirred
themselves, made head against the Gospel, to keep off the dint and stroke of it
from themselves, and all those, with whom they had to do; and then by means of
this, and the three former considerations, you will have an opportune standing
to behold the success of the Gospel in the glory of it, when it advanced first
out of Jerusalem, upon that most honorable and blessed design, to subdue the
folly and madness of the world, and to give laws of life an righteousness,
and true wisdom unto it. There were two sorts of enemies more particularly,
which as they were (more generally) fuller of enmity and of an hostile spirit
against the Gospel, then others, so had they opportunity above others to act
this enmity of theirs with greatest danger (at least, with greatest likelihood
of danger) to the Gospel, having indeed the generality of the world between
them at their command, easy to be drawn by them, to give their assistance unto
any thing, wherein by these men it should be desired. The first of these, were
Kings and Rulers of the earth, men armed with secular authority and power. The
latter, were Philosophers and orators, the wise and learned and eloquent men
of the world. We spoke somewhat of the former of these in another
consideration: now we are to look upon them, as persons rising up in their
might, and acting with an high hand in every place against the Gospel, to keep
it out of their respective dominions, and consequently out of the world. So
that as God upon the fall of man, set an Angel with a flaming sword, to keep
the world out of his Paradise; so do the world set many Angels, many Kings and
Princes, as it were, with flaming swords, to keep God himself (in his Gospel)
out of their Paradise, I mean their earthly kingdoms, and dominions. That which
David spoke long before by the spirit of Prophecy, concerning the Kings of the
earth setting themselves, and the rulers taking counsel together against the
Lord and against his anointed, was fulfilled, when the Lord Christ first set
out upon his white horse (the Gospel) to subdue and conquer the world. This the
Apostles themselves, took knowledge of, when they began but to publish and
preach the Gospel openly in the world. The powers of the earth were presently
up, as it were, in arms to oppose them in their way, taking it grievously (as
the text says) that they taught the people, and preached through Jesus Act. 4
2, 3.
the resurrection of the dead. Yea they presently laid hands on them, and put
them in hold, or in prison; and calling them before verse. 18.
their tribunal, they straightly commanded them that they should in no wise
speak or teach in the name of Jesus. Upon occasion whereof, the Apostles,
amongst other Christians, praising God for bringing them off with their lives
and liberties, mention that prophetical passage of David, which we spoke of.
And when they heard it (says the text, viz. in what danger Peter and John had
been, in regard of the high displeasure of Act. 4. ^4.
the council, and how God had brought them off) they lifted up their voices to
God with one accord, and said Lord -- who by the mouth of thy servant David
have said, why did the heathen rage etc. Again in the following chapter, the
chief Priests with their accomplices, were filled with indignation against the
Apostles for preaching the Gospel, that (as the text says) they took counsel
to slay them. As the Princes Act. 5. 33.
and rulers amongst the Jews began, and led the way, so did the Kings and
rulers of other nations for some hundreds of years together follow, every where
magnifying themselves with all their power and policy, with all cruelty and
blood, against the Gospel, making severe edicts and laws against those, that
should either preach, or profess it; yea prosecuting and pursuing them up and
down the world, with slanders and reproaches, with spoilings and confiscations
of goods: with imprisonments, with banishments, with deaths, and those the
fullest of shame and torment, that they could devise; and all, to secure their
palaces, their towns, their cities, their kingdoms against the Gospel, that it
might not get within them, or at least might soon be cast out, rush and branch,
from amongst them, if at any time, notwithstanding all their diligence and
watchfulness, and way-layings, it should come in unto them. They made
partition walls of fire, and swords, and blood, between their territories, and
the Gospel; to keep the one from coming at the other. It would be a long work,
and take up much time to relate particularly what the Scriptures themselves
intimate, and other histories of the primitive times relate, concerning the
subtle, politic, the violent and bloody practices in every kind, that were
set on foot, and managed with all industry and diligence, by the rulers of the
earth, and their officers and agents, to keep the Gospel down; that it might
not propagate, nor lift up its head in the world. We have given you an account
of these things in the general, and shall content our selves herewith for the
present; leaving the particulars to your own inquiry, and consideration. Again

2. The other sort of enemy, as desperately bent against the Gospel, as the
former, and having as much (if not more) advantage in his way, to set the world
at the greatest distance from it in their affections, is the generation of the
wise and prudent, of the learned and eloquent, of the great disputers of this
world. The Gospel was as great an offense, and matter of indignation unto these
men, as unto the other; and these by means of their endowments of wit,
learning, eloquence, etc. were unto the others, as drums and trumpets are to
soldiers, when by their warlike notes and sounds, they fill their breasts with
martial courage and resolution, against their enemies. So did the heathen
orators and Philosophers, the one by their eloquence, the other by their
arguments and disputes, cast oil upon the flames, and made that enmity and
hatred against the Gospel, which was already kindled in the breasts of Kings, to
break forth into a raging and devouring fire. Lactantius reports of a
Philosopher in Bithynia, who writing against Christians, poured out himself in
the praises of persecuting Princes. Many such passages there are upon record in
ecclesiastical histories.

Nor had they by the means aforesaid, this potent influence upon Kings and
Princes alone, to set them on fire against the Gospel; they had the like, or
greater opportunity to way-lay the Gospel in the judgments and apprehensions
of the generality of men, by representing it unto them, not only as a doctrine,
that would expose them to the displeasure of their Princes, and be the crushing
and undoing of them, and their families and posterities in that kind; but also
as a doctrine of vanity, that had no groundwork in reason for the bottom or
foundation of it, as a doctrine encumbered with a thousand absurdities, and
impossibilities, a doctrine more like unto a devised fable, then to a
substantial truth; and in this respect, not more generally, then deservedly,
rejected and abhorred by the world. It is no hard matter for men of parts,
learning, wit, eloquence, etc. to declaim against any thing how excellent
soever; and to represent that, which is simply, and in it self, unblamable, as
notoriously monstrous and foul: as it is easy for a cunning Painter to make
the soundest and firmest timber that is, look like rotten wood, by coloring it
accordingly; or to disfigure the best countenance and fairest face, into a mere
deformity. Especially when such men as we speak of, men of wit and eloquence,
have to do, either with men that are weak and injudicious, and inconsiderate
withal; much more, when they have to plead, or to promote such a cause, which
suits with the desires and inclinations of those, to whom they address
themselves in this kind; and most of all, when their task is, only to persuade
men from that, which if they do embrace, or own, they know, or at least have
great cause to fear, will be destructive to their peace and comfort, yea to
their very lives and beings in the world; I say when men of wit, and learning,
and parts otherwise, are to deal with the judgments and affections of men upon
such terms of advantage, as these, it cannot in reason be thought, but that
they may very easily prevail, and carry their desire and design in this case,
clear before them, whatsoever it be. Now the heathen Orators and Philosophers
we speak of, who were desperate enemies unto, and opposers of the Gospel, had
generally all these advantages, to take off the judgments and affections of
the world from it, yea and to turn their hearts against it. For first, the men
of the world, with whom they had to do in this kind, were (generally) w^ak
and low in understanding, at least in such things, which ^ended to the honor,
credit, and countenance of the Gospel; and in respect of such things as these,
inconsiderate withal. Secondly, the disparagement of the Gospel, as being a
fable, or a lying doctrine, was agreeable to their corrupt natures, and sinful
desires and inclinations of their souls. Men (generally) were marvellously
disposed and inclined so to judge of it; and desirous to have reasons and
grounds, upon which they might with confidence and security, so judge of it.
Thirdly, and lastly, the men whom they sought to possess with hatred and
enmity against the Gospel, knew very well of what evil consequence it was like
to be unto them, if they did own it, or make profession of it: that it was like
to be the ruin of their peace, and comfort in the world. All which considered,
it is a wonder of wonders, duly considered, that ever the Gospel should get
footing, much more, that ever it should run, and be glorified (as the Apostles
expression is) in the world; and that, what between the bloody rage and fury of
Kings and Princes on the one hand, and the bitter and subtle disputes and
oppositions of Philosophers and orators on the other hand, inter astutiam
suadendi, and duritiam saeviendi (as Tertullian has it) it should not, as
between two milstones, have been ground to powder. But behold the finger and
mighty power of God* This Gospel, which was so mightily disadvantaged in it
self, I mean in the frame and constitution of it, having so little therein (as
we have seen) to commend it unto the world: which had so little help from men,
so slender an arm of flesh (as we heard) to stand by it, or promote the cause
of it in the world; nay, which had so many great and Potent enemies to oppose
it, who dealt furiously on the one hand, and subtly on the other hand,
against it; yea which had (in a manner) the whole world, as one man, up in arms
against it; this Gospel (I say) has made its way through the midst of all
their fierce and fiery oppositions, has thrown down mountains on the right
hand, and mountains on the left, and has built her self a throne in the midst
of the earth, and rules the nations with a rod of iron. The Apostle Paul in his
time took special knowledge of the wonderful success of the Gospel, in every
place whether he carried it, against all oppositions and gainsayings of men.
Now thanks (says he) be unto God which always ^. Cor. 2, 14.
causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his
knowledge by us in every place. Paul always, and in every place, triumphed in
Christ, or, as the original imports, (...) who causes us to triumph, or, who
carries us in triumph, in, or through Christ, i. we never come to preach the
Gospel in any place, or to any people, but, as on the one hand, we meet with
enemies and opposition, so on the other hand we still conquer and subdue, and
are made honorable, like those that ride in triumph, by the spoils we take
from Satan, by rescuing some, either a greater, or lesser number of souls, out
of his hand and power, and lead them captives unto Jesus Christ. And there is
little question but that the rest of Mat 13, 43.
the Apostles triumphed in like manner in their respective quarters, where they
were engaged in the same warfare. So that the three pecks in which the leven of
the Gospel, was hid, i. the three parts of the world (being all of it that was
then known) Asia, Europe and Africa, soon came to be levened with it. Alas! the
Kings and rulers of the earth, as well they that ruled it by power, as they
that ruled it by wit and subtilty, when they consulted the obstruction of the
Gospel, they imagined (as David says) but a vain thing. Their consultations
were but flesh, and their horses and chariots were but flesh: but the
counsels, by which the Gospel advanced in the world, were spiritual; and the
guard of it were chariots and horses of fire in the mountains: so that it
laughed all that pomp and terror of opposition, wherewith it was resisted by
the world, in the face to scorn. It took no knowledge of the leopards, or
lions, or bears, that were in the way of it: and Leviathan-like, it esteemed
iron, as straw, and brass, as rotten wood. The bloody edicts of Emperors and
Kings could not make it flee, Job. 41. 27.
or keep back: and fire and sword were turned with it into stubble. It leaped
over the walls of their cities, it brake into their forts and castles, yea it
found a way into the palaces and chambers of Kings and Emperors themselves, and
took hold of those that stood at their right hand, even whilst they were
breathing out fury and death against it. When they let it alone it prospered;
when they persecuted it, and that unto death, it prospered yet more; in so much
that they were at their wits ends, what to do with it; or how to break the
course and proceedings of it. One while they would give it rest and peace, as
it were, to see whether prosperity would not slay it. Well, this would not do;
therefore another while they fell upon it with the whole weight of their bloody
fury, and they would destroy it at once, rush and branch, from under these
heavens. But when they cast three into the fiery furnace, they saw four walking
in their stead; The blood of Christians which they shed, made the places where
it fell, more fruitful, yea abundantly yielding of Christianity. In so much
that within forty years after the first going forth of it into the world, the
Gentiles themselves confessed that the branches of this congregation (I mean,
of Christians) were spread over all the world, and began to put in fear the
very Roman Emperors themselves (as Tertullian records) yea, after they had
sought by four most bloody persecutions to root out the name of Christ, and
Christianity out of the earth, and in the midst of the rage and heat of the
fifth (for about this time Tertullian lived; which was within the second
century, or hundredth of years, after Christ) this author, in an Apology which
he writes to the Emperor and his officers, in the behalf of Christians,
expresses himself thus (by way of answer to that common objection against
Christians, which was then, it seems, on foot, as it is at this day, viz. that
Christians were enemies and traitors to the state and dignity of the Emperor)
Sienim and hosts ex^rtes etc. If we had a mind to be your open and professed
Apolog. ^ 37
enemies, and not to revenge our selves secretly, have we not numbers of men
and sufficient strength for it? Externi sumus, and vestra omnia implevim^^, --
we are but strangers, and yet we have filled all your Terri^oreas, your Cities,
your I^ands, your Castles, your towns, your counsels, your ^^nts themselves,
your tribes (or families) your offices, your palace, your senate, your market,
or pleading place. We leave only your Temples free for you, and void of our
company. And a little after: Suffadisset utique dominationem vostram tot
qualiumcunque amissio^ (...), etc. i. If we should have but withdraws our
selves from amongst you, the loss of so many citizens would have made the
glory of your dominions ashamed. Yea certainly you would be afraid at your
silit^^inesse; and through the silence and stillness of all things in your
city, as if it were dead, you would or might, have gone to look for such, over
whom therein to bear rule: with much more to this purpose. By all which it
appears, that neither tribulation, nor distress, nor persecution, nor famine,
nor nakedness, or peril, nor sword, nor death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, not height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, was able to separate between the Gospel, and
a most triumphant success in the world: it got into the hearts and consciences
of millions of men, notwithstanding the way was hedgedup against it with thorns
and briers, with swords and spears, and torments, and deaths in every kind: it
taught the flesh to forget her tenderness and weakness, and to think her
strength, like the strength of stones or mountains. And may we not by this
time, taking all into consideration that has been delivered in the point, say
concerning it, as Nicodemus said to Christ. Rabbi, we know thou art a teacher
come from God: for no man can do the miracles, or wonders, which thou do,
except God be with him? Have we not foundation and ground in abundance from the
mighty and Joh 3. 2.
wonderful works which the Gospel wrought, in, and upon, the hearts of such
infinite numbers, both of men and women in the very face, as it were, of such
astonishing and devouring oppositions, to build this conclusion, with the
greatest confidence that may be, upon; that certainly this Gospel comes from
God; and that no doctrine under heaven could do the works, which it has done,
except God be with it? Had not God stood by it, when it was at work, and helped
it to pull, could it ever have drawn to it the hearts and minds and affections
of so many millions of men and women, rich and poor, old and young, as we have
heard it has done, against such potent detentions, and pullings back; against
so many mighty engagements of flesh and blood, all drawing and haling a
contrary way? If a man should see a vessel or a ship run swiftly upon the
waters, quite against the tide, and stream, and a strong gale of wind, would
he not presently say, that there is an invisible force or power, greater then
that of the tide, and stream, and wind, put together; that carries her along,
and gives her this motion? In like manner, the Gospel bearing up with a swift
and irresistible course, against the natures and dispositions, against the fury
and bloody persecutions, against the policy and subtle oppositions of the
world, it cannot reasonably be conceived, but that the stars in their courses
carried it along with them, and that the power of the Almighty wrought with an
high hand in the progressive motion of it, upon such Heb. 11, 12.
terms. The Scripture (speaking of Abraham) says, that there sprang of one,
and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as
the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable. So may it be said concerning
the Gospel; it was at first but as a dead doctrine, in appearance, having
neither spirit, nor life, nor power of generation in it: yet have there sprung
from the loins of it a generation of sons and daughters so numerous, that both
heaven and earth are replenished with them.

But here it may be objected and said; that neither is a speedy, nor yet a
large-spreading propagation of a doctrine, or Religion, any argument of
assurance, that either the one, or the other, is of a divine original, or from
God: for then the Turkish Religion, the law or doctrine of Mahomet, might claim
this honor, of being from God too; for this also ran, and propagated, and made
proselytes in abundance in the world; drew in many nations, and Kingdoms, into
a subjection and obedience to it; as is famously known at this day. To this I
answer,

That the weight and strength of the argument last insisted upon, to
demonstrate the divinity of the Scriptures, did not simply stand, either in a
speedy, or plentiful propagation of the Gospel; but in these, under such and
such circumstances, against all those disadvantages, and unlikelihoods of
success, which were mentioned. So that though neither the one, nor the other
of these, simply considered (I mean, neither the speedy, nor yet the abundant
spreading, or propagating of the Gospel) be any argument necessarily concluding
the divine authority of the Scriptures; yet either of them (and much more both
together) being in conjunction with such and such circumstances, may be
sufficient to evince, and reach, such a conclusion. That Christ was born of a
woman, does not prove any thing miraculous, or above the course of nature, in
his conception: but that the should be born of a woman, which was a virgin, and
had not known a man, this evinceth it. That the Israelites should walk safely
upon dry land, did not prove any thing more, then an ordinary hand, or presence
of God with them, but that they should walk upon dry land safely; in the midst
of the sea, the waters standing like a wall on the right, and on the left hand,
this did abundantly prove it. In like manner, though the fruitfulness of the
Gospel in begetting sons and daughters in the world, was neither in respect of
the suddenness, nor of the abundance hereof, any sufficient proof of any
peculiar relation in it unto God; yet the coincidence of such circumstances, as
have been expressed, with these, may together advance a sufficient, yea an
abundant, proof in this kind. And if the doctrine or religion of Mahomet,
could plead a fructification in the world upon the like terms, which the Gospel
does; doubtless the proof or demonstration would be unpartiall, and evince the
one as well as the other, to be from God. But great are the differences on the
one side, and on the other.

1. The doctrine or Gospel of Mahomet, was fitted to the natural inclinations,
lusts, and corruptions of men; it every ways comported with men in these;
whereas the Gospel (as we heard) handles these with all severity and
roughness; ever and anon injoining the crucifying, and prohibiting the
fulfilling of them; urging and pressing upon men, with all authority and power,
things that are of the most cutting nature, and sharpest contrariety unto them.
The story says, that Mahomet set on foot his new religion, to bring light unto
the Gentiles, and to mitigate to the Jews and Christians the severity of the
law, and of the Gospel. He considered (it seems) where, and in what
particulars, the Gospel suffered disadvantage, in respect of the generality of
men; what it was that made the doctrine of it so offensive to the greatest part
of the world; and all such things as these, he either left out, or altered the
nature or property of them in his law, and substituted things pleasing to
corrupt nature in their stead. He gratified men in his law, with plurality of
wives, to what number they pleased; gave them liberty to put them away, and
exchange them, as often as they pleased: made it lawful for men to revenge
injuries: taught that men are not bound by their oaths before God, except they
swore from their hearts; with many other like things of a wicked confederacy
with the vile and sinful hearts of men. So that whereas, God, the author of
the Gospel, for the composure and frame thereof, did, as it were, go round
about the corrupt hearts and natures of men, telling, and observing all the
inordinate affections, corrupt inclinations and sinful propensions and
dispositions thereof, that so he might make and temper his Gospel to meet with,
and strike at them all; Mahomet on the contrary, took cognizance of them, that
in the composure of his Gospel, he might accommodate them, and speak to their
hearts.

So that if Mahomets Gospel prevailed far and near, and made the world to
wonder after it, there is no great, no strange thing in it: it went along with
men in the ways and desires of their hearts; and what should hinder, but that
they should go along with it? when two are agreed, it is no strange thing to
see them walk together. As the Apostle speaks of some men, 2. Tim. 4. 3.
who though they cannot endure sound doctrine, are yet apt enough to heap up
teachers to themselves, according to their lusts; so likewise is a doctrine, or
teacher, that is unsound, likely enough to heap up auditors, and followers in
abundance, according to their lusts and fancies; I mean, those corruptions and
loose opinions, which are held forth, and taught by them. But as it was a
greater thing, and a more demonstrative argument of the extraordinary power and
presence of God, that one man should be conceived and brought forth by a
virgin; then that all the men that have been in the world beside, should be
brought forth in the ordinary way of propagation; so that any one, or the
smallest number of men, should be made true proselytes by the Gospel, and
cleave unto and follow that in the world, is a far greater and more
considerable thing, and more demonstrative of the gracious and powerful
presence of God with it, then that the doctrine and law of Mahomet should draw
the whole world (in comparison) after it. The Law of Mahomet is carnal, and
the world is carnal, so that there is a symbolicall quality, a principle or
compliance in this law with the world: but the law of Christ in the Gospel is
spiritual, and so in reason like to prove nothing, but hatred and enmity unto
the world.

2. There is this subtle and carnally politic device in the law of Mahomet,
to make proselytes of men laden with diverse lusts and vanities (especially
being injudicious, and inconsiderate withal, which was the condition of the
greatest part of the world when this law most prevailed;) First there are in
this law, many precepts and injunctions unto things morally virtuous and good,
which are apt to commend it much to the, natural consciences of men: as
prayers unto God, fastings almsdeeds, justice, temperance, etc. and again
many sins against the light of nature, as covetuousnesse, drunkenness,
adultery, deceit (especially practiced upon Orphans) and so swearing and
foreswearing, with some others of like nature, are sorely threatened with the
displeasure of God, and fire of hell. Thus far the natural consciences of men
are charged and burdened with this Law; which charge notwithstanding is none
other, then what lay upon them before, in those natural impressions of things
morally honest and dishonest, which God has planted in them. But then
secondly, though this doctrine of Mahomet thus charge the consciences of men,
and threatens transgressors sorely yet it has a way very pleasing to flesh
and blood, to exonerate and discharge them again, when they shall transgress
and do contrary to the things commanded; viz. certain carnal penances or
compensations that are more easy and near at hand (wherein the religion of
Rome much sympathiseth with it,) as for example, about the case of perjury,
there is this declared, that they that forswear themselves, shall have no good
thing in the world to come. But elsewhere this burden is eased by such a
proviso, or clause of mitigation as this; that to redeem an oath (as the law
calls it) i e. either to purchase a liberty to act contrary to an oath, or to
redeem a man's self from under the danger or guilt of having broken an oath,
they must feed or cloth ten poor men, or fast three days. Other instances of
like nature might be produced, but we cannot insist upon particulars. Generally
to go into the wars, and to be valiant and courageous there, is made an
universal atonement for all sins, and carries their paradise planted with all
sensual delights, and pleasures, with a strong hand before it, against all
wickednesses and villainies whatsoever. Now such a constitution and temper of a
doctrine or law, as this, viz. wherein there shall be some things commanded,
which are apt to commend it to the consciences of men, as just, and holy, and
good; and other things again prescribed of an easy purchase or procurement to
relieve and ease the consciences of men, under the stroke of the guilt of sin,
must needs be conceived very apt and likely to take with the generality of men,
and to carry the sinful, sensual, and ignorant world before it, because it
gratifies both conscience and concupiscence at once in such men; yea and that
part of it wherein it gratifies conscience, I mean wherein it commands things
agreeable to the moral impressions in the consciences of men, is a
confirmation by way of comfort unto them, that that part of it also wherein it
gratifies concupiscence, and gives men hope of escaping punishment, without
mortification of their sins, is a truth approved of, and assented unto by God.
So that in this consideration also the doctrine of Mahomet, had a maine
advantage and likelihood of propagating it self in the world, which the law of
God, and of Christ in the Gospel, had not. This law admits of no carnal or
fleshly atonement for sins committed: nor does it give any hope of the pardon
of sins from the hand of God, unto those that have committed it upon any
atonement whatsoever, without the mortification of it in our members, at least
in some degree. Therefore in this respect also the great prevailing of the
doctrine of Mahomet in the world, does no ways shadow or obscure, the
demonstrative force of this argument (to prove the royal descent of the Gospel
from Heaven) the great and mavelous success, wherein it rejoiced over the
world.

3. It was the spreading and prevailing of the Gospel upon the world, as it
did, that occasionally (partly through the weakness, partly through the
wickedness of men,) promoted that great prevailing of the religion of Mahomet
in the world. This it did occasionally two ways: First as it had acquainted
the world with, and made familiar amongst men, the knowledge (or at least the
discourse) of all those particulars in that religion which are any ways
considerable, before the doctrine thereof did so much as look forth into the
world. Secondly, As by reason of the neglect of it, and the unworthy walkings
of men under it (now generally prevailing upon the world) God was provoked to
give up the world, to a reprobate or injudicious mind; a judgment which made
them capable of receiving the impression of any doctrine or Religion whatsoever
that should be brought unto them, though never so erroneous or inconsistent
with reason it self.

For the first of these; It is no ways like that the doctrine or law of
Mahomet should ever have bin so readily, or so generally received and submitted
unto as it was in the world, had not the Gospel and the knowledge of the
Scriptures, prepossessed the minds and apprehensions of men, with many of the
principal and most considerable things, (at least with some kind of notions or
broken ends of these things) which are propounded and taught in this law, as
viz. concerning God as being the Creator of heaven and earth, concerning
Christ as a great Prophet, and the son of Mary a virgin; concerning the
immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the dead, eternal pains or
torments, immortal felicity and bliss, with several other such things as
these which are asserted in the said law; The world having generally drunk in
before hand; though not the steady or grounded belief, yet a kind of general
and loose credulity of such things as these from the Gospel, so that they were
no ways new or strange unto them, when Mahomet propounded them to be believed
in his law, this must in reason needs be looked upon as a great advantage, yea
as a preparation in the world to receive such a doctrine or religion as that,
which should hold forth these things unto them, especially in conjunction with
other things, which were more suitable to the vanity of their minds, and
sensuality of their hearts, then other particularities of the Gospel were; yea
Peter Martyrs judgment in the case is (which with me is very passeable,) that
Mahometanisme is nothing else but an heresy; and the professors of it, how
many soever in number they be, a remnant of the Arrians of old, only more
corrupt, and of a deeper degeneration from the truth; (which is a thing of
frequent observation in a continuation or succession in the line of heresy,
the latter brood is commonly the worst.) So then in this consideration and
respect also, the doctrine of Mahomet had a special advantage which the Gospel
had not, for the propagating and promoting of it in the world. When the Gospel
first set forth, and did that glorious execution, which has been formerly
represented unto you, upon the world, it had no such foundations already laid
to build it self, and its acceptance in the world upon; all things (in a
manner) which it proposed unto men, were strange and new, not so much as the
name of Christ had been heard of in any of those nations and kingdoms, which
yet it subdued: the resurrection of the dead by the confession of Philosophers
themselves, who were the wisest and learned men in the world, was a new and
strange doctrine unto them. Act. 17. 1. 9


There is the same consideration of other the main doctrines of the Gospel, as
of justification by faith, adoption, mortification, self-denial, etc. the
world had not so much as heard. by the lightest hearing of the ear of any of
them, when the Gospel came to demand belief of them, and subjection unto them.
So that the religion of Mahomet, borrowed of the Gospel (or rather stole from
it,) a stock of truth formerly received and acknowledged by men, to set up with
in the world, but the Gospel set up without any advantage or help at all in
this kind; it borrowed not any thing from the doctrine of Mahomet (which had no
being at all in the world in these days) nor yet from any other Sect or kind
of learning, doctrine, or religion in the world whatsoever. That great estate
of honor and acceptance, which it soon raised unto it self in the world, it
raised not by any contribution from other doctrines, but by means of that
glorious spirit of light and truth which accompany it.

Again, 2. by that time that Mahomet was now ready with his religion and law,
to advance with them into the world, the world had in a very great measure
withdrawn it self from the Gospel, I mean from that high esteem of it, which
God expected men should have had, and which the infinite worth of the Gospel it
self, in a way of reason and equity, required of them: yea they were generally
grown rebellious against the laws and holy precepts and injunctions of it Upon
which great provocation of Apostasy, the soul of the Almighty took not that
pleasure in the world, which it had done formerly. If any man draw back (says
God) my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Now the world where the Heb. 10.
38.
Gospel had been formerly preached and received yea and submitted unto, in the
holy laws thereof, about and before the times we speak of (I mean of Mahomets
coming upon the stage) had drawn back from the Gospel, and were fallen from the
love and conscientious practice of it: and in this respect, the soul of the
Lord took no pleasure in it; i. (by the figure (...), which is, when a little
only is expressed, but much intended) the soul of the Lord greatly abhorred it,
and resolved to bring that great sin, which it had committed in the contempt of
the Gospel, upon the head of it: Now the judgment by the inflicting whereof God
is wont (as it were) of course, to take vengeance upon men for the neglect, or
rejection of the Gospel in the truth of it, is the giving of them up to
delusions to believe lies. This is evident from 2 These. 2. 2 These. 2. 11, 12.
11, 12. And for this cause, viz. because they received not the love of the
truth that they might be saved. God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who believed not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness. And thus when the Jews rejected their
true Messiah God avenged himself upon them by that very judgment we speak of;
viz. by delivering them up to a spirit of that vanity and folly which prevailed
with them to believe and follow counterfeit Messiahs, almost without end; yea
even such, who were so far from giving any such substantial and demonstrative
account of what they claimed and pretended unto, as he who was the true Messiah
indeed did, both by his doctrine, miracles and conversation; that they rather
gave evident signs that they were indeed but counterfeits. Now then when
Mahomet came to utter the base commodity of his lying religion in the world, he
found the world in such a posture and condition to deal with him, and to
believe him, wherein it had never been since the first day it was a world,
until then, viz. under the displeasure of God for contempt of the Gospel; a
displeasure of that nature and consequence, that no other displeasure of God (I
mean for any other sin or provocation whatsoever) produces the like strange
effects; in, or upon men, to make them preys to every lying vanity. Every
spirit of delusion that meets them in the world, under this judgment, may slay
them, or do with them whatsoever it lists. Yea there is little question to
be made, but that had this doctrine of Mahomet been ten degrees more rotten, or
ridiculously irrational then it is, it had at that time drawn the world after
as it did. Now the Gospel found not the world under any such judgment, or
displeasure of God as this; no the day wherein the Gospel went forth to visit
the world, was a day of love, and favor, and great compassion, from the most
high God unto it; the world from the foundations of it (or however from the
fall of man,) had not found the like grace or favor in his sight, as now it
had.

4. And lastly, The weapons, whereby the religion of Mahomet was promoted in
the world, were chiefly carnal, Judge. 8. 16.
and not spiritual; He taught the world his law, as Gideon taught the men of
Succoth, I mean, with thorns and briers; and much after the same manner,
wherein the Grand Scignior of Rome procures quarter for his religion and law
in the world, whose chief quartermasters were, fire, and faggot. Kill the
unbeleevers whom you conquer (says Mahomet in his law) if they will not turn
to the law: and the reader or preacher of Rev. 2. Mat. 12, 19.
this law (as a Friar who sometimes, as himself says, had bin a student
amongst them in the University of Baldach, reports) holds a bare sword in
his hand, or sets it up in an eminent place to the terror of the
gainsayers. So that whereas Christ went forth in his Gospel sitting on a white
horse, attempting and making his conquests without striving, or crying, or any
man's hearing his voice in the streets: i. with all gentleness and meekness,
without offering, or threatening the least outward force or violence unto any,
that should oppose him; Mahomet on the contrary se forth in his Law, upon a red
horse, taking a great sword in his hand, wherewith he threatened to take peace
from the earth, I mean to trouble, oppress or slay where his law should not be
embraced and subjected unto. So that in this respect also the marvelous
prevailings of the doctrine of the Gospel upon the world, have a plain
character upon them, by which they may be clearly discerned to be from God; and
the prevailings of Mahometanisme, another, as plain upon them, by which they
may readily be known to be from the wisdom of the flesh, and from men.

A Third Demonstration and proof (of that kind we are now upon) that the
Scriptures are from God, is the exact and punctual fulfilling of those
predictions and prophecyes, which are contained in the Scriptures; as David in
an holy address unto God concerning his providence and interposall about his
conception, and first rise of his being, expresses himself thus; My substance
was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the
lowest parts of the Earth. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being
unperfect, and in thy book all my members were written, which in time were
fashioned, Psalm. 139. 15, 16.
when as yet there was none of them. In like manner it appears from the
Scriptures, that whoever was the Author of them, saw as it were, the substance
and frame of many great events occurrences, changings, and turnings of things
in the world, whilst they were yet secret, and only in working in the lowest
parts of the Earth, and that he wrote down all the particulars of them in his
book; which in time came to be fashioned and to receive their being, whilst as
yet there was none of them. It would take up more time then you I believe would
willingly allow for the perfecting of the demonstration (and perhaps more then
is necessary) to insist particularly upon all the prophecies and predictions of
future events that are found in the Scriptures and compare them with the events
themselves, and show how particularly and punctually they have bin fulfilled.
For certainly there is none of them, whose time and season appointed for the
fulfilling, is already past, that has fallen to the ground, but they have all,
from the greatest to the least of them, taken place and received actual and
complete performance in all particulars whatsoever mentioned in the prediction,
and are to this day numbered amongst the famous providence of God, and
historical passages of the world. I shall insist only upon some few of them,
somewhat more particularly, pointing at others in a brief and general way;
premising only these two things in two words. First, That the predictions or
prophecies of things in the Scriptures, (at least many of them) are delivered
in plain significant, and direct words, without ambiguities and doubtfullnesse
of sense in the expression; and secondly, that they are of such events and
things, whose effecting or coming to pass, in respect of second causes,
depended only upon those that were merely contingent, as (for the most part)
upon the wills and actions of men, and not upon such which act uniformly, and
with necessity of causation: which kind of events, may be foreseen (at a good
distance of time) by an eye of reason, enlightened only with the knowledge of
natures course, motions, and workings. We shall have occasion to touch upon
these two particulars afterward, but to our purpose: The Scriptures record
several promises made unto Ahraham that great and famous Patriarch of the
Jews, which were as so many prophecyes, or predictions of things that were
future: we shall instance but two of these. amongst many The one was concerning
his having issue whenas yet he had none, nor was any ways like ever to have
any, yea when he despared and was out of all hope of having any, Behold (says
he unto God) thou have given me no seed, wherefore lo a servant of my house
Genesis 15. 3.
shall be mine beyre: Before he had the promise and word of God that he should
have issue, he did consider his own body, as being now as good as dead, being
almost 100, year old, and the deadness of Sarahs womb too, and judged of
things accordingly though (it is true) when once God had told him he should have
a child by her, he considered neither (as the Apostle informs us, Romans 4.)
But how unlikely soever it was in a way of reason, or experience that Abraham
ever should have a child especially by Sarah. yet the prophetical promise of
God miscarried not (no not in the least) the womb of that was not dead, it
brought forth that which was conceived in it, at the time appointed, for Sarah
conceived (says the text) and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the same
season that God told him; Here was both substance and Gen 21. 2.
circumstance of what was foretold, performed. The other prophetical promise
made unto Abraham, was, concerning the going down of his posterity into Egypt,
and of the time of their servitude, and the manner of their deliverance from
thence. This particular was foretold 400. years (at least) before it was
performed; and that at such a time, when there was not the least appearance or
intimation of a likelihood of it; Know of a surety (says God to Abraham) that
thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve
them, and they shall afflict them 400. years: And also that nation whom they
shall serve, will I judge, and afterward they shall come out with great
substance. Now how exactly this prediction was in all points Genesis 15. 13, 14.
fulfilled, as well for the time prophesied of, as for the judgment executed
upon the Egyptians, and deliverance of Abraham's posterity, with that substance
mentioned in the prophecy, is plainly and distinctly laid down in the book of
Exodus; and besides is not only avouched and constantly believed by the Jews
themselves at this day, who yet were bitter enemies to Christianity, but is
acknowledged by heathen writers themselves and particularly by Porphyry (in his
4th book against Christians) who yet was one of the ablest, and withal the
most malicious enemy that Christians ever had.

Another famous prophecy, was that uttered by Jacob being now ready to leave
the world; The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from
between his feet until Shiloh come: and to him shall the gathering of the
people be. This prophecy, Genesis 49. 10.
as touching the fulfilling of it, i. the complete fulfilling of it, was
suspended for well nigh 2000d years; though it is true for a great part of this
time viz. (as Josephus testifies) from the entrance of the government into the
tribe of Judah, in the person of King David, until the going out of it again
in the person of Hircanus whom Herod slew; but when the time appointed was
fulfilled, the prophecy it self was fulfilled also; which was, when Herod a
stranger, and of another nation, cut of the house and line of Judah from the
government of Jury; about which time (as the New Testament it self declares)
the Shiloh spoken of in the prophecy, i. the long expected Messiah (as all
interpreters I have met with, expound it) came. Now there are in and about this
prophecy, some particulars of mavelous importance and weight for our present
purpose.

First, When this prophecy was uttered by Jacob, there was no likelihood at
all that the nation of the Jews, i. the posterity of Abraham by Jacobs line,
should ever come to have any scepter or Kingly power amongst them in any of
their tribes whatsoever. For now the sons of Jacob were very low, and poor,
and but few in number, in a strange land; out of which they were never like to
depart, or to become a distinct nation by themselves.

2. In case such a thing should come to pass, I mean, that they should fairly
get out of Egypt, and grow into a distinct people by themselves, and come to
have a scepter or government among themselves; yet there was very little
likelihood, that ever this scepter should come into Judahs hand; or the
Government fall into his tribe; because he had three elder brothers, Reuben,
Simeon and Levi, who according to the law of nature, and custom of all
nations, were likely to enjoy the dignity before him.

3. When Moses recorded and put in writing this prophecy (which was some
hundreds of years after it was uttered) there was less appearance or
likelihood of truth in it, then was at the time of the uttering it. For Moses
himself was now in actual possession of the Government, (who was of the tribe
of Levi;) and was put into it by God himself: yea, and Joshua, designed by God
for his successor, was not of the tribe of Judah, but of Ephraim. And this
consideration (by the way) is a notable evidence for the truth and certainty of
this, that the prophecy we speak of, was uttered by Jacob; it being no ways
like, that Moses would ever have put such a prophecy in writing, to the
disparagement of his own tribe, or to the offense or provocation of the three
tribes, Reuben, Simeon, and Ephraim (two of which as has been said; were in
privilege of birth before Judah, and the third immediately designed by God
himself to the government;) and perhaps of the rest of the tribes also, had it
not been generally received amongst them for a truth, that Jacob their father
had spoken it.

4. In the days of Samuel, who was the last of the Judges, and about 400.
years after Moses, there was yet no appearance of any life or truth in this
prophecy; in as much as the government had not yet so much as looked upon, or
toward the tribe of Judah. At last, when God, upon the importunity of the
peoples desire, granted them a King, he chose Saul, who yet was not of the
tribe of Judah, but of Benjamin: and besides, had several children, who were
likely, one or other of them, they and their race, to have succeeded in, and
inherited the kingdom. So that all this while the prophecy we speak of, lay
as if it had been quite dead, without breath or motion; as if there had been
neither life nor soul in it. At last it began to open the eyes a little, when
David, a poor young shepherd was chosen out of the tribe of Judah, to the
King, and to stand as it were upon the feet, when the government and scepter
were established to him, and his posterity. Yet,

5. We know that ten tribes of the twelve, at once revolted from Judah, and
never returned to their obedience again; but combined and conspired with the
Gentiles and enemies on every side, to overthrow and extirpate the said
Kingdom, and government of Judah.

6. Many of David's race and posterity themselves, who succeeded in this
Kingdom; sinned against God with as high an hand (if not with a far higher)
then Saul had done, whom God rejected, with his posterity, from the Kingdom.
Yea,

7. The glory and power of this Kingdom, was given by God into the enemies
hand, and was made tributarie to other States and Kingdoms, for many years
together; as first to the Caldeans or Babylonians; and afterward to the
Romans; and yet,

8. And lastly, the spirit of Truth in this Prophecy wrought through all these
difficulties and improbabilities, brake in sunder all these bars of iron, and
first brought the scepter and government into, and then maintained and kept it
in the hand of Judah, till Shiloh or Messiah was ready to come: or (which is
the same) till Jesus, who is called Christ, was now ready to be born into the
world. Evident it is from Josephus, and other grave Historians of those times,
that it was a very little while before the birth of Christ, that Herod made
that bloody massacre of the tribe of Judah, (so much spoken of) and slew
Hircanus the last King of David's race.

A third very remarkable Prophecy recorded in the Scriptures, is that
concerning Cyrus; which was given out by Isaiah, above an 100. (some say, near
200.) years before Cyrus was born. You have it in the latter end of the 44. and
beginning of the 45. chapters of this Prophet: That says of Cyrus (speaking
Isa 44. ^8. 45 1, 2, etc.
of God) he is my shepherd, that shall perform all my pleasure, even saying
to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the temple, thy foundation shall be
laid, etc. Now,

1. That a man should be called by his name an 100. years and more before he
was born (it is like, long before his Parents were born, who were at liberty to
call him by any other name.)

2. That it should at such a distance of time be said (and that with truth, as
the event famously known, declared) that such a man should conquer so great and
potent a monarchy, as that of Babylon was at this time.

3. That he should build again the Temple of Jerusalem, which others of his own
religion had destroyed, etc. and that he should do it indeed, accordingly;
these things (I mean, predictions and events compared together) certainly are
the undoubted characters of him, who with one view overlooketh the long tract
and whole duration of time which extends it self from the beginning of the
world, to the end thereof, with all the motions, occurrences, and events, of
things that rise up, and fall, and come to pass within the compass thereof.

Nor can this prophecy of Isaiah, be any ways suspected of forgery, or
supposititiousnesse in any kind; in as much as it was pronounced openly, as
other prophesies were, in the hearing of all the people, and so divulged into
many hands before the captivity: and then also carried into Babylon and
Chaldea; where it is no otherways like, but that it was dispersed, seen, and
read of many, many years before the accomplishment of it, yea whilst as yet it
looked like a cloud without water, or a parcel of words, that neither had
weight, nor worth of truth in them.

And for the event of the thing as 1. That there was such a man as Cyrus; 2.
That a man called by this name did conquer Babylon, and vested himself with the
Monarchy thereof; and 3. That the same man did restore the captivity of the
Jews, and furthered the building of the temple of Jerusalem, with large
contributions of his own money thereunto, heathen Authors themselves, and
generally they that write the histories of those times, do attest and confirm.

To pass by many other particular prophecyes, in other parts of the
Scriptures, how many are there in Daniel alone, very strange and wonderful
(compared with the nature, and truth of their correspondent events) as, 1. That
concerning the destruction of Belshazzer, foretold unto him in the midst of his
great jollity, Dan. 5. 25, 26, etc. Dna. 11. 1, 2.
and triumph, and in the hearing of all his nobles. 2. That delivered to Darius
the Mede, in the beginning of the second monarchy of the Medes and Persians,
which foretold him, how many Kings should reign after him; and how the fourth,
who was to be the last, and Darius by name too, should fight against the
Grecians, and be overcome by a Grecian King (which was Alexander the great.)
and 3. That also concerning the kingdom of the Grecians, as that, after
Alexanders death, it should be divided, and torn in pieces by his Captains, and
not pass to his posterity (which last is confirmed Dan. 7. 3, 4.
by many heathen writers.) 4. That great prophecy, concerning the four great
Monarchies of the world, which are so lively and distinctly described, as if he
had lived in them all, and had had that experience of them all respectively,
which the world since has had. 5. That concerning the fight between Darius and
Alexander, under the names of, the fierce Goat with one horn, and the great
Ram. But to pass by these, with diverse others of like consideration, in the
writings of this one Prophet; yea and a 1000d more in other parts of the
Scriptures; I shall only further insist upon some few particulars of those many
prophesies, which are found in the Old Testament concerning Christ; and
particularly upon those which relate to such things about Christ, that are
recorded and acknowledged by those, who are no friends, or favorers of
Christianity, as well Jews as Gentiles.

First, There is a great concurrence of Scripture prediction in the old
Testament, that Christ the Messiah, was to be God. We Isa. 7. 14. Jer 23. ^.
Jer. 33. 16, etc.
shall not need to instance for the proof hereof, the Scriptures being
(generally) so well known to us in this behalf. The ancient Jews, and
particularly the holy Rabbine (as the Jews call him) Rabbi Hacca dosch.
who lived not long after Christ, were clearly of this faith. The expressions
of some of them to this point, are marvellously remarkable; but it would be too
much to burden you with the particular records of them. Philo the Jew, the
most learned of this nation since the Prophets, and who lived in the same time
with Christ, having mentioned a tradition amongst them, which says, that
before their return from banishment, they must expect the death of an High
Priest; professes this to be his opinion concerning this High Priest, viz.
that he shall be the very word of God, which shall be void of all sin,
voluntary, and involuntary, whose Father shall be God; and this word shall be
that fathers wisdom, by which all things in the world were created. The
Sy^illine Oracles likewise, written in Greek verse, by certain women
Prophetesses among the Gentiles, long before the Incarnation of Christ (as
Constantine the Ad calcem lib. de vita Constantini.
Emperor long since fully proved, in a learned Oration recorded by Euse^ius,)
clearly deliver and assert the same thing. One of these Prophetesses begins her
Greek meeter thus: Know thy God which is the Son of God; And Josephus, a
learned Jew and Historian, who was born a very short time after Christ, though
he does not expressly acknowledge Christ to have been, God, yet he seems
somewhat tender of calling him a man, i. a mere man. The tenor of his words,
as to this purpose, is well known: There was (says he) at this time one Jesus,
a wise man, if it be lawful to call him a man; a worker of most wonderful
Ioseohus Antiqu. Iudais. l. 18 c. 6.
miracles, and a master and teacher of all such men, as were willing and
content to embrace the Truth. And a little after: unto those who loved him from
the beginning, he appeared the third day, (viz. after he had been crucified)
according to what the Prophets divinely inspired, had, besides many other
miraculous things, foretold concerning him, that were to come to pass.

2. The Scripture Prophecy which went before of the Messiah Christ, predeclared
likewise unto the world, that he was Isa. 9. 6. Psa. 27. 12. etc.
to be the Son of God. The tenor of this prophecy also concerning him, is
attested both by Jews, and Gentiles. For the former: The ancient Jewish
Expositions more generally (and some of the later also) both hold, and prove by
Scripture, that Christ, or the Messiah, was, and is to be the very Son of God.
Multiplicity of quotations in this kind, would but overcharge the discourse.
Take the first fruits in stead of the harvest. Rabbi Kimhi proves by a long
discourse, that the word, Shiloh (in Jacobs prophecy concerning Christ Genesis
49. 10. formerly mentioned) signifies as much as, Filius ejus, his Son; that
is, the Son of God. The holy Rabbine (lately mentioned) cabalizeth thus, upon
the place of Jeremy even now cited, where he finds the Messiah, to be called,
Jehovah. Even as (says he) the letter (...) He, in Jehovah, is compounded of
two other letters, viz. (...) Daleth; and (...) Van (as appears by their
form) so shall the Messiah, who is signified by the word Jehovah, be made of
two natures, throne, divine, and the other, humane. And as in Jehovah, there is
twice (...) He, and consequently two (...) Daleths, and two (...) Vaus,
contained therein; so are there likewise two births, filiations, or childhoods'
in Messiah, the one, whereby he shall be the Son of God, the other whereby he
shall be the son of a virgin, which Isaiah calls, the Prophetess.

As for the later, the attest of the Gentiles, to the truth of this prophecy;
we lately cited this testimony from one of the Sybills; wherein she thus speaks
unto the world; Know thy God, which is the son of God; There are many other
passages in these Sybilline verses of like import. Besides in the fragments of
those ancient writers, Zoroastres, Hermes, Trismegistus, and others, which are
yet exstant, and recorded by somewhat later Authors, there is frequent mention
made of the Son of God; as also in the writings of Orpheus, Hesiod, and others.
Besides, the Platonique Philosophers, speak much of the Son of God, in their
writings also. He that desires satisfaction herein, may readily obtain his
desire, if he please to read either what Origin anciently wrote against Celsus;
or what Cyril in his first book against Julian the Apostate.

3. It was further presignified concerning Christ. by the Genesis 3. 15.
Scriptures of old, that he should be man: Isa. 7. 14. 15, etc. Isa. 9. 6. Isa
42. 1, 2, etc. Dan. 9. 26, etc.
and consequently (the two last particulars taken into the consideration) that
he should be both God, and man. This we heard lately attested by that famous
Rabbi (among the Jews) Rabbi Haccadosh: who yet further (to this point) after
the words mentioned, immediately subjoyns thus: And as in Jehovah the letter
(...) He, is twice put, and yet both Hehs do make in effect but one letter, so
in Messiah there shall be two distinct natures, and yet shall they make but one
Christ. It is famously known how plainly and particularly the forementioned
writings of the Sybills speak of the birth and incarnation of Christ. Josephus
(of whom mention has been made more then once) a Jew, a well by Profession, as
by nation, went as near the acknowledgment of the verification of this
prophecy ( viz. that the Messiah should be both God and man) in the person of
Christ, as near might be, without a plain and right down acknowledgement of it
indeed; in the words formerly related: There was at this time one Jesus, a wise
man if it be lawful to call him a man, etc.

4. The Messiah according to Scripture prediction, was to Isa. 7. 14. Jer. 31.
22. He that desires to see more testimonies from the Jews, upon this point, may
please to read Morneus de veri^ate religionis, (a worthy and learned tract
translated long since into english) cap. 28.
be born of a virgin. This we have heard lately asserted in plain terms, by the
Jewish Doctors themselves: yea all the Sybills in like manner make special
mention of the mother of the Messiah; that she should be a pure and most holy
virgin; and it is sufficiently known, that those professed enemies of
Christianity (the Turks I mean) do generally acknowledge this to be true in the
person of Christ. And some histories report, that Simon Magus (that
primogenitus Diaboli, first born son of the devil, as one of the fathers called
him) to gain a belief amongst men, that he was the Messiah, affirmed himself
to have been born of a virgin.

5. Concerning the house and family out of which the Messiah was to come, the
Scripture long before particularized the house of David Isa. 11. 1. Psa. 26.
36. 37.
. And this point of prophecy the Jews themselves without all contradiction
acknowledge to have been fulfilled in the person of Christ; it being recorded
in their Talmud it self, that Jesus of Nazareth crucified, was of the blood
royal from Zorohabel of the house of David. And besides that lamentable and
bloody massacre, which (as both Philo and Josephus themselves record) Herod
made of all the nobility and chief men of the tribe of Judah, to secure himself
in the kingdom of Iudaea, together with that false and forged pedigree which
he caused to be drawn up, and divulged, wherein his descent of the tribe of
Judah was avouched, do sufficiently testify, that it was the general and
confident persuasion of this nation, that their Messiah was to come of this
Tribe.

6. The Scriptures of old, plainly foretold the rejection of the Messiah by his
own nation and people, Isa. 53. 1, 2.
when he should come, together with his death, as a malefactor, Isa. 53. 9,
12. Dan. 9. 26. Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Psa 22, 16. etc.
yea and gave clear intimation of the manner or kind of his death. c How truly
the first of these was (and is too, at this day,) accomplished in the person of
Christ; cannot be unknown unto those who understand any thing of that obdurate
and inveterate spirit, wherewith this whole nation, though scattered up and
down the world, has allwaies been, and still remains possessed against Jesus
Christ, and Christian Religion. As concerning the manner of his death, which
was, by crucifiing, we lately cited a plain record, and acknowledgment hereof
out of the Talmud it self. And the Acrostick verses, (as they are commonly
called, and famously known amongst learned men) of one of the Sybills, the
initiall letters of which verses make these words, Jesus Christ, Son of God,
Savior, Cross. do with no less evidence join in that testimony. The two
last of these verses, (in English) speak thus; He that has bin here described
by our Acrostick verses, is an immortal Savior; and a King that must suffer
for our sins.

7. (And lastly, to omit many other particulars) concerning the time, wherein
the Messiah was to come into the world, and to suffer, the Scripture long
before had described it by certain charecters and signs, limited and bounded
it with certain great and very remarkable events and occurrences of Providence
in the world. As first by the departure of the Scepter or government from the
tribe of Judah Genesis 49. 10.
a little before; 2. by the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the second temple,
Dan. 9. 26,
a little after. 3. by the contemporarinesse of the fourth and last ( i. the
Roman) Monarchy with him. 4. And lastly, (and which is more then all the rest)
by the punctual determination of the very year it self ( Dan. 9. 25, 2^.
yea of the part of this year) Dan. 927.
wherein he should be crucified, viz. in, or about the middle of the four
hundred eighty and third year after the edict of Cyrus for the building again
of Jerusalem: Concerning which year, though there be some variation amongst
Chronelogers and Expositours in the preciseness of the account, yet according
to the general current of (well nigh) all the computations made, it falls into
the reign of Tiberius who succeeded Augustus in the Roman Empire. Now that
all these signal properties or distinguishing characters of time were found in
that very part of time or season, wherein Jesus Christ accomplished his
pilgrimage on earth, is abundantly acknowledged by the Jewish Doctors
themselves who generally pitch upon that narrow compass of time, whereunto all
the said particularities agree for the time or season; wherein their Messiah
was to come and appear unto them. For brevity sake I omit particular citations
from them, for the confirmation hereof: if any man doubts of the truth of what
is asserted in this behalf, let him read the 29, chapter of the forementioned
learned treatise entitled of the trueness of religion, for his satisfaction
^here he shall find a very great and remarkable conjunction of the judgments
and learning of this nation in the asseveration of this truth.

To give instance in many more particulars of Scripture prediction besides
these, as well in relation unto the person of Christ, and other things
appertaining to him, as otherwise, which has been countenanced from heaven,
and honored by God, with suitable events, is matter of a very easy undertaking:
and the performance (I conceive,) would be more burdensome to the reader, to
peruse, then to the undertaker to accomplish. The truth is, that the body of
the Scriptures is enlivened with the spirit of prophecy (almost) throughout:
and if we were capable of, or narrowly intent upon such observations, we might
(I conceive) be able upon sufficient ground to say, that there is scarce any
day passes over our heads, wherein some remarkable prediction, or other,
contained in the Scriptures, does not bring forth, and is delivered of some
Truth of importance, and concernment unto the world.

Let us then briefly consider, whether the demonstration in hand, be any whit
beneath that great conclusion, the proof and evidence whereof, is the prize
for which we run. viz. that the Scriptures issue and flow from that inexhaust
fountain of wisdom and knowledge, which is, by interpretation, the only wise
God.

Let them bring forth (says God,) expostulating with his people about the
vanity of Idols) and show us what shall happen: let them show the former
things what they be, that we may consider them, and know the end of them; or
declare us things for to come. Isa. 41. 2^, 2^.
Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods
etc. clearly implying, that to be able to foresee, and positively to declare
events and occurrences, of things merely contingent: (for such as are necessary
are as good as present in their causes) at a long distance of time, before they
come to pass, argues special communion with him, who from the mountain of
eternity takes a prospect of the whole tract and extent of time at once, with
all that infinite variety of motions, actions, generations, corruptions, and of
whatsoever rises, or falls, or that any ways, or upon any terms comes to
pass, within the whole compass and continuance thereof. This is no more then
what the more ingenuous and considering sons of nature themselves do
acknowledge. The Platonique Philosohers generally teach and confess, that the
foretelling of things which are yet afar off, cannot be done either by art, or
by nature, but only by inspiration from God. This is the express doctrine of
Porphyrius himself (that firstborn enemy to Christian Religion) It is true,
sometimes by the just judgment of God upon those, who out of vanity of mind,
and contempt of himself, will needs be the Devils customers for the commodity,
which God will not afford them, knowing it to be no ways useful or
beneficial unto then (I mean; the knowledge of things to come, relating to
their condition in this present world,) the Devil is permitted either to do
or to procure execution to be done upon such persons, according to the tenor
of his own predictions unto them. An instance hereof we have in the history of
Saul, who making the witch of End^r, his Mediatrix to the Devil, to learn from
him what should become of him, being now upon an engagement in battle with the
Philistines, received from him first the knowledge of his sad disaster
approaching, and the day following, the disaster it self. In the French history
we read of a wizard; who foretold Duke Beron of his death by a Burgundian; and
did the execution himself. As for the usual answers, (surnamed Oracles) given
out of old, by the Devil, (called by his Prophets and Clients, by the name of
Apollo) being compared with the Prophecyes recorded in the Scriptures, there
appears (one says) as much difference between them, as is between the
discretion of a wise man, and the tittle tattle of a fool. Yea the
ambiguities; amphibologies, crosse-sensednesse, and volatile meanings,
continually found in these answers, occasioned the giving of the by-name, (...)
i. Thwarter, or crooked-speaker, unto the Devill-god, the author of them, by
the heathen themselves. And if we shall measure, or judge of these Oracles or
predictions of the Devil, by a rule in Aristotle (and this very rational and
straight) which says; that, (...), i. not to signify one thing,
(determinately) is to signify nothing at all; then were they neither Oracles,
nor predictions indeed; but only confused noyses, or sounds of words, without
sense or signification. As for the prediction of Astrologers, and of all those
who have made profession of the Prophetique art upon any other terms, or
grounds whatsoever, they have long since, through the long experienced vanity
in them, exposed their Authors and professors partly to the neglect, partly
to the just censures of all considering and understanding men. Whereas the
spirit of Prophecy, which has now for some thousands of years together, spoken
out of the Scriptures unto the world, gains interest, Reverence, and
authority in the judgments of such men, daily more and more.

What may be taken in by knowledge, and given out in prediction, by the help of
nature, and the narrow observation of her motions and course, in all her
respective ways, before she brings forth, is of no consideration at all, to
check the evidence and power of the Demonstration in hand: Because such events,
which depend upon natural causes, working by the known rules of necessity, are
interpretatively present, and not future, when their causes are in being and
before us. And besides, such events as these, being, nothing else but the
issues and productions of nature, are of a quite differing nature, and
consideration from the greatest part of those, the prophetical discovery
whereof, the spirit of prophecy in the Scriptures, thought worthy of himself:
whose chief engagement in this kind is, plainly and distinctly to foreshew,
such particularities of events, which depend, partly upon the will of God
(otherwise secret, and inacces^ible to the understandings of men) partly also
upon the wills of men; and this, many years before they do so much as bud, or
begin to put forth, from any cause producing them. An experienced and skillfull
gardener, may possibly, upon the first and smallest appearance above ground
that can be imagined, of several kinds of herbs from their respective seeds,
sown in your garden, tell you what manner of herbs, and of how many kinds you
may expect for your use, by such or such a time, or season of the year; which
another man who has not been versed in such observations, cannot do: but if
you bring this gardener, as skillful as he is, to a bed, or piece of ground not
yet sown, your self not yet resolved with what kinds of seeds to sow it, all
the skill he has will not enable him to tell you, what herbs you shall gather
from thence: he that shall clearly and upon grounds inform you of this before
hand, had need be Mary Magda^ens gardener (spoken of Joh. 28 15.) In like
manner, when events of things natural, begin to work in their causes, though
at never such a distance from the full production and accomplishment of them,
an exact naturalist, who for a long time together, has with much intention of
mind, and cleernesse of observation, accompanied nature in her retired and
secret progresses and paths, may prophecy of many of her works, some
considerable space of time before she brings them forth, to the admiration
(happily) of ordinary men, whose education, and course of life have looked quite
another way. Yea moral Philosophers and wise statists, who are well studied in
the actions, manners, dispositions and tempers of men, and have conversed (in
history) with the most understanding and knowing persons of all ages, and of
all countries and nations, about all the memorable occurrences, changes, and of
affairs, that took place in their respective generations, together with the
specialties of occasions and means producing them; may possibly, from a
prudentiall contemplation partly of the present juncture of things in a state
or Commonwealth, partly of the inclinations, and humors, most predominant in
the generality of the people, foresee, in a way of pregnant conjecture, and
such as seldom miscarrieth, what will befall this State or Commonwealth;
either to the advancement, or to the detriment of it, within such, or such a
time. But to predeclare particularities of events, whilst there is yet nothing
at all in being, any ways likely to produce them, or to contribute toward
their being, yea such events, which depend upon the mere motions, and acts of
the wills of particular persons yet unborn, and to the effecting whereof, when
they are born, they cannot be led, neither by any common principle or
suggestion of reason, nor yet by any evil inclination, or corrupt principle
incident to the natures of men; to predeclare (I say) and give perfect and
distinct knowledge unto the world, of such events of these long before their
coming to pass, is an undoubted and indisputable character of one greater then
Solomon in wisdom; even of him, who was able to read the long roll of time
from the one end of it unto the other; whilst it was yet folded up; and whose
knowledge prevented all, and all manner of beings whatsoever, but his own. Now
this kind of prediction being frequently found in the Scriptures, and
accordingly justified by a constant correspondency of event (both which have
been sealed for truths in the former part of this Demonstration) does it not
make it plain robbery either for men, or Angels, to count or claim themselves
the Authors of them?

A Fourth Demonstration or Argument (of that head we are now upon) to prove the
Scriptures to be from God, i. the consideration of the great and wonderful
effects, which God has formerly, and continues still daily to produce and work
in the world by the Scriptures, and particularly by the Gospel, and the
ministry of it. We spoke somewhat to this point, in laying down our Arguments
of the first kind, when we opened that inward virtue and power of the
Scriptures, to work upon the hearts and consciences of men: somewhat likewise
of a like tendency and import was delivered, in the unfolding of our second
argument of this latter kind, when we spoke of the wonderful success which
the Gospel had, against the wickedness and unbelief of the world, in the
first expedition and going forth of it from Jerusalem. In consideration whereof
we shall be the more brief in our present demonstration. But doubtless great
and mavelous are the works, and effects, which the Gospel (or if you will,
which God by the Gospel) has both heretofore wrought, yea and still continues
working from day to day in the world; you have heard how gloriously it has
triumphed, over the darkness of this world, with all the power thereof; the
old, inveterate, and rooted superstitions and idolatries, the wickednesses and
impieties, the profaneness, Atheism, and unbelief, which ruled and raged with
an high hand, in all places of the world amongst the sons and daughters of men;
yea how it has magnified it self in the hearts and consciences of men and
women, against the faces and frowns of the terrible ones; against the most
cruel and bloody edicts of Emperors, Kings, and States, yea, and against the
most furious executions of them.

We shall (for the present) insist only upon three things, to give authority
and strength to the Demonstration in hand. First, we shall show you what those
great and mavelous works are (or at least, some of the principal, and most
considerable of them) which the Gospel at this day works in the world.
Secondly, we shall consider the frequency of them. Thirdly, (and lastly) we
shall ponder the nature and quality or greatness of them, that so we may the
better see or judge, what evidencing or demonstrative power they have, in
respect of that great conclusion, the Truth whereof we labor to evince and
evidence unto you.

First, The great and mavelous works, which the Gospel, Romans 1. 5.
or God by the Gospel, performs, and produces from day to day in the world,
are these (with their fellows) First the subduing of the hearts, and minds,
and consciences of men, to a settled persuasion and belief of the Truth of
supernatural things: of things which are very remote from the common thoughts
and apprehensions of men, and which are very difficult to be believed; (the
believing whereof the Scripture calls, obedience unto the Faith) as for
example; that Jesus Christ should be both God and man in one and the same
person, that he should be born of a virgin, that he should be willing to die,
especially upon those terms of shame and torment, for the benefit of others.
That he should rise again from the dead the third day; that believing these
things concerning him, should be a means of the justifying of a sinful man, in
the sight of God, and so of bringing him into an estate of immortal
blessedness and glory (with some others of like consideration) the Gospel (I
say) fights against the natural unbelief of these things in the hearts and
judgments of men, and breaks the stiffness and stubbornness of their
diffidence, into a rational, free, and willing consent unto the truth of them.
Many who despised and rejected the great things of the Gospel, formerly, as
things devised by men; now embrace them as the oracles of God. The Gospel
anoints men's eyes with such a precious and sovereign eye salve, that it makes
them able to see cleernesse of truth in those things, wherein they saw nothing
but darkness and doubtfullnesse (yea falsehood and untruth to their
apprehensions.)

2. Another work of the Gospel great and mavelous also (as we shall show
presently) is, the taking off of men's hearts from the world; the cooling and
quenching of the inordinate heat, wherewith men naturally, and according to the
course of the world in every place, are wont to burn in desires after the
things of the earth, and the contentments of the outward man. When the heart of
a man and the world are so close knit and incorporated, as it were, together,
that they are become one flesh (as the Apostle speaks of the adulterer, and
adulteress, in reference to the act of their wickedness) the Gospel many
times comes and gets in between, divides, and separates the one from the
other, throws the one one way, as it were toward the East, and the other,
another way, toward the West: and so keeps them asunder for ever. It falls
upon the heart and soul like lightning, and melts down the great mountain of
the world there, and makes it become a plain. It dissolves the sorceryes and
enchantments, wherewith the world is wont to bewitch the minds and affections
of men, and to bind the facultyes and powers of the soul, so that these shall
act nothing to the recovery of them from this miserable bondage. The spirit
which is in the Gospel being greater and stronger, then he that Luke 19 8.
is in the world, takes away his weapons from him, and binds him, and then
divides his spoils. This kind of work, it wrought upon Zacheus, when it so
far loosed those iron chains, wherewith his soul had of a long time been fast
bound to this present world, that at once he gave away unto the poor, the one
half of his Kingdom; I mean, of those goods, which he had been long in
getting and gathering together; yea and further offered and engaged himself to
make a fourfold restitution, of whatsoever he had unjustly wrung from any man.

3. Another great work of the Gospel is, it makes men self-deniers. Men
naturally are deniers of other men, yea and of God and Christ; but great
confessors and zealous assertours of themselves: they stand naturally so
deeply and entirely devoted and affected to themselves, and the promoting of
their own good (as they call good) that in the prosecution and pursuance
hereof, they take little, or no notice of, but tread and trample upon, the due
interests and rights, both of God and men; as if they were dead, or not in
being, and so had no right to any thing, and as if themselves were only alive.
This I mean, by denying God, and other men, and by confessing or asserting
themselves. But now the Gospel, when that comes upon men in the power of it, it
batters in pieces, and grinds to powder this principle and inclination in them;
and makes them denyers of themselves, and confessors or acknowledgers of God
and men, yea of all men: it makes them able and willing, to neglect and trample
upon their own interests, ends, and desires, when they cannot be promoted and
carried on, with the preservation of all the rights and privileges both of God
and men. It teaches men to seek themselves and their own good, not in
opposition to (which naturally they are inclined unto) but only in conjunction
with the glory of God, and good of all men. By the tenor of which practice and
course, they loose, or hide themselves as it were in the crowd, and drown their
own interests in the interests and good of many. This operation of the Gospel
was clearly seen upon Paul. Even as I (says he) please all men for their 1
Cor. 10. 33.
good, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many that they may be
saved. When he says, not seeking mine own profit, he does not mean or imply,
that he did not please himself, or seek his own profit, simply, or not at all;
but he sought not his own profit by it self, or apart from, or out of the way
of the profit, that great profit of other men's salvation. For certainly Paul
pleased himself, to the highest degre^ of pleasure and contentment that he knew
how to do, in pleasing all men, and seeking the profit of all men; and had an
eye to his own benefit and profit, as well as to the profit of all men: as he
expresses himself elsewhere: And this I do (says he, speaking of that very
course of his we speak of, viz. his pleasing all men, or seeking 1 Cor. 9. 23.
the profit of all men,) And this I do for the Gospel sake, that I may be
partaker thereof with you; (...). Paul had a desire to partake himself of the
benefit and blessedness of the Gospel; as well as that other men should
partake of them. But this was his glory and crown, that he did not desire to
partake of them alone, but in conjunction with other men; yea his desire to
partake of the Gospel upon these terms (I mean with company, and in conjunction
with others) was so strong and potent in him, that he made orts (as we use to
say) of all his inferior interests, and contentments, in the world, and which
related to his outward man, for the promoting and obtaining of it.

4. Another great work of the Gospel, is the changing of men's hearts and
dispositions; the turning as it were, the course and frame of nature
upside-down within them: the fulfilling of those and such like prophesies in
Isaiah (in a spiritual sense) where he says that in the wilderness, waters
shall break out, and streams in the desert: that the parched ground, shall
become a po^le, and the thirsty land, springs of waters; that in the
habitations of dragons (which commonly are the hottest, sandy, and most barren
places) there should be grass with reeds and rushes* And again, I will plant
in the wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah-tree, and the myrtle, and the Isa.
35. 6, 7.
oil tree; I will set in the desert the firre-tree, the pine and the box-tree
together. And in another place, In stead of the thorn 41. 19.
shall come up the firre-tree, and in stead of the brier shall come up Isa. 55
13.
the myrtle tree etc. Such a kind of change as these, does the Gospel make in
the natures, and spirits, and hearts of men, When it first comes unto them, it
finds them like so many wildernesses and deserts, full of thorns and briers,
but no fruitbearing, useful, or pleasant tree growing in them; full of
distempers, lusts, vile affections, corruptions, and inclinations unto evil,
as covetousness, uncleanness, pride, deceit, cruelty. etc. but no holy or
righteous affection at all; but the Gospel comes, and makes waters to break
out in these deserts, makes the firre-tree and the myrtle-tree to grow in stead
of thorns and briers, i. it poures the grace of God, and sheds the influences
of heaven upon the souls of men; by means whereof in stead of those
distempers, and base affections, of pride, covetuousnesse, uncleanesse etc,
there spring up holy affections and heavenly dispositions, as of love,
meekness, purity, chastity, humility, liberality, etc. these take place in
men, and fill the soul. This effect of the Gospel, was very visible in the
Corinthians, as the Apostle describes their different estates or dispositions,
before, and after, the Gospel had to do with them. And such were some of you,
viz. fornicatours, idolatours, adulterers, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
effeminate, covetous, drunkards, revilers, etc. but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God.

5. Another effect of the Gospel, great and wonderful also, is that which the
Apostle Paul, notably describes and sets out, 2. Cor. 10. viz. the pulling down
of strong holds, and casting down of imaginations, and every high thing which
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every
2 Cor. 10 4, 5.
thought to the obedience of Christ, There are in men, some by nature, and some
from Satan, and some by acquisition from other men by means of much converse
in, and with, the world, certain principles or reasonings, certain
imaginations, suppositions, or apprehensions of things* which are first said to
be strong holds; because as men, when they are in strong holds, as in forts or
castles well made, strongly fortified, and sufficiently provided otherwise,
think they are in safety; so whilst men frame their counsels, designs and
actions* according to the import and tenor of certain rules and principles
within them, which they confidently judge to be full of wisdom and truth, they
verily think they are in a safe and blessed condition, they are under protection,
and out of the reach of any great danger And therefore such imaginations or
principles as these in men, are called strong holds. First, they are strong in
their opinion and apprehension; they are confident they will secure and protect
them: And secondly, they are strong in respect of that difficulty of gaining
them, or the resistance which they usually make against those, that shall
attempt the demolishing of them. Again Secondly, these imaginations,
principles, or high things in men, are said to ^^alt or magnify themselves
against the knowledge of God; because men out of a long-habituated and
fearlesse confidence of the truth of them, are hereby strengthened securely to
despise the knowledge of God, which the Gospel holds forth and avoucheth for
truth, as being opposite unto them, and inconsistent with them. Now the Gospel
notwithstanding comes, and encounters, and fights against these strong holds,
these high imagnations in men; and attempts the battery and the shaking of
them, first, on the one side, then on the other, discovering and evincing to
the judgments and consciences of men, that there is vanity, and extreme
danger in them, in this respect, and in that, and in a third, and perhaps in
many more: and by this time they begin to shake and bow, and stand more
loosely, and weakly in the judgments and minds of men, and with much more
neernesse to a rejection. But by that time the Gospel and the wisdom thereof,
have made a clear representation of their own principles, in opposition to
them, and have argued these thoroughly, and have left no objection or thought
against them in the minds of men unanswered, nor any place for any more to be
made, now are the strong holds pulled down, and the imaginations and high
things, which exalted themselves against the knowledge of God, cast to the
ground; and every thought brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ;
Men will deal by their former principles and thoughts, as Isaiah prophecyes
the Isralites should do by their idolatrous implements, when God should open
their eyes to see the abomination of Idols. Ye shall defile also the covering
of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of of thy molten images of
gold: thou shall cast them away as a menstrous Isa. 32. 22.
cloth; thou shall say unto it, get thee hence. In like manner, when the
Gospel by the light thereof, has discovered and made men able to comprehend
the darkness of these former notions, and conceptions, they deal by them as
Amon did by his sister Thamar (the sinfullnesse of his act only excepted) after
he had committed folly with her: the text says, that he hated her exceedingly;
so that the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater then the love wherewith
he had loved her, saying unto his servant, put now this woman out from ^ee, and
bolt the door after her. 2 Samuel 13. 15, 17.

An instance of this kind of effect of the Gospel, in one particular, is
clearly seen in Paul himself. I verily thought (says he) within my self that I
ought to do many things contrary to Act. 26 ^.
the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. I verily thought, here was a strong hold in
Paul, he thought, and he thought verily, i. confidently believed without all
mixture of fear or doubting, that he ought to do many things -- i. that it
was his duty, and so for the advancement of his happiness, and obtaining more
grace and favor with God, to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of
Nazareth i. to be active and resolute, to go on in the face of all opposition
or discouragements, to lay the name and honor of Jesus of Nazareth in the
dust. Even as many amongst us think verily that they o^ght to do many things,
to be very active, vigorous, and resolute, against the dear servants of God,
under the names of Schismatics and Separatists amongst us, and never to give
over, though they should be seven years in effecting it, till they have laid
their spiritual liberties, comforts, and peace in the dust; yea and said unto
them (in David's phrase) go and serve other Gods, 1 Samuel 26. 19.
Doubtthey think verily, that they shall ingratiate themselves in heaven by
such an engagement as this, and perform a service of a very choice acceptance
with God. But as the Gospel and the spirit that works in it, cast down that
imagination we spoke of in Paul, and made it an abomination and abhorring to
his soul, yea and planted another directly opposite unto it, viz. this, that
he ought to do many things, yea all he could, for the name of this Jesus: so
may there a day of such a gracious visitation dawn upon the men we speak of,
from God, wherein the Gospel shall throw down with an high hand, that dark and
dangerous imagination, by the ducture and guidance whereof, their hearts and
their hands are lifted up together (and that to a strange height) to reach the
molestation of the Saints, and the ruins of their liberties; and in stead
thereof, put another principle into them which will lead them a contrary
course, and enlarge them mightily to build up the liberties and comforts, which
now they destroy. It is said of Abraham, that against hope (or rather, (...),
besides hope) he believed in hope, whereby he became the father of many
nations. My Brethren, let us put our selves, and our hearts to it to the
uttermost, Romans 4. 18.
to imitate him herein; I mean, besides hope, to believe in hope, that great
work of God we speak of: we may by the means of it, become the sons of such an
acceptance and favor with God that we may prevail with men also, and turn
their gall and wormwood, into honey, and the honeycomb. This for a fifth great
effect of the Gospel.

6. A Sixth is; the abasing of the proud, the casting of secure, careless,
fearlesse and profane men into the den of Lions, into the midst of the raging,
terrifying, and devouring fears, and expectations of hell fire. It is an
expression of God himself unto Job: Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath, and
behold every one that is proud, and abase him: Look on every one that is proud,
and bring him low; and tread down the wicked in their places, hide them in the
dust together, and bind their Job 40. 11, 12, 13, 14.
faces in secret. Then will I also confess unto thee, that thine own right
hand can save thee. i. that thou art God, as I am. Now (my Brethren) the Gospel
many times casts abroad the rage of its wrath; it beholds the proud,
disdainful, and secure ones, that stand in the presence of it, and it does
abase them, and bring them low; it gives them ashes in stead of their beauty,
and sackcloth in stead of their joy and gladness. It lades their consciences
with chains of fears, and transforms their pomp and grandeur in the world, into
tremblings. As Paul (the poor prisoner reasoned of righteousness, temperance,
and judgment Act 24. 25.
to come, Foelix the judge, though sitting upon the seat of his power, with a
guard of honor and strength about him,) trembled, But of this before.

7. Lastly, Another great effect and work of the Gospel is; it lifts men up
unto heaven, and that sometimes out of the nethermost hell: it rescues the
souls and spirits of men out of the hand of violent fears, and the most
devouring and raging terrors: it makes the bones, which sin had broken, to
rejoice, and the faces of many to shine like the face of an Angel, which before
had gathered the blackness of hell. And what (indeed) is the ministry of it
from day to day unto many, but life from the dead? The Jailer (spoken of Acts
16.) being surprised with such a desperate fit of fear and astonishment, that
he drew out his sword, and was ready to have killed himself with it, was very
suddenly, by the virtue and power of Evangelicall applications ministered by
the hand of Paul, not only recovered out of the jaws of this death, but in a
way of surplussage over and above his cure, had a new addition of spiritual
joy made unto Act. 16. 34.
him, such as his soul had never known before. But this point also (I remember)
we have had in consideration formerly.

Consider we now (in a word) the nature and import of these great effects, that
we may see and understand, whether they do not teach, and that with authority
and power, the Scriptures parentage and descent from God. Nicodemus, by
considering the great works and miracles which Christ wrought, came Ioh. ^0 2.
demonstratively to conclude, that he was from God. Rabbi, we know that thou
art a teacher come frvm God: for no man could do the miracles thou do,
except God were with him. In like manner, if we shall draw near, and consider
narrowly, how great and wonderful those works are, especially some of them,
which (as we have heard) are wrought by the Scriptures, and the Gospel; we may
come, nay, we cannot lightly but come, to a stable and grounded certainty and
belief in our selves, that doubtless they also are from God, For (certainly)
no learning, wisdom, or doctrine, could do such things, except God were with
them.

First, How great a thing it is, that the judgments and consciences of men,
should be subdued under such mysterious, and supernatural Truths, so far
remote from the thoughts and apprehensions of men, as many of those are, which
are held forth by the Gospel; yea as those are, which are the spirit and life,
the heart and soul thereof? As that Jesus Christ, one reputed a Carpenters son
in the world, neglected, yea, hated by the great, the wise, and prudent ones of
his generation, despised, scorned, ignominiously used, put to death as a
malefactor and evil doer, should, all these notwithstanding, be the Son of God;
that he should be born of a virgin, that he should rise again from the dead,
that by dying he should purchase, not only a perfect remission of sins, but an
everlasting estate in blessedness and in glory, for all those that should
believe in him, etc. that men (I say) should be carried over such a great gulf
of fears and doubtings, of objections, of unlikelihoods, etc. into the bosom
of such Truths; especially that this should be done with so much frequency, and
in so many instances, and examples of those, that have been, and are still from
day to day thus carried over, argues the presence and engagement of a mighty
spirit indeed, in, and about those truths. How much more, if we shall further
add, that the believing of these things by men, is mightily opposed, not only
with objections and difficulties, which very seemingly, and with the appearance
of a strong hand, rise up against the truth of them, but by worldly interests
also without end, as ease, credit, pleasures, estates, friends, etc. all which
are mighty disswasives unto men, from so much as an effectual searching after
them, and the truth of them; and this in two respects; First, as the very time
and labor of mind which a man must bestow, and undergo in such a search after
them, is contrary to men's ease, and pleasures, and otherwise like to streighten
them, in many worldly occasions. Secondly, as a man's being observed and taken
notice of, for being studious and seriously engaged in that kind, is like to
bring trouble upon his head, and molestation from the world, to gain him the
loss of friends, credit, estate, etc. even as much, as if he did seriously and
fully believe, what in this case he is but inquiring after.

Again secondly, If we shall consider those other effects of the Gospel that
were mentioned, as, the taking off of men's hearts from the world, the making of
men deniers of themselves, the changing of men's tempers and dispositions, the
casting down of their imaginations, and bringing every thought in them into
captivity to the obedience of Christ, etc. these, even every one of them, from
the greatest to the least, and much more all of them put together, and laid in
consideration with the frequency of their production in men, is as clear an
evidence, and confirmation, that those Scriptures, that wisdom, that doctrine,
by which they are wrought, are from God, as the sight of the sun being risen,
is an evidence that the night and the darkness thereof, are past. The glory of
such works as these, is as the glory of the word of God. The spiritual and
most intimous nature and property of them, shows, that means or cause, by
which they are produced, to be full of his spirit, who is as intimate and
inward with men, as themselves, or their own souls.

All the wisdom, and writings, and learning that ever was in the world besides,
cannot show so much as the appearance, or face of such a generation of
proselytes, or children, as the Gospel can; and not so much as one person of
like noble principles, and inward parts with thousands of those, who are the
genuine and right-born offspring hereof. The tallest and bestgrown men, that
ever sprang from the root of Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, Plutarch, or any other
of those ancient Fathers of secular learning, were but a race of dwarfes, or
pygmies in real worth, and true excellency of spirit, being compared with a
great part of that heroique progeny, whose hearts and spirits came by the way
of a second birth, out of the loins and bowels of the Gospel. Yea the whole
fraternity of this parentage, breaths part and fellowship in the Divine nature
it self.

A fifth demonstration (of that house we are now surveying) which reaches, and
takes fast hold of the same conclusion with the former, viz. that the
Scriptures and the Gospel, are from God, is the consideration of the tenor or
manner of the government of the world, and of the workings of the hearts and
spirits of men of all kinds and conditions in it. That exact conformity and
agreement, which both the one and the other hold with the descriptions, reports
and assertions of things in the Scriptures, and in the Gospel, does clearly
demonstrate and evince these to be from God.

1. For the government of the world: How are all things carried, ordered, and
managed herein, as well in a permissive, as in an active or executive way,
according to the model and plat form of the Scriptures?

1. For the permissive part of this Government, how are things permitted and
suffered to come to pass, and to take place in the world, with all possible
exactness according to the representation of the Scriptures in that behalf?
This we shall consider chiefly in these four particulars: First in the
frequent infirmities and miscarriages of the Saints. Secondly, in the
sufferings of the Saints from the men of this world. Thirdly, in the relapses
and declinations of great multitudes of forward, and sometimes seemingly
zealous professors, into ways of loosnesse, some of worldliness, some of
pleasures, yea some into ways of persecution it self. Fourthly (and lastly) in
the manifest perishing of the generality, or far greatest part of men,
through the lusts of the flesh, ignorance, and unbelief.

1. We know, and too too frequent experience informs us, that the Saints, and
good men, are often left unto themselves, to the weakness of their hearts, and
vanity of their minds: in which cases they are like Sampson, when his hair was
cut, who was then but like other men; and quitted himself with no more strength
or courage against his enemies, then ordinary men did; and was taken prisoner
by the Philistim^. Even so many times it is with the Saints and servants of God
themselves; they are overcome with temptations, and faulter and stumble, and do
unworthily, after the manner of the world round about them, and not like unto
themselves: they step out of the ways of grace, into the ways of the pride, the
covetuousnesse, the unjustice, the uncleanesse, the rashness and
inconsiderateness, the fearfullnesse and baseness of the world. Now such
permissions as these on Gods part, answer exactly those permissive
dispensations of his, which are held forth in many places of the Scriptures.
Abraham that great believer, and Father of believers, was left unto himself;
and then how did he faulter about Sarah? And so Sarah, when she denied that she
laughed, so likewise Simeon and Levi, how did God leave them in the hand of a
bloody and revengfull passion: and how treacherously and cruelly did they deal
with the poor men of Sichem? And so how were both they, and the rest of the
Patriarchs their brethren, transported with a passion of envy against their
younger Brother Joseph? even as many now (we hope Brethren in the faith; as
they were both in the faith, and in the flesh too, unto Joseph) through envy,
that God should give better and richer visions of himself unto their younger
Brethren (as they look upon them) then unto them, are ready to sell them into
the hands of the Ishmalites, I mean to expose them to the rage and fury of the
rude multitude. But this by the way, We might instance in many other of the
Saints of God in this kind, as in Moses, Aaron, Joshua, David, Solomon,
Hezekiah, etc. who though they were Saints, yet being left by God to
themselves, they did like sinners. This permissive providence of God (as has
been said) manifests it self in the world, among the Saints in every place at
this day: The greatest enemies the Scriptures have, will be free enough to give
testimony unto them in this behalf.

2. As God sometimes leaves his Saints in the hand of their spiritual enemies,
tentations, and they do with them (in their kind) even what they list; so
otherwhile does he leave them also in the hand of their outward, their bodily
enemies, evil men, and they do unto them sometimes even what they list also
(in their way,) they injure them, they oppress them, they crush them, tread
and trample them under their feet, as if there were none that looked after
them, or took any care what became of them. Our Saviors expression is
concerning John the Baptist, that they did unto him, even what they listed;
implying, Mat. 17. 12.
that as Holy, and High in interest with God as John was, yet did not God (as
might in reason have been expected he would have done, considering how great a
man John was in his sight) interpose in the least, to hinder that shameless
danghter of Belial (Herodias I mean) from having her revengfull will upon him
by his death.

After the same manner, we see and hear daily, things acted and done in the
midst of us; many holy and faithful men, are misused and dealt with, according
to the will and lusts of men that know not God,; they are suffered to go as
far in misusing them, as their hearts desire: and there is none that opposes
them. They revile them, they beat them, they oppress them they spoil their
substance, they imprison them, they bring them before their judgment seats, and
obtain cruel sentences against them. Yea its more then to be feared, that
there will be a more general leaving of the Saints, to the lusts of their
Antichristian Rev. 15. 5. Dan. 7. 21.
enemies and persecutours, then has been yet (at least of late) and that the
date of this permissive providence of God, will not expire, till the great
deliverer shall appear from the mount Sion of Heaven. Yea it appears from
several places of Scripture, that any appearance of God on the behalf of his
people in the times of this persecution, will be so rare, that they will
generally be at the point, at which they, who were in the ship with Paul, in
that dangerous voyage at sea, Act. 27. were, whenas neither Sun, nor Stars,
appeared for many days, and when in regard of the sore tempest that lay upon
them, all hope that they should be saved was taken away. Nevertheless (says
Act. 17. 20. Luke 18. 8.
our Savior) when the son of man comes, shall he find faith upon Earth? viz.
amongst his Saints; shall he find any expectation, any hope amongst them all,
that ever they should be delivered? The expression seems to point at such a
time of universal trouble and danger upon the Churches of Christ, wherein they
shall all seem to lie covered all over with the shadow of death; So that
deliverance shall be thought as incredible a thing to them, as that plenty in
the gates of Samaria, which Elisha prophesied, in the time of an extreme
famine, was to the noble man on whose hand the King of Israel leaned. 2 Kings.
7. 3.

And as he is not like to find faith amongst his friends his Saints, so
neither is he like to find fear in his enemies, upon the same ground, though
his coming will bring both faith in abundance unto the one, and fear in
abundance upon the other. See whether this constellation of truth, be not
visible Rev. 11. 10, 11, 12.
in the Horizon of that Scripture, which the margent points unto: I dare not
stand the unfolding of it, at the present.

3. There is another strange, and sad vein of occurrences in the world,
through the permissive providence of God, which is also exemplified and
attested in the Scriptures: this is the looking back of many, who had put forth
their hand to the plough of Christ; the turning head of many great professors
of religion upon their profession. But many (says our Savior Man. 19. 30.
himself) that are first, shall [or rather will] be last; and the last shall
[and will] be first. He does not say, that now one, and then one, one in one
age, and another in another, who are, or have Mat 24* ^0. 13. ^0, 21. 1 Timothy 5.
15.
been looked upon as marching in the very head of professors toward heaven,
will wheel quite off, and face about toward hell, but many such (says he)
will do it; many that have been the head, will turn to be the tail, of
profession. See further what the Scriptures speak in this point, by the light
of those other places named in the margent.

Whether the world brings not forth children in abundance marked in the very
forehead with this black brand of shame and sorrow (I mean Apostasy) I refer
you only to the experience of those late days of trial, which have gone over
the head of this nation: Have not the stars of the Heaven, (old professors I
mean) fallen to the Earth, even as a figtree casts her green figs when she is
shaken with a mighty wind? Rev 6 13.
Have not these days been like the days of Isaiah, wherein he complains, that
the faithful city was become an harlot; it was (says he) full of judgment,
and righteousness lodged in it: but now murderers Isa. 1. ^4.
. The thorns and briers, wherewith God of late has taught this kingdom, have
so rent and torn the sheeps clothing, wherewith many great and violent
pretenders to religion had garbed themselves, that the wolf is now to be seen
face to face. It is true (and the glory of Christ appears wonderfully in it)
there is a generation too risen up in the midst of the fire, which to this day
burns in the very bowels of the land, a generation (I say) of the blessed
Apostasy, wherein the great Apostle went before them, who at last forsook the
tents of ungodliness, and came to preach that faith, which formerly he had
destroyed, Gal. 1. 23.
that prediction of our Savior (lately mentioned) And behold there are last
which shall be first, Mar. 13. 30.
having brought forth many children unto us. But on the other hand, many also
who had declared for the God of Heaven, by a long and loud profession, have now
changed masters, and forsaking the tabernacle at Shilo, are gone to Dan and to
Beersheba to worship.

4 (And lastly) There is nothing more evident, then that the generality of men
perish daily, being taken captive by Satan at his will, and led away by him in
the chains of sin and unbelief, unto destruction. How does the world abound
(almost) in every place, with those very kind of sinners, as fornicatours,
idolaters, adulterers, effeminate, thee^es, covetous, drunkards, revilers,
extortioners! against whom the holy Ghost has given this definitive and
dreadful sentence; they shall none of them, inherit the kingdom of God; 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10.

This vein also of the permissive providence of God, is clearly delineated in
the Scriptures* Enter ye in at the strait gate (says our Savior in a
gracious advice unto his Disciples) for wide is the gate, and broad is the way,
that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat. Because
strait is the gate and narrow is the way, that leads unto life, and few there
be that find it. Peruse the other Scriptures presented in the margent, Mat. 7.
13. 14. Romans 9. 27. 1 John 5. 19.
you will find them of like import, besides many others.

Again 2. for the government of the world in respect of the operative, or
working providence of God; we shall find a perfect correspondency and
agreement between those things which the Scriptures speak concerning it, and
the events and carriadges, the passages and comings of things to pass in the
world. This we may consider in a threefold subject, or in things of a threefold
consideration, first, in things natural, secondly, in things moral, thirdly
and lastly in things spiritual.

First, For things natural, about which the working providence of God we
speak of, is held forth, and represented unto us in the Scriptures, they are
of two sorts: either first, such as are merely natural; or secondly, such,
which though they be in part, and in a sense, natural, yet they are in a
superior consideration, judicial also (for we want a better term for our
purpose) For the first of these, things merely natural, we know the
Scriptures, even from the days of Moses, who was the first penman of them,
gave knowledge as from the mouth of God himself, that there should be seed-time
and Genesis 822.
harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter; and that day and night
should not cease.

And elsewhere the Scriptures speak of a covenant which God has made, either
with, or concerning, the day, and so Jer. 33. 20.
with, or concerning, the night, that the one should succeed the other
interchangeably, without variation: we see this covenant of God performed
without any faultring or failing. It were easy to instance more particulars in
this kind.

2. Take we knowledge how the Scripture portraitures that part of the
providence of God, we speak of the (executive or working providence of God,) in
such things, which I call, Judicial; in which word I comprehend, as well those
occurrences and events of things which fall on the right hand, and make men's
conditions in the world better, and more comfortable, as those, which fall on
the left hand, and are poenall and afflictive Eccl 9 1^
unto men.

First, Concerning the indifferent befalling, as well of the one, as the other,
upon all sorts of men, without the exemption of any (I mean of any sort of men,
in respect of some or other particulars in every sort) we know what the
Scripture says. No man (says the wise man) knows either love or hatred, by
all that is before him (he means, either the love or hatred of God) by all that
is before him, i. by any outward condition he is in, be it either a nest among
the stars, or a seat upon the dunghill, Of this his assertion he gives this
reason (in the words following) All things come alike unto all, there is one
event to the righteaus, and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean, and to
the unclean and. The Holy ghost does not speak this de singulis generum (as
some use to distinguish) but de generibus singulorum: his meaning is not that
all things come alike to all individual and particular persons; but to all,
and every kind of persons, in respect of some particulars in every kind (as
was said.) How do we see the contents of these lines visibly acted, and put in
execution from day to day in the world? If you see a righteous and holy man,
one, or more, rejoicing in one place, if you will look but a little about you,
you shall see a wicked and profane man rejoicing in another.

And again if you see a wicked man, mourning or afflicted in one place, you may
soon see a godly man in the same posture and condition of sorrow, in another;
yea if we consider the particular providence of God in outward things, which
are the causes, either of the rejoicing, or of the heaviness, whether of the
one sort of men, or other; we shall find a likeness, or samenesse in these
also between them. Do godly men prosper and thrive through the blessing of
God, in the way of their callings, and gather substance? you may find ungodly
men, that prosper and thrive as fast as they. Do ungodly men decline, and sink
in their outward estates, fall from riches to poverty in the world? we know
that this is the portion of many godly men also. Have godly men any cause of
comfort and joy in their relations, as in wives, children, servants, when these
answer the desire of their souls? you may find men who know not God, that
will match them in all these. So again, if you know wicked men that are of
infirm and unhealthfull bodies, subject to troublesome distempers, or painful
deseases, as the gout, stone, or the like: you may find in the generation of
the righteous, those that bear them company in these also. Yea and on the
contrary, healthfullnesse, and strength, and activenesse of body, is a
providentiall commodity or blessing, wherein many of the one sort, and of the
other, are partners. And (to instance only once more in this kind,) is there
any strange hand of God, sore and terrible, sometimes laid upon wicked men, in
any extraordinary judgment, as in any sudden or untimely death (as we call it)
very grievous (it may be) for the manner of it; either upon themselves, their
children, or the like? you may find examples of like providence falling even
amongst the tents of the righteous also. Under this head may well be reduced
that kind of dispensation also, which the Scripture expresses, verse. 11. of
the forenamed Chapter. I returned and saw under the sun, that the race is not
to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet Eccl 9. 6. 11.
bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to
men of skill. The meaning is not as if the race were never to the swift, or the
battle never to the strong etc. no nor yet as if the race were not more
ordinarily and frequently unto the swift; and the battle, usually to the
strong; but only to show that time and chance (as it follows) happneth to
them all. i. that God reserveth a liberty unto himself to interpose when he
pleases, and to umpire matters of event and success, contrary to the Law, and
common rule of second causes; with which notwithstanding he ordinarily
concurreth, and so makes it altogether uncertain unto men, when he intends a
variation or digression. And this kind of digressive providence (as we may
call it) sometimes rules in the affairs and concernments of men that are
strangers unto God, as well as it does at other times, in matters relating unto
his Saints. And thus you see, how the providence of God in this particular,
viz. in an indifferent dispensing of outward mercies and judgments to some of
either sort of men, godly and ungodly, acts and works in the world, with
all possible exactness, according to the model presented unto us in the
Scriptures.

Again secondly, consider we how the same Providence acts also in the world
according to the express tenor of the Scriptures in a way of judgment, with
the same relation, not to some particulars only of either sort of men (as was
showed in the former branch) but to all of both sorts (at least in some degree
to all of both sorts) who live together (as it were) within the sphere of the
activitie, of each particular Mat. 24. 7.
judgment. Our Savior Mat. 24. foresheweth, that before the end comes (as he
speaks). i. before the great day of his return unto the world for the
judgment of it, Nation, shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom, against
Kingdom; and that there shall be famins, and pestilences, and earthquakes in
diverse places. We our selves experimentally know that such things as these have
been executed, and come to pass in the world some of them in our days, and in
those parts of the world, where we have become. They that are versed in
Histories, have the knowledge of many more particulars in this kind. And how
little difference such judgments as these have put between godly men and
others, within the line of their respective fallings, and prevailings, I appeal
to the testimonies of all those, who have been observers of such things, and
most narrowly watched the particular windings, and turnings, the leapings over,
and the lightings on, the particular favors, and severities of Providence
under such judgments.

Thirdly (and lastly to this) As the Providence of God expresses it self
indifferently, as well in mercies, as in most kind of judgments, to some of
both sorts of men, good, and bad; and again, in some particular judgments, to
all of both sorts within a distance, and in both, moves regularly according to
the compass of the Scriptures, so also does it express it self with a great
deal of variation and difference, to the one sort of men, and to the other,
indifferently considered (I mean taken in the main body and bulk of both) in
it is ordinary dispensation; and this too with a perfect agreement unto the
Scriptures. These (we know almost in every place, especially in the Gospel
speak of the troubles, and sorrows, and sufferings which abide the Saints in
this present world; as on the contrary, they give information, that the world
shall generally have the better of it, and rejoice when they shall mourn,
Verily, verily (says our Savior to his Disciples, Joh 16. 21.
and in them to all his Saints, in all their succeeding generations) I say unto
you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice; meaning, that
this should be, not the constant and uninterrupted, but far the more frequent
and ordinary estate and condition of either. Rejoicing amongst the Saints, by
reason of their outward condition in the world should be but seldom, and for a
short season: their lucida intervalla, should be rare, and of a small
continuance, and in both respects, inconsiderable; in comparison of the
standing prosperity, and the lifting up of the heads of their adversaries (all
most without hanging down at any time) in the world. The Scripture (we know)
has many more passages and sayings of like import. Yea and all (says the
Apostle) that will live Godly in 2. Tim. 3. 12.
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution: i. their more constant and general
condition will be persecution; and consequently the condition of their enemies,
the ungodly, will be superiority and strength in the world; or else they could
not well be in a case to persecute. Men must have a stock of power and strength
to command, that will drive a trade of persecution, to any purpose. Rev. 13. 7.
So it is said that it was given unto the beast to make war with the Saints,
and overcome them. God gave this beast strength and power, and dominion,
whereby he was enabled to trouble, vex, crush and ruin, the Saints of God, far
and near. Whilst it was the simple profession of Christianity, that exposed
men to persecutions, and sufferings from the world (as the case was till the
days of Constantine) there were but few hypocrites in the Church, for (as
Austin well observes) hypocrisy did not increase among Christians, the till
Name and profession of Christianity began to be honored, and highly esteemed
in the world Post quan in tant^ culmine nomen coepit esse Christianum, crevit
hypocrisis.
. But however, whilst it was the bare and naked profession of Christianity,
that drew persecution after it, all that joined together in the profession of
it, whether hypocrites, or sound, held together, expressed love and mutual
affections, one to another: the common hatred and persecution wherein they were
joint sufferers from the world, was of a sodering and cementing nature unto
them, kept them in love and peace. But when upon Constantines coming to the
Empire, being a Christian, there was no more persecuting for the profession of
Christianity; for some short season, they that were Christians indeed, and who
had the power, as well as the form or profession of Christianity, were free
from persecution, enjoying the same privilege in this kind, with those that
were formal and hypocritical. And this great turn in the world is (I
conceive) spoken of, Rev. 12. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Where, upon Rev. 12 7, 8, 9.
the great battle that was fought in Heaven, between Michael, and his Angels,
and the dragon and his, it is said, that the dragon and his prevailed not, nor
were there place found any more in heaven, i. (I conceive) the devil could
never after prevail with the world, at least not with the Roman world (this
Empire being elsewhere in this book of the Revelation expressed by the name of
a world) to persecute the name, or the bare profession of Christianity. So then
after a while that Constantine was settled in the Empire, the profession of
Christianity being now matter of honor and esteem in the world, multitudes of
persons changed professions, and would needs become Christians; as we have
amongst us multitudes of drunkards, and swearers, and adulterers, and covetous,
and persecutours, that will needs be Christians, professors of Christianity,
as well as the best; the state wherein they live, favoring a profession of
Christianity. But it was not long, before these professors of Christianity,
being multiplied to vast numbers, began to taste the different spirits one of
another, in their different walkings and applications in the world. Those who
were carnal, and worldly, and complied with men in place and power, to be
countenanced and preferred in the world by them, were censured and reproved by
the holy and heavenly conversation of those, who neglected the great things of
the world, and applied themselves close to the principles of their profession,
and the great things of eternity, so long, till they were no longer able to
bear it; but the wickedness and hypocrisy of their hearts brake out and
discovered themselves, by stirring up the powers of the world (I mean, the
civil Magistrate, into whose affections they had wound themselves by undue and
unworthy applications) to persecute the other, as being troublesome and
dangerous, in, and to, their state. This (I conceive) is clearly signified,
verse. 17. of the same chapter, where its said, that the dragon was wroth with
the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed. The Dragon (i.
as all Expositours agree, the devil; yea the holy Ghost himself so interprets)
was wrath with the woman i. with the Church of Christ, indefinitely considered
as a body or party of men professing the name of Christ, in the world. The
devil was wroth with this woman: why? because she had now gained into her
party, his greatest vicegerent he had, for the time being, viz. the Roman
Emperor: who till now had been the Son of his right hand, and made havoc of
Christian profession. But being sorely galled and vexed at this, by way of
revenge, he went (says the vision) to make war with the remnant of the woman's
seed. He went viz. cunningly or by stealth, and as if it had not been he, (for
so the word elsewhere signifies, Mat. 13. 25.) to make war with the remnant of
the woman's seed. i. with that remainder of Christian Professors, who were
sincere, and stood close to the rule and principles of their profession. But
whether or to whom did he go, to make this war, with this remnant, or smaller
part of the woman's seed? Doubtless to the other part, who were the far
greater part hereof; I mean, to such professors of Christianity, who being now
come where the honey of this world lay thick upon the ground, gave over the
close chase and pursuit of the world to come, and beginning at first only to
lick and taste, of this honey; in time they came to love it so inordinately, that
they fed foul upon it, yea and surfetted. Now the Devil wisely apprehending
that there is no sort of men, likely to make better soldiers for his purpose,
when he intends to levy war against those that are Saints indeed, then formal
and worldly professors of Christianity, who commonly pretend to Saint-ship
with more impatiency of being questioned upon the point, then they; unto these,
being now grown numerous, and many of them potent in the Roman State, he
applies himself, and by working upon such corrupt principles in them, (as
pride, covetousness, ambition, and especially that root of bitterness, that
hatred, wherewith they secretly burned against their Brethren, who in
uprightness and faithfulness of walking, were separated from them) which
made them obnoxious unto him, in a short time he inflamed them into such a
malignity of spirit against that holy remnant (we spoke of) of the woman's seed;
that they consulted hard things against them, and sought their ruin. But of
this carnal, worldly and persecuting party, shortly sprang that great and
famous enemy of Christ, and his Saints, the great persecutour of the righteous
generation (surnamed Antichrist) and he being advanced and gotten up into his
throne became like an whore, who made all nations drunk with the wine of the
wrath (or rather of the poison or i^ toxication, for so (...), many times
signifies) of her fornication and allured the Kings of the Earth to commit
fornication with her: i. to quit the holy commandments, and spiritual worship
of Jesus, and to embrace her adulterated religion; insomuch that they all, all
the ten Kings (for these only he calls the Kings of the Earth) amongst whom the
Roman Empire in the fall and breach of it, was divided, gave their Kingdoms,
and their power to the beast, Reve 17. 17.
i. agreed as it were with him, not all of them to profess every article or
point in religion, which he professes (for there is few of these Kings, or
Kingdoms, which do this) but to join with him in persecuting, or making war
with the remnant of the seed of the woman, who keep the Commandments of Jesus.
For whilst Kings and States do this, they give their power to the Beast; and
support his Kingdom, and justify his proceedings against the Saints; what
tenets in Christian religion soever, in the mean time they profess. He can
willingly enough give liberty of conscience in some doctrinalls, unto those,
who are willing to give the right hand of fellowship unto him in persecuting
the Saints, from whose faith only he fears the ruin of his kingdom.

It is true, this Antichristian Beast, with his great assistants, the Kings of
the earth, in the heat of their bloody expedition, their course of persecuting
the Saints, meet now and then with some storms and tempests of blood from
heaven falling upon themselves; the seven vialls have been, and are to be all
poured out upon their quarters. But as they that came to apprehend Christ,
though they met with a sore brush in attempting their enterprise, they were
beaten backward down to the earth by the word of Christ; yet would not give
over so, but got up again, and went on with their work; So though that scarlet
whore, with her accomplices, who love to make themselves drunk with the Saints,
have been once and again sorely rebuked from heaven, and have had their own
blood given them to drink: yet have not the wages made them out of love with
their work, their stocks and stones which they worship and serve, have made
them so like unto them (as David speaks) that they cannot see truth in any
religion, but only in that, which will be their ruin. But this by the way.

The Second kind of subject, or vein of matters wherein the Scriptures
holds forth the operating Providence of God, consists of things moral; or of
a moral consideration. And herein also, we may clearly see the same things
acted and done in the world, which are presented unto us in the Scriptures. We
shall mention only two particulars, and this very briefly, because there is not
much in them.

1. We know that the providence of God so orders and disposes between
persons and persons, that some are of sweeter tempers and dispositions, and of
far better principles in matters of morality, then others. Some are by nature
so Cynicall and froward, and Nabal like, that a man cannot speak to them;
others, have that fairness and delightsomnesse of 2. Sam. 15 5.
carriage from God by nature, which Absalom had by his dissimulation, from the
Devil, when he spoke every man fair that came to him: So again, nature commends
some of her children with gravity and soberness of disposition, witness the
Ruler who had kept all the commandments of the second table from his youth;
whereas she disparageth others, by setting them forth with a rough and
careless temper. Hereof that unrighteous Judge, spoken of Luke 18. who neither
feared Luke 18. 21.
God, nor regarded man, may yet be a competent witness. The like is observable
in many other diversities, and contrarieties of tempers.

2. The faithful servants and children of God, many times speed better, and
are more courteously entreated, more justly dealt with, by mere natural and
moral men, and such as are strangers unto God, then by many that are forward
and zealous professors of religion. The days wherein we live, have furnished
us with many experiments, and observations in this kind. How many mere
natural and moral men, scarce pretending so much as to a form in religion,
have been shadows to the Saints, whilst many Grandees in profession, have been
a scorching heat? with how much more righteousness and equity, has their
cause been judged by mere strangers, then by those who pretend highly to the
same household of Faith with them? How has the wisdom of the children of
light, been justif^ed, by the ingenuity of the sons of nature, whilst it has
been condemned by the superstitious partiality of those, who Act. 15. 14, 15
Act. 28. 17, 18, 19
call themselves a generation of the righteous: Thus did Festus an heathen and
Idolater, justify Paul, professing that he had found nothing worthy of death
that he had committed, when as all the multitude of the Jews, zealous
professors of the worship of the same God with them, cried out, that he ought
not to live any longer; yea the High Priest himself, and the chief of this
devout nation, thought they did God service, in seeking to take away his life,
though in a treacherous way. Act 25 3.
Thus likewise that Just one himself, was pronounced Just, Mat. 27. 24.
by Pilate, an heathen Judge (and by his wife also v. 1^.
) and clearly acquitted from all manner of blame touching those things, whereof
he was accused; Luk 23. 14
yea this Pilate had determined, Act. 3. 13.
and labored it accordingly, Luke 13. 14. 15 16. 20 2^. etc.
to discharge and set him free; when as the chief Priests, who were looked upon
both by themselves, and others, as the chief pillars of religion, and the true
worship of God in those days, together with the rulers, and great bulk of that
zeale-professing people; both falsely and furiously accused him; Luk 23. 18.
charged him with blasphemy, Mat. 26. 65.
with perverting the nation, Luke 23. 2.
with forbidding to give tribute unto Caesar, idem.
and were so exceeding mad in their hatred against him, that nothing could
restore them to their wits and senses, but only a sacrifice made of his life
upon the service thereof. Musculus expounding those words in Isaiah 8. 12.
neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid, observes, that the Prophet and the
godly people with him, were in greater danger of the reprobate and stifnecked
Church of Judah, then either of the Syrians, or Assyrians; yea and makes this
general observation, that it is the lot and condition of persons truly godly,
who live and converse amongst a stubborn, wicked, and rebellious people,
claiming Church-ship and relation unto God, not only to be in danger of
receiving mischief, from the professed enemies of God, but from those also, who
make profession of the same religion with them; who are wont with far more
bitterness and violence to prosecute the godly, who dissent from their courses
and ways, then those who professedly are the enemies both of God, and his
people Quin si sorte^ piorum, qui in populo Dei rebelli and contumaci impio and
incredulo versantur probe consideres, sic est illa comparata, ut non modo
periculum sit a professis populi Dei hostibus, sed and ab ipso populo ejusdem
religicnis consorte, qui multo acerbius insectatur pi^s, a studijs suis
abhorrentes, quam qui ex professo sunt Dei ac populi sui hosts. Quare non
minus, imo plus periculi erat Fro^hete, and reliquis pijs, quos hic Dominus
alloquitur, a reproba and contumaci Ecclesia Iehudae, quam a Syris, vel
Assyrijs.
.

The Third and last general head, of things mentioned, wherein the working or
disposing Providence of God, in the affairs and occurrences of the world,
answers the pattern of the Scriptures, is of things that are spiritual, or
of a spiritual consideration. This correspondency or agreement we shall take
notice of in five particulars.

1. In the variety or several kinds of means, by which men and wom^n
ordinarily are brought home unto God, and built up in the knowledge of God. 2.
in the property or quality of these means. 3. in the manner or terms, upon
which men are brought home unto God, and savingly converted unto the faith. 4.
in the different conditions, dispositions, practices, of those, who are brought
home unto God, before this blessed motion is found in them. 5. (and lastly) in
the different growths or statures, as well in knowledge, as in grace, of those
that are brought home unto God, after their coming into this estate.

1. For the several kinds or variety of means, by which men are ordinarily
brought home unto God, the Scripture runs much upon three; first, judgments or
afflictions: secondly, the excellent carriages and deportments of the Saints in
their wa^es: thirdly, (and lastly) the ministry of the Gospel.

For the first, the Scripture speaks much of afflictions, as of a kind of
ordinance sanctified by God, for the reducement of men unto themselves, and
consequently unto himself. Even as Solomon speaks of the rod (in the letter, or
properly so called) as if it were appointed by God to drive out that childish
Pro 22. 15.
folly or unto wardnesse which is bound up in the heart of a child: but the rod
of correction shall drive it far from him; In like manner, there is a kind of
folly, appropriate unto men; (you may call it spiritual folly,) a remissness
and negligence of soul, to look after the great things of their peace: which
the Scripture represents as frequently cured, or driven out of men, by the hand
of afflictions. Thus Elihu in Job, And if they Job. 36. 8, 9, 10.
be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction, then he shows
them their work, and their transgressions, that they have exceeded, he opens
also their ear unto discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity.
-- So the rod of extreme misery and shame, drove away that abundance of folly
which was bound in the Prodigalls heart before, far from him, Luke 15. Isa. 26.
9.
and brought him home to his fathers house. And that of Isaiah is of the same
importance, When thy judgments are in the Earth, the inhabitants of the world
will learn righteousness (with many the like.) If we look into the world
amongst the Saints, and the congregations of the righteous, there are many of
them will tell you, how they were driven in to their spiritual refuge or
shelter, by some temporal storm; not that tribulations or afflictions, have
by, or of, themselves, brought any man home unto God, but they have awakened
many to enquire after, to attend, and intermeddle with that wisdom, by which
they have been brought unto God. As though a lie Romans 3 7.
in the nature of it, be most contrary to Gods glory, yet he can overrule it,
and through his truth make it to abound to his glory; so though sickness and
weakness, and poverty, and disgrace, and imprisonment, etc. be contrary to the
peace and comforts of men; yet God who sometimes caused the sun to turn head
upon its own proper motion, and to go backward, can, and many times does,
alter the course and tendency of afflictions, which is to make men miserable,
and to curse them; but he makes them to bless them altogether.

2. The Scriptures speaks much of the worthy and excellent deportment of the
Saints, as having great authority and power to work, and that saving-wise, upon
the hearts and consciences of natural men: and to persuade and prevail with
Mat. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 12. 3. 1, 1.
them, to the embracing of that truth, which will both sanctify and save them.
Let your light (says our Savior to his disciples) so shine before men i. (let
your conversation in all parts of it, be so pregnantly and convincingly
excellent and holy) that they may sea your good works, and glorify your father
that is in heaven. i. that beholding and considering the worth and heavenly
import of your actions and course, they may be so taken and overcome therewith,
as to turn Proselytes to heaven, and so have a rich and happy occasion
ministered unto them, of magnifiing God for such a mercy. The Apostle Peter
atrributes no less to the royal walkings of Christians. And have your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil of you as
evil doers, may by your good works which they shall see, glorify God in the
day of visitation; clearly implying, that the lives and ways of the Saints may
be raised to that height and pitch of excellency and of glory, that the
profaneness, ignorance, and unbelief of men will be astonished at them; yea and
those, who sometimes were the firstborn enemies of these very men, be so far
transformed in their minds and spirits, as to bless and glorify God on their
behalf, as having savingly touched their hearts and consciences with the finger
of their holy and heavenly conversations. So again cap. 3. 1. (of the same
epistle) he supposes that such husbands, who obey not (and so, either cannot,
or will not be won by) the word, may yet, without the word, be won by the
conversation of the wives, whilst they behold their chaste, or pure*
conversation, coupled with fear.

I believe if inquiry were made throughout the household of faith in the
several societies of the Saints, up and down the world, there will many be
found, who will confess and acknowledge, that the godly, righteous, and sober
conversation of the Saints, have been benefactours to them in their spiritual
affairs, and contributed richly toward their believing. Though I confess that
it is not like that this kind of means, should have blessed the world in these
our days, at any such rate, as it did in the primitive times, or as it well
might do at any time; because there is not, there has not been, so much of
God in the lives and ways of the Saints amongst us, as was in the days of the
Apostles; Professors of religion, in these days, are crest-fallen (as it
were,) and sunk many degrees lower and nearer to the Earth in their spirits,
principles, actions, and deportments, in comparison of what they were
heretofore: there is too much of themselves, and too little of God in their
ways, to do any great things in the world in that kind we speak of. The
Genius of Christians and true believers in Paul's days, was like that of Paul
himself, viz. to forget the things that were behind, and to press hard, [or
endeavor themselves] unto that which was before; whereas now such a spirit
Phil. 3. 13.
of unworthiness generally rules among professors of religion, which
persuades them to remember the things that are behind, viz. that they have
truly believed, that they are in an estate of grace and salvation, that so they
may have a pretense, not to endeavor themselves toward that which is before;
i. (as the Apostle had express^d it verse. 11.) toward the attaining of the
resurrection of the dead; meaning (the which elsewhere he calls) perfection.
For when Christians are excellent, and full of God, in their lives and ways,
they live as it were in the state of the resurrection of the dead; wherein men
are no ways swayed or acted by the cares, or lusts, or sears of this present
world, or by any unworthy dispositions, or distempers of their natures; but
live (as our Savior says) like the Angels of God. If believers would sow
more liberally unto the spirit, would put more cost, more of that precious
ingredient, the resurrection of the dead, into their lives, the strength of
their influence upon the world, (I mean upon the souls and consciences of men
yet natural) would be doubled and trebled; and many more, in an ordinary way
of Providence, would be wrought upon, and won to the Faith of Christ by them,
then now are. But this by the way.

3. (And lastly, for this) The most common and effectual means of all the
rest, which the Scriptures present unto us, as anointed and sealed by God for
the gathering in of Christ's sheep, into his fold, from their goings astray in
the world, I mean, for the effectual conversion of souls unto God, is the
ministry of the Gospel, the spreading abroad of the sweet savor 1 Timothy 4. 16.
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
of the knowledge of Jesus Christ amongst men. We know the Scripture speaks
much to this point: we shall not need to multiply places. Peter by casting the
net we speak Acts 2 41.
of, (the Gospel,) out of the right side of the ship, enclosed a multitude of
men fishes (as Christ had told him that he would make him a fisher of men) even
three thousand souls at once. So Paul to Timothy, Take heed to thy self, and to
thy doctrine; continue in them: for by doing this, thou shall both save thy
self, and them that hear thee. So that the ministry and preaching of the
Gospel, is the great standing ordinance of heaven for the translating of men
and women from death to life; for the conveying and carrying them over that
great lake or gulf, which lies between an estate of sin and unbelief on the
one hand, and a condition of peace and blessedness, on the other; Therefore
they who despise, or neglect it, are as great enemies to themselves and their
own salvation, as those Pharisees and Lawyers were, who rejected the counsel
of God against themselves, in refusing to be baptized by John, Luke 7. 30. It
were easy to make the pile of testimonies, greater in this kind: but a first
fruits insuch a case as this, is better then an harvest.

Now we all generally know, and cannot but confess, that such as the
Scriptures are in this behalf, such are the actings and workings and
dispensations of the providence of God in the world. Go through the Churches of
the Saints, ask of the sons and daughters of God in all their quarters, how and
by what means, they came to be partakers of the divine nature, which is in
them: doubtless they will generally answer you as with one mouth, that it was
by that immortal seed of the word of God, sown in their hearts, by some that
went out from him to sow it. There is not one amongst many, but will give this
account of their translation from death unto life, from the power of Satan,
unto the kingdom of God.

2. The Scriptures hold forth the active and working providence of God (in
reference to things of a spiritual importance) as considerable in the
property, or quality of the means, by which ordinarily men are savingly wrought
upon, and brought home unto God. And that quality or property in the means we
speak of, which the Scripture principally eyes, as rendering all the several
kinds of these means, that were mentioned, the more effectual and proper for
their ends (the bringing in of souls unto God) is an abundance of God in them;
and as little of the creature as may be. Afflictions, the more they have of God
in them; and so the lives of the Saints, the more they have of God in them; and
especially the ministry of the Gospel, the more it has of God in it; all
these means (I say) of bringing men home unto God, the more they have of God in
them, are so much the more effectual, and likely to prosper in their way.
First, those afflictions have most of God in them, first, which are more
extraordinary and rare, and that either in respect of the nature and kind of
them, or of the degree of them, or of the second means producing them: secondly
which have the most manifest sympathy and agreement, or sutablenesse with such
sins, one or more, in our lives, for which we have been most reproved; either
by our own consciences, or otherwise, and notwithstanding have not forsaken
them. Thirdly, which strike us (as it were) in the master-veyn of our pleasures
and contentments in the world, when the firstborn of all our enjoyments and
contentments on earth, are as it were singled out from all the rest, and slain,
or else sorely smitten, by the hand of God, in the affliction. Fourthly (and
lastly) which touch and smite the conscience, without any outward breach made
upon men. Such afflictions which have the greatest proportion, of one or more,
or all of these properties in them, are the most like of all others to be
operative upon men in a way of salvation. If you first search the Scriptures,
and the world, you will find the one answering the other in the truth of these
things. Those troubles or afflictions which the Scriptures mention and record,
as having wrought occasionally upon men toward their conversion unto God, you
will clearly find to have had one or more, of those ingredients in them which
have been described, and that in some considerable degree. We need not stand to
examine particular instances. That smiting to the earth, which prepared the
Apostle Paul to hearken the more attentively to the voice that spoke to him
from heaven, had much of God in it, in regard of the strangeness and
extraordinarinesse of it, as also of the means producing it, so the fear and
astonishment in the Jailer which had a saving tendency in it, by causing him to
hearken to Paul's preaching of the Gospel, had much of God in it too, in regard
of the means producing it, which was the flying open of all the prison doors,
and the loosing of the prisoners bands, by means of a great earthquake, (or at
least in conjunction with this earthquake,) I forbear any more instances.

I make no question but some of you that are present, can parallel the
Scriptures in this point, at least so far, as to confess, that amongst those
afflictions, which have befallen you, in the course of your mortal pilgrimage,
those which have had most of God in them* in some or other of the
considerations mentioned, have been most operative and effectual upon you, to
persuade you to seek after God. So again,

2. The Scripture presents such ways and practices of the Saints, which have
most of God in them, as of the most efficacious tendency to prevail with others
(at least such as are capable of them) to enquire after God, to engage the
world to look after the things of eternity. Now such ways and practices of men
have (in the general) most of God in them, which most excel the common and
ordinary ways and practices of men in goodness, or which have the richest
strain of some such excellency, which is very rarely, if at all, to be found in
any degree, in the ways or practices of the men of this world. And that such
ways as these are of the richest tendency, to take the hearts and consciences
of natural and worldly men, and to awaken them to look after the things of
their peace, is sufficiently intimated in the Scriptures. But I say unto you
(says Christ) love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them which despightfully use you, and persecute
you; that ye may be (i. appear, approve your selves to be) the children of your
Father which is in Heaven; for he makes his sun to rise on the evil and on
the good: and sends rain on the just and the unjust: for if you love them
which love you, what reward have you? (i. what spiritual service do you unto
men, for which God should reward you?) Do not even the Publicanes the same?
And if you salute your Brethren only, what do you more then others, do not
even the Publicans so? The whole carriage of the place is clearly of this
importance, that an uniform and constant tenor of such actions and
deportments, which in loveliness and honor transcends the line of the common
civilities and courtesies of the world, has an excellent and potent tendency
to bless the world, by occasioning or causing men to conceive honorable and
worthy thoughts concerning God, his people and ways: Th^se passages of
Scripture also formerly cited in this argument (and in part explained) Mat. 5.
16. 1 Pet. 2. 12. 1* Pet. 3. 1* 2. shine with a clear light of the same truth.

And if we had the opportunity to converse freely with the hearts and
consciences of men, we should meet with many exemplifications of the Scriptures
in this particular. For (doubtless) there are few, if any, savingly converted,
and brought home unto God, whose conversion has not received, either rise or
progress, or both, from the virtuous and holy conversations, of those who were
in Christ before them: not is there any of these, if they please to recollect
themselves a little about the point, but w^ll be able to acknowledge and say,
that the nearer they ^aw Saints walking to the Heavens, the more the work of
their conversion was advanced by them.

3. (And lastly) For the ministry of the word and Gospel, the Scripture is yet
more clear in this: viz. that such a ministry, which has most of God in it,
is most effectual, and for the most part, most fruitful, either in bringing
in souls unto God, or in building up souls in God. Now that ministry has most
of God in it, which has most of Christ in it, with the least mixture of the
wisdom and weakness of the flesh: i. which 1. makes the cleerest and richest
discoveries of God in Christ, i. of the mind and counsel of God concerning the
salvation of men by Christ: and 2. which gives the cleerest testimonies, that
there is a reality and truth in those things, which it thus discovers, without
entermingling any thing, which is apt, or likely, to disable this testimony in
the hearts and consciences of men. I add this last clause, without intermixing
any thing, etc. because, though men do make rich discoveries of Christ, yea
and do argue and prove with some good authority and power, the reality and
truth of what they discover in this kind; yet if they mingle any thing of the
flesh herewith, if they attempt to bow, sway or carry any passages of the
Gospel, to make them to comply with any worldly end, as to gain, or hold the
savor of men, to gratify the flesh in any the lusts or ^ Cor. 2. 16, 17
undue desires thereof, to protect any unsound or weak opinion, because a man
stands already declared for it, or the like; any of these things will
proportionably incumber and disadvantage their work, and take away from the
weight and worth, of what they shall teach otherwise, especially in the
judgments and consciences of some men. To the one (says the Apostle) we are
the savor of death, unto death: and to the other the savor of life, unto
life, (and who is sufficient for these things?) For we are not, as many, which
corrupt the word of God; but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of
God speak we in Christ: clearly implying, that look in what degree any man
corrupts the word of God, in the ministry of it ( i. embaseth it with any
mixture whatsoever for the accommodation of the flesh) the less sincere, or
mindful he is of the inspection of God over him, whilst he preaches, he
renders the Gospel so much the less powerful and affectionate in his
dispensation of it, either for the conviction, or conversion of men: he causes
it to give forth so much the weaker and fainter smell, or savor, either of
death and condemnation to the wicked nd impenitent, or of life and peace, to
the righteous and believer. When the Gospel is preached sincerely, and as it
comes from God, it casts forth a strong sent, and fills the nostrills of the
souls and consciences of those that believe and submit unto it, with a most
odoriferous and pleasant savor of life, peace, and joy, in the love and favor
of God: as on the other hand it sends forth a strong sent or smell of the fire
and brimstone of hell, and of the eternal vengeance of a most dreadful God,
into the nostrills of all that are ungodly and disobedient. And in what degree
the spirit of it shall be at any time stifled, clogged or allayed, by any
carnal ingredient, it loses proportionably of the strength and vigor of
either of these operations.

3. Concerning the manner, or terms, upon which men and women are saviugly
brought home to God, the Scriptures represent the case under this difference:
viz. that some pass from death to life, after some such manner, as Peter
informs us that the Heavens shall pass away in the great day of the Lord,
(...), with a great noise; I mean, with great perplexity tumults,
consternation, and astonishment of soul, precedaneously ushering in, and
sometimes, for a while attending upon, this blessed change. Others again,
without so much as the mind in the least disquieted, or a thought troubled.
After the former manner, those converts of Peter, Act. 2. 37. and Paul's Jailer:
Act. 16. 27. yea and Paul himself, Act. 9. 4* 6. were brought into the household
of faith, God make a preface to the work of their conversion, in thunder. After
the latter, Matthew Mat. 9. 9, 10. Simon Peter, and Andrew, his Brother, Mat.
4. 18, 19, 20. and so Philip, Joh. 1. 43. and Nathaneell. verse. 45, 46. etc.
and Lydia, Act. 16. 14. (to omit others) were taken in to the Ark of life and
peace; God came to the hearts of these in a still voice, and this without the
harbingery either of whirlwind, earthquake or fire. If there were perfect
records, kept and searched into, of the manner, how, and the terms, upon which,
the present generation of the Saints, in all the respective members of it, came
into the estate of grace, wherein they stand; there is little question to be
made, but the one part of them would be found to have come after the one manner
specified; and another, according to the other. God shakes the foundations of
the hearts of some, and makes all that is within them to quake and tremble,
when he is about to remove them: others he removes with so gentle and soft an
hand, that it cannot be perceived, that so much as the least hair of their head
is shaken in the translation.

4. Concerning the different diipositions and practices of persons, before
their reconciliation unto God; the Scripture presents some, vile and
abominable above measure, in both: Others without any notorious blot or
foulness in either: some very conscientious in ways and practices, of a
grievous provocation in the sig^t of God; others without all sense or regard of
God in their impieties. The Prodigal in the parable, (Luke 15. 13, 18.) the
repentant Malefactor upon the cross, Mary Magdalene, several amongst the
converted Corinths, (1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. besides many others) are of the first
presentment. Of the second, Matthew, Andrew, Peter, and generally the Apostles,
together with Mary, the mother of Christ, Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea, the
Eunuch baptized by Philip, Lydia, etc. Concerning whom, we hear of nothing
memorable in any way, or practice of ^in, before their turning unto
righteousness. Of the third, the Apostle Paul himself ^^ an instance, in stead
of a thousand; who before his blessed Apostasy, from Satan unto God, thought
verily that he ought ^^ do many ^^ings against the name of Jesus of Nazareth:
and did accordingly, shutting up many of the Saints in prison, punishing them
throughout all the Synagogues, compelling them to blaspheme, and persecuting
them, even to strange cities Act. 26. 10,
.

Of the fourth and last representation, are the Ephesians, who were dead in
sins and trespasses, wherein in times past (i. before their conversion to the
truth) they walked according to the course of this world, after the Prince that
rules in the air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience
b; being without Christ, and without God (i. without either the sense, or
knowledge, either of Christ or of God) in the world c. And doubtless there are
in these our days, and have been in those past, persons both men and women,
under all these respective characters, baptized into the spirit of faith, and
holiness by the Gospel. The draw-net of the Gospel, at this day gathers
fishes, of all these several kinds, and makes them good, and fitting to be
gathered into vessels. A little observation of, and inquiry after, the manner
of the lives and principles of those before their new birth, who are from time
to time begotten of the immortal seed of the word, will abundantly satisfy,
in this; that the tenor of Gospel delineation, and of Providentiall acting in
that behalf, do answer one the other, as face answers face in the water.

5. (And lastly) for the different growths, and statures, as well in knowledge,
as in grace, of persons raised from the dead (in sin and unbelief) by the
Gospel, such as the Scriptures represent them, such does the daily experience
of the world exhibit them also. If the Churches of Christ, were diligently
surveyed, here will be found spiritual disproportions and inequalities,
answerable to those in civil States and Commonwealths; high and low, rich and
poor, one with another, some sitting upon the throne and reigning, others lying
in the dust, and complaining: some, clothed with scarlet, others with rags;
some, eating the f^t, and drinking the sweet of the Gospel; others, only
dipping their morsells in the vinegar thereof; and some again fed with food
convenient. They who travail the Scriptures meet with babes in Christ, in one
place, and with strong men, in another, with carnal believers in one place,
with spiritual in another, with men enriched by Christ with all utterance, and
with all knowledge in one place; with persons dull of hearing, allwaies
learning, and never able to come to any clear knowledge of the truth, in
another. Here are of the race of Oligopists, or little-faith'd Christians; and
here are also of the generation of the Plerophorists, whose faith laughs
heights, depths, life and death, things present and things to come, yea, every
creature in the face to scorn. And who knows not but the household of faith,
at this day consists of all these constitutions, tempers, and conditions of
men?.

Having thus opened and confirmed the consideration, or argument in hand, as to
the truth of it; Let us (in one word) consider the efficacy, and weight of the
relation of it to our purpose, and whether it does not mightily evince and
prove the Scriptures to be from God. When our Savior asked Philip, whence
shall we buy bread, that these may eat? the Evangelist ads, that this he said
to prove him, for he himself knew what he would do. If our Savior some time
before the working of the miracle (the feeding of five thousand with the 5
barley loaves, and two small fi^hes) should have told his disciples, or any
other, that there would such a number of men as five thousand repair shortly to
him; and that they should sit down upon the grass, and be all entertained, and
fully fed, with no more, no other provision, but only of five barley loaves, and
two fishes (which it seems by the Evangelist he could easily have done, knowing
what he meant, and withal what he was able, to do) would not those persons,
whoever they had been, to whom he should have signified this before hand, have
absolutely concluded, when they had seen the thing done, the miracle wrought
accordingly, that he himself was the worker of it, or at least had his
information and knowledge of the thing, before it was done, from him, who was
the doer or worker of it? In like manner, when we see such a model or map of
^he Government of the world, as is presented and held forth in the Scriptures,
made long ago, which answers in all points those dispositions,
dispensations, and events of things, which are observed and found daily in the
course of providence, and the government of the world, how can we but infer and
conclude that certainly he that could describe the manner of the government of
the world, in regard of such a variety of contingent and casual events, as
come to pass from time to time, so long since and before their coming to
pass, either is the governor of the world himself, or at least received his
instructions from him, who is the governor of the world, how to write? either
of which is sufficient to evince the original of the Scriptures to be from
God. It is true, men out of long observation, and experience either of their
own, or other men's improvements by contemplation, and a rational inquiry and
search into the reasons and causes of things, may describe and set down long
before many natural events, and such particulars relating to the government of
the world, which are wont to come to pass in a regular, constant, and
unaltered course, and whose causes are necessary; such as the motions of the
sun, moon, planets, and other stars, the times of their risings, and fallings,
eclipses, and such like; but for such things, such events, which depend upon
voluntary or free-working causes, which are wont to act, sometimes one way,
sometimes another and have no law of uniformity imposed upon them by God: he
that shall draw up such an exact platform of such actions, and proceedings of
these, as that which has been presented unto you, must needs be the governor
of the world himself, or at least have his directions for the work from him
(which is of the same importance for our purpose) Never was there any book or
author heard of, besides the bible and those that ploughed with this heifer (I
mean, that took the substance of what they wrote from hence) who either
represented the sufferings of the Saints, and those that should live godly in
Christ Jesus, from the world, or displa^ed that great variety that is, and all
ways has been, found amongst Christians, in respect of their spiritual
conditon, after any such manner, or upon any such terms, as the Scriptures do.
It is true* Juvenal, Tacitus, and some other Heathen Authors, mention some
remarkable ragings of Neroes cruelty against the servants of Christ in his
time; and further intimate a general odium or hatted of men against this
generation: but such veyns of relation as these, found in the bodies of such
Authors, do rather add unto, then take from, the divine Authority of the
Scriptures; attesting the truth of what they assert in these, by asserting the
truth of such hypotheses, or particular examples, which do abundantly confirm
the same. But concerning the greatest part of those things which we called
matters of a spiritual consideration, and which are things of choicest
observation in the government of the world, there is profound and deep silence
in all authors and writers whatsoever, those only excepted, who have drawn
their waters out of those wells of salvation, famously known amongst us, by the
name of, the Scriptures.

This for this fifth Demonstration, or argument, of that kind, we are yet
upon, viz. such acts or passages of Divine providence, whereby God plainly owns
the Scriptures as his, and from him.

We mentioned a sixth particular, under this head (which Jesus Christ in the
flesh, into the world. I make no question but many of you, have read the volume
of Church History, entitled, Acts and Monuments, published many years since by
Mr Fox, in the english tongue. You that have read this history cannot but know,
that God has broken out of heaven like a lion out of a thicket, from time to
time, with great terror and exemplarinesse of judgment, both upon particular
persons, and whole states and kingdoms too, who have magnified themselves, in
the greatest height of hatred, and enmity, and furiousness of proceedings,
against the Scriptures, and the religion contained and commanded therein. And
as God threatens that he would make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the
people round about, when they should be in seige against Judah and Jerusalem;
and again that he would make Jerusalem a burden some stone for all people:
telling them, that all that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pe^ces,
though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it; So has he
done, and is in doing by all Zach. 12. 2, 3.
States and Kingdoms in the world, that have and do oppose the Scriptures or
the truth contained in them, or that afflict, oppress, and exercise cruelty
upon those, who hold forth the truth of them, with greatest power and advantage
unto the world, Those persons, States, and Kingdoms, who thirsting after the
blood of the Saints, made way by a strong hand of violence, oppression and
cruelty, to come at it, and drank of it; found it a cup of trembling, and
astonishment unto them: though the taste of it was very sweet, and as honey in
the mouth, and in the going down, so that they thought they had had a sovereign
cordial of it, and that which would have bred the best blood that ever ran in
their veyns; yet when it got into their bellies, it wrought terribly, it made
them cast up all the sweet morsells of the pleasures and contentments of this
world that ever they had devoured, it either brought present death, ruin, and
destruction upon them, or else exposed them to shame and misery in the world.
And as sometimes it comes to pass, that he that heaves at a stone that is too
heavy for him, and seeks to take it up, and bear it away upon his shoulder, is
thrown back and dashed to pieces, by the weight of it; So have many, both
persons, and kingdoms, heavd at the Scriptures, and those that held them
forth, attempting the removal both of the one, and of the other, out of the
world: whose enterprise has recoild upon them, with such violence, that their
bones have been broken, yea they and their kingdoms dashed in pieces by it.

If we speak of states and kingdoms, God began that examplarinesse of
judgment we speak of, with Egypt (in the letter) and has done somewhat, and
will proceed further very shortly, yea and will conclude with Egypt in the
spirit (or Egypt spiritually so called) I mean that scarlet whore, that mother
of abominations spoken of in the Revelation, who makes her self drunk with the
blood of the Saints. Concerning Egypt in the letter, it was foretold by him
that put the thing in to execution, and did the deed afterward, four hundred
years before it was acted, that he would judge this state and kingdom for
their opposing and attempting to suppress, the truth, or true worship of God
(now held forth in the Scriptures) in the persons of those, in whose hearts and
lives only Genesis 15. 13, 14
it was then written, Know of a surety (says God to Abraham) that thy seed
shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and
they shall afflict them four hundred years. And also that nation whom they
shall serve, (viz. in afflictions, oppressions, and sufferings) will I judge.
viz. with most exemplary and remarkable judgments indeed, as is to be read at
large in Exodus. So now the same God, having strecht the same line of judgment
and destruction over many other States, nations, and kingdoms by the way, in
the succeeding generations of the world, has at this day, spiritual Egypt in
chase* that Autichristian state, which troubles the Christian world in blood,
who is active by her prophets, agents, and instruments in sheep clothing, and
who have his mark, not in their foreheads, where the world might take notice of
it, but in their hand, which they shut, and so keep the mark therein secret
from the sight of the generality of men (though the Saints know it to be there
by their actings and workings) that antichristian state (I say) which is active
by such agents as these, in making war, against that remnant of the seed of the
woman, who keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus, God
has in chase, and is in pursuit hereof, with his judgments; and though
sometimes he seems to make a default, and to be at a loss of his game, yet he
will soon recover, and follow closer then ever, the sent of the blood of his
Saints: yea he will not give over the chase till he has hunted, this great
Nimrod himself, this mighty hunter of the Saints, and of the testimony of
Jesus, into the pit of destruction even the lake that burns with fire. Of old
he anointed but 3 swords, to destroy Idolatry and Idolaters, out of Israel, the
sword of Jehu, the sword of Hazael, the sword of Elisha, and foretold, that he
that escaped the first, should be slain by the second, and that he that escaped
the second, should be met withal and be slain by the third, by which also it
appears that he gave many of them times of ease and respi^ 1 Kin. 19. 17.
between a space or spaces, wherein to repent, before he out them of; but yet
went on, with the course of his judgment notwithstanding, and did by the
second and third sword, make short work (as the Scripture phrase is) at last,
with those who did not repent. But to destroy that great Idolatry, and Rev. 15.
7.
Idolatrous state out of the world, h^ has consecrated seven golden vialls,
full of his wrath; and has appointed so many Angels, to pour them out one
after another, though not presantly or immediately one after another, but with
some competent space of time between, to try the working of them respectively,
upon that State or generation of men, on whom they are to be poured* and the
great quarrel which the glorious God has with this Idolatrous or antichristian
State we speak of, for the pleading of which he has prepared the seven vialls
of wrath mentioned, i^ their hatred against the testimony of Jesus, as it is
held forth, acted, and contended for by his Saints, and servants, that are
faithful unto him, and to his crown and kingdom. For this (by the way) is to
be known and considered, that though it be flesh and blood, or the persons of
men and women against, or upon whom, the enemies of the truth, or of the
Scriptures, utter and express their bloody hatred and enmity, and the
oppression and murder of the Saints, be mentioned is one of the principal
sins, that arm^ the right hand of God, with sury and ^engeance against them,
yet it is not simply flesh and bl^od, or the persons of men* which they so hate
and persecute, but the Scriptures, and that in the truth and holiness of them,
^^ being received in, and given out again, in soundness and sincerity of
profession, by ways and conversations in such men, suitable to them. If they
could separate the truth, from the men, and take them off from ways and
practices consederate with in, their hatred and indignation against them would
soon be (...)yed and cease. And this the Holy Ghost himself implies, R^c. 12.
ult. where he says that the dragon was wroth with the woman, and w^nt to make
^ar with the r(...)nt of her seed, which keep the (...) a^d^ments of God, and
have the testimony of Jesus Rev. 12, 17:
Christ; clearly implying that all the quarrel the dragon had against the
(...), was only this* the^^ were conscientious and faithful in a practical
observation of the commandments of God, and* held forth the truth and purity
of the doctrine of Christ, and of the Gospel, by a zealous and unstained
profession.

It is true, the Beast himself professes, and that with great vehemence of
contestation, that he and his children are they that keep the commandments of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus; But* what commandments of God are they,
which they keep? o^ what testimony of Jesus is it, which they have? they keep
such of the commandments of God, or rather so much of the commandments of God,
as they conceive necessary to cover the nakedness of their hypocrisy, whilst
they carry o^ an earthly design of secular greatness for themselves, under a
pretense and color of advancing the spiritual interests of Jesus Christ in
the world: but for such of these commandments, which rise up* in their might
(as many of them do) against the horrid impiety of their proceedings, they
tread and trample them under their feet, like clay and ^ire in the streets. And
for the testimony of Jesus, they have i^ in ink and paper, in their books* but
in the fleshly ^^l^s of their heart* they have a law of hypocrisy written in
de(...) of it, and whenever Christ in his testimony opposes (...) i^ their
interest (as at every time all most ^e does) they say unto Christ in his
testimony, as Christ sometimes s^id unto Satan in his disciple, Get thee
behind ^^, for thou art an offense unto (...).

Now then this is that which I say, (and I speak ^t as from the mouth of the
Lord* both for your comfort, and mine own, and of many others engaged in the
same honorable cause with us) that whatsoever we shall suffer for
righteousness ^ake, or for the holding forth ^^y ^ar^ of the testimony of
Jesus* unto the world, whether it be (...) of life, liberty, ^a^^, or ^s^^te,
or in what kind so^^er god will call those to a s^ver^ account (...) it, for
whom and by whose means, we shall suffer, a^ he has called to account (in
part) for our brethren, who have suffered from the same spirit, or generation
of men, upon the (...) terms, before ^^. There have been already, three of the
seven vials mentioned, by the consent of all our interpreters (upon the matter)
if not four, poured out upon that antichristian state, and generation of men,
who persecute the Saints: and though God suffers them to take breath a while
between vial and vial, and gives them opportunity, to fall afresh again to
their work of persecution, after some discouragement and interruption; yet we
may assure our selves, that if they will not give over their occupation in
blood, neither will he give ^ver his of taking vengeance: the rest of the seven
angels, whose vials are yet unpoured out, stand in his presence, waiting but
for the direction of his eye; which shall be given unto them in due time, and
then what the three or four former vials have left of this spirit and power in
the world, those that remain will, when they shall be poured out, abolish and
destroy utterly. Then shall be fulfilled, that which is written: They shall not
hurt or destroy, in all my holy mountain, says the Lord* sufferings for the
testimony of Jesus, shall th^^ be swallowed up into victory. O persecution
where is thy sting? O ye so^s of blood, where is your victory? Women that are
any Isa. 65. 25.
thing masculine, in their spirits and courage, though they may have some
sorrow as well as others, when their hour comes (as our Savior speaks) yet if
they could be confident, that a man should be born into the world, by their
labor and travail, and that they should live to see, and enjoy the comfort of
it, they would not be much troubled ^t any pains they might endure, upon such
terms. Joh. 16. 21.


Therefore let us not forget the encouragement that speaks unto us. Fear none
of th^se things which thou shall suffer Rev. 2. 10.
. For if we travail we shall the second time bring forth that manchild who
shall rule the nations with a rod of iron, yea immediately upon this birth, he
will rule them upon other terms of power and glory, then he has done to this
day. As a woman can have no child or son, likely in time to protect her, or to
be ^^ honor unto her, unless ^he first travails and suffers pains in bringing
him forth: so neither must the Church of God expect to have Christ present at
any time in power and height of protection with her or to be a glory unto her,
in the fight o^ the world, unless she first groans and labors under
persecutions, which are as proper a means to bring him forth upon such terms,
as the pains or* throws of a woman in travail are, ^^ bring forth the child
that is yet in her wo^b. But this by the way.

Let us (in a word) weigh the strength of this consideration also, and see
whether it will not contribute liberally as all the former have done, toward
the relief of our consciences, against all jealousies and fears, least the
original and authority of the Scriptures should not pro^e divine. Behold
(says God unto his Church and people) all they that were incensed against
thee, shall be ashamed and conf(...)ded, they shall be as nothing, and they
that strive with thee shall perish. Thou shall s^^k them, and shall not find
them, even them that con^^nded Isa. 41. 11, 12.
with the^; they that war against thee, shall be as nothing, and as a thing of
naught. Does not God, by speaking the^e things to a particular people, or
generation of men, and acting accordingly for them, and in their vindication,
plainly declare a peculiar relation to them, and that he had ch^s^n them, (as
he had said ^ little before) from amongst all other people, and formed them (as
he says elsewhere) for a peculiar people to himself? and that all other people
and nations, for whom he never did, nor intended to do, any such things as
these, were but str^ngers to him, in comparison? In like manner, God having
risen up in all ages, and from time to time, to plead the cause of the
Scriptures, and of th^se who professed the faith, and practiced the doctrine of
them, and that with great jealousy and wr^th* against such who appeared in
enmity and opposition, either against the one or the other, having done no such
thing for any other kind of writing, or for the lovers or professors of any
other kind of learning, or doctrine whatsoever, against their enemies: does
not this plainly demonstrate and evince* that he owns the one, the Scriptures,
as peculiarly his, and formed by himself, and that ^e reject^ all the ^^s^, as
touching such a relation. For as the Apostle evinceth the excellency of Christ
above the Angels, as being the son of God, by demanding or rather r^^soning
th^^. But to which of the ^ Angels said he a^ any time, (...) at my righ^ hand,
until ^ m^k^ thine enemies thy footstool? implying, that he had so said unto
Heb. 1. 1^
Christ; so may we clearly enough evince and prove, the excellency of the
Scriptures, above all other writings and doctrins whatsoever, and their
peculiar relation unto God, by such a demand (reason-wise) as this: Did God say
unto any other book or doctrine, or to the professors of them, Lif^ up your
heads; maintain your authority and interest in the hearts and consciences of
men in the world, until I make your enemies your footstool? Or has he not
said thus (in effect) to the Scriptures and the true professors of their
doctrine? has he not given their enemies from time to time: as the dust to
their sword? and as driven stubbl^ to their bow? Has not the world beg^n to
fall before them? and shall it not fall altogether? Thus has it been done,
and thus shall it be done still, to that doctrine, to that religion, with the
true professors of it, which God will honor: but it neither has been, nor
shall be so done unto any other. And thus we have done with our sixth and last
of the first sort of arguments, to evince the divinity of the Scriptures, under
the second general head, which we called, extrinsecall. These arguments were
such passages or acts of Providence, whereby God plainly owns the Scriptures as
his, and as proceeding from him.

The latter kind of arguments contained under the same general head, consists
of such, partly doings, partly sayings of men, which are so far confederate
with those providence of God, as to join in testimony with them in the behalf
of the Scriptures. We shall be very brief both in the proposal, and arguing
of these, though they be both the one and the other of them, of as large a
consideration, as any of the former.

First, There have been, and are daily acted and done by men such things, which
clearly prove the Scriptures to be from God. These again may be divided into
two sorts: they are either 1. such actions, by which the predictions or
prophetical carriages of the Scriptures (I mean, some of them, and such as
^^inently considerable) are fulfilled, or else, 2. such by which the
doctrinall, or sententious passages of the Scriptures, and these like wise very
remarkable, are verified and asserted.

For the former. The actions of men, by which that spirit of prophecy, which
speaks in them, is justified, i. by which the things predeclared and foretold
by this spirit, are accordingly performed and done in the world, do give
testimony unto the Scriptures, that they are divinely inspired, and from God.
Thus the act of Judas in betraying Christ, and the Apostles flying, those
actions of the soldiers in crucifying Christ, and those mortiall actions of
the Romans, by which they conquered Jerusalem, defaced and demolished the
temple, not leaving one stone upon another, all these did abundantly
demonstrate the Scriptures to be from God.

The Christian worlds, wondering after the Beast, so long together, the ten
Kings, in giving their Kingdoms unto the Beast, the Beast in making war with
the Saints, with many other actions of men, prophetically fore showed in the
book of the Revelation, do the like. At this day (amongst our selves) they that
express hatred against the Saints (godly men) for Christ's sake, i. for that of
Christ which is in them, their godliness or holiness; so again, they who act
as men, that cannot, or will not, endure sound doctrine ( viz. such doctrines
or truths, though never so agreeable to the word of God, which cross their
carnal ends or humors, or temporal designs but after their own lusts will
heap up unto themselves teachers) i. will seek out and follow, they care not
how many teachers, that will comport with them, and strengthen their hand, in
their sinful and unworthy ways; they (I say) who do such things as these, do
by such actions, confirm and seal the divine original of the Scriptures,
though they intend nothing less. As Paul sometimes said of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and their rulers, that because they knew not Christ, nor yet the
words of the Prophets, which are read every Sabbath day amongst them, they
fulfilled them in condemning them: So may it be said of many the inhabitants of
London, and of Act. 13. 27.
their rulers, that because they know not Jesus Christ, nor the words of the
prophets and Apostles, though they be read yes and preached unto them every
Sabbath day, yea and oftener too, they fulfill both in condemning Christ, both
in many of his servants, and in many of his Truths; and consequently by walking
contrary to the Scriptures, they assert the Scriptures, and secure their
authority from above. So again those amongst us, who having been formerly sins
and daughters of Belial, full of all unrighteousness, and all manner of
abominations, but have now through the grace of God, fo far remembered
themselves and the extreme vileness and sinfullnesse of their former ways,
that they build up with both their hands the honor of Christ, and of that
religion, which before they pulled down, marching in the head of the Saints,
and out running those in the race of holiness, who had set out long before
them; such persons as these also, by such ways and actions as these, do make
the crown of divine authority upon the head of the Scriptures to flourish,
because they give accomplishment to that remarkable and prophetical saying,
that many that are last shall be first, as on the other hand, they who having
been salt, but are now become unsavory, good for nothing but to be thrown upon
the dunghill, and trodd^^ and trampled under feet by men; who were sometimes
like shining stars, Mar. 10. 31.
of the first magnitude in the firmament of religion, but are now fallen to the
earth, and move according to the course and motions of this present world,
practicing enmity and hatred against the Saints, against the ways and truths of
God, such as these likewise, even by these ways and works of abomination,
plead the same cause with the former, the royal parentag^ and descent of the
S^riptures from God; inasmuch as they plainly attest and keep from falling to
the ground, such a saying of prophecy in them, which otherwise might seem but a
dead letter, without any spirit of life and truth in it, and so might pollute
or endanger the credit and authority of all the rest; this I mean, That there
are many first, which shall be last. The truth is, that the Scriptures are so
framed and contrived, that let men walk which way they will, let them set their
faces, and fall in their practices, either to the E^st, or to the West, to the
North or to the South; let them be righteous, or unrighteous in what degree
they please: yea let them set themselves with all their might, and with all
their strength to oppose them, yet they shall do homage unto them: yea their
fiercest contestations, and most fierce oppositions against them, shall and
will* will or nill they, turn unto them for a testimony, and that of their
heavenly original, and proceeding from God. For this is that which we
mentioned.

In the second place; viz. that men do not only give testimony unto, and assert
the divine authority of the Scriptures, by acting the propheticalls thereof,
but the doctrinalls also, i. by acting either those graces, those noble
principles and perfections on the one hand, or those lusts, and base principles
and corruptions on the other hand, which the Scriptures declare to be in those
two great divisions of men in the world. As for example, when men live and act
out of that noble principle of faith, as if they took all for granted, and most
unquestionably true, which the Scriptures report concerning Jesus Christ, and
the freeness of the grace of God in him, and the great things of the world to
come, and hereupon shall speak unto the world daily, as the Lord Christ spoke
unto Satan (in Peter) World, get thee behind me, and be no offense unto me;
and so to their pride, frowardness, revenge etc. in all their ways, and with
all their might, plying their heavenly interest, and laying up for themselves
treasures without end, there, where neither rust nor moth does corrupt, nor
thieves break through and steal. Men (I say) by such actions, and ways as
these, do give a testimony full of power, and authority to the Scriptures, that
they are not of humane but of divine inspiration, and that God himself put of
his own wisdom and knowledge unto them. So again when men shall act out of
those base and vile principles, which are discovered to be in the hears and
natures of men, only by the Scriptures, as ( verse. 8.) out of an hatred unto
Jesus Christ and his Saints, out of a contempt or neglect of that great
salvation, which is brought and tendered, and as it were laid down at their
feet, by the Gospel, and in the very face and presence of life and mortality on
the one hand, and of the vengeance of h^ll fire on the other hand, shall be
covetous, unclean, proud, lovers of themselves, unjust, (...)cifull, etc. as we
know thousands amongst ^s are, such ways and practices of men as these, will
not suffer the minds or thoughts of any considering man to have any rest, but
in (...) acknowledgement, and perfect belief of the procedure of the Scriptures
from God; because they speak ever and anon of such things as these; and present
them, with the characters and stories, or examples of such persons as these,
like unto which there are none to be found in all the world, where the
Scriptures have not been preached, or known. The pride, covetousness,
uncleanness, hatred, malice, injustice, oppression, cruelty, etc. which reign
in the territories of hell, amongst persons, who have not had the opportunity
of converse with the Scriptures, nor so much as heard of the gracious
proposalls of the God of glory in these unto the world, are sins indeed of
the same name, and nature (as touching the letter of sin) with the pride,
covetousness, uncleanness, etc. which are acted in the presence of the powers
of the world to come, and by persons, unto whom the great and blessed Inhabiter
of Eternity, exposes himself in Scripture vision, to be seen (as it were) face
to face; yet as touching matter of sinfulness, or demeritoriousnesse, which is
the spirit of sin, and that which is so potently operative in it to the
everlasting ruin and destruction of the creature, they are sins of a far
more innocent and harmless nature, and import; yea they are scarce sins,
comparatively. The sins of heathens are but grasshoppers: it is the sin of the
Christian which makes the giant. As there was no creature could make a devil,
but an Angel: so neither is there any circumstance or opportunity that can make
a sinn^ so dreadful above measure, and devouring, as the promise of life and
immortality before the face of the sinner in the committing of it. This briefly
for this argument. Great sinners under the Gospel, rightly interpreted, are
notable assertours of the Divinity of it.

The latter proof or demonstration of the Divinity of the Scriptures, of the
two last mentioned, was the consideration of such passages of speech, or
sayings of men, whether in their writings, or otherwise, which reflect the
light of that divine authority upon them, which has been asserted hitherto.
This argument, should we traverse it in the full extent and compass of it,
would, I conceive, be more prolix, and take up more time, in the explication
and prosecution of it, then any, yea I suppose then all the former have done.
But I have promised you a conclusion of the whole, in this sermon; and
therefore for this promise sake, shall present you only with a first fruits,
instead of the harvest, confining my self to a few particulars, amongst many.
Nor shall I insist upon, or so much as mention, any of those sayings or
passages of speech, which fall ever and anon from the lips of men in these
days; no nor yet upon any thing found in books or writings either of a modern
date, or whose authors are suspected as supposititious and counterfeit, though
out of these three quivers, there might many arrows be drawn, to slay the
unbelief of men, concerning the divine original of the Scriptures: but I
shall only produce some special testimonies out of some ancient writers, of
the best credit and authority within their line and sphere, yea of far better
with with many then the Scriptures themselves.

First, then (in the general) this is considerable, that though the penmen of
the Holy Ghost, do not receive the testimony of men, (as our Savior himself
speaks in a like case) i. do not need, or stand upon the testimony of men, for
the avouching or confirmation of the truth of their writings, but are confident
that what they write will gain authority and credence in the judgments and
consciences of men upon other terms, though the testimony of men, should fail
them; yet God desiring that men, who do believe them, should believe
abundantly, that so the heirs of promise might have every ways strong
consolations, (...)h so provided that most, or all the principal, the most
strange and wonderful things recorded in the Scriptures, should be reported
also and confirmed by Infidels, Pagans, Gentiles, and Heathen writers
themselves, and such who are enemies unto the Scriptures, and to the religion,
which is recommended in them unto the world.

This in general: For particulars, by which the truth of the general will
fully appear, there are so many of them taken notice of, and drawn together in
the books and writings of Christian authors, who have labored in this
argument, both heretofore, and of later times, that the time would fail us (as
the Apostle speaks in a like case) yea and strength too, to rehearse them all
particularly.

First, Concerning the creation of the world by God; this is one of the
greatest, and most wonderful things asserted in the Scriptures, the serious
and effectual belief whereof must needs make such a breach upon the
judgment, reason, and understanding of a man; that this being once entered and
gotten in, other things reported in the Scriptures, will hardly keep out. All
the miraculous and wonderful things of the Scripture besides, are but as
sparks of that flame of infinite power, which shone to the clear manifestation
of it self, in the creation of the universe. And yet this great and most
considerable piece of Scripture, (the creation of the world by God) how great a
concurrence has it from amongst the heathens for the confirmation of the truth
of it? He that shall peruse, what Mercurius Trismegistus (one of the most
ancient writers amongst the heathen) has left in those fragments of his works,
which are preserved, and to be found in other ancient authors, concerning the
subject we speak of (the creation of the world by God) will be half persuaded,
that he had seen Moses text, and meant to write a kind of comment upon it:
Moses speaks of darkness upon the waters; this Trismegistus represents in his
commentaries, a dreadful shadow hovering on the moist nature, as it were
brooded by the word of God; Moses says, that God spoke, and that forthwith
things were made: Trismegistus acknowledges and brings in Gods word shining,
whereby he created the light, and made the world, and all that is therein. And
so he goes on, as it were hand in hand with Moses, a great way together,
paraphrasing upon his expressions. I might here add the testimony also of
Orpheus, one of the ancientest of the Greeks, who (as himself reports) had
been in Egypt, where he said he had learned, that there was but one God, and
that the Air, the Heaven, the Sea, the Earth, and Hell with all things in them,
had dwelt or harbored in the breast of this God from eternity (with many other
high and excellent expressions of himself in this point) It were endless to
cite the testimonies of all those authors, famous for wisdom and learning to
this day, who plainly taught and avouched the creation of the world, and all
things by God; as of Empedocles, Hesiod, Parmenides, Sophocles, Aeschilus,
Euripides, Pythagoras, Thales, Anaxagoras, Plato, with many others.

Again secondly, For the long lives of the first patriarchs, and those that are
storied in Scripture, to have lived in the first age, or ages of the world, as
some seven, others eight, some nine hundred hundred years and more (of which,
some it seems, make* a grand objection against the truth, and consequently
against the divinity of the Scriptures) yet diverse heathen authors confirm
the relation of Moses herein: as Manethon an Egyptian writer, and Berosus a
Chaldean, Moschus, Hestiaeus, and others,, who write the Ph^nician story. Yea
Hesiod, Hecataeus, Acusilaus, Hellanicus, and Ephorus, consent unto the
relation, affirming moreover, that they were ordained to live so long, that
they might study sciences, and invent arts; especially that they might discover
the motions, of the heavens, and enrich the world, with the knowledge of
Astronomy; wherein (they say) they could have done little good; if they had
lived less then six hundred years: because the great year (as they call it) is
so long in going about, and coming to a period.

Concerning Noah's flood; what nation (says du Plessis, a learned Protestant
writer) has not believed it? and what author has not spoken of it? Among the
Egyptians, Phaenicians, Greeks, and Romans, nothing was more common. And
because they had heard, that it had been most ancient, and fallen out toward
the beginning of the world, being ignorant of the account of the times;
therefore every writer assigned it to such a time as he thought to be of
greatest antiquity. The Theban writers referred it to the time of Ogyges: the
Thessalian, to the time of Deucalion: and proportionably others. And by the
reports of travailours, the belief of it is at this day common in Brasile, nova
Hispania, Florida, etc. who likewise affirm, that the inhabitants of these
countries, do generally impute it to the sin of man, and to the wrath of the
highest, poured out upon mankind.

Concerning Noah's Ark; though the heathens had not the story as perfect as
Moses had, who ploughed with a far better heifer then theirs, and had his
knowledge hereof by the revelation of the Spirit of God; yet some of them, as
Alexander, Polyhistor, and Abidene by name (very ancient writers) relate the
story in their writings thus; that Saturn foretold unto Xysu^hrus the flood
ere it came; and that he mad^ him an ark to save all cattle with him: that he
preserved his holy writings by ingraving them in certain pillars in Egypt; and
sayl^d in his ark toward Armenia; that after certain days he sent forth
certain birds, which found no dry ground, etc. Their speaking thus of Saturn,
answers the fabulous notion and conceit of the Greeks, who supposed the Jews to
have worshipped Saturn, because they kept holy the seventh day. And for the
name of Xysuthrus, it may well be that in the Assyrian language it signifies as
much as Noah; who (as Josephus reports) had diverse names, in diverse places. Yea
and Plutarch speaks expressly of the dove, which Deucalion sent out of the ark
to seek dry land.

Concerning the building of the Tower of Babel, and the confusion of tongues,
some of the foresaid authors write thus. The common opinion is (say they) that
men being bred of the earth, and trusting in their own strength, would needs in
spite of the Gods, go rear a tower up to the Sun, in the same place where
Babylon now is: and that when they had raised it very high, the Gods overthrew
it, and cast it down upon their heads with a great wind; and that at this time
began the diversity of languages: whereupon the Hebrews called the place, Babel.

It were easy (as before was intimated) to make this pile far greater, and
to fetch in credit and authority in abundance from foreign authors, such as
they afford, to strengthen and enrich all other the relations of Scripture,
with reputation of truth; and particularly those which seem most obnoxious. But
this having been so copiously, and with so much faithfulness performed to my
hand, by the forementioned worthy and learned author, du Plessis, in his book,
De veritate Religionis, i. of the trueness of Religion, not only extant, but
of easy procurement also in the English tongue: I am willing to discharge my
self from any further engagement in the argument in hand, upon his account:
only transcribing that famous record of Josephus concerning him, who is the
grand theme and subject of the Scriptures, and whom they count it no robbery to
make equal with God.

In the time of Tiberius there was one Jesus, a wise man (at least if he was to
be called a man)n who was a worker of great miracles, and a teacher of such who
love the truth, and had many, as west Jews as Gentiles who clave unto him. This
was Christ. And when Pilate, upon his being accused, by the chief men of our
nation, had sentenced him to be crucified, yet did not they who had first loved
him, forsake him. For he appeared unto them the third day alive again;
according to what the Prophets, divinely inspired, had foretold concerning him,
as they had done an innumerable number of very strange things besides. And even
to this day, both the name and kind of persons, called Christians, so named
from him, remain. This Josephus was a Jew, as well in religion, as by nation:
though he wrote in Greek. He was born about five or six years after the
sufferings of Christ, and wrote the history, where the record mentioned is
found, about twenty years after the destruction of the city and temple of
Jerusalem by Titus.

For a conclusion: As the Evangelist John says, that truly Jesus did many
other miracles in the presence of his disciples, which were not written in his
book: but whose he did write, were written, that men might believe that Jesus
is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing they might have life through
his Name Joh. 20. 39,
: implying, that though he recorded not all things, which were subservient to
his main end in writing, that he had opportunity to write; yet he wrote what he
judged completely sufficient for the procurement and obtaining of this his end;
So I acknowledge, that there are many other considerations and arguments,
besides those held forth and managed in this treatise, strongly assertive of
that conclusion and truth, the demonstration whereof is the great prize, that
has been mainly contended for in this long race; but judging these, which have
been proposed, argued, or insisted upon, to be abundantly evictive of this
important truth, that the Scriptures are from heaven, and not from men. I was
willing to gratify both you, and my self, with silence in the rest: And to
this that as (according to our Saviors determination) they that will not hear
Moses and the Prophets, neither will they he persuaded though one should rise
from the dead Luke 16. 31.
: neither is it many degree likely, that those, whose judgments and
consciences will not bow down unto, and acknowledge the Divinity of the
Scriptures, at the instance and command of all those pregnant and important
demonstrations, by which it has been asserted in this present discourse, would
yield, or be persuaded to take upon them the yoke of this blessed subjection,
though an Angel from heaven should bring it unto them; or though as many books
were written in confirmation thereof, as the whole world were able to contain.
Aristotle in setting out the work and part of a Rhetorician, asserting it to
be, (...), i. not to persuade, but to speak things pertinent and proper to
persuade; drew with the same stroke of his pensill an happy character also of
the proper work of a Minister of the Gospel. To overrule the judgments and
consciences of men in the great things of eternity, appertains to him, that
rides upon the heavens: they who dwell in houses of clay, quit themselves to
the utmost point of their line, by proposing and pressing such things upon men,
which have sufficient potencie of reason and argument to persuade, where there
is no bar of wilful neglect, frowardness, or resistance in the way. God
persuade Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem Genesis 9. 27.


FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. l. 21. after been, r. either. l. ult. for and, r. or. after malice, r
or both p. 3. l 30. for them, r. the words P 7 l. 27, 28 these words [
especially i^ proper also* and most precisely corresponding with the terme] to
be enclosed in a parenthesis. p. 14. l. 6 dele the brief heads of. p. 32. l.
ult. for bang, r. hang one. p. 38 l. 1. for answer, r. answering. p. 51* l. 18.
for charge, r. charr. p. 54 l. 26. for addition, r additions p. 55. l. 3. r.
for consumation. r. consummation p. 56 l 15. for promise, r primize. ib for
phoenomena. r. phenomenon. p. 62. l. 32. for Gods, r God. p. 63 l. 9 for in
them, r therein. p. 68. l. 30. dele. he. p 69. l 6. for followship. r.
fellowship p 70 l. 17. for him, r. them p. 72 l. 18. for meditation, r.
mediation, p 74. l 18 for and, r. and this. ult. for new, r. never p. 75. l.
21. these words [ as they may by study and strength of contemplation] to be in
a parenthesis. p. 85. l. 5. for shows* r^strains p. 87 l. 10 for we, r. men. p.
80. l. 1. dele, to. p. 93. l. 8. for apprehension, consideration, r
apprehensions, considerations l. ^5. for apprehension, r. propension p 97. l.
18. for whatsoever, r soever. p. 98. l. ^7. for conjunction, r. communion p.
100 l 17. for appartaining, r. appertaining. p. 101. l. 32. for verily, r
universally p 105. l. 11. for principal, r principle. p. 106. l. 33. for
honor, r. tenor. p, 111. l. ^0. for ver. 8 r for example p. 112, l. 9 for
me, r. him. p. 115. l. 29 for to which, r with p. 116. l. 27. for properly, r.
property. l ^6. del. and. p. 117. l. 21. for work, r. women. for consor r.
conser. l. ult. for conjunction, r. communion p. 118. l. 3. for coming, r.
cousening p. 119 l 33 for Scriptures r. Scripture. p. 120. l. 19 for work. r
women l. 21. for treatise, r. translation. l. 29. for ture. r. tive l 30. for
special. r spiritual p. 128 l. 29 for deep* r. deeper. p. 159 l. 1. for them,
r. men l. 5. for rule, r rules p. 18 1. l 6. for uncapablenesse r.
unreasonablenesse. p. 182. l. 36 for reports, r. report. p. 191. l. ^7. after
make, r. it. p. 194 l. 7. for treatise r, treaty. p. 205 l. 24. for i^, r was.
p. l. ult. for is, r. it. p. 210 l. 27. for disolved, r dissolved p, 212. l. 8.
after Son, r. of God. p. 217. l. 7. for motions, r. notions. p. 221. l. 32. for
intelligililty, r. intelligibility, p. 237. l. 8. for Generalissino, r.
Generalissimo p. 238 l. 27, after as, r. on. p. 242. l 6. for may, r. many. p.
246. l. 16. for of r on. p. 249. l 5. for shall, r should. p. 256. l. 28. after
he, r. had. p. 258 l. 13. for God, r Ghost. p. 266. l. 10. for head governor,
r. heads governors. p. 274. l. 34 del that p. 275. l. 23. for shall, r should.
l: 30. after call, r it p. 292. l. 26. for their r these. l. 37 for (...), r
(...). p. 298. l. 35. for or, r of p 304. l. 12. after after. r. it. p. 307. l.
20. for were, r are l. 21. for themselves r. also. l. 31. This parenthesis ( as
Josephus testisies) is to come in l. 36. after stranger. l. 34. after slew, r.
was in a visible motion toward an accomplishment p. 316 l. 10. for nelogers,
r. nologers. p 317. l. 36. for then, r. p. 320. l. 7. del of p. 32^ l. 19 for
power r. powers. p. 324. l, 6. for men's salvation, r. men, salvation, p 327 l.
13 for these, r. their p. 338. l, for doubt, r. doubtless. p 340. l, 13. for
providenc. r providence l. 19. for variaton r. variation. p 341. l. 18 for the
till, r till the p. 344 l. 31. after the, r. blood of the p 345. l. 1. for
matters, r matter. p. 346. l. 6. for them, r him. p. 355. l. 10. for
affectionate, r effectual. l. 14 for nd, r. and. p. 356. l. r. for make, r.
making. p. 364. l. 24 for time, r. turn. l. 35. for for, r. from p. 369 ult.
for fierce; r. fiery. p. 370 l. 13. for Scriptuaes r. Scriptures. l. 29. for
ver. 8. r. for example. l. 33. for mortality, r. immortality.

Texts of Scripture, unto which some light is given in the Treatise; besides
many other cited occasionally.
GENESIS 19. 5
THis fellow is come alone, as a stranger, and shall he judge and rule? page
268. Levit. 11. 44, 45. Ye shall therefore be holy: for I am holy, etc. p. 67.
1 King. 19. 11. -- but the Lord was not in the earthquake -- nor in the wind
-- nor in the fire. p. 142. Psalm. 2. 3. Let us break their bands asunder, and
cast away their cords from us, etc. p. 236. and p. 238, and p. 284. 19. 2. Day
unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge. p. 44. 19. 7,
8. The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever. p. 80. 113. 5, 6. Who
is like unto the Lord God, who dwells on high, who humbles himself to behold
the things in heaven, and on earth? p. 40. 212. 119. 96. I have seen an end of
all perfection: but thy Law is exceeding large. p. 78. Prove. 22. 2. The rich
and the poor meet together: the Lord is the maker of them all. p. 39. Eccles.
7. 13. Consider the work of God: for who can make that strait, which he has
made crooked? p. 38, 30. 9. 2. All things come alike unto all: there is one
event to the righteous, and to the wicked, etc. p. 337, 338, etc. 9. 11. I
returned, and saw under the sun that the race is not to the swist, nor the
battle to the strong, etc. but time and chance happens to them all. p. 339.
Zach. 12. 2. Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the
people round about -- and a burdensome stone for all people. p. 361. Matthew. 5.
29. 30. And if thy right eye offend thee pluck it out -- for it is profitable
for thee, that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body
should be cast into hell. p. 113. 5. 44. But I say unto you, love your enemies:
bless them that curse you, etc. p. 353. 10. 37, 38. He that loves father or
mother more then me, is not worthy of me. p. 110. 10. 39. He that loses his
life for my sake shall find it. p. 110. 11. 3. Go and show John again those
things, which ye do hear and see: The blind receive their sight, and the lame
walk, etc. p. 135. 13. 5. Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much
earth: and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no deepnesse of earth.
Ep. to the Reader. 13. 9. He that has ears to hear, let him hear. p. 34. 35.
36. 17. 12. -- And they have done unto him, even what they list. p. 334. 19.
30. But many that are first, shall be last, and the last, first. p. 335. Mark
10. 38. But Jesus said unto them, ye know not what ye ask. p. 136. 12. 20. --
till he bring forth judgment into victory. p. 269. Luke 2. 34. -- and for a
sign that shall be spoken against that the thoughts of many hearts may be
revealed. p. 129. 10. 18. I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. p. 232.
18. 8. -- nevertheless when the son of man comes, shall he find faith on
earth? p. 334. Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, etc. p.
219. 3. 16. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.
p. 196. 3. 20. He that does evil hates the light etc. p. 283. 6. 68. Lord, to
whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. p. 136. 10. 17.
Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take
it again. p. 166. 14. 12. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on
me, the works that I do, shall he do also; and greater works then these shall
he do, etc. p. 152. 16. 21. -- ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall
rejoice. p. 346. Act. 2. 24. Whom God has raised up having loosed the pains of
death, because it was not possible he should be holden of them. p. 173. 2. 37.
And when they heard it, they were pricked in their hearts, and said -- men and
brethren, what shall we do? p. 139. 13. 22. -- a man after mine own heart. p.
155. 14. 17. Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did
good, and gave us rain from heaven, etc. p. 184, 185. 26. 8. Why should it be
thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? p. 137.
26. 9. I verily thought, that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name
of Jesus of Nazareth, etc. p. 327. Romans 1. 14. I am a debtour both to the
Grecians, and to the Barbarians, to the wise and to the unwise. p. 108, 109. 1.
19, 20. Because that which may be known of God is manifest unto them -- For the
invisible things of him, are manifest from the creation, etc. p. 100. and p.
201. 1. 21, 22. They became vain in their thoughts -- professing themselves
wise, they became fools, etc. p. 79, 80. 1. 24. 26. Therefore also God gave
them up to uncleannes, to vile affections, etc. p. 143. 2. 4. Or despisest thou
the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing
that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? p. 186. 3. 5. Is God
unrigteous? God forbid. p. 180. 3. 19. Now we know that what things soever the
law says, it says to them that are under the law, that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. p. 201. 3. 25. Whom
God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, etc. p.
196. 4. 11. -- the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of
faith. p. 50. 4. 25. -- and was raised again for our justification. p. 174. 6.
8. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him.
p. 189. 6. 23. For the wages of sin is death. p. 180. 7. 9. For I was once
alive, without the law; but when the commandment came, sin revived; but I
died. p. 121. and p. 140. 8. 3. God sent his Son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, etc. p. 214. 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
for us all, how shall he not also with him frreely give us all things? p. 192.
10. 2. For I bear them record, that they have the Zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge. p. 91. 10. 19. But I demand, have they not heard? yes
verily their sound went into all the earth, etc. p. 183, 184. 15 1, 2, 3. We
then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves. For even Christ pleased not himself, etc. p. 107, 108. 1
Cor. 1. 24. We preach Christ, the wisdom of God, and the power of God. p. 171.
and p. 215. 216. 2. 13, Which things we also speak, not in words, which man's
wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual
things with spiritual. p. 31. 32. 2. 16. The spiritual man judges all
things: but he himself is judged of no man. p. 131. 132. 3. 1. And I (Brethren)
could not speak unto you, as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal --. p. 132.
3. 13 Every man's work shall he made manifest: for the day shall declare it:
because it shall be revealed by fire. p. 44. 6. 11. But ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God. p. 149. 9. 19. For though I be free from all men, yet have I
made my self servant unto all men. p. 108. 109. 9. 23. And this I do for the
Gospels sake, that I may be partaker thereof with you. p. 324. 10. 20. The
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice unto Devils, and not unto
God. p. 89. 10. 24. Let no man seek his own but every man another wealth. p.
107. 10. 31. -- do all to the glory of God. p. 88. 10. 33. Even as I please all
men for their good, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many; that
they may be saved. p. 324. 14. 24. But if all prophecy, and there come in one
who believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of
all. And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, etc. p. 118. 119. and
127. 15. 28. -- that God may be all in all. p. 69. 70. 2. Cor. 2. 14. Now
thanks be given unto God, who always causes us to triumph in Christ, and
makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every place. p. 292. 2.
15. For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and
in them that perish. p. 175. and p. 355. 4. 3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the eyes.
etc. p. 16. 17. and p. 216. 4. 4. -- Who is the image of God. etc. p. 220. 221.
5. 19. To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them. etc. p. 198. 7. 1. Having therefore these
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness, etc. p.
70. 71. etc. 10. 4, 5. For the weapons of our warfare, are not carnal, but
mighty through God, etc. p. 325. 326. Gal. 3. 1. O ye foolish Galatians, who
has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ has been evidently set forth, etc. p. 222. 3. 28. There is neither Jew,
nor Greek, etc. for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. p. 280. 281. Ephesians. 5. 13.
But all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the light. p. 120. Col.
1. 24. -- and fill up that which is behind of the affliction of Christ in my
flesh for his bodies sake, etc. p. 167. 2. 19. -- increases with the increase
of God. p. 53. 1 Timothy 3. 16. And without controversy great is the mystery of
godliness, etc. p. 84. 85. 3. 16. -- great is the mystery of godliness --
Christ manifested in the flesh. p. 206. 6. 3. -- and to the Doctrine which is
according to godliness. p. 84. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Now as Iannes and Iambres with
stood Moses, etc. p. 233. 3. 14. But continue thou in the things which thou
have learned, and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them.
p. 63. 3. 15. -- which is the pillar and ground of truth. p. 243. 244. 4. 3. --
but after their own lusts will they heap to themselves teachers. p. 368. Tit.
1. 16. -- but in works they aleny him. p. 106. Heb. 2. 14. -- that through
death, he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil. p.
176. 177. 4. 12. 13. For the word of God is lively in operation, sharper, etc.
Neither is there any creature, which is not manifest in his sight, etc. p. 125.
129. 5. 12. Of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing
ye are dull of hearing, p. 33. 5. 14. -- who by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil. p. 158. 10. 38. -- but if any man
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Epist. To the Reader. 11. 6.
-- For he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of them, who diligently seek him. p. 186. 11. 17. By faith, Abraham
when he was tried, offered up Isaac, etc. p. 50. ^. Pet. 1. 18. -- forasmuch as
ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, but by the precious blood of
Christ, etc. p. 68. 69. 2. Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great
and precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine
nature. p. 71. 1. Joh. 3. 20. If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our
heart, and knows all things. p. 124. Rev. 3. 4. -- these shall walk with me
in white; for they are worthy. p. 112. 12. 7. 8. And the Dragon fought, and his
angels: -- and prevailed not, etc. p. 341. 12. 17. And the Dragon was wroth
with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep
the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. p. 342. and
p. 364.
FINIS.

