First, Great Britains Confession. Second, Great Britains Intercession.
Third, and the Authors earnest desire for the Kings Majesty's happy and speedy
return to his high Court of Parliament.
Great Britains mournful doleful lamentation,
Because of sin, and sinful occupation.
Craving of God true righteousness and peace,
Faith, hope and love, unto her joys increase.
VVOes me great Britain, what becomes of me
That have offended in so high degree,
By sins committed? fearful sins indeed,
Which makes my soul and body much to bleed.
I have forsaken God, the God of love,
Well may Christ Jesus my ill deeds reprove.
I have forsaken God, the God of peace,
Well may Christ Jesus fearful woes increase.
I have forsaken truth, peace, righteousness,
By fearful heinous sins and wickedness.
I have forsaken Jesus Christ my Savior,
By my most base and filthy foul behavior
I have abused Gods most holy Spirit,
By my refusing of Christ Jesus merit.
I have so much defended my ill cause,
That of Christ Jesus I get small applause.
Whereas I should in humble wise confess
My sins to God, and all my wickedness.
I have defended sin, and sins condition,
That well I may be thrown into perdition.
I with a brazen face have fronted God,
I well may suffer his most fearful rod.
I have excused, whereas I should accuse,
Condemn and judge my self for my abuse.
I have abused Gods patience by my sin,
Well may my sorrows miseries begin.
By pride, oppression, I have sins committed,
Which in true justice scarce can be remitted.
If mercy plead not for my sinful case,
I shall become most filthy, foul, and base.
By drinking, eating, riot, and excess,
I have committed fearful wickedness.
By swearing, lying, idleness, and sloth,
I have offended, broken faith and troth.
By Idol service, fearful to behold,
I have offended, I may be comptroll'd.
By great injustice I have much transgrest,
The poor man's cause I have not in request.
By wrongful dealing, bribery, extortion,
In hell I do deserve to have my portion.
By whoredom, loosnesse, idleness, and ease,
By gaming, sporting, I my God displease.
By crisping, curling, pondring, frizling hair,
I seem a russian rude, without compare.
By digging, delving in the depth of sin,
Well may my sorrows miseries begin.
By sins in secret, and in public done,
I grieved have both Father and the Son.
I grieved have my Gods most holy Spirit,
Death and destruction well may be my merit.
I have so proved my self base Cavalleer,
That I deserve to have sad whipping cheer.
I have so much rebelled against my God,
He may full justly plague me with his rod.
I have been such an enemy to peace,
That well Christ Jesus may my woes increase.
The peace of God I slenderly regarded,
I for my sins may justly be rewarded
With war, with famine, misery and woe,
Because my sins I will not quite forgo.
By Idol service, Romish occupation,
I do deserve to have no longer station.
By Image Worship, Idol gods adoring,
I from Christ Jesus basely run a whoring.
By swearing, cursing, blasphemy, and lies,
My fearful oaths infected have the skies.
By much profaning of Gods Sabbath day,
I well deserve to be cast quite away
By my dishonouring of my parents dear,
I much deserve to have sad whipping cheer,
By killing, slaying, murdering, hating, wounding,
My fearful sins are super much abounding.
By base adultery, spiritual fornication,
By whoredoms base, and soul abomination
I sinned have, I have offended God,
He well may plague me, make me feel his rod.
For robbing, plundring, cozning, cheating, stealing
God well may plague me for my unjust dealing.
For bearing witness false, unjust, untrue,
My wretched case my sinful soul may rue.
For coveting, and craving things unjust,
I justly suffer, and I suffer must.
Unless Gods mercy do appear to me
In Jesus Christ, I shall forsaken be.
Good God forgive me these my sinful crimes,
In mercy turn thee unto me betimes.
Turn me unto thee by my sins forsaking,
That of true joys my soul may have partaking.
Grant this good God for Christ his sake thy Son,
Forgive my sins I have against thee done.
To whom with thee, and blessed holy Spirit,
Who only do eternity inherit,
Be glory, honor, power, thanks, and praise,
On earth, in heaven, without end of days, Amen.
Great Britain prays for pardon, for remission
Of sins, transgressions, filthy foul condition:
She craves Gods mercy, righteousness, truth, peace,
Faith, hope, and love, unto her joys increase.
I Sigh, I sob, I sorrow, mourn, lament,
My sins committed make me to repent.
My God is angry, he offended is,
For sins, transgressions, for things done amiss.
What will become of me Great Britains Land,
That have offended with so high a hand?
I have abused my God, my self, my friends,
By sinful actions causing fearful ends.
I am ashamed to look God in the face,
Because my sins have brought me in disgrace.
Good Lord forgive me mine offenses all,
My fearful sins, transgressions great and small.
My sins of thought, my sins of word and deed,
Good God forgive them, they still make me bleed.
Lord heal my griefs, my wounds are festred sore,
My fearful sins still make me cry and rore.
I much lament my filthy foul condition,
Which brings my soul and body to perdition.
Remove my sins out of thy precious sight,
In sins committed thou take no delight.
Good God pass by them, pity my distress,
Forgive my sins, and all my wickedness.
I am become like one that is diseased
With falling sickness, that would feign be eased,
Who wounds his head, his body, and his heart,
And trembles, quivers, shakes in every part,
Beating and thumping with such fearful blows,
His breast, his stomach, belly, face, and brows,
And finds no rest, until the fit be gone,
Which makes him weep his fit to think upon.
This is my case, this is my sad disease,
To free me from it Lord thee let it please.
Thou have the power, none but thee alone,
Thou well can heal my malady and moan.
Thou can defend my head and members all,
Preserve Great Britain that it may not fall.
Lord heal those members that infected are,
Thou in sweet mercy art without compare.
Speak thou the word; do thou perform the deed,
Thy healing Spirit send to me with speed.
Lord spread thy mercy over thine handmaid,
Who has by sins been fearfully betrayed,
And lies a bleeding in most fearful wise,
Lord in thy mercy do not me despise.
I am a sinner I my self confess,
And am arraigned for sin and wickedness,
To plead not guilty if I make denial,
My sins cry out against me in my trial.
I am found guilty, I my self submit,
My sins confess, Christ Jesus them remit.
I humbly pray thee for thy mercies sake
Of thy sweet merits let my soul partake.
Make well my head, Lord, make my body found,
Let no ill member in the same be found.
Let head and members in such wise agree,
That I true service may perform to thee.
My head, my body make so perfect well,
That I may live in peace, in safety dwell,
That so I may be thankful unto thee,
Who make me sound and safe in each degree,
That soul and body both may well consent
To hold with thee a blessed Parliament.
That so my sins transgressions swept away,
I may thee truly serve both night and day.
Grant this good God for Christ his sake, thy Son,
And his sweet merits he for me has done.
To whom with thee, and blessed holy Spirit,
Be thanks and praise, who heaven do inherit,
Be glory, honor, power, thanks, and praise,
On earth, in heaven, without end of days. Amen.
To bring our King to his grave Parliament
John Cragge has written this with hearts consent,
Praying to God he may return with speed,
To cure the fretting wound which still does bleed.
COm home, com home, sweet soverain Charlemain
Come cheer your subjects hearts which much complain,
By reason of your absence causing war,
Which in Great Britain makes a fearful scar.
Full many a hundred thousand pound is spent
This Civil war, which causes discontent,
Which might have been bestowed a better way,
Then thus to bring your kingdoms to decay.
Besides the loss of many a gentle heart,
Whose loss to friends brings sorrow, woe and smart.
Your coming home will be accepted well,
Why should you thus against your self rebel?
Why should you strive against your Parliament,
Which in true justice seeks to give content
To God and man, to neighbor, friend, and brother,
Yea to your self in Christ above all other.
I dare be bold, there is not a man does live
In Parliament but would contentment give
Unto your Majesty, in such a way
As might for ever make you win the day
Against your foes that Antichrist maintain,
Such foes subdue your Parliament would feign.
The grand Militia which they take in hand,
Is for the health and welfare of the Land,
Not any ways to derogate at all,
Nor take from you, nor make your scepter fall.
Their strength is yours, if you will side with them,
They do esteem you for their precious Gem.
Their sending forces is to fetch you home,
To bend your force against the force of Rome;
Not to molest you, nor your person tear,
But to conduct you for your safety here,
From such as have abused your kingdoms Crown
And would the Law and Gospel quite put down,
The Law of God, and Jesus Christ his Son,
To make your kingdoms three be quite undone.
Come then sweet Sovereign, friendly give consent
And well accord with your grave Parliament.
What if you did in presence of them all,
Before Christ Jesus let your Scepter fall,
And yield to him what is his due by right?
It would advance you in Christ Jesus sight.
What if you did confess your self to be
A sinful man against his Majesty?
And one that had not done so good a deed,
As to Christ Jesus might contentment breed?
And that you sorry are for what is done
Against Christ Jesus under Britains Son.
This is the thing Christ Jesus does desire,
Your humbleness is all he does require.
If you submit to him, he yields to you,
And will your foes for ever quite undo.
There Is not a man in your grave Parliament,
But with their heart will give you good content.
Nay if before them all you should lay down
Your Diadem, your Scepter, and your Crown,
There Is none but would fall down upon their knee
And with your Majesty full well agree,
And much advance you for your royal deed,
Which thing would stench the wound that still does bleed
This thing no doubt would such contentment give
To God in Christ, that you should peaceful live,
And in your soul should such contentment find,
No thing on earth should more content your mind,
No King on earth should such contentment have,
You shall not want what you can wish or crave.
Your subjects love in Christ shall be your gain,
And then in Christ you shall full sweetly reign,
In faith, in truth, in righteousness and peace,
In love, in honor, to your joys increase.
Then come sweet Sovereign, come to London town,
It will advance your Scepter, and your Crown,
By siding with your wise grave Parliament,
Will give true Christian hearts full sweet content.
Which that you may in Christ perform with speed
Christ Jesus bless you for such Princely deed.

