portrait of John Goodwin JOHANNES GOODWIN. S: THEOL: CANTABRIG: Ao AETAT 47.
1641.



Thou see not whom thou see: then do not say
That this is HE: who calls a lump of clay
Without it is soul a man's thou see n^^ more,
Nay, but the SHADOW of that lump^ what store
Of gifts and graces, what perfections rare,
Among ten thousand persons scatt'red are:
Gather in one, Jmagine it to be
This SHADOWS substance and then say it is He.
DT G G. fecit.
IMPVTATIO FIDEI. or A Treatise of Justification wherein ye imputation of faith
for righteousness (mentioned Rom 43.5.) is explained and also yt great Question
largly handled. whether, ye active obedience of Christ performed to ye moral
Law, be imputed in Justification or not, or how it is imputed.

Wherein likewise many other difficulties and Questions touching ye great
business of justification viz ye matter, and form thereof etc are opened and
cleared.

Together with ye explication of diverse scriptures, which partly speak, partly
seem to speak to the matter herein discussed

By John Goodwin, pastor in Coleman-street.

Nisqua^ legi sanctitutem humanani Christi (...), esse iustitiam nostram, vel
ejus partem. Si quis legit, quoeso mihi ^^tendat, ut et ego legem et eredam.
Partus De Justice. Christi Act et Passus.

Remis^i^ peccaterum, est Iusticia imputata. Ch^^^^r. Tim. 3. lib. ^. C. i^.
9.10.

L^am Abie^tisimi verbae in Ecclesia, non contem^^nda, sod audi: end et
iudicanda sunt. Zuingl. in Epist.

LONDON Printed by R. O. And G. D. And are to be sold by Andrew Crook at the
Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1642.

Small wyars sometimes Massic wayghts do carry.
And on poor faith hangs great eternity.
TO HIS DEAR BRETHREN the Reverend and Faithful Ministers of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, in, and near about the CITY of LONDON.
Reverend and much honored and respected in the Lord,
I Presume you have all taken special knowledge of a Book not long since
presented unto you by a Leviticall hand, entitled, Socinianisme Discovered and
Confuted: What Quarter the Divinity of the said Discourse has in your
approbations, I do not yet so well understand, as I desire I might; but for
the morality of it, I make no question but you have done justice upon it,
as well to mine, as to other men's satisfaction. (...). 2 Cor. 2.6.
I do not here offer unto you, any formal answer or confutation of that
piece, because if I could do the Truth, and my self right otherwise, I would
willingly decline all personal contention and contestation: I only lay down
more fully and at large, mine own judgment, concerning those things, about
which the question is still depending between my Antagonist and me, conceiving
it a special duty lying upon me, as the case stands, to give an ingenuous and
fair account unto your selves especially; and from you, to all men, of what I
hold therein, as well by making known what Scriptures, and reasons and grounds
otherwise, have commanded my judgment to that point, whereat it now stands, as
wherefore I judge both those Scriptures and arguments impertinent and
insufficient to prove the contrary, which have hitherto bin produced and
insisted upon for that purpose, either by my Adversaries in the mentioned
Discourse, or any other I can meet with. Nor do I make the least question, but
that when you have diligently examined the particulars of my account, you will
give me your quietus est, for the Total. Or in case you shall deny me this,
that you will give me in the stead thereof (that which will be of equal, or
rather of superior consideration to me) better reasons and grounds for the
contrary opinion, then I here deliver for mine. It is of sweet and comfortable
importance, to be accompanied in the way of a man's judgment, by those that are
learned and religious: yet is it much more desirable of the two, to be turned a
side out of a way of error by an high hand of evidence and truth.

Since God engaged me in these and some other controversies, and the
oppositions of men grew strong and thick upon me, I have bestowed some time and
thoughts to find out and possess my self thoroughly of such considerations,
which might make me willing, yea and more then willing (if it might be)
rejoycingly willing, to embrace such opportunities, wherein I may exchange
error for truth. And if God has not given me darkness for a vision herein, I
apprehend a marveilous beauty, benefit, and blessing in such a frame of spirit,
which makes a man able, and willing and joyful, to cast away even long
endeered and professed opinions, when once the light has shone upon them, and
discovered them to be but darkness. I look upon ignorance and error and all
misprision in the things of God, and of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ,
as that region in the soul, wherein only doleful creatures, as Owls and
Satyrs, and Dragons, I mean fears and terrors and distractions, spiritual
tumults, and storms and tempests are engendered and begotten. If all were light
and truth in the judgment, all would be peace and sweetness and joy in the
heart and soul Therefore to me it is no more grievous to abandon any opinion
whatsoever, being once clearly detected, and substantially evicted for an
error, then it is to be delivered out of the hand of an enemy, or to take hold
of life and peace. But on the other hand, it argues childishness in
understanding, and a bundle of weakness and folly bound up in the heart, to be
baffled out of a man's judgment with every light and loose pretense. The rain
fell as sore, and the floods came with as great rage; and the winds blew with
as much violence against the house that was built upon the rock, as upon that
which was built upon the Sand: yet that fell not, as this did Mat. 7.25, 26,
27. In like manner many opinions that are built upon the Rock and Foundations
of the Scriptures, being truths of very dear and precious importance, are
capable of as much opposition and contradiction from men, may have Forts and
Bullwarkes and Batteries of as much strength in apearance, raised up against
them, as opinions that are loose, and lighter in the balance then vanity it
self; yet are they not therefore to be forsaken. I presume my keen Adversary
himself, had his patience bin pleased to have awaited the sight and
consideration of the whole body and frame of my discourse, would have kept his
Sword in his Scabberd, and not drawn upon me with that violence and extremity
of passion which now he has done.

However, I have presumed to follow him in the way of his Dedication: ( fas est
et ab host doceri) knowing none more able then your selves to comprimize a
difference of this nature, according to equity and truth, and withal desiring
none more indifferent and upright to give an award, then I hope to find a
competent number (at least) of you. I make no question but you all study of
conscience, and then you cannot make flesh your arm. I crave leave to be your
remembrancer of this, that suspicion of falsehood has always bin a calamity
incident to truth. Nor can the integrity, zeal, faithfulness, parts,
learning, diligence of a Minister of Jesus Christ, quit or express themselves
upon more honorable and worthy terms, then in vindicating and relieving a
distressed truth, and breaking the staff of the oppressors thereof, be they
never so many in number, never so great in Authority and power. The only art
and method of raising an estate of honor and peace out of our errors, is by
sacrificing them upon the honor and service of the truth. This is a way to
circumvent the great circumventer the Devil, and to turn his weapons upon
himself. He sends errors out of Hell, to curse the truth: but by this means
you shall cause them to bless her altogether. Truth never gets up into her
throne with that advantage, as when her enemy (the opposite error) is made her
footestoole.

If we have built timber, hay, or stubble, upon the precious foundation Jesus
Christ, instead of silver, gold, and precious stones, it is a point of the
greatest wisdom under Heaven, to prevent the trial of the fire, by a serious
and strict examination of our own, or from our Errors, together with other
loose and light materials in our spiritual buildings, leave us salvation
indeed, but upon the hardest and least desirable terms that it can be received
by a creature. 1 Cor. 3.15.
If any man's work shall burn (says the Apostle) he shall suffer loss: but
he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire. The laying of the right
foundation, though it may keep us from being consumed, yet will it not keep
us from being scorched with the fire of Gods displeasure, if we miscarie in the
walls, and raise these quite besides the foundation: we must look to abide a
bitter blast of chiding from Heaven, if we be found remiss, and careless
herein, and put in timber gilded with the consents and approbation of men,
instead of beaten silver and gold.

But I reflect upon my error and boldness in representing things of this
nature unto you, who have much more need to learn both these and many other
things from you my self. And if you will please to communicate of your light
unto me when you meet me in the dark (which is a walk much frequented by
mortality) I shall be as thankful a Proselyte of yours, as you can lightly
wish or desire.

The God of glory, whom you serve in the Gospel of his dear Son, double
that anointing upon you which teaches you all things, and shine in your hearts
abundantly, to give the light of his knowledge in the face of Jesus Christ,
unto the world, and give you of the labor and travail of your souls, in the
spiritual prosperity of your several Flocks and charges, that at last you
may shine like stars in the firmament of Heaven, for ever and ever.

This is none other but the hearty and affectuous prayer of,

Your poor Brother, and fellow labourer in the Vineyard of CHRIST, JOHN
GOODWIN.
From my Study in Colemanstreet, Jan. 24. 1641.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Good READER,
IF Friends and enemies would have bin so satisfied, it would have bin
satisfaction enough to my self, to have kept the world fasting from this
Shewbread. Nor do I yet apprehend any more convincing argument of my calling
to the Press at this time, then the unreasonablenes of the one in one kind,
and of the other in another. Frindship is but a sweet and pleasant bondage, and
courtesy the great underminer of liberty Friends must have that done, which
is done; not so much because of their wills or requests, as their interests.
Yet these (I conceive) might easily have bin overruled and taken off, had not
the importune proceedings of some men of opposite affection, rather then
judgment, to the cause maintained in the Discourse, in gaged and pressed them
with an high hand to prosecute their motion this way to the uttermost. If these
men would have bin content either to preach or maintain the truth themselves,
or patiently to suffer others to teach it, yea or to burden them that should
teach it only with their own errors, and not with other men's, yea with those,
which they are ten degrees further from, then themselves (which had bin no
great work of supererogation) doubtless this piece had had its desert, (and
that according to the severest censure that can lightly pass upon it) it had
never seen the light of the Sun. In suspici^^^e hae. res^os nolo quenquam
esse patientem.
But suspicion or charge of heresy (according to Jeroms maxim of old) is more
then a dispensation for speaking out: he could not bear the patience of any
man under it. And yet loath I am, that men of hard language or thoughts, should
fall softer any where, or where they might take less harm, then upon me: For
God having graciously pleased to make the revileings and repoaches of men such
benefactors unto me, as he has done, has put a golden bridle in my lips, to
keep me in from much sharpness of complaint or contestation against them. It
had bin a very unseemly thing for Joseph, in the height of his preferment and
honor in Egypt, either to have cried out of, or taken revenge upon the envy
of his Brethren in selling him, which GOD had sanctified for the means of his
advancement. It is an easy matter to forgive injuries, after that GOD has once
altered their properties, and turned them into blessings. Besides, my hope is,
that those who are or have bin zealous for supposed truths, will be zealous for
truth indeed, when they come to see it: and in this case, I can freely set the
one against the other, my hope against my experience, and so let my complaint
fall. But as touching the hard measure which I have received from men, my best
satisfaction rests in this consideration, that GOD is both able to pardon the
offenders, and to recompense the Sufferer.

Concerning the Discourse it self, I can reasonably expect no better, then to
see and hear it vexed from all quarters, with a spirit of zeal in some, of
learning in others, of wisdom in a third, and of indiscretion in a fourth sort
of men. The first will cry out against it, Heresy, Blasphemy, Socinianisme,
Arminianisme, etc. without any more ado, and with a, what need we any more
witnesses? The verdict of the second (it is like) will be, error and noveltie.
The profound and sage complaint of the third, Uselessenesse and non-necessitie.
The sober and soft exception of the last, unseasonablenesse, and, better at
another time.

For answer to the two first, which are the grand objections, the whole
Treatise it self is engaged, and (I make no question) will do real and
thorough execution. If any man has the least mind or inclination to be
satisfied touching the Doctrines here maintained, that there is neither Heresy
nor Blasphemy, neither Socinianisme nor Arminiarisme, neither error nor
noveltie in them, doubtless the Discourse it self will abundantly gratify him
herein. But he that is full of prejudice, loatheth the honeycomb of
satisfaction, Only to the charge and imputation of Noveltie (besides what is
effectually laid down in the ensuing discourse for the healing of this
exulceration in the Spirits of men) I desire to suggest a few things here by
the way.

First, that America, though lately discovered unto us on this side of the
World, was yet as ancient a Land and part of the World, as either Asia, Africa,
or Europe it self. And what prohibition can there be served out of the
Scriptures upon any tenet or opinion in Religion, to arrest it for error or
untruth, or to prove it not to have bin of as ancient Creation and standing as
any other truths professed amongst us, only because we never saw the face or
heard the name of it till yesterday? Might not nay did not, the Synagogue of
Rome upon the same pretense, blaspheme and quarrel against all that glorious
light brought into the Church by Luther and his compeeres in the days of that
reformation, and brought it under the censure and condemnation of darkness? If
so great and considerable a part of the world as America is, being as large as
all the other three so long known (within an eight or there-abouts) was yet
unknown to all the world besides, for so many generations together: well may
it be conceived, not only that some, but many truths, yea and those of maine
concernment and importance, may be yet unborne, and not come forth out of their
Mothers womb (I mean the secrets of the Scriptures) to see the light of the
Sun; especially considering, of how easy and ready a discovery visible things
are, and by Name, lands and great tracts of Earth, in comparison of things that
are Spiritual, and those especially whose scituations and dwellings are far
remot from the common road or walk of men's studies and understandings: as also
how poor and barren and empty the visible world is, of secrets and things to be
known, and how soon the contents thereof may be read over and understood, in
comparison of the infinite and endless variety of the riches and treasures of
the Scripture, and the unknown abyss of truth there.

Secondly, the Scriptures themselves give us a prophetical intimation of this,
that in and toward the latter ages of the world, their foundations (as it
were) shall be discovered, and their great depths broken up, and that knowledge
shall abound, as the waters cover the face of the Sea. But thou, oh Daniel
(says the Angel to him, Dan. 12.4) shut up the words and seal the book even
to the time of the end [meaning that Daniel should so carry the tenor of this
part, at least, of his prophecy, that it should not be clearly understood
till the drawing near of the time wherein it is to be fulfilled: and then]
many shall run to and fro, [that is, shall discourse and beat out the
secrets of GOD in the Scriptures with more liberty and freedom of judgment
and understanding, and traverse much ground to and again, on which no man
should set foot, till that time] and knowledge [by this meanes] shall be
increased. Much more might be added from the Scriptures in this particular.

Thirdly, that no man is competently furnished and instructed to the Kingdom
of Heaven, that is, for the Ministry of the Gospel, and promoting the
affairs of the Kingdom of Heaven that way, Ma^t. 13.25.
but he that is like unto a man an householder, which brings forth out of his
treasure, things new and old: i. who is not as well able, to make some new
discovery, and to bring forth somewhat of himself in the things of God in one
kind or other, as to preach the common and received truths.

Fourthly, that there are thousands of Scriptures, that have not yet opened, or
delivered out their treasures, but reserve them as the proper and peculiar
glory of the generations of the CHURCHES yet to come.

Fifthly, that many interpretations of Scriptures, anciently delivered by
Chrysostom, Augustine, and others of the Fathers, are wholly deserted by
Luther, Calvin, Musculus, and other late Divines, and others of a quite
differing importance substituted in their stead.

Sixthly, that several opinions, not only maintained by some special Father,
one or more, as those lately mentioned, or the like, but even such as generally
ruled in the Church for some ages together, have been waved, yea and strongly
opposed by their successors. It were easy to instance, were not brevitie the
greater necessity of the two.

Seventhly, that diverse interpretations of Scriptures, especially in the old
Testament, and of some in the new, delivered by Luther, Calvin, Musculus and
other learned and Orthodox Writers of that Centurie, are suspected, yea and
more then suspected, even detected of misprision and mistake, by many of the
most learned of this age.

Eighthly, that is neither new, nor unjustifiable by the practice of wise men,
to examine, yea and to impugn received opinions, if they be found erroneous.
He that will please to peruse the first Chapter of the first Book of Doctor
Hakewills learned Apology of the Power and providence of God, etc. shall meet
with great variety of instances and examples, both in Divinity, Philosophy,
in Ecclesiastical History, in Civil or National History, in Natural
History, of opinions which had a long time bin generally received, and yet
were at last suspected, yea and many of them evicted and rejected, upon due
examination.

Ninthly, that there are now many errors (erroneously so called) in the
Christian World, which are made of the greatest and choycest truths: yea and
which (doubtless) will be redeemed from their captivity, and restored to
their Thrones and Kingdoms, by the diligence, gifts and faithfulness of the
approaching generation.

Tenthly, that it is of sweet consistence with the providence of God, and with
the known method of his dispensations, to put honor upon that which lacks,
to discover and reveal himself in some particulars, unto those that are weak
and of less esteem in the Church, wherein he reserv's himself from persons
of far greater light and knowledge otherwise, and which are counted pillars
of the Church, as is said of James, and Cephas, and John. Gal. 2.9. This made
Zuingl. to say, Etiam abjectissimi verba in Ecclesia, no^ conteyn nda sed
a^dienda er judic^nda su^t. Zuingl. in Epist.
that the words even of him that is most abject and despicable in the Church,
ought to be heard, examined, and considered of: and a late writer of our own,
H. W. True original of the Soul p. 3.
that they are not always the learned m^^, that find out the greatest
mysteries.

Eleventhly, that to oppose and cry down for error, every thing that is not
generally received and taught, is to quench proceedings, and to interdict unto
the Churches, growth in the Lord Jesus Christ, and consequently, increase and
growth in grace also. 2 Peter. 3.

Twelfthly, that notwithstanding all that has bin said for the vindication of
new apprehensions or opinions, substantially prooved from the Scriptures, yet
the Doctrine maintained in the following Discourse, has no need of any
sanctuary in this kind to protect it, being nothing but what has an army
both of ancient and modern worthies to make it good. Insomuch that as touching
the two maine points avouched herein, viz. the imputation of Faith for
righteousness (in the sense specified in the entrance of the Discourse) and
the non-imputation of the righteousness of Christ (in the sense disclaimed) I
here make this open, ingenuous, and solemn profession, that what I cannot
pregnantly and irrefragably demonstrate (to any unpartiall and disengaged
judgment) to have bin both anciently held and taught by the chief Fathers of
the Primitive times, as likewise by the best and most considerable part (at
least) of the late Reformed Writers, Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, Musculus,
Pareus, etc (at least if their judgments and to^chings may be judged of by
their writings) I will no ways own, but disclaim. Only this I must
confess, that few of these Authors always speak so evenly or steadily, but
that some expressions from their pens, are very obnoxious and opportune for a
contrary interpretation. But my meaning is, that take them either in their more
frequent and constant expressions, or in their more perspicuous and clear
expressions, they cannot but by an unprejudicate eye be discerned fairly to
sympathize in judgment with the points mentioned. As for the contrary opinion,
it is (as Mr. Gataker modestly enough expresses his judgment) to be feared,
that for more then a few ages together, it was unknown to all Antiquity Verecy
ne illa potius, quam tuetur ipse, qua^que assertores ejusdem nonnulli, pro
lapide primario insidei pietatisque fundame^tu habent, per secula hand pauca,
antiquitati omni penitus ignota fuerit; cum ea, quam de Christi morto ae
perpessionibus nos tutamur, tu^ in Scripturu sacru, tum et in antiquoru^
scriptu, passim occurrat. Mr. Gata. in his defense of his Animadversio^s upon
Piscators and Lucius disp. p. 16.
. This by way of salve for the soar of noveltie.

The next impeachment of the Discourse, was the emptiness, and slender
importance, use, or consequence of it. Many (it is like) will not be far off
from saying of it, as Judas said of Mary's box of ointment poured out upon our
Saviors head, Mat. 26.8.
What needs this wast? Here is a great deal of pains, bestowed to little
purpose. Might not men make Heaven, and be saved as well in the contrary
opinion, which is commonly received and taught, as in this, whatsoever it be?
The Author might have employed himself and his time better otherwise. Give me
leave to ease the discourse and my self of this burden also, by tendering
these things to consideration.

First, Luk 12, 7.
that if God be so tender and respectfull of us, that even all the hairs of
our heads are numbered, and kept upon account by him: much more respectfull and
tender ought we to be, not only of the maine limbs, or principal members of
his truth, Verbum onim ^n est res lovieula ut phanatici hodie putant, sed e^
Vnus apex major est coelo et terra. Luther. in Gal c. 5.12. Nihil putandum
exiguum: siquidem spiritus Sanctus noluis literu mandare quod non prosit.
Luther. in Gen 12. Maledicta sit chariras, and comcordia, propter quam
conservandar^ periclitars necesse sir verbu^ Dei. Luther. in Gal. 5. Maledicta
sit charitas quae servatur cum jactura Doctrinae fidei, cui emnia cedere
debent, charitas, Apostolus, Angelus e coelo etc. Idim ibid. Pax est omni bello
tristior, que veritatu et justitiae ruina Constat.
but even of all the hairs of the head thereof, I mean those that seem of
smallest consequence and importance, that we suffer not the least of them to
fall to the ground, or to be trampled upon by the foot of negligence or
contempt. Especially if we consider

Secondly, that the least hair, I mean the least jot or tittle of divine
truth, is more worth a thousand fold then our whole heads, yea then all our
heads put together. One tittle of the word (says Luther) is greater then
Heaven and Earth. And in another place: nothing in the Scriptures is to be
thought little, in as much as the Holy Ghost would not have caused that to be
written, which should not be profitable, which consideration drew from him many
such expressions as these: Cursed be that charity and agreement, which must be
preserved and kept with the danger of the word of God: and again, Cursed be
that charity, which is kept with the loss of the Doctrine of Faith, unto which
all things must give place, charity, Apostle, Angel from Heaven, etc. It was
the saying of another, that that peace is more grievous then any War, which
costs the loss of truth and honesty. But the Lord Christ himself gives us the
best and most certain account of the infinite worth and value of the least
strictures or filings of the word of God, in that passage to his Disciples,
Mat. 5, 18, 19. Verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or
one title shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all things be fulfilled.
Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, but
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Doubtless if God so highly prizeth the anise, mint, and
cummin of his Law, as to recompense the tithing of them with such high
preferment in the Kingdom of heaven; much more (or at least every whit as
much) does he esteem, the jots and titles, the meanest and least considerable
things of his Gospel, which is his darling and most beloved manifestation of
himself unto the world. And therefore it must needs argu much profaneness of
heart, and great estrangement in mind and spirit from the worth and
excellency of the things of God, either to despise the knowledge, or to censure
a just discussion and examination of the smallest of them, as a thing
needless, and of little use. Hierom was far from such a conceit as this,
when he said, In Scripturis me minima differentia omitti debet. Nam singuli
semenes, syllaba, apices et puncta, plena sunt sensibus. Hieronymus.
that the smallest difference in the Scriptures was not to be lightly passed
over, because every word, syllable, title and point, are full of sense and
meaning.

Thirdly, it is very considerable, that misprisions and errors in Divinity,
as well as in other arts and Sciences, go (as it were) by tribes and families;
so that there is no one error, but has many more linked in affinity with it,
and related to it, some greater (it may be) and more dangerous then it self,
and some lesser. Now when a man's judgment is matched into a stock or lineage of
error, suppose it be but with the lightest and least dangerous in all the
tribe, yet is he engaged hereby to own and maintain all the rest of the same
descent and blood, be they never so foul and dangerous, and if he be true to
his principles, cannot But do it. Genesis 19.20.
So that Lots plea to the Angel for the sparing of Zoar, is it not a little
one? is at no hand to be admitted for the sparing of an eror. A small eror
cannot lightly be favored or connived at, but that great errors will be
comprehended in the indulgence also. The foundation of a building may be
endammaged and at last perish, by the rain or wet that salls through the
roof, and settles upon it. So may the judgment soon come to be corrupted and
tainted in the great and fundamental points of Religion, if it has once
miscarried in others that seem at first to be of harmless consequence, and
far enough off from the foundation: Therefore it was a provident and prudent
saying, from whomsoever it came: Minimum non est, non negligere minima. that
is, It is not a thing of the least consequence, to look after things that
seem to be of the least. The judgment will corrupt and putrify as well
downwards as upwards, though I conceive it corrupts soonest and fastest
upwards. A man that at first sets in, and couples himself with a great or
fundamental error, is far more apt to embrace and swallow all lesser errors
depending thereon, then he that is first tainted with a lighter error only, is
to admit of those that are more dangerous, though of the same stock and
lineage. Therefore

Fourthly, to condemn or censure the teaching and searching out of any truth,
but what is of precise and absolute necessity to be known unto salvation, as
impertinent and needless, favors of much ignorance and profaneness. For 1.
what understandingman will undertake to make any such umpirage between the
things or truths of God, that shall determine these or these by name, and no
other, to be of absolute necessity to salvation? Or where has God given any
Commission or authority to men, to make any such election and reprobation as
this, amongst his divine truths? Secondly, it is much to be feared, that those
that are so wise as not to trouble themselves about knowing any thing, but what
is of an absolute and peremptory necessity to salvation, will prove so
foolish, as not to know so much. He that will constantly walk as near the edg
or brink of a ditch or pit, as is possible, runn's a desperate hazard of
falling in, first or last. It is a saying of Chrysostom; that it is not
possible for a man to be saved, without a continual reading or studying
spiritual things (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 3. do LaZ.
. Thirdly, to desire or care to know nothing more in the things of God, then
what is of precise necessity to salvation, is far more unfavoury, then to
labor or care for nothing more in outward things, as in meats, drinks,
apparel etc. then what is of absolute necessity to keep life and soul
together, or not to eat one morsel of bread more, or drink the least drop of
water more, then without which nature must of necessity give up the Ghost. As
such a desire or resolution as this, in the way of nature were very unnatural,
and near unto monstrous: so is that temper and frame of Spirit hardly (if at
all) consistent with the nature of grace, which disdeigneth the knowledge even
of the sweetest and most pleasant truths, if it apprehends a possibility of
being saved without them. Fourthly, to censure the knowledge of all things as
impertinent, which are not simply necessary to salvation, is to involve the
far greatest part of the Scriptures themselves, (and much more of the
writings of the best of men otherwise) in the same condemnation. For who
(lightly) can conceive, that the knowledge either of the Historical, or
Prophetical part of the Scriptures, is of that precise and indispensable
necessity to salvation, which we speak of? Nay it is evident from that
passage in the Scriptures themselves, Joh. 20.31. that the Gospel written by
this Evangelist alone, is sufficient to salvation: and consequently that the
rest of the Scriptures are not of that austere and strict necessity thereunto.
But these things are written (says the Holy Ghost in this place) that ye might
believe, that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing, ye
might have life through his Name. Fifthly, as to attempt to be wise above that
which is written, is presumption and offensive unto GOD on the one hand; so not
to attempt, or desire to be wise up to that which is written, is (as AUGUSTINE
somewhere terms it) damnable unthankfulness, and every whit as much (if not
more) displeasing unto GOD, on the other hand. Certainly there is no piece of
divine inspiration, but is too sacred and precious, to be offered up upon the
service of sloathfulnesse and contempt. Sixthly (and lastly to this particular)
if things were duly examined and compared together, I believe it would be
found, that the knowledge even of those things which are not of so absolute a
necessity to salvation, is of greater consequence, and more to be desired in
it self, then salvation it self; at least then salvation, considered only as
the good and benefit of the creature. As to generous huntsmen the game is ever
more then the prey; the nature and quality of the exercise more desirable then
the Venison: so to dispositions eminently spiritual and heavenly, that mystery
of the will of God (as the Gospel is somewhere called) the wonderful cariages
and contrivances of that profound and glorious project of his by Jesus Christ,
to bring about their salvation, is more precious and of sweeter contemplation
(at least ought to be both to them and others) then that salvation it self
which they attain by it, especially if it be looked upon, as their own
concernment only. It is the saying of Calvin: that the glory of God alone, Vua
Dei gloria preferri meretur centum mundu. Calvin.
deserv's to be preferred before an hundred worlds. Now there is no such rise
or advantage for the soul to glorify GOD, as the clear and full knowledge of
him in his Christ. It is not the salvation of his creature simply, but this
salvation as effected and wrought about by the way of JESUS CHRIST, that is the
first borne of all the discoveries and manifestations of the fullness of GOD.
Again

Fifthly, to vindicate the innocence of the Treatise yet further from the
crimes of fruitlessenesse and impertinencie, it is considerable, that as
ignorance, error, and mistake in any one point of the Gospel whatsoever,
though it seems far remote from any thing which we call fundamental, yet do
they dispose more or less, unto apostacy and absolute unbelief: so on the
other hand, a clear and sound and comprehensive understanding of any one
carriage or passage of the Gospel according to the Scriptures, contributes much
toward the settling and establishing of the heart and soul in a firm belief
and confidence of the whole. The truth is, that the body and frame of the
Gospel is so compacted, so nearly related in the several parts and passages
of it, one thing looking with that favorable and full aspect upon another, all
things set in that methodicall order of a rational connection, and
consequentiall dependence one upon another, that if a man be master in his
judgment of any one passage thereof, he may by the light and inclination hereof
rectify his thoughts otherwise, and work himself on to a clear discerning,
and upright understanding of other things. Therefore a thorough and full
explication of any one point of the Gospel, is of precious consequence and
use. But

Sixthly, the weightinesse and high importance of the subject of the discourse
pleads the usefulness and concernment of it with an high hand. For what can be
of a more rich and solemn concernment to a man, then clearly to see, and
fully and satisfyingly to understand from the Scriptures, how, and by what
means and upon what terms, he either is or is to be Justified in the sight of
God? Doubtless the prospect of the promised Land from Mount Nebo, was not more
satisfactory and pleasing unto Moses, then a clear beholding of the Counsel
and good pleasure of God touching the justification of a sinner, is to the
soul and conscience of him, that either hopes, or desires to be justified.
Therefore to search and inquire into this with all possible exactness, cannot
seem needless to any man, that savours never so little the things of his own
peace. Add we

Seventhly (in further prosecution of the same plea) that there is no vein in
all the body of the Gospel, no point whatsoever in Christian Religion, more
tender, and wherein the least variation from the truth and mind of GOD may
endanger the soul, then this of Justification. An hairs breadth of mistake in
this, is more to be feared, then a broad error in other points. The truth is,
that if a man be of a sound and clear judgment in the Doctrine of
Justification, and shall so continue, he may find a way into life through the
midst of many errors and mistakes in other Articles and arguments of Christian
Religion: but if he stumbles or enterfires with the counsel of God about his
justification, he is in danger of perishing for ever; neither will the cleerest
knowledge of all other mysteries relieve him. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that
if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Gal. 5.2. A small
addition (we see) to the Counsel of God for our justification, may cause our
part to be taken away out of the Book of life. If an error in other points of
Religion, as about election, reprobation, freewill, discipline, or the like, be
to be redeemed with thousands, doubtless an error in justification is to be
redeemed with thousands of thousands. In so much that all possible exactness
and diligence in pensiculation of Scriptures and reasons and arguments, to lay
this corner stone aright in the building of our Faith, may rather seem
negligence and looseness, then any impertinencie or superfluity of labor.
And though I have no commission from Heaven to judge that opinion, touching the
imputation of Christ's active obedience, which I oppose in the ensuing Treatise,
to be inconsistent with the favor of God, and acceptance unto life and
salvation: yet in the bowels of Jesus Christ I humbly and heartily, and
seriously beseech all those that build their comfort and peace upon that
foundation, seriously to consider and lay to heart these 4 things, which I
shall very briefly mention, desiring their respective inlargments, rather in
the souls and consciences of those, whom they so nearly concern.

First, that the bridge of Justification, by which men must pass and be
conveyed over from death unto life, is very narrow (as has, in effect, bin
said already) so that an heedlesse or careless step, may be the miscariage and
loss of the precious soul for ever.

Secondly, that to promise our selves justification and life in any other way,
or upon any other terms, then upon the express word and will of God revealed,
is to build upon a sandy foundation, and may and ought to be abhorred and
trembled at by us, as the firstborn of presumptions.

Thirdly (and with nearer relation to the great business in hand) that to
seek justification by the Law, is by the determination and sentence of
Scripture it self, no less then an abolishing from Christ, or a rendering of
Christ of none effect to salvation. Christ is become of none effect unto you
(says Paul) whosoever of you are justified by the Law; that is, that seek or
promise unto your selves justification by the works of the Law. Gal. 5.4.

Fourthly (and lastly) that that distinction which you commonly make, between
the Law or works of the Law, as performed by your selves, and as performed by
another (meaning CHRIST) to salve the danger (as you conceive) of your being
justified by the Law, is but a devise of humane wisdom at the best, and no
where warranted, much less necessitated unto, in the Scriptures: and
consequently, must needs be a dangerous principle or notion, to hazard the
everlasting estate and condition of your souls upon. I have in the Discourse
it self, and that more then once, demonstrated the insufficiency and danger
of this Distinction, and withal showed, that the Scriptures do no where
ascribe the Justification of a sinner to the works of the Law, no not as
performed by Christ himself, but only unto his death and sufferings. Therefore
I content my self here only to mention it.

Eighthly and lastly, the usefulness of the Discourse will abundantly appear
in this. The opening and through Discussion of that great and noble Question
therein handled, concerning the Active and Passive obedience of Christ, in
Justification, has an influence into many other great and master veins and
passages of the Gospel, and tends much to the rectifying and clearing of our
judgments in these. The difference between the two Covenants, the
communication of Adams sin to his Posterity, and the equity of Gods
proceedings in making the world subject unto death and condemnation thereby,
the consideration in Faith which makes it justifying, the non imputability of
the works of the Law to the non-performers of them, the necessity of Christ's
death, the righteousness whereby we stand formally just before God, with many
other particulars of sweet and precious consideration, will receive much light
and clearing and confirmation hereby. So that to charge the Treatise with
fruitlesnesse or impertinencie, is an accusation framed by the same line of
equity and truth whereby Joseph was accused of incontinencie by his Mistress.

I have only the fourth and last (and indeed the least and lightest) imputation
of unseasonablenesse to wipe off: and then (I trust) the Discourse will be
innocent. The troublesome workings of the times, the laboring both of Church
and State as it were in the fire (for the present) will (I make no question) be
pleaded by many, as repugnant and much dissuasive to the publication of such a
piece as this: This offense (I hope) will be thoroughly healed, by these and
the like lenitives.

First, the publication of it (at least of part of it) was intended, whilst
all things were yet in peace amongst us.

Secondly, as the mother cannot choose her time wherein she shall bring forth,
or the child be borne, but must be content with the time which God and nature
have appointed her, though it be in never so many respects unseasonable for
her: so neither had I liberty to carve an opportunity to my own mind and
liking for the putting forth of this piece, but was by a special hand of
necessity and providence cast upon this season, such as it is, My time, was
some years since: but Gods time (it seems) was not till now.

3. When a man is fallen into a kennel, and become all mirie and durty thereby,
it is not unseasonable for him to take the first opporitunity he can meet with,
to wash and make himself clean. In like manner when he is dangerously
wounded, there is no place for scanning opportunities or fitnesses of seasons
wherein to be healed. Those numberless base reproaches, and forged
cavillations and slanders under which I have a long time suffered far and near
(yea and yet suffer daily, not only in City and Country, but in Kingdom and
Kingdom, yea as well beyond the Seas, as on this side; are (I conceive) in the
judgment of all reasonable men, an authentic dispensation unto me, to neglect
curiosity of times or seasons for my vindication.

Fourthly, nor do I conceive what ill aspect such a subject as this can have
upon the times, or affairs of the Church or State depending. Those that are
Interessed in the procuration of these, have (doubtless) both their hearts and
their heads and their hands full of employment otherwise, and during the time
of these engagements, will have little list or leisure to traverse writings of
this nature. Or if they should, I know not what antipathie the Doctrine here
maintained, should have either to the prudent, or peaceable composure of our
troubles. Nay,

Fifthly, certain I am, that if the Doctrine of Justification, that is, the
opening of the door of life and salvation unto men, be more seasonable at one
time then another, the advantage lies for times of troubles, and dangers, of
fears and distractions in the world. When can it be of deeper and deerer
concernment to the soul, to see (with Stephen) the Heavens open, then when the
earthly house of this Tabernacle (as the Apostles metaphor is) begins to be
shaken, and is ready to fall, as it was with Stephen, when he saw that vision?

Sixthly, the fittest season for a calm and quiet debating of matters in
controversy, between parties engaged, is, when both parties are involved in
the same condition of danger or trouble. The Martyrs in Q. Mary's days being
together in prison, argued their differences in points of Religion, as
Election, Reprobation, etc. with more meekness, moderation, and mutual
equanimitie, then in all likelihood they would have done in fulness of peace
and liberty on both sides. We have many examples in History, where a common
enemy proved a mediator between those, that were at variance before; yea and
were like so to have continued, had not the atonement bin made by a way or
means displeasing to both, I mean by a danger threatening both.

Seventhly (and lastly) to support so great and important a truth of the
Gospel, as that contended for in the Discourse, is by a fair interpretation,
a means far more likely to advance both the peace and safety of Church and
State, and to heal the sores and troubles of both, then any ways to prejudice
or set back the cure. It is much to be feared, that among many other grounds
and causes of that sore controversy, which God is at this day (and has bin
some years past) pleading with the land and his people in it, these three have
done their parts, and helped forward the displeasure. First, that those to whom
God has graciously revealed himself amongst us, and withal endued with
gifts and abilities for such a purpose, have raised the line of Evangelicall
knowledge among us so little, above what was delivered unto us by our first
Reformers. We have done little else with that talent of Gospell-light, which
God at first gave us as a stock to set up and Trade withal for him, but only
put in a Napkin. We have scarce added an hairs breadth to our stature in the
knowledge of Christ, whereas a cubit at least, might well be expected from us.

Secondly (that which is worse and of more provocation, then the former) by our
unworthy symbolizing with the Church of Rome in that ignoble Principle of hers,
so dishonorable to Heaven, to believe as the Church believes, we swallow down
many of those misprisions and mistakes in matter of Religion, which were found
in our first Reformers, and teach them for Doctrines and Orthodox truths. As if
it were not lawful to think that there may be more light in the air when the
Sun is risen in his might upon the earth, then there was at the first dawning
and breaking of the day.

Thirdly and lastly, and that which is more unworthy the Name of Christians
then either of the former; we have quite lost (as it were) and let fall amongst
us many precious truths and streynes of the Gospel, which God by the hand of
the former generation, had conveyed over to us, and entrusted us withal. An
instance whereof may be that very point of truth, which is so copiously handled
and defended in this Treatise, and withal so fully demonstrated to have bin
delivered unto us, by Luther, Calvan, Musculus, and other worthies of that
band. Now that such a negligence and sinful deportment of a Church or people
toward God as this, is a just occasion of his breaking out in wrath and
judgment upon them, may be gathered from Rev. 3.11. Hold that fast, which thou
have (says the Lord Christ to the Church of Philadelphia) that no man take thy
Crown: implying, that either the loose-holding, but especially the letting go
of any Gospel truth, which sometimes a Church has had in custody and
professed, indangers the Crown of it, that is, the peace, safety and
continuance of it. Therefore to endeavor to keep an ancient truth alive,
which was ready to die amongst us, is rather a means to ease and lighten the
burden of that guilt which lies upon us, and consequently to turn away, or
to abate the displeasure of God, and so to further the healing of the Land,
then any ways to increase or soment the troubles of it. And thus much more
then enough by way of Apology.

I have only two things to require of thee (good Reader) by way of courtesy,
in reading this Discourse, which I hope will recompense thee for them; though
they be both fair, and equal to be granted, even without demand, and much
more without recompense. First, in case thou meetest with the same sense or
substance of matter, clothed with different expressions; one or some whereof
thou can well bear and understand, others being more hard and offensive unto
thee (which I conceive may be a case frequently incident in the perusal
hereof) my request is, that thou will reduce that which seems crooked, to that
which is straight, and make an atonement of the better for the worse.

Secondly, whereas one and the same proposition or assertion in words, may
admit of different explications and meanings, in the one whereof it may be
true, and accordingly either affirmed or granted by me; in another false, and
so by me denied; my request in this place is, that thou will not judge me a man
of contradictions, though in one place I deny that assertion in words, which
in another I affirm or grant, but that thou will relieve me in such passages
and reconcile me to my self, by the mediation of mine own distinctions and
particular explications of my self elsewhere. I give thee notice in one place,
Part. 2. c. 3. soct. 9. p. 57.
that there is scarce any proposition can be framed, wherein the word, impute
or imputation, is used indefinitly and without special limitation and
explication, but may both be granted and denied, according to a different sense
and acceptance thereof. And who knows not, but that assertions and sayings
otherwise, are very frequently thus conditioned? Now to grant a proposition in
one sense, and to deny it in another, is so far from being contradictions,
that it can hardly be avoided in any close reasoning upon any theme or subject
whatsoever. But for the greatest part of ambiguities incident to matters
discussed in the subsequent Treatise, I explain my self and mine own
apprehensions in two places chiefly, viz. in the first Chapter of the first
Part, but especially in the third of the second.

If any man shall please publicly to oppose, and write against what is here
published, I have two requests to make unto him likewise. First, that he will
bend the maine body and strength of his discourse against the maine of mine;
and not brouze or nibble upon some twiggs, or outward branches, but strike at
the root or maine body of the tree, or at least at some of the principal arms
and limbs thereof. A tree may stand firm, and be choice timber, and yet the
smaller boughs and branches thereof being tender, easily broken. It is no
damage or prejudice to a Discourse, though some sentences or expressions may be
picked out here and there, which being separated from their trunck or stem
wherein they grow, seem weak, and very capable of opposition.

My other request to such a man is, that he will please to interdict his pen
all passionate language and expression, and return no worse measure in this
kind, then is here measured unto him. Truth is not to be drawn out of the pit
where she lies hid, by a long line of calumnies, reproaches, and personal
aspersions upon him who is supposed to oppose her: but by the golden chain of
solid demonstrations, and close inferences from the Scriptures. The readiest
way to overtake her, is to follow after her in love. When men are fierce and
fiery in their disputes, it is much to be feared, that they want the truth, or
at least the clear and comprehensive knowledge of the truth, to cool and
qualify them.

I take little notice in the ensuing Treatise of that passionate piece of
Discourse lately published, and styled by the Author. Socinianisme Discovered
and confuted; a title better fitting the work, then the Author was aware of, or
intended. For herein he discovers Socinianisme in his own opinion; and then
crosses and confuteth it, when he has done. This I have made appa^ant in the
Answer to part of that Discourse which I sent unto him, and which since has
bin thought meet (it seems) to some, to be made more public. In
consideration whereof, as likewise by the advice of some friends otherwise, I
took off my pen, and suspended the finishing of a full and particular Answer
to that Discourse (which I began immediately upon the publishing thereof) after
I had made some considerable progress therein. As upon advice I desisted, so
upon advice I may be brought on again to perfect and publish those beginnings,
In this Treatise, I no where trouble the rest and peace of Mr. Walkers
Socinianisme, but only in the fourth Chapter of the second Part: nor here do I
meddle with any other particular thereof, but only with that, which is the
heart and soul (such as it is) of that whole discourse, viz. his delineation
or description of the whole Doctrine of Justification.

I have detained thee somewhat long in the entrance: but thou see there was
cause. I desire now to open the door unto thee, which leads into the
Discourse it self, by earnest prayer and addressement of my heart and soul
unto God on thy behalf, that he will give thee a spirit of discerning, a sound
and upright and unpartiall judgment in all things, that thou may call no man
Master on Earth, but reserve the glory and honor of this Name whole end
entire, for thy great Master in Heaven: that he will so bless and sanctify
the Discourse unto thee, that in the reading of it, it may pour thee out a
blessing of knowledge for thine understanding, of establishment for thy
judgment, of peace for thy conscience, of joy and gladness for thine heart
and soul, and all this and much more through Jesus Christ, by whom he is able
to do it, to whom be everlasting confessions and acknowledgements of all Grace
and Glory, and every excellency, by every Creature AMEN.

Thine in the LORD JESUS assured, J. GOODWIN.
From my Study in Colemanstreet.
A brief view of the Method and carriage of the whole Discourse of the first
PART.
CAP. 1. THe Question stated; and declaration made, in what sense the Discourse
either affirms, or denies, the Imputation of Christ's righteousness in
Justification. From p. 1. to 18. CAP. 2. Those Scriptures, Romans 4. ver. 3.5, 9,
22. etc. managed for the Imputation of Faith for righteousness, in a proper,
not a metaphorical or metonymicall sense; with the testimonies of many Authors
both ancient and modern, standing by this Interpretation. From p. 19 to 54.
CAP. 3. Several Scriptures, wherein the works of the Law are absolutely
excluded from Justification, as Romans 3.28. Gal. 2, 16. etc. not admitting the
Imputation of the Active obedience of Christ, in the sense opposed in this
Discourse; with several objections against such an Interpretation of them,
propounded and answered. From p. 55, to 68. CAP. 4. The non-imputation of
Christ's righteousness, in the sense ruling in this Controversy, argued from
Romans 3.21. The argument made good against an objection. From p. 69. to 72. CAP.
5. The said non-imputation further prooved and established from Romans 5.16.17.
comp^^ed together, with an objection answered. The sufficiency of the Answer
attested by Galvin, Musoulus, Luther, Melancthon, Beza, Zanchie, Fox, and
Chamier. From p. 73. to p. 83. CAP. 6. A further proof for the imputation of
Faith, in the sense explained, against the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ in the sense refused, from Philip. 3.9. From p. 84. to 88. CAP. 7.
Further proofs for the imputation of Faith as aforesaid, from such Scriptures
wherein Justification is ascribed unto Faith, as Romans 3.18. Romans 1.5. etc. with
4 objections against the carriage of these Scriptures answered. From p. 88. to
92. CAP. 8. The Non-imputation of Christ's righteousness (in the sense first
rejected) clearly argued and prooved, from Gal. 3.12. being the last of our
Scripture proofs. From p. 93, to 98. CAP. 9. The Jmputation of Christ's
righteousness (in the sense challenged) disproved from the incompetiblenesse
of it to many, if not to all, believers (without exception) in respect of many
particulars wanting in it, which must be found in a Law-righteousnesse
appropriable unto them. Two objections against this argument answered. From p.
98, to p. 106. CAP. 10. A second argument against the said Imputation, drawn
from the precise and exact proportion and fitness of that righteousness for
the person of Christ alone, as being the only Mediator, between God and men:
with two objections answered. From p. 107, to 117. CAP. 11. A third ground
against the said Imputatison, viz. the non-necessitie of it: with an objection
anwered; the answer, pleading for entireness of justification in remission of
sins alone, absolutely consemans with the judgment of Calvin That Calvin
placed Justification simply and absolutely, and not comparatively, in Remission
of sins alone, see fully proved part 2. c. 7. Sect. 15. p. 213.214. of this
Discourse.
, relieved by Par^us in some passages, which Bellarmine and some others would
wrest to a contrary interpretation. From p. 118. to 135. CAP. 12. A fourth
demonstration against the saia Imputation, viz. the dissolving or frustration
of the Evangelicall Grace of Adoption: with an objection Answered. From p. 136.
to p. 144. CAP. 13. The fifth and sixth grounds against the said Imputation. The
former, the taking away the necessity of Repentance: the latter, the
necessity of Christ's death; with two objections against the former, and as
many against the latter, Answered. From p. 145. to 150. CAP. 14. A seventh
ground against the said Imputation, viz. the taking away for givenesse of
sins; with an objection answered. From p. 151. to 153. CAP. 15. Enforcing an
eight Reason against the Imputation questioned, viz. a manifest compliance with
that dangerous error, that God sees no sin in his people. From p. 153. to
155. CAP. 16. A ninth Demonstration against the pretended Imputation, viz. the
confounding of the two Covenants, with two objections propounded and answered.
From p. 154. to 157. CAP. 17. Three Arguments more managed against the
already-impugned Imputation: all of them drawn from the meritoriousnesse of
that righteousness (according to the professed tenets of those against whom we
argue) which is said to be imputed. From p. 158. to 164. CAP. 18. Three further
Reasons against the opinion prerejected: with an objection propounded against
the last of them, and Answered. The first, drawn from the unsoundnesse of this
assertion, that Believers wrought righteousness in Christ. The second, from
the non-imputation of the passive obedience of Christ, in the letter and
formalitie of it. The last, from the non-intermedling of the Ceremonial Law
with Justification. From p. 165. to 169. CAP. 19. Five further Demonstrations
of the conclusion undertaken for. The first, drawn from the non-imputation of
our sins to Christ, in the letter or formalitie of them. The second, from the
uncleanness of this saying, that God should look upon us as worthy of that
Justification, which we receive from him. The third, from the erroneousnesse of
this, that men are made formally sinful by Gods act of imputing Adams sin.
The fourth, from the absurdity of this, that there is a double formal cause of
Justification. The last, from the evidence of this truth, that there is no
necessity of bringing in this imputation, either in respect of the justice, or
mercy of God or for the salving or advancement of any other Attribute. From p.
170. to 179. CAP. 20. Four Reasons more, to streng then the Conclusions taken
into protection. The first, drawn from the insufficiency of a Law
righteousness, to justify those that have once sinned, though personally
performed. The second, from the non-obligation of any man to keeps the Law for
his justification. The third from Gods requiring only Faith of men, to their
justification: with two objections answered. The last from the imputation of
Faith made unto Abraham. From p. 180, to 187. CAP. 21. The last Reason
propounded against the Imputation of Christ's righteousness, drawn from the
Non-imputabilitie of the Law, or the righteousness thereof: with an objection
answered, and some things considered about the Imputation of Adams sin.
Of the Second PART.
CAP. 1. THe method and contents of the Second Part of the Discourse p. 1, 2.
CAP. 2. Fourteen Conclusions laid down and prooved, to give further light into
the Controversy depending, and to repare a way for answering the remaining
objections The first, is this: He for whose sins a plenary satisfaction has
bin made, is as just and righteous as he that never sinned p. 3. 2. There is no
medium, or middle condition, between absolution from all sin, and a perfect
and complete righteousness. p. 3.4. 3 Adam till his fall by sin, was
completely righteous, and in an estate of Justification before God. p. 4.5. 4.
Perfect remission or forgiveness of sins, includes the imputation or
acknowledgment of the observation of the whole Law. p. 5.6.7.8 5. He that is
fully acquitted and discharged of his sins, needs no other righteousness,
to give him a right or title unto life. p. 8 9. 6 That satisfaction which
Christ made for sin, and whereby he procured remission of sins for those
that believe, consists only in that obedience of his, which is commonly called
Passive, and not in that subjection which he exhibited to that common Law of
nature which we call, Moral, p. 9.10. 7 If Christ had kept the Law for us,
that is in our stead, during his life, so that we might be counted perfectly
righteous by the imputation thereof unto us, there had bin no occasion or
necessity of his dying for us. p. 10.11. 8. That union and communion which
Believers have with Christ, does no ways require or suppose any such
imputation of his righteousness unto them, as is conceived. p. 11, 12, 13. 9.
No other imputation of Adams sin to his posterity, can be proved either by
Scripture, or sound reason, then that which stands, either in a communion of
his posterity with him therein, or in the propagation of his nature defiled
therewith, unto them: or in that punishment and condemnation which is come upon
them by it. p. 13, 14, 15, 16. 10. Though Justification and salvation came unto
the world by Christ the second Adam, as condemnation and death came by the
first: yet there are many different considerations, between the coming and
bringing in of salvation by the one, and of condemnation by the other. p. 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21. 11. That which makes true Faith isntrumental in
Justification, is nothing that is essential or natural to it, whether
descent, property, or act, but somewhat that is extrinsecall and purely
adventitious, as viz. the force and efficacy of the will, good pleasure,
ordination and covenant of God in that behalf. p. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. 12.
It has no foundation either in Scripture or reason, to say that Christ by any
imputation of sin, was made formally a sinner. p. 26. 13. Faith does not only
(if at all) declare a man to be righteous, or in a justified estate, but is the
very means by which Justification or righteousness it obtained. p. 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. 14. The sentence or curse of the Law, was not properly
executed upon Christ in his death: but this death of Christ was a ground or
consideration unto God, whereupon to dispense with his Law, and to let fall or
suspend the execution of the penalty or curse therein threatened, as concerning
those that believe. p. 33, 34, 35, 36.
CAP. 3. Seven Distinctions propounded and explained, necessary for the further
understanding of the business in question, and the clearing of many
difficulties incident to it. As 1. Justification, is taken in a double sense,
either actively or passively. p. 37, 38, 39. 2. Justice or righteousness, is
sometimes in Scripture attributed to God, and sometimes to men: and in both
relations, has a great diversity and variety of acceptions. p. 39, 40 41,
42, 43, 44, 45. 3. The righteousness or obedience of Christ, is tw^fold, or of
two kinds: the one by Divines called, Justitia personae, the righteousness of
his person: the other, Justitia meriti, the righteousness of his merit 45, 46,
47, 48, 49, 50. 4. The term of Imputing, or imputation, will admit of nine
several acceptions or significations. p. 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56. 5. Obedience
unto the moral Law, may be said to be required of men in two respects: either
1o, by way of justification: or 2o, by way of sanctification. p. 57, 58. 6.
Christ may be said to have kept the Law, in reference to our justification, two
ways: either 1o, for us, or 2o, in our stead. p. 58. 7. The justification of a
sinner, though it be but one and the same entire effect, yet may it be ascribed
unto many (and those very different) causes respectively, according to their
several influences, and differing manner of concurrence thereunto. p. 59, 60.
CAP. 4. A delineation or survey of the entire body of Justification, in the
several causes of it, according to the tenor of the Conclusions and
distinctions laid down in the two former Chapters. P. 61. wherein I. are
premised 4 general rules touching the number, nature and property of causes
in the general. p. 62, 63, 64, 65. 2. Some more particular and special kinds
of causes, comprehended under the 4 general heads, are mentioned and
explained, p. 65, to p. 77. 3. The causes of Justification are inquired into.
As 1. The efficient causes thereof. From p. 77, to 84. 2. The final causes
thereof. p. 84, 85. 3. The material cause thereof, from p. 85, to p. 90. 4. The
formal cause thereof, from p. 90, to 121.
4. A Description of Justification raised from the former discussions in the
Chapter. p. 121.
CAP. 5. Scriptures alleged for the Imputation of Christ's righteousness or
active obedience in Justification, cleared and answered: and the true sense and
interpretation of them respectively established according to the judgment of
the best Expositors. A reason given by the way of men's confidence, and
impatiencie of contradiction, in respect of some opinions above others. p. 122,
123. The Scriptures urged, and answered are. 1. From the Old Testament. Psalm.
32, 1, 2, answered, p. 124, 125, 126. Jer. 23, 6, and 33, 16. answered, p. 127,
128. Esa 45.24. answered p. 129, 130. Esa 61, 10. answered p. 130. to p. 136.
where by the way 3 other Scriptures also are opened and cleared, as viz. Rev^^.
19, 7, 8, p. 134, and Romans 13, 14, with Gal. 3, 27, p. 136.
2. From the New Testament, As Romans 3, 21, answered, p. 136, 137. Romans 3, 31,
answered, p. 137, 138, 139. Romans 4, 6. answered. p. 140, 141. Romans 5, 19,
answered, p. 142. to 145. Romans 8, 4 answered, p. 145, to p. 152. Romans 9, 31,
32, answered, p. 153, to 157. Romans 10, 4, answered. p. 157, to 162. 1 Cor. 1,
30. answered, p. 162, 163, 164. 2 Cor. 5, 21 answered, p. 165, to 168. Gal. 3,
10, answered, p. 168. to 173.

CAP 6 Six Arguments against the Imputation of Faith for righteousness,
propounded and answered. As 1. That such an Imputation impeacheth the truth or
justice of God, answered, p. 175, 176, 177. 2. That this Imputation makes
Justification to be by works, answered p. 178, 179. 3. That such an Imputation
is inconsistent with the free grace of God in Justification answered. p. 179,
180 4. That this Imputation ministers occasion of boasting unto the flesh,
answered p. 180, 181, 18^, 183. 5. That such an Jmputation supposes
Justification by somewhat that is imperfect, answered p. 183, 184, 185. 6. That
such an Imputation implies, that God should rather receive a righteousness
from us, then we from him, in our Justification, answered. p. 185, 186.
The opinion opposed in this Discourse, of much more affinity with the
master-veyne of Socinian Heresy, and that by the verdicts of Pareus, Piscator,
and Mr. Gataker, then the opinion maintained in it. p. 187, 188, 189. CAP. 7.
The chief grounds and Arguments for the Imputation of Christ's Active obedience
(in the sense hitherto opposed) proposed and answered. As 1. That there is no
standing in judgment before God without the imputation of this righteousness,
answered, p. 192, 193. 2. That justification cannot be by the righteousness of
another, except this imputation be supposed, answered p. 194, 195. 3. That a
true and real Communion between Christ, and those that believe in him, cannot
stand, except this Imputation be granted, answered. p. 195, 196. 4. That there
can be no other reason or necessity assigned, why Christ should fulfill the
Law, but only this imputation, answered from p. 196, to 207. 5. That we are
debtors unto the Law, not only in matter of punishment for our transgression,
but in perfection of obedience also, answered, p. 208, 209, 210. 6. That there
can be no justification without a perfect righteousness; nor any such
righteousness, but the righteousness of Christ, Answered, p. 211, 212 213,
214, 215. 7. That Do this and live, is an everlasting rule, and which shall
never be dissolved, answ. p. 216, 217. 8 That the righteousness of Christ is
that righteousness, which God accepts on our behalf, answ. p. 217 218, 219.
9. That Christ was a public Person, standing in the stead of all those that
should believe in him, answ. p. 220 221, 222 223, 224. 10. That there is no way
of being justified by the righteousness of Christ, but only by the imputation
of it, answered p. 225. 11. That we may as truly and as properly be said to
have fulfilled the Law, in or with Christ, as to be dead, crucified, quickened,
raised, to sit in Heavenly places with him, etc. (all which the Scripture
affirms) answered p. 226, 227, 228. 12. That those that are sinners, and so
continue whilst they live, can be no otherways justified then by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, answered, p. 229, 230.
The Conclusion, p. 231.
Good Reader, the Correctors request unto thee is, that upon a particular
confession of some of these faults, which here follow, and whereby thou may
relieve thy self, thou would pardon him.
IN THE FIRST PART.
Page 2. l. 6. for, term read, terms. p. 3. l. 31. for Law, he. r. Law. He. p.
5. l. 35. for, consciences, r. conscience. p. 7. l. 24. for, habit, r. habits.
p. 20. l. 16. for, circumstance. r. circumstances. p. 21. l. 10. for, word. r.
words. p. 22. l. 2. l. 2. for, of, r. which. p. 36. l. 1. for, Romans 24, r. Romans
2, 4. p. 41. l 24. for, word, r. sword. p. 52. l. 5. after, is, t. belee^ed. p.
60. l. 6. for, me, r. one. p. 65. l. 13. for, (...) r. (...) p. 66. l 32.
after, mediatly, r. before. p. 71. l. 12. for, because, r. although. p. 80. l
20. dele, our p. 9^. l. 18. for deceiveablenesse, r. deriveablenesse. p. 99, l.
22. for, defects, r. defect. p. 113, l. 26. for, and r. to. p. 117. l. 19. for
of, r. of it. p. 125. l. 24. for as, r. as if. p. 126. l. 31. for, boltring, r.
bolting. p. 136. l. 9 for, (...), l. (...). p. 138. l. 16. for, the. r. that.
ibid. for, that is, r. that it is. p. 144. l. 1. for, infallably, r.
infallibly. p. 146. l. 29. dele, not. p. 154. l. 30 for, into, r in. p. 154. l.
8. delo, the. p. 163. l. 3. for into. r. for. p 171. l. 26. for, that, r. the
p. 175. l. 16. for, formaliter, r. normali^er. l. 17. for, this, r. his. p. 180
l. 14. for them, r. men. p. 200. l. 18. for, unanswerable, r. answerable. p.
202 l. 8. for, de^erved, r. served. p. 204. l. 26. after, sin, r. a full
satisfactionto him. l. 28. for, received at, r. received it at.

IN THE SECOND PART.
Page 1. l. 15. dele, to. p. 4. l. 26. for, and, r. and in. p. 5. l. 7. for,
equivolant, r. equivalent. p. 7. l. 32. after, acts. r. of no other person
besides. l. 35. for, reverence, r. refe ence. p. 10. l. 35. atter life, r. so
that we might be counted perfectly righteou, by the imputation thereof unto us
p 11. l. 28. for, and, r. that. p. 13. l. 8 dele in. p. 15. l. 30. for, him, ^.
sin. p. 20. l 29. for, passage, r. passage of. l. 38. f^r, employed, r.
implied. l. 41. for, clear, r. certain. p. 28, l. 35. fo relation, r. reason.
p. 31. l. 3. for, objections r. objection. p. 34, l. 14. for term, r term,
death. p. 49, l. 2. for, called, r. called by p. 50. l. 20, for inconsistence,
r. in consistence. p. 57. l. 35. for, impossible, r. possible. p. 59. in the
margin. for, Cap Sect. r. Cap. 20. Sect. 3. p. 66. l. 4. for working, r.
working) p. 68. l. 21. for, (...), r. (...) p. 74. l. 16. for, properlyr. r.
properly. p. 80. l. 7. for, both, r. both the. p. 86. l. 26. for, otion, r.
notion. p. 89. l. 10 dele, of. l. 31. for, proper, 1. unpt oper. p. 95, l. 19.
for, simplifie, r. simplifie p. 99, l. 31, for, Sect. r Sect. 2. p. 110. l. 35,
for, which, r. which is. p. 119. l. 25, for, that, r. then. p. 125 l. 4. for,
Romans 47, r. Romans 4.7. p. 135. l. 14, 15, for his, his, r. her, her l. 34, dele,
to. l. 33, for, Scripture, r, Scripture to. p. 142. l. 14, for, includencie, r.
inconcludencie. p. 146. l. 12. dele, of. p. 148, l. 29, dele, of. p. 157, l.
20. for, resemblance, r. semblance. p. 176 l. 23, for, God r. God, as such. p.
194. l. 31. for, predicatum r. pradicatum. p, 207. l. 7. for, address, r.
addressed. p. 213. l. 8. dele, of. p. 222. l 22. for be, r. by.

Some other lighter escapes there are, as mis-pointings, mis-joynings, and
mis-dividings of words, mis-placing parentheses, sometimes singulars for
pluralls, defects of Capital Letters, with some oversights in the marginall
citations, etc. In all which, the Corrector submits himself to thy censure.

Reader, if thou had rather take a little pains, then be angry; I desire
thee to relieve the Printer with thy pen, and to reform thy Book, before thou
read it, according to these subsequent directions.
In the PREFACE.
Page 9. line 5. for, serapp. r. scrap. p. 11. l. 1. for, present, r. pleasant.
l. 18. for, (...) r. (...) p. 12. l. 25. for, passages, r. pages. p. 13. l. 13.
for, discrologie, r. dischrologie. l. 14. for, messenger, r. messengers. l. 15.
for, magnificant, r. magnificent.

In the DISCOURSE.
Page 6. l. 31. for, corponeris, r. componens. p. 8. l. 29. for opinion any, r.
opinion, that any. p. 13. l. 13. for, Divinity (who, r. Divinity at Leyden (who
ibid. f^^, of judgment, r. of that judgment. p. 15. l. 22, for, urge a
little. r. urge. A little. p. 20. l. 10. for, defended here, r. defended, etc.
Here. l. 18. for, word, discourse, r. wordie discourse. l. ult. for, too, r.
to. p. 22. l. ult. for, misperisian, r. misprision. p. 26. l. 13. for, our, r.
own. p. 29. l. 27. for, no satisfaction, r. no such satisfaction. p. 32. l.
15. for, this is, r. is this. p. 33. l. 27. for, first, r. fullest. p. 34. l.
20. for, says further, r. says he further. p. 37. l. 24. for, skill, r.
still. p. 40. l. 33, for, promises, r. premises. p. 43. l. 2. for,
justification, r. or free justification. p. 47. l. 9. for, hihobular, r.
triobular. p. 48. l. 19 for, black, in so, r. so black and. p. 55. l. 26. for,
neighbors, r. neighbor. p. 59. l. ^3. for, me, r. men. p. 65. l. 25. for,
contradiction, r. contradictions. p. 70. l. 2. for, believed, r. believing. p.
l. 10. for, not for, r. not of us for. p. 74. l. 2. for, to speak r, to speak
to. p. 86. l. 12. for, interpres, r. interpretesse. p. 95. l. 37. for,
censured, r. conceived.

CAP. I.
Wherein the state of the question is opened, and the sense EXPLAINED: Wherein
as well the Imputation of FAITH is affirmed, as the imputation of the
RIGHTEOUSNESS of CHRIST denied, in JUSTIFICATION.
FOR the clear understanding of the state and drift of the question, some
things would be premised, which for their evidence sake might be privilledged
and exempted from passing under much dispute or contradiction, yet if any thing
be not sufficiently prepared for assent in the brief proposal of it, the
ensuing discourse will labor to reconcile the disproportion, and in the
progress make satisfaction for what it shall receive upon courtesy in the
beginning. As

1. That the terms justifying, justification etc. are not to be taken in this
question (nor in any other usually moved about the justification of a sinner)
either 1 sensu physico, in a Physical sense, as if to justify, signified to
make just, with any habitual or actual, any positive or inherent
righteosnesse. Nor yet, 2. sensu forensi proprie dicto, in a juridicall or
judiciary sense (properly so called) where the Judge has only a subordinate
and derived power of ^udicature, and is bound by Oath or otherwise to give
sentence according to the strict rule of the Law, as if to justify were to
pronounce a man just, or (...) absolve him from punishment according to the
strict term of precise rule of that Law whereof he was accused as a
transgressor, (though this sense be admitted and received by many) But 3. (and
lastly) sensu forensi improprie dicto, in a judiciary sense, less properly and
usually so called, vizr. where he that Titteth Judge being the supreme
Magistrate, has an independancy or sovereignty of power, to moderate and
dispense with the Law, as reason or equity shall require: So that to justify in
this question, import's the discharging or absolving of a man from the guilt,
blame, and punishment of those things, whereof he either is, or justly might be
accused; not because he is clear of such things, or justifiable according to
the letter or strictness of the Law (for then he could not be justly accused)
but because the Judge having a sufficient and lawful sovereignty of power is
willing upon sufficient and weighty considerations known unto him, to remit the
penalty of the Law, and to deliver and discharg him as if he were an innocent
or righteous man. As for the Physical sense of making just by inherent
righteousness, though Bellarmine and his Angels, earnestly contend for it,
yet till Scriptures be brought low, and Etymologies be exalted above them, till
use and custom of speaking deliver up their Kingdom into Cardinals bands,
that sense must no way be acknowledged or received in this dispute: Yet (to
give reason and right, even to those that demand that which is unreasonable) it
is true, that God in or upon a man's justification, begins to justify him
Physically, that is, to infuse habitual or inherent righteousness into him.
But here the Scriptures and the Cardinal are as far out in terms, as in a
thousand other things they are in substance and matter: that which he will
needs call justification, the Scriptures will as peremptorily call
Sanctification.

Concerning the other sense of a judiciary justification usually and strictly
so called, God justifying a sinner, not as of such an act whereby he will
either make him or pronounce him legally just, of declare him not to have
offended the Law, and hereupon justify him; but of such an act, whereby he
freely forgives him all that he has done against the Law, and acquits him from
all blame and punishment due by the Law unto such offenses. So that in that
very act of God whereby he justifies a sinner, as there is a discharge from all
punishment due unto him, so there is a profession withal, or plain intimation
of the guiltiness of the person now to be justified according to the Law, and
that he is not discharged or acquitted upon any consideration that can be
pleaded for him according to the Law, but that consideration upon which God
proceeds to justify him, is of another order; the consideration of somewhat
done for him in this case to relieve him out of the course and order or
appointment of the Law, he whose justification stands (whether in whole or in
part, it is not material herein) in the forgiveness of sin, can in no
construction be said to be justified according to the Law, because the Law
knows no forgiveness of sins, neither is there any rule for any such thing
there. The Law speaks of the curse, death, and condemnation of a sinner; but
for the justification of a sinner, it neither takes knowledge, nor gives any
hope thereof.

Secondly, Jesus Christ the natural Son of God, and supernatural Son of
the Virgin, ran a race of obedience with the Law (as well Ceremonial as Moral)
and held out with every letter, jot, and tittle of it, as far as it any ways
concerned him, during the whole continuance of his life in the flesh, no man's
thoughts ever rose up to deny, but those that denied him the best of his being
(I mean his Godhead) Which of you convinces me of sin? was his challenge to
the Nation of the Jews whilst he was yet on earth ( Ioh 8, 46.) and remains
through all ages as a challenge to the world. He that can ^ast the least
aspersion or imputation of sin upon Christ, shall shake the foundations of
the peace and safety of the world.

Thirdly, Christ offered up himself as a Lamb without spot in sacrifice upon
the Cross to make an atonement for the world, and to purge the sin of it, I
know no spirit at this day abroad in the Christian world that denies, but that
which wrought in Secinus formerly, and still works in those that are baptized
into the same spirit of error with him.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ is the sole and entire meritorious cause of every man's
justification, that is justified by God; or that that righteousness or
absolution from sin and condemnation which is given to every man in his
justification, is somewhat, yea a principal part or member of that great
purchase which Christ has made for the world. Evan as God for Christ's sake
freely forgave you. Ephesians. 4.32. Forgiveness of sins or justification is
from God for Christ's sake; he is worthy to be gratified and honored by God,
with the justification of those that believe in him, whatsoever he is worthy of
more.

Fifthly, God, and required on man's part to bring him into Communion and
fellowship of that justification and redemption which Christ has purchased for
the Children of men, and that without believing, no man can have part or
fellowship in that great and blessed business.

Sixthly, It is evident from the Scriptures, God in the act of every man's
justification does impute or account righteousness unto him, or rather somewhat
for or instead of a righteousness (the Scripture uses both expressions) by
means of which imputation the person justified passes in account as a
righteous man (though he be not properly or perfectly such according to the
Law) and is invested accordingly with those great privileges of a man
perfectly righteous, deliverance from death and condemnation, and acceptance
into the favor of God. The reason of which imputation, or why God is pleased to
use such an expression of righteousness imputed in or about the justification
of a sinner seems to be this; the better to satisfy the natural scruple of
the weak and feeble consciences of men, who can hardly conceive or think of a
justification or of being justified (especially by God) without an express,
literal, and perfect legal righteousness. Now the counsels and purpose of
God in the Gospel being to justify men without any such righteousness (being
a righteousness indeed whereof man in his lapsed condition, is wholly
incapable) the better to salve the fears of the consciences touching such a
defect, and to prevent and stay all troublesome thoughts or queries that might
arise in the minds of men, who when they hear of being justified, are still
ready to ask within themselves, but where is the righteousness? conceiving a
legal righteousness to be as necessary to a justification, as Isaak conceived
of a Lamb for a burnt offering, Genesis 22, 7.) He (GOD I mean) is graciously
pleased so far to condescend to men in Scripture treaty with them about the
weighty business of justification, as (in effect) to grant and say unto them,
that though he finds not any proper or perfect righteousness in them, no such
righteousness as passes under the name of a righteousness with them, yet if
they truly believe in him, as Abraham did, this believing shall in the
consequences of it, be as good, as a perfect or complete righteousness unto
them, or that he will impute righteousness unto them upon their believing.

So that now the state and drift of the Q. Christ, be imputed for
righteousness, for such a Faith (doubtless) in the point of justification was
never dreamt of by any man that kept his wits company: men may as well fancy a
living man without a Soul; or a wiseman without his wits, as a Faith without
an Object: much less was ever such a faith conceived by any to be imputed for
righteousness. Neither 2, is it any part of the intent of the Question to
enquire, whether Faith be the meritorious cause of a man's justification, for
both they that affirm, and they that deny the imputation of Faith for
righteousness, deny the meritoriousnesse of faith every ways: however it is
true, that they that would seem most to disclaim it, and cast it furthest from
them, do yet in some of their most beloved tenets draw very near unto it (as
will afterward appear) Neither 3, is it the Question, whether Faith be the
formal cause of justification, that is, whether God does justify a man with
his Faith, as a Painter makes a wall white with whiteness, or a Master makes
his Scholar learned with knowledge, for both parties make the form of
justification to be somewhat else differing from Faith (contrary to that which
is conceived to be the genuine tenet of Arminius) Nor yet 4, does the Question
make any quere at all, whether Christ be the sole meritorious cause of the
Justification of a sinner; for both they that go on the right hand of the
Question, and they that go on the left, are knit together in the same mind and
judgment concerning this. Neither 5 does the Question (as it is here
propounded) intend any dispute at all, whether the active obedience of Christ
falling in with the passive, and considered in conjunction with it, has any
influence into, or contributeth any thing toward the Justification of sinners,
for this also is acknowledged on both sides, (at least by the greater party of
both) But 6, (and lastly) the Question in precise terms is this whether the
faith of him that truly believes in Christ, or whether the righteousness of
Christ himself, that is, the obedience which Christ performed to the Moral
Law, consisting partly of the inward habit of grace, and righteous dispositions
of his soul, partly of all those several and particular acts of
righteousness wherein he obeyed, be in the letter and propriety of it, that
which God imputes to a believer for righteousness, or unto righteousness in
his Justification; So that he that believes, is not righteous only by account,
or by Gods gracious reputing and accepting of him for such, but as rigidly,
literally, and peremptorily righteous, constituted and made as perfectly, as
completely, as legally righteous, as Christ himself is, no difference at all
between them, quoad veritatem, but only quoad modum, the justified every whit
as righteous as the justifier, both righteous with the self same individual
righteousness, only this difference between the one and the other, the
justified wears it as put upon him by another, by imputation: the Justifier
wears it put upon him by himself, or by inherency. That the Scriptures no
where countenanceth any such imputation of the righteousness of Christ as
this, I trust (the Spirit of truth directing and assisting) to make manifest in
the sequel of this discourse, and to give good measure of this truth unto the
reader, heaped up, and pressed down, and running over; heaped up by
testimonies from the Scriptures themselves; pressed down by the weight of many
Arguments and demonstrations; running over, with the clear approbation of many
Authors, learned and sound, and every way greater then exception.

Only give me leave here to mention that by the way, Christ's righteousness
unproperly, out of the usual and formal signification of it (as Luther and
Caelvin, and other Divines of the reformed Churches sometimes do in their
writings) viz. for the giving out or bestowing (as it were) the righteousness
of Christ including his obedience as well passive as active, under one and the
same term of righteousness, in the return of it, i. in the privileges,
blessings, and benefits, that are procured and purchased by it for men, so a
believer may be said to be justified by the righteousness of Christ imputed.
But then the meaning can be no more but this. A believer is justified by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, that is, God justifies a believer for
Christ's righteousness sake, and not for any righteousness of his own: Such
an imputation of the righteousness of Christ as this is, is no way denied or
once questioned. And thus such passages as those in Calvin. Nos gratis
justificat Deus, Christi obedientiam nobis imputando. i. God freely justifies
us by imputing the obedience of Christ unto us: and again, Homo non inse ipso
justus est, sed quia Christi justitia imputatione cum illo communicatur
(Instit. l. 3, c. 17, ss. 23.) i. A man is not righteous in himself, but
because the righteousness of Christ is communicated or Imputed unto him by
imputation: These and such like expressions in this Author, are to be
interpreted by such passages as these (which are frequent also in the same
Author, Christus suaobedientia gratiam nobis apud Patrem acquifivit and
promeritus est (Instit. l. 2, c. 17. ss. 30.) 1. Christ by his obedience,
procured and merited for us grace or favor with God the Father. And again, l.
3, c. 14. ss 17. Christus per suam obedientiam nobis justitiam acquisivit. i.
Christ by his obedience procured or purchased righteousness for us. And again
in Gal. 3, 6. Omnes istae locutiones peraeque valent, justificari nos Dei
gratia, Christum esse justitiam nostra^ justitia^, morte and resurrectione
Christi nobis acquisita^ etc. i. All such expressions as these import the same
thing, that we are justified by the grace of God, that Christ is our
righteousness, that righteousness was procured for us by the death and
resurrection of Christ etc. By all which passages and many more of like
Importance, that might be produced out of the same Author, it is fully evide^t,
that when he mentions any imputation of the righteousness of Christ in
Justification, his meaning is only, that the righteousness of Christ, meaning
chiefly his passive obedience or righteousness, happily not excluding his
active) is the meritorious cause of our Justification and has procured and
purchased this for us at Gods hand, that upon our believing we should be
accounted righteous by him, or (which is but the same) that our Faith should be
imputed for righteousness to us. To which purpose he speaks yet more
significantly and expressly in the place last mentioned in Gal. 3, 6. Quum
autom justitiam in se repositam non habeant homines, imputatione hanc
adipiscuntur. i. Men not having any righteousness lodged ^n themselves they
obtain it by imputation, which Imputation he thus explicates and interprets,
quia Deus fidem illis fert acceptam pro justitia: because (says he) God does
Impute or account their faith unto them for righteousness. Diverse like
passages might be drawn together out of other Authors, which must be seasoned
with the same salt of Interpretation, to be made savory and meet for
Spiritual nourishment.

In the Homilies of our own Church, Christ's righteousness in Justification,
for the genuine sense whereof, if we consult with the eleventh Article of
Religion (which is concerning Justification, and is framed with all possible
exactness this way, that so few words are capable of) that will directly lead
us to the same Interpretation of them: we are accounted righteous before God
(says our Article) only for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by
faith, and not for our own works or deservings. Where ^, it is to be observed
that we are not said to be constituted and made righteous before God in
Justification (though such an expression may in a sense be admitted) but only
that we are accounted or reputed such. 2. It is not said, that we are accounted
righteous with the righteousness of our Lord and Savior, no nor yet with his
merits, but only thus, we are accounted righteous before God, only for the
merit of our Lord by Faith. i. The merit of Christ or of his righteousness,
has so far prevaled with God on our behalf, that by or upon our Faith we
shall be accounted righteous before him; which (in effect) is the same truth we
maintain, viz. that God for Christ's sake or Christ's merits sake, does impute
our faith for righteousness unto us, requiring nothing more at our hands for
Justification. And thus Musculus expresses himself roundly, Fides reputatur
in justitiam propter Christum: Faith is accounted for righteousness for
Christ's sake: And again, Commendata debet esse haec fides etc. qua^ constituit
credentibus in Christum propter ipsum, justitiae loco imputare (Loc. Com. de
Iustif. sect 5) i. This faith ought to be esteemed of us, etc. which God
purposes for Christ's sake to impute for righteousness to those that believe
in him. So Luther also, ad Gal. 3.6. Deus reputat istam imperfectam fidem ad
justitiam perfectam propter Christum. i. God for Christ's sake accounts this
imperfect faith, for perfect righteousness. And Chamier calls remission of
sins that righteousness which is imputed unto us. Remissio peccatorum est
justitia imputatat. 3, l. 21. c. 19. ss. 10. And Vrsinus: Idem sunt
justificatio and remissio peccatorum. Cat. part 2. Qu. 60, ss. 3. Therefore
wheresoever, whether in the Homilies of our own Church, or in other Authors, we
meet with any such expression, as of the righteousness of Christ imputed in
Justification, we must not understand this righteousness in the Letter,
propriety, or formalitie of it, but in the Spirit, or merit of it, to be
imputed, Iustificamur per Iustitiam Christi, non personae, qua ipse est
vestitus, sed meriti, quae suos vestit, nobis imputatam. Dr. Prideaux Lect. 5,
ss. 11. And this manner of speech, to put the name of a thing in the propriety
of it, instead of the value, worth, benefit or return of it, is both usual
and familiar, in ordinary passage of discourse amongst us, and very frequent in
the Scriptures. When we say a Merchant grew rich by such or such a Commodity,
our meaning is, that he grew rich by the game or return he made of the
commodity: He may be enriched by the Commodity, and yet have never a wh^t of it
with him, or under his hand. So when we say such a man grew rich by his place
or Office, our meaning plainly is but this, that he grew rich by such gains or
matters of profit as his place or Office afforded him; we do not mean, that
his place or Office it self was his riches. So may it be said, that we are
justified by the righteousness of Christ, and yet not have the righteousness
it self upon us by imputation or otherwise, but only a righteousness procured
or purchased by it, really and essentially differing from it, viz. remission of
sins (as will appear in due time.)

Thus in the Scriptures themselves, there is no figure or form of speech more
frequent, then to name the thing it self in the propriety of it, in stead of
the fruit or effect of it, good or bad, benefit or loss, vantage or
disadvantage, merit, or demerit of it.

Thus Job 33, 26. God is said to render unto man his righteousness, i. The
fruit or benefit of his righteousness, in the favor of GOD, and manifestation
of it, in his deliverance and restoration: the righteousness it self in the
propriety of it, cannot be rendered unto him. So Ephe. 6, 8. Whatsoever good
thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord. i. he shall receive
benefit and consideration from God for it. So Revel. 15, 12. Here is the
patience of the Saints, and c. 13, 10. Here is the patience and faith of the
Saints, i, Here is the benefit and unspeakable reward of the patience and faith
of the Saints to be seen, when the Beast and all that worship him, or adhere
to him shall be tormented in fire and brimstone for evermore, and those that
have constantly suffered for not worshipping of him, shall be delivered from
drinking of that bitter cup. So again, So work is often put for the wages due
to it. Levit. 19, 13. Job 7, 2. Ior. 22, 13 Esa. 49.4. etc.
Psalm. 128, 2. Thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, that is, the fruit of
this labor. So on the other hand, Heb. 9, 28. it is said of Christ, that to
those that look for him he shall appear the second time without sin: that
is, without the guilt or punishment of sin charged upon him, for otherwise,
if we take sin in the formal and proper signification of it, there will be no
difference implied between his first and second appearance, in as much as he
was as free from the defilement or pollution of sin in his first appearing, as
he can or shall be in his second. So Ezech. 16, 58. Thou have borne thy lewdness
and thine abominations (says the Lord) viz. in punishments or judgments
answerable to them. So 1 Kings 8, 32. To bring his way upon his head, that is,
the punishment he has deserved by his way of sin. So (to let pass many
other instances of like construction) Genesis 19, 15. Least you be destroyed in
the iniquity of the City; that is, in that judgment or punishment that fell
upon the City by means of the iniquity of it. In such a construction of
speech as the holy ghost himself uses in these and many such like passages in
the Scripture, the righteousness of Christ (Active and Passive) may be said to
be the righteousness by which we are justified, or which is imputed unto us in
our justification, and not in any other.

Wherefore (to draw toward a close of this first Chapter, and withal to give
a little more light, i, when we affirm the faith of him that believes, to be
imputed for righteousness, the meaning is not either I, that it should be
imputed in respect of any thing it has from a man himself, or as it is a man's
own act: nor yet 2. in respect of any thing it has from God himself, or from
the Spirit of God in the production or raising of it in the soul, (though it
be true it requires the lighting down of the Almighty arm of God upon the
soul to raise it) Neither 3, See this further opened and proved in the second
part of this Discourse. Cap. 2. ss. 17.
Is it imputed for righteousness in respect of the Object, or because it
lays hold upon Christ, or Christ's righteousness^, (though it be true also
that that faith that is imputed for righteousness, must of necessity lay hold
upon Christ, and no other faith is capable of this Imputation besides) because
if faith should justify or be imputed for righteousness, as it lays hold
upon Christ, it should justify out of the Inherent dignity and worth of it,
and by virtue of that which is natural and intrinsecall to it, there being
nothing that can be conceived more natural or essential unto faith, then to
lay hold upon Christ, this is the very life and soul of it, and that which
gives it its specificall being and subsistence: Therefore to make the Object of
FAITH as such, the precise and formal ground of the Imputation of it, is to
make have into the midst of Samaria, whilst men are confident they are
travailing toward Dothan: It is the giving the right hand of fellowship to the
Romish Justification, which makes faith the meritorious cause of it (in part).
But 4 and lastly, when with the Scripture we affirm, that faith is imputed for
righteousness, our meaning is simply and plainly this, that as God in the
first Covenant of works, required an absolut and through obedience to the whole
law with continuance in all things, for every man's Justification, which perfect
obedience, had it been performed, had been a perfect righteousness to the
performer, and so would have justified him. So now in the New Covenant of
grace, God requires nothing of any man for his justification, but only faith in
his Son; which faith shall be as a vaileable and effectual unto him for his
justification, as a perfect righteousness should have been under the first
Covenant: this is that which is meant when faith is said to be Imputed for
righteousness, which is nothing but that which is generally taught by Divines
both ancient and modern: Sic decretum dicit a Deo, ut cessante lege, Solam
fidem gratia Dei posceret ad salutem. Ambrosius in Romans 4. that is, the Apostle
saying that to him that believes, his faith is Imputed for righteousness,
affirms, that God has so decreed, that the Law ceasing, the grace of God
will require (of men) only faith to salvation. And again, upon Chapter 9, of the
same Epistle, Sola fides posita est ad salutem, only faith is appointed or
ordained to salvation. Calvin writing upon Romans 10, 8. has words of the same
importance, and somewhat more clear and full, Ex hac distinctionis nota,
colligimus, sicutilex opera exigit, sic Evangelium nihil aliud postulare,
nisi^ut fidem afferant homines, ad recipiendam Dei gratiam. that is, From this
distinction we gather, that as the Law required works, so the Gospel requires
nothing else, but that men bring faith to receive the grace of God. If God
requires Faith in the Gospel for the same end for which he required wor^^s or
perfect righteousness in the Law: it necessarily follows, that he should impute
this faith for that righteousness, that is, accept it from men upon the same
terms (in respect of justification) and bestow the same favors, rewards, and
privileges upon the tender of it, that should have been given unto men, in
regard of that legal righteousness, had it been fulfilled: otherwise he should
require it for such an end, or upon such term's as he would refuse to make good
unto it, when the creature has exhibited it and tendered it unto him; to
require it for righteousness, or instead of righteousness, and not to accept it
for righteousness, when it is brought unto him, would be as apparent a breach of
Covenant with God, as it would be in a rich Creditor that should compound and
agree with his poor Debtors for twelve pence in the pound, (or the like) but
when they brought the money to him, should refuse to take it upon any such
terms, or to discharge them of their debt, and give them out their bands.

Secondly, Christ's righteousness in Justification, we neither deny the
righteousness of Christ in it self, we rather suppose and establish it; Neither
2 do we deny the absolute necessity of it, both to the Justification and
salvation of a sinner: Neither 3, do we deny a meritorious efficiency or
causality in this righteousness, in respect of the Justification of a sinner:
but verily believe and conceive, that God justifies all that are justified,
not simply and barely for Christ's sake, or for his righteousness sake (for a man
may do a thing for his sake whom he much loves and respects, though he has not
otherwise deserved it at his hands) but for the merits sake of Christ's
righteousness, there being a full and real consideration in this righteousness
of Christ (I mean his death or passive righteousness chiefly) why God should
justify those that believe in him. But 4, (and lastly) that which we deny in
denying the Imputation of Christ's righteousness, is this, that God should look
upon a believing sinner in his Justification, and account of him as one that
had himself don all that Christ did in obedience to the Moral Law, and
hereupon pronounce or account him righteous, or (which is the same) that God
should Impute unto him those particular acts of obedience which Christ
performed ^ the nature and propriety of them, so that he should stand as
righteous before God, as Christ himself, or (which is the same) righteous with
the self same righteousness wherewith Christ was righteous, and so God make
himself countable unto him for such obedience imputed, in as great matters of
reward as he would have been for the like obedience personally performed by
himself: In a word, this is that which we deny, and this is that which we
affirm concerning the righteousness of Christ in the Justification of a sinner,
that God clothes no man with the letter of it, but every man that believes with
the Spirit of it, that is, that this righteousness of Christ is not that that is
imputed unto any man for righteousness, but is that for which righteousness is
imputed to every man that believes. A Justified person may in such a sense be
said to be clothed with Christ's righteousness, as Paul's necessities were
relieved and supplied by his hands, Act. 20, 34. These hands (says he) have
ministered unto my necessities. PAVL neither eat his fingers, nor spun out the
flesh of his hands into clothing, and yet was both fed and clothed with them;
so may a believer be said to be clothed with the righteousness of Christ, and
yet the righteousness of Christ it self not be his clothing, but only that
which procured this clothing unto him; and so Calvin calls that clothing of
righteousness wherewith a believer is clad in his justification, justitiam morte
and resurrectione Christi acquisitam, a righteousness procured or purchased by
the death and refurrection of Christ: This righteousness of Christ may be said
to be the righteousness of a believer in such a construction of speech, as the
knowledge of God and of Christ is said to be eternal life ( Ioh. 17, 3.) viz in
way of causalitie not in the formalitie of it: And again, the righteousness
of a Believer in his Justification, may be termed the righteousness of Christ
in such a sense, as the favor of God in deliverance out of trouble, is called a
man's righteousness, Job 33, 26. or as a bond servant under the Law is said by
God himself to be his Masters money, Exo. 21, 21. because he was bought with
his money: or as the Nation and people of the Jews is often in the Scriptures
called Jacob, they were not Jacob in the propriety of his person, but in his
descent and propagation. So may the righteousness of a Believer be called the
righteousness of Christ, viz. in the fructification of it, because it is a
righteousness descended from it, and issuing (as it were) out of the loins of
it. What has been affirmed, and what has been denied in the Question: We
come now to prove and to demonstrate the truth of both. 1. from the authority
of the Scriptures. 2. from the grounds of reason: as for the third kind of
proof or confirmation, consent of Authors, we shall not assign a peculiar
place for that by it self, but enterlace our other proofs occasionally with
such testimonies, as we have received from learned and judicious men for
confirmation of the point to be discussed the greatest part whereof
notwithstanding, you shall meet with in the second and fifth Chapters.

CAP. II.
Wherein the imputation of Faith for righteousness, is proved from the
Scriptures, and the interpretation of those Scriptures confirmed both by reason
and authority as well of ancient as modern Divines.
What it is, that is imputed for righteousness in Justification, all the
wisdom or learning under Heaven, is not so fit or able to determine, as the
Holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture; being the great Secretary of Heaven, and
privy to all the ways and counsels of God; and therefore there is none to
him to take up any difference, or to comprimise between the Controverters
about any Subject in Religion. All the difficulty and question is, because
though he speaks upon the house top, yet many times and many things he
interprets in the ear: All the Christian world, either know's, or readily may
know, what he speaks in the Scriptures, but what his meaning and intent is in
many things there delivered, he leaves unto men to debate and make out amongst
them: To some indeed he reveals the secret of his counsel, the Spirit of his
Letter, in some particulars, but because these are not marked in the forehead,
therefore their thoughts and apprehensions (though the true begotten of the
spirit of truth) are yet in common esteem, but like other men's, till God
himself shall please to make the difference by causing a clearer light of
evidence and conviction to arise upon them; yea many times the nearer the
truth, the further off from the approbation of many, and sometimes even of
those that are the greatest pretenders to the truth.

Four things there are especially, Prove. 30 31. against whom there is no
riseing up. First if the Letter or Grammar of the Scripture will fairly and
strongly bear it. Secondly, If the scope of the place will close directly and
entirely with it. Thirdly, If the interpretation that is set up against it,
cannot stand before the circumstance of the context about it. Fourthly, and
lastly, when the judgment of able, learned, and unpartiall men, is found in
perfect concurrence with it. If these considerations be sufficient to furnish
out an interpretation with authority and power, then shall we need no more
Scriptures to vindicate the innocence of our affirmative, viz. that Faith is
that which is imputed by God for righteousness in Justification (the truth of
our negative inseparably accompanying it, viz. that the righteousness of
Christ is not imputed) but only that one Chapter, Romans 4.

For the first, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness, v. 3. Again, but to him that works not, but believes in him,
that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted unto him for righteousness.
ver. 5. So again, We say that Faith was imputed to him for righteousness ver.
9. And yet again, And therefore it was imputed unto him for righteousness. v.
22. The same phrase and expression is used also ver. 23, 24. Certainly there is
not any truth in Religion, not any Article of the Christian belief, that can
boast of the Letter of the Scripture, more full, express, and pregnant for it.
What is maintained in this discourse concerning the imputation of Faith, has
all the authority and countenance from the Scriptures, that word can lightly
give: whereas the imputation of the righteousness of Christ (in that sense
which is magnified by many) has not the least relief, either from any
express sound of words or sight of Letter in the Scriptures.

Secondly, for the scope of the place, this also rejoices in the
interpretation given, viz. justification (extending from the first Chapter of
the Epistle to some Chapters following) was to hedge up with thorns (as it
were) that false way of Justification, which lay through works and legal
performances, and so to put men by from so much as attempting to go or seek
that way: and withal to open and discover the true way of justification,
wherein men might not fail to atteyne the Law of righteousness (as he speaks
elsewhere) before God: that is (in plain speech (to make known unto them what
they must do, and what God requires of them, to their justification, and what
he will accept at their hands this way, and what not. As our Saviors answer
was to the Jews, asking him what they should do to work the works of GOD,
meaning for their justification: This (says he) is the work of God ( i. All
the works of God requires of you for such a purpose) that you believe in him,
whom he has sent, John 6, 28, 29. So that that which God precisely requires of
men to their justification, instead of the works of the Law, is FAITH, or to
believe (in the proper and formal signification) He does not require of us the
righteousness of Christ, for our Justification, this he required of Christ
himself for it, that which he requires of us for this purpose, is our Faith in
Christ, himself, not in the righteousness of Christ, that is, in the active
obedience of Christ, (as hereafter is showed). Therefore for Paul to have
certified or said unto men, that the righteousness of Christ should be imputed
for righteousness unto them, had been quite beside his scope and purpose in
this place, which was plainly and directly this (as has been said) to make
known unto men, the counsel and good pleasure of God concerning that which was
to be performed by themselves (though not by their own strength) to their
justification, which he affirms from place to place, to be nothing else, but
their Faith, or believing. To have said thus unto them, that they must be
justified by Christ, or by Christ's righteousness, and withal not to have
plainly signified, what it is that God requires of them, to give them part and
fellowship in that righteousness, or justification which is by Christ, and
without which they could not be justified, had bin rather to cast a snare upon
them, then to have opened a door of life and peace unto them. And therefore he
is careful, when he speaks of Justification, or redemption by Christ often to
mention Faith, as the means whereby this redemption is communicated unto men.
See Romans 3, 25. Romans 5, 1, 2. By the light of which, and such like expressions,
the sense and meaning of those Scriptures are to be ruled wherein justification
or Redemption by Christ are taught, without any express mention of Faith, as
Romans 3, 24. Romans 5.9, etc. as likewise of those wherein justification by Faith
is affirmed, without express mention of Christ, or any thing done or suffered
by him. As Romans 3, 28.30.

And here by the way, I cannot but reflect a little upon the unsavorinesse and
inconsideratnesse of their conceit, who to avoid the strength of the
interpretation given of these Scriptures, will needs force themselves (contrary
to all Interpreters both ancient and modern, that I have yet met with, and
most apparently contrary to the most apparent scope of the Apostle, throughout
this whole disputation,) to suppose that the Apostle does not here speak of
that Faith of Abraham, whereby he was justified or made personally righteous
before God, but of such a Faith only, as God did approve of and commend in him,
and impute unto him as a particular act of righteousness, in such a sense as
that act of Phineas mentioned Number, 25, 8. is said to have been imputed to him
for righteousness, Psalm. 106, 31. Alas Paul was now in the heat of his
Dispute, concerning the great and weighty business of Justification,
travailing as it were in birth with his Romans, t^ll he had convincingly
satisfied them from the Scriptures, that the way of Justification was not by
the works of the Law, but by Faith in Jesus Christ.

Now how importune, and impertinent to this design had it been for him to
interpose a whole Chapter only to prove that, which was never doubted of nor
questioned by any? To wit, that Abraham did well in believing God, and was
approved by him for it. His business here was not to argue what was lawful,
and what was unlawful, or whether Abraham was justifiable in his act of
believing God. But to demonstrate and show, how and by what means a poor
miserable sinner, might come to be justified, and accounted righteous before
God, which he clearly and fully demonstrates to be by way of Faith or
believing, from the example of Abraham, whose faith was by God himself,
imputed for righteousness unto him, that is, upon and by the means of his
Faith he was looked upon by God as a righteous man. But the conceit against
which we now argue, is too weak to bear any great weight of confutation.

If that yet sticks with any man, that Abraham having believed formerly (as
appears from his History) and thereby justified, should be said to be
justified by a second, or after act or believing. I answer 1. Be it granted
that Abraham believed, and was thereby justified before that act of believing,
whereunto this Testimony is subjoined, that it was imputed unto him for
righteousness. Genesis 15, 6) yet does it not follow, that this testimony should
be precisely limited to, or only understood of that particular act of his
believing, whereunto it is subjoyned, but it may indifferently relate as well
to the first as the last act of his believing, (yea happily rather to the first
then to the last) for it is not said (in the place cited) that Abraham believed
the Lord in this particular promise now made or renewed unto him, but
indefinitely, and in the general, that Abraham believed or had believed the
Lord, and it was imputed, or accounted unto him for righteousness. So that
howsoever Abraham was precisely justified by the first act of a sound Faith,
which ever he put forth, yet the testimony or record of his justification by
believing might be suspended by the Holy Ghost, till his Faith became more
conspicuous, and was further manifested. Thus Heb. 11, 4. the testimony of
Abels righteousness by Faith, was (as it seems) deferred, till the
manifestation of his Faith, by offering such a sacrifice unto God as he did:
whereas it cannot be thought, but that he was a righteous or justified person,
and that by means of his Faith, before the offering of that sacrifice. So that
this Objection, is easily answered.

Besides further answer might be, that the intent of the Holy Ghost in this
testimony and passage concerning Abraham, was not to show the time when, but
the manner or means how and whereby he was justified. Now all succeeding acts
of justifying Faith as justifying (for there are many acts of a justifying
Faith, which are not of that kind of act, whereby such a Faith justifies) being
of the same kind and nature with that primary and first act of believing,
whereby he was justified, may in sufficient propriety of speech have the effect
of Justification ascribed as well to them, as it is to the first act it self.
As suppose a man has been a true believer in God through Jesus Christ for
seven years together, during which space he has constantly every day renewed
or repeated the very same act of believing, whereby he was at the first of a
sinner made righteous, this man's Justification or making righteous, may
according to the frequent tenor of Scripture language, be as well ascribed to any
of these after acts of believing, as to the first of all, it being usual with
Scripture to ascribe effects, though not really and actually effected and done,
to such means or actions of men, which are apt to produce and effect them.
Thus he is said to destroy the Temple of God. 1 Cor. 3, 16. who shall do any
thing that endanger's it, or is apt to destroy it. The like expression we have
Romans 14, 15, and verse 20. See also and consider Mat. 16, 6. Esther 8, 7.
Romans 24. Mat 5, 32. with other like places without number.

Thirdly, Faith properly and formally understood, but Faith tropically or
metonymically, that is, the righteousness of Christ is clearly overthrown by
many considerations and passages in the context.

First, it colour's not with any appearance or likelihood of truth, that the
Apostle in the great and weighty point of justification, wherein (doubtless)
he desired (if in any Subject beside) to speak with his understanding (as his
own phrase is) that is, that what he himself conceives and understand's, may
be clearly understood by others, should time after time, in one place after
another, without ever explaining himself throughout the whole disputation, use
so strange and harsh, and uncouth an expression or figure of Speech, as is not
to be found in all his writings, nor in all the Scriptures besides. To say that
Faith, or believing, is imputed for righteousness, but to mean, that indeed
it is not Faith, but the righteousness of Christ that is imputed, must needs
argue the speakers design to be this; the making sure that his meaning should
not get out at his mouth. If Paul should manage the great point and mystery of
justification, in such language and phrase of speech as this, he might truly
say of what he had said herein, EDIDI, ET NON EDIDI, that he had said, and not
said.

Secondly, it is evident, that that Faith or beleeveing, which ver. 3. is said
to be imputed to Abraham for righteousness, is opposed to works or working
ver. 5. Now between Faith properly taken, and works, and so between
believing and working, there is a constant opposition in the writings of this
Apostle, yea and reason it self demonstrates an opposition between them (as
occasion will be to show more at large in the second part of this discourse)
but between the active obedience or righteousness of Christ, and works,
neither does Paul ever make opposition, neither would reason have suffered him
to have done it.

Thirdly, it is said, ver. 5. that to him that believes, HIS faith is imputed
to him for righteousness. From which clause it is evident, that that Faith
(whatsoever we understand by it) which is imputed for righteousness is HIS,
that is, somewhat that may truly and properly be called his, before such
imputation of it be made unto him. Now it cannot be said of the righteousness
of Christ, that that is any man's, before the imputation of it be made unto him,
but Faith properly taken is the believers, before it be imputed (at least in
order of nature, if not of time) Therefore by Faith, which is here said to be
imputed, cannot be meant the righteousness of Christ.

Fourthly, Christ, should be here said to be imputed, but either God himself,
or the promise of God made unto Abraham. For it is said, Abraham believed God,
ver. 3. not that he believed the righteousness of Christ, except we set up
another trope to maintain the former, and by God, will say is meant, the
righteousness of Christ, which would be, not a trope or figure, but rather
(indeed) a monster of speech. Therefore the righteousness of Christ cannot be
here said or meant to be imputed for righteousness, Yea whereas the Object of
Faith, as justifying, is expressed with great variety of words and terms in
the Scriptures: in all this variety there is not to be found the least mention
of the righteousness of Christ. As if the holy Ghost foreseeing the kindling
of this false fire, had purposely with-drawne or withheld all fuel that might
feed it. Sometimes Christ in person is made the Object of this Faith. Ioh. 3,
16. -- that whosoever believes in him etc. Sometimes Christ in his Doctrine,
or the Doctrine and word of Christ, Ioh. 5, 46. Had ye believed Moses, ye
would have believed me. Sometimes Christ in the relation of his person: and
that either as he stands related unto God, as his Father. Ioh 20 31. These
things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of
GOD. Or else as he stands related to those ancient promises of God made unto
the Nation of the Jews from time to time before his coming in the flesh,
concerning a Messia to be given or sent unto them. Ioh. 8 24. Except ye
believe that I am he, you shall die in your sins. Sometimes th^r aising up of
Christ from the dead, is made the Object of this Faith. Romans 10, 9. For if thou
shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart,
that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved. Sometimes again.
God himself is mentioned as the Object of this Faith. 1 Pet. 1, 21. -- that
your Faith and hope might be in God. and John 12, 44. He that believes on me,
believes not on me, but on him that sent me: Besides many like places.

Lastly, (to forbear further enumeration of particulars in this kind, which
are of ready observation in the Scriptures) Sometimes the record or testimony
of God concerning his Son, is made the Object of this Faith. 1 John 5, 10. He
that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believed not the
record God witnessed of his Son, etc. In all this variety or diversity of
expressing the Object of Faith as justifying, there is no sound or intimation
of the righteousness or active obedience of Christ. Not but that the
righteousness of Christ, is and ought to be believed, as well as other things
that are revealed and written in the Scriptures, yea I conceive it to be of
nearer concernment to the maine, to believe this righteousness of Christ, then
the believing of many other things besides comprehended in the Scriptures
as well as it. But one principal reason, why it should not be numbered or
reckoned up amongst the objects of Faith as justifying, may (with great
probability) be conceived to be this: because, though it ought to be, and
cannot but be believed by that Faith, which justifies, yet it may be believed
also by such a Faith, which is so far from justifying, that it denies this
Christ (whose righteousness notwithstanding it believes and acknowledges) to
be the Son of God. Thus some of his own Nation the Jews, have given testimony
to his righteousness and innocence, who yet received him not for their
Messiah, nor believed him to be God. And this is the frame and constitution of
the Turkish Faith (for the most part) concerning him at this day.

Fifthly, Faith which is here said to be imputed unto Abraham for
righteousness, ver. 3. is that Faith by which he believed in God, that
quickens the dead, and calls the things that are not as if they were, ver.
17. But the righteousness of Christ, can in no tolerable construction, or
congruitie; of speech, be called that Faith, by which Abraham believed in God
that quickens the dead etc. Therefore the righteousness of Christ is not
that Faith, that is here said to be imputed for righteousness.

Sixthly, that Faith which was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness ver. 3.
is that Faith, wherein it is said ver. 19. that Abraham was not weak, and is
opposed, to doubting of the promise of God through unbelief, ver. 20. But the
righteousness of Christ cannot be conceived to be that, wherein Abraham was
not weak, neither does the righteousness of Christ carry any opposition with
it, to a doubting of the promise of God through unbelief, being a thing of a
differing kind and nature from it. But between Faith properly taken or a firm
believing, and a doubting through unbelief, there is a direct and perfect
opposition. Therefore it is Faith in this sense, and not the righteousness of
Christ, that is said to be imputed unto Abraham for righteousness.

Sevently, that Faith which was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness, was
that Faith, by which he was fully assured, that he which had promised, was able
also to do it (for thus it is described, ver. 21.) and the imputation of faith
so described, is plainly affirmed ver. 22. and therefore it was imputed unto
him for righteousness. But the righteousness of Christ, is not capable of any
such definition or description, as this, that by it Abraham was fully assured,
that he that had promised, was also able to perform it. Therefore the
righteousness of Christ, is not that, that was imputed for righteousness unto
Abraham.

Eighthly, that which shall be imputed unto us for righteousness, is said to be
our believing on him, that raised up the Lord Jesus Christ from the dead. v.
24. But the righteousness of Christ is not our believing on him that raised up
our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead. Therefore it cannot be that, that is
either said or meant to be imputed unto us for righteousness.

Ninthly, (and lastly) whereas the question or point of imputation in
Justification, is handled only in this passage of Scripture, Romans 4. (for those
other places Gal. 3, and Iam. 2, only mention it, but insist not at all upon
any declaration or explication thereof) it is no ways probable, but that the
Apostle should speak somewhat distinctly and plainly of the nature of it
here. Otherwise he might seem rather desirous to have laid a stumbling block
in the way of men; then written any thing for their learning and comfort. If we
take the word FAITH or BELIEVING, so often used in this Chapter, in the proper
and plain signification of it, for that Faith whereby a man believes in
Christ, or the promise of God concerning Christ, then the tenor of the
discourse is as clear as the day, and full of light: the stream of the whole
Chapter run's limpid and untroubled. But if we bring in a tropicall and
metonymicall interpretation, and by Faith, will needs compel Saint Paul to
mean the righteousness of Christ, we cloth the Sun with a Sackcloath, and
turn Paul's perspicuitie into a greater obscurity, then any light in the
Scripture knows well how to comfort or relieve. The word FAITH, being a term
frequently used in the Scripture, is yet never found to signify the
righteousness of Christ, the Holy Ghost never putting this word into that
sheath: neither is there any, either rule in Grammar, or figure in Rhetorique,
that know's how to salve up the inconsistencie of such an interpretation.

If it be objected and said, that faith in the Scripture is sometimes put for
the object of faith, as Gal. 3, 23. But before Faith came (that is, the
Doctrine of Faith, or Christ himself the object of Faith) we were kept under
the Law. So Gal. 1, 22. He preaches the faith, which sometimes he destroyed.
etc. and may be so used with as good propriety of speech, as hope is put for
the thing or things hoped for (which is an expression not unusual in the
Scriptures.)

To this I answer, first, by concession, that true it is, the name of the
faculty is sometimes put for the object appropriated to it: neither is there
any hardness or cause of offense or mistake in such an expression. It rather
add's grace and comeliness to the sentence wherein it is used, if it be used
seasonably, as might be exemplified by several Scripture instances, (if it
were pertinent).

But secondly, by way of opposition I answer, First, though the faculty be
sometimes put for the Object, yet the act seldom (or never) to my remembrance.
The actor exercise of the grace of hope, is never put for the things hoped for,
but hope it self is sometimes found in that signification. As Colos. 1, 5. for
the hope which is laid up for you in the Heaven. So Tit. 2, 13. Looking for
that blessed hope, etc. Now that which is here said to be imputed unto Abraham
for righteousness, was not the habit or grace of his Faith, but Abraham
believed God (that is, exercised or put forth an act of Faith, and it was
imputed unto him for righteousness. So that though faith may be sometimes put
for the object of Faith, yet the exercise of this Faith, or to believe, is
never put for it.

Secondly, though it should be granted, that as well the act it self, as the
faculty or habit, may be sometimes put for the Object, yet when the act and
Object have been named together, and the act expressed and specified by an
Object proper to it, and further, somewhat immediately ascribed to this act
under that consideration (all which is plainly seen in this clause, Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness) in this case to
conceive or affirm, that what is so ascribed, is neither ascribed unto the act
it self there mentioned (which is here, Abraham's believing) nor unto the
Object mentioned likewise with it (which is here, GOD: Abraham believed God)
but to some third thing really differing from them both, and not so much as
once mentioned or named in all the discourse (as the righteousness of Christ
is not once named throughout this whole Chapter, no nor in any other Chapter
near at hand, either antecedent, or subsequent) what is this but to turn a
man's back upon the text, to look out an interpretation? and to exchange that
which is plainly affirmed, with what is not so much as obscurely intimated or
implied? and to make the Apostle speak as man never spoke besides, not for
wisdom or excellency of speech, but for the uncouth abstrusenesse of his
meaning? Doubtless no instance is to be found of any Author whatsoever, sacred
or profane, who so far abhorred to be understood in what he spoke, as to put
his mind into words of such a construction.

Thirdly, and lastly, to the Objection I Answer: that neither is the
righteousness of Christ the object of Faith, as justifying (as has been said,
and sufficiently made good) nor does the Scripture, where it speaks of Faith
as justifying (which places are not a few) make the least mention, or give the
least intimation of such a thing. It is true, the Scriptures sometimes propound
the righteousness of Christ or his obedience to the Law, as that which is to be
believed, and so it may be termed a partial object of Faith, that is, somewhat
that is and ought to be believed: but so the creation of the world is
propounded to be believed, and that Cain was Adams Son, is somewhat to be
believed. And generally whatsoever the Scriptures do affirm, may be called a
partial object of Faith. But the object of faith properly, as it justifies,
is either Christ himself, or the promise of GOD concerning the Redemption and
salvation of the world by him. The righteousness of Christ is no more the
object of Faith as justifying, then either his being borne of a Virgin, or his
ascending up into Heaven, or the like, and either the one or the other, may (in
that respect) be as well here said to be imputed unto Abraham for
righteousness, as the righteousness of Christ. Thus you see at large how many
passages and circumstances in the context, stand up in contestation against
that exposition, which by Abraham's Faith in this Chapter, will needs understand
Christ's righteousness.

Fourthly, Faith or believing, is to be taken properly in all the passages
mentioned, and not tropically or metonymically) was the common interpretation
anciently received and followed by the principal lights, (I mean the Fathers)
of the Church of God from the primitive times, and for 1500 years together (as
far as my reading and memory together will assist me,) was never questioned or
contradicted. Neither did the contrary opinion ever look out into the world
(at least was never contended for) till the yesterday of the last age. So that
it is but a calumny or evil report, brought upon the opinion, and
interpretation of this Scripture which we maintain (unworthy the tongue or pen
of any learned and sober man) to make either Arminius or Socinus, the Authors
or founders of either. And for this last hundredth years and upwards, from
about Luthers and Calvin's times, the fairest stream of Interpreters so runs,
as to water and refresh the same interpretation. You will be easily inclined (I
presume) to believe both the one and the other, that both former and latter
times have been friends and favorers of the interpretation given, if you will
please, with diligence and without partiality, to ponder and examine these few
testimonies and passages following, as they stand in their several Authors
respectively.

TERTULLIAN, Caeterum quomodo fil^ ^^let ^^t ^^tus fide^, si non A^^a^^ S^^enim
A^^cham Deo credidit, et d^^^tatum est Iustitiae, atque extud^ Pate multatum
natiorum m^ruit nuncupart: no^ ^atem credendo Deo, magis protrd^ justificamur
sicut Abraham. Tertull. contra Marc. l. 5. c. 3. Denique Abraham Deo credidit,
et justitiae deputatus ab isto est: sed fidem ejus patientia probavit, quum
filium immolaere jussus est etc. Idem. de Patient. c. 6.

Videtur ergo eciam in prasenti ^oco quam multae fides Abrahae praecesserint,
in hoc nunc universa fides ejus esse collecta: et ita ad justitiam ei reputata.
Origin. l. 4. ad To. in c. 4.

(...) Just. Mar. Dial. cum Tryph. post medium.


who lived and wrote about the year 194, in his fifth Book against Marcion,
writes thus, But how the Children of Faith? or of whose Faith, if not of
Abraham's? For if Abraham believed God, and that was imputed unto him for
righteousness, and he thereby deserved the name of a Father of many Nations,
we by believing GOD more, are therefore justified as Abraham was. The same
Father in his tract of Patience, Abraham believed God, and was accounted
righteous by him, but he tried his Faith by patience, when he was commanded to
offer his Son. Therefore Tertullians opinion directly is, that that Faith which
is said to be imputed to Abraham for righteousness, is Faith properly taken,
and not the righteousness of Christ apprehended by Faith, because he says
that God tried his Faith by patience, which cannot be applied to the
righteousness of Christ.

ORIGIN, Who lived about the year 203 in his fourth Book upon the Romans,
writing on cap. 4. ver. 3. speaks thus. It seems therefore, that in this
place also, that whereas many faiths, (that is, many acts of believing) of
Abraham had gone before, now all his faith was recollected and united together,
and so was accounted unto him for righteousness. And in the same place not
long after, he has more words to like purpose. Therefore he joined with
Tertullian in the interpretation of this Scripture.

JUSTIN MARTYR, Who lived before them both, and not long after the Apostle
John's time, about the year 130, in his Dialogue or disputation had at Ephesus
with Trypho the Jew, it seems led them both the way to that Interpretation.
Abraham carried not away the testimony (or commendation) of righteousness,
because of his circumcision, but because of his Faith. For before he was
circumcised, this was pronounced of him, Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed unto him for righteousness.

CHRYSOSTOM, who lived somewhat after the year 380, (...). Chrysostom. ad Romans
cap. 4. v. 23. circa initium Sermon. 9. et paulo post. (...) Idem ad Gal. 3. c.
in the beginning of his ninth Sermon upon the Romans. Having spoken (says he,
meaning Paul in the former part of that Chapter) many and great things
concerning Abraham and his Faith, etc. And a little after, Wherefore (says he)
was it written, but that we might learn that we also are justified, as he was,
because we have believed the same God? The same Father again upon Gal. 3. For
what was he the worse for not being under the Law? nothing at all, for his
Faith was sufficient unto him for righteousness. If Abraham's Faith was
sufficient unto him for righteousness, it must needs be imputed by God for
righteousness unto him, for it is this imputation from God, that must make
that sufficiency of it unto Abraham. That which will not pass in account with
God for righteousness, will never be sufficient for righteousness unto the
creature.

Saint AUGUSTINE, who lived about the year 390, Credendo quipp^ invenimus,
quod illi (Iudai) non credendo amiserunt. Quia credidit Abraham Deo, et
reputatum est illi ad justitiam, Aug. in Psalm. 148. versus finem.
gives frequent testimony in his works, both to the opinion and interpretation
contested for. Upon Psalm. 148. For we by believing have found that which they
(the Jews) lost by not believing. For Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
unto him for righteousness. Therefore his opinion clearly is, that it was
Abraham's Faith or Believing properly taken, that was imputed unto him for
righteousness, and not the righteousness of Christ. For that Faith of his,
which was so imputed, he opposes to the unbelief of the Jews, whereby they
lost the grace and favor of God. Now the righteousness of Christ is not
opposed to unbelief, but Faith properly taken. Again, writing upon Psalm. 70,
In eum credo, qui justificat impium, ut deputetur fides mea in justitiam. Idem
in Psalm. 70.
For I believe in him that justifies the ungodly, that my faith may be imputed
unto me for righteousness. Where by Faith he cannot mean the righteousness of
Christ, because he calls it his own before the imputation: whereas the
righteousness of Christ can no ways be imagined to be any man's, till it be
made his by imputation: The same Father yet again, in his tract of nature and
Grace: But if Christ died not in vain, Si autem non gratu mortuus est
Christus, in illo solo justificatur impius: cui credenti in eum qui justificat
impium, deputatur fides injustitiam. Aug. De Not. et Great. non lorge ab initio.

Credidit Abraham Deo, et deputatum est illi ad justitiam. Ecce sine opere,
justificatur ex fide^ et quicquid illi, legali observatione potest conferri,
totum crdulitas sola donavit. Idem de Temp. Sermon. 68.


the ungodly is justified in him alone: to whom, believing in him that
justifies the ungodly, his Faith is accounted for righteousness. And yet once
more, in his 68 Sermon of Time (^f that piece be his) Abraham believed God, and
it was imputed unto him for righteousness. See, without any work, he is
justified by Faith, and whatsoever was possible to have bin conferred upon him
by the observation of the Law his believing alone gave it all unto him.
Certainly this Author (whoever he was) by the word CREDULITY (for so the
Latin word signifies) whereby he expresses that Faith which was imputed unto
Abraham for righteousness, could not mean or understand the righteousness of
Christ.

PRIMASIUS about the year 500, upon Romans 4, ver. 3. Tam magna fuit dono. Dei
fides Abrahae, ut et pristina ei peccata donarentur, et sola prae omni justitia
doceretur accepta. that is, Abraham's faith by the gift of God was so great,
that both his former sins were forgiven him, and this FAITH of his alone
preferred in acceptance before all righteousness. By Abraham's alone Faith, he
cannot mean Christ's righteousness.

BEDA, who lived somewhat before the year 700 upon Romans 4. ver. 5. has these
words, What Faith, Que fides, nisi quam alio loco plenissime definit Apostolus:
Neque circuncisio neque praeputium aliquid valet, sed fides que per dilectionem
operatur. Non qualis^^nque fides, sed sid^s que per dile^ta mem operatur. Beda
ad To. 4 5.

Quia credidit D^o, reputatu^ est et ad justitiam ^. ad remissionem peccatorum,
quia per ipsa^ sidem, qua credidit, justus effectus est. Haymo in Romans 4, 3.
Quod ita firmiter credidit, reputatum est illi divinitus ad justitiam, i. non
solum liberatus est ab omni originali et actuali peccato per hanc credulitatem,
sed justus est a Deo reputatus. Anselm. Cant. in Romans 4.3.


but that which the Apostle in another place fully defines: neither
circumcision, nor uncircumcision avails any thing but faith which works by
love, not any faith, but that faith which works by love. Certainty that
Faith, which Paul defines or describes to be a Faith working by love, cannot
be conceived to be the righteousness of Christ, and yet this Faith it was, in
the judgment of this Author, that was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness.

HAYMO, about the year 840, in Romans 4, 3. Because he believed God, it was
imputed unto him for righteousness, that is, unto remission of sins, because
by that Faith, wherewith he believed, he was made righteous.

ANSELME, Archbishop of Canterbury, about the year, 1090, upon Romans 4, 3.
That he meaning (Abraham) believed so strongly, was by God imputed for
righteousness unto him: that is, etc. by this believing he was imputed
righteous before God.

From all these testimonies it is apparent, that that interpretation of this
Scripture which we contend for, has anciently ruled in the Church of God, and
no man found to open his mouth, or lift up his pen against it, till it had bin
established upon the Throne for above a thousand years. Come we to the times
of Reformation, here we shall find the right and title of it still maintained
by men of greatest authority and learning. Christiana justitia est fiducia in
filium Dei: quae fiducia imputatur ad iustitiam propter Christum. Luther. ad
Gal. 3, 6.

Deus reputat istam imperfectam fidem ad justitiam perfectam propter Christum,
in quem coepi credere. ibid.




LUTHER in Gal. 3, 6. Christian righteousness is an affiance or faith in the
Son of God, which affiance is imputed unto righteousness for Christ's sake. And
in the same place not long after: God for Christ's sake, in whom J have begun to
believe, accounts this (my) imperfect faith, for perfect righteousness.
Doubtless this Author was for the interpretation given, or else his words and
he, were not of the same mind.

BUCER, upon Romans 4.3. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness, that is, he accounted this FAITH or believing, Abraham fidem
habuit Iehovae, et reputavit id ei justitiam^ hoc est, habuit ei pro justitia
hanc fidem. Credendo igitur id accepit, ut Deus cum pro justo haberet. Buce^.
Ad To. 4, 3.

Imputari ad justitiam, alio modo significat ^d, per quod nos ipsi habemur in
censu justorum. Atque id Paulus tantummodo fidei tribuit etc. (P. Mart. Ad Romans
4, 3.

Quare Abraham credendo nihil aliud, quam obla, tam sibi gratiam amplectitur,
ne ^rrita sit. Si hoc illi imputatur in justitiam, sequitur non aliter esse
justum, nisi quia Dei bonitate consisus, omnia ab ipso sperare audet, Calvin.
ad Romans 4, 3.

Fides reputatur in justitiam, non qu^d ullum a nobis meritum afferat, sed quia
Dei bonitatem apprehendit. ibid. in v. 4.


for righteousness unto him. So that by believing he obtained this, that God
esteemed him a righteous man.

PETER MARTYR declares himself of the same judgment, upon Romans 4, 3. To be
imputed for righteousness in another sense, signifies, that by which we our
selves are reckoned in the number of the righteous. And this PAUL attributes to
FAITH only.

CALVIN abetteth the same interpretation with as high a hand as any of his
fellows, upon Romans 4, 3, Wherefore Abraham by believing does only embrace the
grace tendered unto him, that it might not be in vain. If this be imputed unto
him for righteousness, it follows, that he is no otherwise righteous, but as
trusting or relying upon the goodness of God, he has boldness to hope for
all things from him. Again, upon verse 5. Faith is reputed for righteousness,
not because it carries any merit from us, but because it apprehends the
goodness of God. If all this be not home to the point in Question, I desire
the Reader that desires further satisfaction concerning the judgment of this
Author therein, to peruse and ponder what he has commented at large upon the
sixth verse of Gal. 3. Whosoever thinks it prejudicial to Calvin, that he
should be thought to hold Imputation of Faith (in a proper sense) for
righteousness, may if he will, pity him, and lament over him, but without an
Index expurgatorius (and that in folio) can never relieve him. In the place
last mentioned (to omit many other passages and expressions: here extant, as
pregnant for that imputation of Faith which is pleaded for, as eyes can look
upon) he describes at large that Faith of Abraham (which is there said to be
imputed for righteousness) by the nature and property of it, and differenceth
it from other persuasions that men may have of the truth of God. By which
carriage of the business, it is as manifest as manifestation it self knows
how to make any thing manifest, that his thoughts were never tempted with any
insinuation either of a tropicall or metonymicall sense in the word Faith: but
that the plain, ready, and Grammatical signification, was that which he
wrought upon,

MUSCULUS, Commendata debebat esse haec sides, non propr^e qualitatu, sed
propositi Dei respectu, quo constituit, illa, credentibus in Christum, propter
ipsum, justitiae loco imputare.

Musc. Loc. de. Iustif. sect. 5 Quid enim fecit (Abraham) quod imputaretur illi
ad justitiam, nisi quod credidit Deo? Idem Ad Gal. 3, 6. Sic de hac Abrah^ fide
loquitur, ut manifestum sit disputare ipsum de fide, qua non simpliciter Deo,
sed in Deum creditur. Idem in Genesis 15, 6.

Verum vbi promittenti Deo firmiter credidit, est illi ejusmodi fides justitiae
loco imputata: hoc est, obeam fidem, justus est a Deo reputatis, et ab omnibus
dei^ctis absolutus. ibid.


as far as his judgment and learning will reach, engages himself for this
Imputation also. In his common place of Justification. Sect. 5. This Faith
should be in high respect and esteem with us; not in regard of the proper
quality of it, but in regard of the purpose or decree of God, whereby he has
decreed, for Christ's sake, to impute it (this faith) for righteousness unto
those that believe in him. The same Author upon Gal. 3, 6. What did (Abraham)
that should be imputed unto him for righteousness, but only this, that he
believed God? Words plain enough to our purpose, yet behold from the same pen,
more plain then they in another place. Upon Genesis 15, 6. you shall find words
of this importance. He so speaks of Abraham's Faith, that manifest it is, that
he disputes of that Faith, wherewith a man believes, not God simply, but in or
on God. Where though he makes a difference between believing God simply, and
believing in God: yet evident it is, that if there be either trope or metonymie
in the word BELIEVING, he was not aware of it, because be interprets it of such
a Faith, as properly notes the act, not the object of believing. Again,
afterward, in the same place: But when he firmly believed God promising, that
very Faith was imputed to him, in the place, or stead of righteousness, that
is, he was of God reputed righteous for that Faith, and absolved from all his
sins.

BULLINGER likewise gives the same right hand of fellowship to the same
interpretation, upon Romans Concredidit se Abraham Deo, et illud ipsum illi pro
justitia imputatum est. Bulling. ad To. 4.

Imputatum est illi adjustitiam etc. hoc est, illa ipsa Abrahae fides ipsi
adjustiam imputata est, cum ad huc ageret in praputio. Idem. ad Gal. 3, 6.

Credidit Abraham Deo, et impuravit ei, scilicet Deus, hanc fidem, pro
justitia. Gualt. Ad Romans 4.4.

Imputavit ei justitiam, quod est, fidem giatam habuit, adeo ut justum ex eo
haberet justitia imputativa. Aret. ad Romans 4.

Fides tam firma et pia, pro justitia Abrahamo imputata est. Aret. ad Romans 4,
22.


4 Abraham committed himself unto God by believing and this very thing was
imputed unto him for righteousness. And the second time upon Gal. 3, 6. It was
imputed unto him for righteousness. that is, that very Faith of Abraham was
imputed to him for righteousness, whilst he was yet uncircumcised.

GUALTER comes behind none of the former in avouching the Grammatical against
the Rhetorical interpretation, upon Romans 4.4. Abraham believed God, and he,
viz. God, imputed unto him THIS FAITH for righteousness.

ARETIUS no whit digresseth from the former expositions upon Romans 4. He imputed
righteousness unto him, which is as much as to say, he so far accepted or
thought well of his faith, as thereupon to account him righteous with an
imputative righteousness. Where note by the way, he does not call an
imputative or imputed righteousness, any thing that is a righteousness
properly so called, any righteousness that should be in one person inherently,
and become another by imputation (neither do I remember the phrase of an
imputed righteousness in that sense, in any classique Author) but by an
imputative righteousness, he means somewhat imputed or accounted by God for
righteousness, which literally and in strictness of consideration is not
such. Again, the same Author more plainly and succinctly upon ver. 22. of the
same Chapter, A faith so firm and pious, was imputed unto Abraham for
righteousness. Illud credere, ei imputatum est ad justitiam, vel pro vera
justitia. Illyr. ad To. 4.3. Et paulo post: Mendica illa fites apprehendeus
Christi justiciam, imputata ipsi est loco propriae justitiae.


ILLYRICUS forsakes not his fellow-interpreters in this point. Upon Romans 4, 3.
That same believing was imputed unto him for righteousness. And afterward,
That same poor begging faith, apprehending the righteousness of Christ, was
imputed unto him instead of a proper righteousness.

PELICAN ^s breaks not this rank, Credidit simpliciter verbo Dei, et non
postulavit signum a D^mino: et imputabat came sidem ipsi Abrahae Deus pro
justitia qua creditur propersus Deus in nostrum bonum. Pelican to Genesis 15.6.

Fides qua promittent^ Deo credidit Ab^aham, et fuit ad justitiam imputata.
Hunnius ad ^om. 4 3.

Hic agitur de eo. quod ipsi imputatum est, nempe de ipsius side ^re. ad Romans
4.3.

Eum quan vis justitia carente^ numeravitque pro justo habuit, in justit^ loco,
quod promissiones firma fide ample ^us est. I c^mel. et Iun. Not. in Genesis 15.6.

Intelligimus fide^ nomine acqutes^^ntiam Abrah^e non in se sunv^ m^titu, sed
in Dei promissione et benevolentia. Par. ad To. 4.3.


Upon Genesis 15 6. Abraham simply believed the word of God, and required not a
sign of the Lord and God imputed THAT VERY Faith unto Abraham himself for
righteousness, whereby GOD is inclineable or propense to do us good.

HUNNIUS another Reformed Divine sets to his seal that the avouched
interpretation is true, On Romans 4.3. The faith whereby Abraham believed GOD
promising, was imputed unto him for righteousness.

BE^A himself, upon the same Scripture is as deep in the same way as any. Here
(^a^th he) the business is, concerning that, that was imputed unto him, viz
his faith.

JUNIUS and TREMEILIUS, are likewise of the former conspiracy aginst the
tropicall interpretation. On Genesis 15, 6. God esteemed (or accounted) him for
righteous though wanting righteousness wherewith to stand before God, and
reckoned this in the stead or place of righteousness, that he embraced the
promise with a firm belief.

PARAEUS (the last we shall name of foreign Divines) deals out this
interpretation as freely as his fellows. On Romans 4.3. We understand by the
name or word FAITH (which is said to be impu^ed unto Abraham for
righteousness) Abraham's acquietation or resting, ^ot in himself, or in his
own merits, but in the promise and graciousnesse of God.

Neither are there wanong from amongst our selves, men of soundest learning and
j^dgment, holding forth the light o^ the same interpretation a so.

Doctor ROBERT ABBOT (^^^^wards Bishop of Sa^um) in his Apology against
Bishop, Romans 4, 5, and 6. he adds as follows. In which words we see, how
the Apostle affi^meth (accordingly as I said) an Imputation of righteousness
without works: which he expresses to be, The repu^ing of Faith for
righteousness; for that thereby we obtain remission and forgiveness of
sins. Again not long after; for in the imputation of righteousness without
works, what is it that is reputed for righteousness? Faith (says the Apostle)
is reputed for righteousness. Tell us then Mr. Bishop, is faith with you
reputed for righteousness without works? Spit out man and tell us, whether in
your first or second justification, you hold that a man for his faith is
reputed righteous, etc. (with more of like importance, in the page following)
He that will undertake to divide b^^weene this Author, and the opinion we
contend for, must be more severe then to give a man leave to be of his own
mind.

Dr. PRESTON also, makes himself a stranger to the tropicall interpretation
of this Scripture, and imbraceth that which is litterall and proper without
scruple or question. In his Treatise of Gods Allsufficiency, page 12 13. In this
sense faith is said to be accounted (or imputed) for righteousness. Abraham
believed God, Genesis 15. God indeed made the same proposition, that he does here
for substance, he tells him what be would do for him: and (says the text)
Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness. Now it
was accounted unto him for righteousness chiefly in this sense, as it is
interpreted Rom 4 that his very taking of the promise, and his accepting of the
Covenant in that he did receive that which God gave that put him within the
Covenant, and therefore the Lord reckoned him a righteous man, even for that
very acceptance and believing But that is not all: but likewise be accounts
faith to him for righteousness, because faith does Sanctify, and make a man
righteous, etc. So that evident it is (if there be any such thing as evidence
in the writings and opinions of men) that this man's thoughts were never so much
as tempted, to conceit that the Apostle should tropologize or metonymize in the
word Faith, or believing, in this Scripture.

Mr. JOHN FORBS, late Pastor of the English Church at Middleburgh, a man of
known gravity, piety, and learning, in his Treatise of Justification, cap.
28, p. 135. has these words, For faith in this sentence (meaning, where it is
said that faith is imputed unto righteousness) is in my opinion, to be taken
properly, in that sense whereby in it self it is distinguished, both from the
word, whereby it is begotten, and from the object of it in the word, which is
Christ.

Thus I have cited the authority of many Authors, by way of collateral
assurance, for the securing the literal and proper interpretation of this
Scripture. Not that the interpretation it self needs tali auxilio, aut
defensoribus istis: but only to remove that great stumbling stone of the world
(which lies in many men's way toward many truths) called PREJUDICE.

CAP. III.
Other proofs from Scripture to to establish the former conclusion, vindicated
likewise from such exceptions, as may be laid in against them.
SEcondly, that the active obedience of Christ, Moral Law, was never intended
by God, to be that righteousness wherewith we should be justified (in any such
way of imputation as is pretended) may be (I conceive) further demonstrated,
from all such passages in Scripture, where the works of the Law are absolutely
excluded from justification. As Romans 3, 28. Therefore we conclude that a man is
justified by Faith, without the works of the Law. So Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a
man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ,
even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith
of Christ, and not by the works of the Law, Again, Romans 3.20. Therefore by the
works of the Law, shall no flesh be justified in his sight: Besides other
Scriptures of like importance. Now if a man be justified by the righteousness
of Christ imputed unto him, he shall be justified by the works of the Law,
because that righteousness of Christ we now speak of, consists of these
works, as every man's personal righteousness should have done had there been a
continuance in the first Covenant? Therefore this righteousness of Christ
cannot be imputed to any man, for that righteousness, whereby he is to be
justified.

Neither will these and the like Scriptures be charmed by words of any such
gloss or interpretation as this: No man shall be justified in the sight of God
by the works of the Law, viz. as personally wrought by themselves, because no
man's works will hold out weight and measure with the strictness and perfection
of the Law. But this hinders not, but that a man may be justified by the works
of the Law, as wrought by another, supposing this other to be as great in
working or obeying as the Law it self is in commanding, and withal, that God
is willing to derive these works of his upon us by imputation. For to this I
answer 4 things.

First, in materia necessaria, as this is, propositio indefinita vim obtines
universalis, as Logicians, the best oversees of reason, generally resolve us:
not to be justified by the works of the Law, is as much as not to be justified
by any works of the Law whatsoever) wi hout imposing any necessity upon men,
either in the same place, or else where in the Scriptures, to limit or
distinguish upon it, then for men to interpose with their own wisdoms and
apprehensions, by distinctions and limitations, and reservations of what they
please, to overruled the plain and express meaning and signification of the
words, is not to teach men obedience and submission unto, but to usurp a power,
and exercise authority over the Scriptures: Neither is there any practice so
sinful, or opinion so erronous, but may find a way to escape the word of the
Spirit, and to come fairly off from all Scripture censure, if they be but
permitted to speak for themselves by the mouth of such a distinction. Give but
the loose Patrons of an implicit Faith, liberty to distinguish upon like terms;
where the Scriptures in the most explicit manner falls foulest upon their
implicit Faith, they will be able by the atonement of such a distinction to
make their peace with the Scriptures. He that believes not (says our Savior
Mar. 16, 16.) shall be damned. He that believes not shall be damned. True (may
these men say) He that believes not, either by himself or by another, shall be
damned, but this hinders not, but that he that believes as the Church
believes, may be saved, though he knows nothing explicitly of what the
Church believes: the explicit Faith of the Church is sufficient to save him.
So likewise by the Law of such a distinction, the Antinomian Sect amongst us,
will be able to justify their non-necessitie of personal sanctification or
inherent holiness, against those Scriptures that are most pregnant and
peremptory for it. Without holiness says the Apostle. Heb. 12, 14.) no man
shall see the Lord: True (says the Antinomian) without holiness either in
himself, or in some other, no man shall see the Lord: but he that is in Christ
by Faith, has holiness in Christ, and therefore has no necessity of it in
his own person. Who sees not, that in these and many like cases, that might
be mentioned, that liberty of distinguishing which we implead, would plainly
beguile the Holy Ghost of his direct intentions and meanings in those and such
like Scriptures? Therefore when the Scriptures expressly and indefinitly
deliver, that by the works of the Law no man shall be justified, if men will
presume to distinguish (as has been said) and exclude such works from
justification only as performed by our selves, but make the^ every man's
justificatio^, as performed by another, who tastes not the same spirit of an
unwarra^table wisdom in this distinction, which ruled in the former?

Secondly I answer, that if the Apostles charge and commission had bin,
justification, either to have made, or to have given allowance for any such
distinction as is contended about, between the works of the Law, as performed
by men themselves, and the same works of the Law, as performed by Christ, that
those indeed should have no hand in justification, but these should be all in
all, these should be justification it self: certainly he should have bin
unfaithful in this trust, and very injurious to these works of Christ, in
giveing away that place of honor in the opposition, which was due unto them,
to another thing of a far inferior nature to them, viz. Faith, as it is evident
he does, in the Scripture cited. Gal. 2. Knowing that a man is not justified by
the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ. He does not say, but by
the works of Jesus Christ, as if the opposition stood between the works of the
Law as performed by men, and the same works as performed by Christ, which in
all congruity of reason he should have done, had the works of the Law, as done
by Christ, any such pre-eminence this way above the other; and not have
ascribed that unto Faith (which is somewhat wherein the poor and weak
creature has to do) which was the right and prerogative of Christ's
righteousness. Doubtless Paul was no such enemy to the righteousness of
Christ, as to set up an usurper upon the Throne, which belonged to it. Thirdly,
if Paul's intent had bin to have reserved a place in justification for the
active righteousness of Christ, or for the works of the Law, as performed by
Christ, by way of opposition to the same works, as performed by men themselves,
his indefinite expression excluding the works of the Law simply, without the
least in imation given of any difference of those works, either as from the one
hand or from the other, would have been of dangerous consequence, and as a
snare upon men, to cause them to pass over the great things of their
justification. Certainly if Paul had ever dug such a pit as this, he would
have bin careful first or last to have filled it up again.

Fourthly (and lastly) if by excluding the works of the Law from justification,
Paul's meaning had been, Christ, it can at no hand be thought, or once imagined,
but that he would have made use, yea made much of such a distinction or
reservation himself, and would have been a glad man, if salva veritate
Evangelij, without trenching upon some Gospel truth, he could have come over so
near to his Countrymen the Jews, and have closed with them in the great point
of justification upon such terms. Such a distinction might have been a happy
mediator between them. For what was it that chiefly incensed the Jews against
Paul and the Preaching of the Gospel and the righteousness of Faith, but that
the Law and the observation of it, should be passed over and not taken into the
great business of justification. Now if Paul keeping a straight course in the
Gospel, could have said unto them, or treated with them after any such manner
as this: you have no reason to take offense or to be troubled, that I preach
justification by Faith in Christ, because I do not exclude the righteousness
or works of your Law, no not from having the maine stroke in your
justification: nay that which I preach concerning Faith, is purposely to
advance the righteousness of the Law, and to show you how you may be justified
by it. I only Preach, you cannot be justified by your own observation of it,
because the holiness, excellency and perfection of it is such, that you cannot
attain or reach it by your own strength: but God has sent me to keep it for
you, by whose observation imputed to you, you shall be justified. Therefore I
am no enemy to your justification by the works of the Law: but only teach you,
that these works are done by another for your justification. Who sees not, but
by such an interpretation or mitigation of matters as this, Paul might have
taken off, (at least) a great part of the violent and furious oppositions of
the Jews against him? A little of this oil poured into the wound, would have
much mollified it, and (in all likelihood) in time have healed it. But Paul (it
seems) did not like the composition or make of it, neither durst he administer
any receite of it. He cannot be thought to have bin ignorant of this
distinction or means of mitigation, and with as little probability can it be
thought, that he, that could be content, not only to be made all things unto
all men for their good, but even to have been an anathema from Christ to win
them to the Gospel, would have withheld any such word of reconciliation from
them, whereby there had been the least hope of gaining them. But we do not meet
with so much as any one word of this qualification in all his writings: which
shows that the difference and distance between them, was deeper and greater
then so. The paroxysme or sharp contention between him and them, was not,
whether they were to be justified by the works of the Law, either as performed
and wrought by themselves, or as wrought by another, but simply and indefinitly
this, whether justification were by the works of the Law (by whomsoever
performed) or by Faith (as is more then manifest in all the passages in his
Epistles, wherein this question and dispute is brought upon the stage) There is
not the least intimation of any difference between them this way, whether
justification should be by the works of the Law, either as performed by our
selves, or as performed by Christ: Paul never puts them upon the works of the
Law as done by Christ, for the matter of their justification: which shows,
that both he and they, though otherwise at as great a distance as can readily
be conceived in the point of justification, yet in this were both of one mind
and one judgment. Paul as far from holding Justification by the works of the
Law as performed by Christ, as the stubbornest Jews themselves were.

But there are two things that (happily,) Paul himself, upon which to found the
forenamed distinction, viz. that by excluding the works of the Law from
Justification, he only excludes them, as done by men themselves, but not at all
as done by Christ. Secondly, that there is mention also of the works of the
Law, as done by Christ, or (which is the same) of Christ's being made under the
Law, in one of the chiefest disputes Paul has concerning Justification. The
former objection is built upon Tit. 3, 5. The latter, upon Gal. 4.4.

The words of the former Scripture, are these: Not by the works of
righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved us. Upon
which words the objection gets up thus: Paul by so precise a rejection of
works of righteousness done by us, that is, by our selves, plainly implies an
admission of these works as done by another for us. Where one part or member of
a distinction is given, the opposite member being implied, is still to be
framed to it (as readily it may). Therefore Paul had no intent to shut out, but
to bring in the works of the Law (as wrought by Christ) into the business of
Justification.

To this I answer sundry things: First, that the active obedience or
righteousness of Christ should be wholly excluded, and be made a stander-by,
so as to have nothing at all to do in the great business of Justification,
this discourse has no where affirmed hitherto, neither does it savor any where
of the spirit of that affirmation. It has been expressly acknowledged from
the beginning, to have a gracious and blessed influence thereinto as it issues
and falls into his passive obedience, which together may be called a
righteousness for which, but at no hand, with which, we are justified.
Therefore this objection, contending and pleading for an admission of the
works of the Law, as done by Christ, into Justification, does no ways
contradict the answer given in any part of it, except it can prove the
necessity of this admission of the active righteousness of Christ, either for
the material, or formal, or isntrumental cause of Justification: which it no
ways does, nor pretends to do. And the truth is, whosoever shall do it,
that is, go about to make this righteousness of Christ either the formal, o^
material, or isntrumental cause of Justification, will be found upon a due
examination, wholly to dissolve and overthrow the merit of it: the
establishment whereof is yet pretended as the great and pious design of that
opinion.

Secondly I answore, that the inference insisted upon in the objection from the
Scripture mentioned, comes heavily and with much unwillingnesse and reluctation
out of the premises: there is no necessity, nor indeed so much as a face of
probability in it. The Holy Ghost may reject the works of men from being the
cause of such or such a thing, and yet no ways suppose or intimate that the
works of another should be the cause thereof. As when we deny either the Faith
or works of any man foreseen to be the cause of his election, we do not imply
that the Faith or works of Christ foreseen are the cause of such election. No
more does it follow, that because Paul rejects the works of righteousness
which men do, from their justification, that therefore he must needs imply a
substitution of the works of Christ in their stead. If the words had gone
thus, Not by the works of righteousness which we OUR SELVES had done, this
had been somewhat a higher ground, and a more rational advantage to have
inferred the opposite member of the distinction, viz. but by the works of
another, or of Christ. As Act. 20, 24. where Paul expresses himself thus,
Neither is my life dear unto my self, etc. here the opposite member of the
division may with good probability be conceived to be implied, after this
manner: my life is not dear unto my self, THOUGH IT MAY BE DEAR UNTO OTHERS.
And yet even such an intimation here, is not of absolute necessity neither.
But if the tenor of the words had only run thus, Neither is my life dear unto
me, so that I may fulfill my course with joy: No man would ever have dreamed or
thought of any further thing to be implied, then what was expressed. So when
the Holy Ghost in a direct and plain tenor of Speech speaks only thus: Not
by the works of righteousness which we had wrought (not which we our selves
had wrought) for men to conclude or infer, an implying of works wrought by
another, is (in plain and necessary interpretation) to make themselves wise
above that which is written:

But thirdly, (to put the matter out of all question) that excluding the works
of the Law which we had done, he had no intent, by way of opposition to imply
the works which another might do, he expresses plainly the opposition
himself, and tells us that it was according to his mercy that he saved us, not
by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy he
saved us: Therefore here can be nothing implied by way of opposition, because
the opposition is fully and distinctly set down. And

Fourthly, least any might yet say, that it may be according to Gods mercy, and
yet by the works of righteousness wrought by Christ too, these two may easily
be reconciled and stand together: the Apostle delivers himself distinctly of
that wherein this mercy of God he speaks of, consists, not in saveing of us,
by the works of Christ imputed to us, but in regenerating of us, and washing us
in the new birth.

Fifthly (and lastly) as such an inference is no ways necessary, Apostle here
rejects the works of righteousness which he names, from being any causes
antecedaneously moving God to save us, and not from being the formal cause of
justification. So then let us give the objection its own hearts desire, even
that it murmur's so much after, viz. that the works of Christ must of necessity
be here implied, yet will it perish and come to nothing, even whilst this meat
is in the mouth of it. For all that will follow, or can be concluded by the
imaginary advantage of such a supposition is only that whereof themselves will
be ashamed when it is brought forth unto them, viz. this, that it is not the
works of the Law which we have done our selves, but those which Christ has
done, that have moved God to save us by the washing of the new birth, and by
the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Which if it be understood and meant of the
decree and purpose of God so to save us, is against the truth: if it be
understood of the execution of this decree, is against themselves. For that
which moved God to decree or intend this salvation unto us, was nothing out of
himself, but that (...), that good and gracious pleasure of his will. Ephesians.
1.5. or as that clause (...), of his will, is somewhat more emphatically with
more of the Spirit and life of the original in it rendered by our Translators
ver. 11. of his own will, implying (as I conceiv^) that that will, wherewith
God wills and purposes to save his people, is entirely his own, borne and
begotten (as it were) only out of himself, without the seed of any
consideration of any thing whatsoever, out of himself. As for the execution of
this decree in the actual justification or regeneration of those whom he has
purposed to save, if this be ascribed to the works of righteousness done by
Christ, as the cause moving God thereunto, this clearly establishes the merit
of the righteousness of Christ in justification, but overthrows the
formality of it (which is that very truth, which this discourse seeks and
ensues) for if God justifies or regenerates for the righteousness of Christ
(which imports the merit thereof) he cannot either justify or regenerate with
this righteousness of Christ, as the formal cause of either: the Reason is,
because it is unpossible, that one and the self same thing in respect of one
and the self same effect, should put on the different habitude or
consideration both of the formal and efficient cause. Wherefore if the
righteousness of Christ be any efficient cause of Justification (as all must
grant that will acknowledge it for a meritorious cause thereof, no man
gainsaying but that the meriting cause is a species or kind of efficient)
unpossible it is that it should be brought in to any part or fellowship in the
formal cause thereof, as will further be demonstrated, when we come to lay
down our grounds and reasons for what we hold. This for Answer to the former
exception.

Concerning the latter objection, Gal. 4.4. Where Christ is said, to have been
made under the Law, From hence it is inferred against the answer given, that
Paul does mention the works of the Law, as done by Christ, in this discourse of
Justification, and hereupon concluded further, that therefore he had no intent
to exclude the works of the Law, as done by CHRIST, from having their part in
Justification.

For Answer hereunto (not to insist again upon that which was delivered in
the first branch of my Answer to the former objection, which yet is sufficient
to ease the point in Question of the burden of this objection) I ad this in the
first place: that the phrase of Christ's being made under the Law, does not
signify Christ's obedience or subjection to the Moral Law, or that part of the
Law which we call Moral, but rather his subjection to the Law Ceremonial, as
is evident from the scope of the place: and particularly, from that which is
delivered immediately (ver. 5.) as the end or intent of that his being made
under the Law, viz. that he might redeem them that were under the Law. There
is no reason to conceive that Christ should be said to be made under any other
Law, then that, from under which he was to redeem others. Wherefore we being
not redeemed from the Moral Law, or from that obedience due to that (that
being lex aeterna, and aeternae obligationis, an eternal Law, and of an
eternal obligation) but from the Law of Ceremonies, it must needs follow, that
it was this Law, under which Christ is here said to have been made. So that if
men will gather anything from hence, for the imputation of Christ's obedience in
just sication, it must be of that obedience which he performed to the Jewish or
Ceremonial Law, and so not only the Jews, but we of the Gentiles also, must
be clothed with the robes of a Ceremonial righteousness imputed unto us for
our Justification.

B^ secondly, if we follow that interpretation of t^is clause, Christ was made
under the Law, which Luther ^clines unto (and is an exposi^^n of no hard aspect
neither upon the place, perhaps of a more favorable then the former) then by
Christ's being made under the Law, we shall neither understand his subject on to
the Moral Law, nor yet to the Ceremonial Law, in the preceptive part of
either, but his subjection unto the Curse of the Law. And thus it expresses
both the gracious designation of God, and likewise ^he voluntary submission of
Christ himself unto dea^^ for the deliverance of men, not only from death it
self (in the future) but even from the fear of death (in the p^^s^n^) as is
plainly expressed Luke 1.74. and Heb. 2.15. In which respect, the fruit or
effect and benefit of this his being made under the Law, is here (v. 1.5.) said
to be, the receiving the adoption of Sons. If this exposition will stand (as I
see not how it will easily be overthrown, there being much more to be said for
the justifying of it) then is it a plain case, that here is nothing spoken,
nor intended, of any such works of Christ, as are pretended for imputation, in
the Justification of a believer. No adversary I have yet met with in this
controversy, ever affirmed, that either the death of Christ, or the imputation
of his death, should be either the formal or material cause of Justification.
Much more might be added, for the taking of this clause of Scripture from
intermedling at all to the prejudice or disturbance of that conclusion, for
which we have undertaken: but having sufficiently cleared (as I conceive) our
second order or sort of proofs from the Scriptures, we proceed to others yet
remaining.

CAP. IV.
A third Demonstration from the Scriptures of the non-imputation of CHRIST'S
righteousness for justification, in the sense ruling in this Controversy.
THirdly, Christ is not imputed unto men for their righteousness or
justification, I demonstrate (with more brevitie) from that Scripture, Romans
3.21. But now is the righteousness of God made manifest without the
righteousness of the Law, having witness of the Law and the Prophets, even the
righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon
all that believe. From whence I thus reason: if the righteousness of Faith
which is here called the righteousness of God, (as else where it is in the
writings of this Apostle) either because he is the founder and contriver of it
(as Divines for the most part agree) or because God bestows it and gives unto
men (as Calvin conceives upon this place) or because it is this righteousness
only that will stand, and hold out before God (as the same Author varieth his
conjecture here) or whether it be called the righteousness of God by way of
opposition to the righteousness of the Law, which is (and may well be) called
the righteousness of men Rom: 10.3. because they can hardly relish or savor
any other righteousness but it, or whether for some other reason (not so
necessary or pertinent to our present inquiry) I say if this righteousness of
Faith consists in the imputation of Christ's righteousness, then is it not, nor
can it be made manifest without the Law, that is, without the works of the Law
(as Calvin rightly interprets the meaning of the word) But the righteousness
of Faith is sufficiently manifested without the Law, that is without the works
or righteousness of the Law: Therefore it does not consist in the imputation
of Christ's righteousness: The reason of the conn^xion in the major prop^sition
(against which exception must be made, ^f the conclusion be denied, because the
minor is plain Scripture in terminis) is evident. If the righteousness o^ God
consists in the imputation of Christ's righteousness, then is it not made
manifest without the Law, that is, without the works and righteousness of the
Law, because to such a righteousness, the Law and the works thereof, are every
whit as necessary, and more necessary then Faith it self, for Faith is made
only a means of the derivation of it upon men: but the body and substance of
the righteousness it self is nothing else but the pure Law and the works of
it. And how a righteousness should be said to be made manifest without the
Law, whose essence, strength and substance is nothing but the Law, I conceive
to be out of the reach of better apprehensions then mi^^ to comprehend.

If it be here objected and said, God or of Faith, may be said to be made
manifest without the Law or the works of it, because there are no works
required of us toward the raising of it: but this hinders not but that the
works of the Law, as performed by Christ, may be the matter and substance of
it. To this I answer.

First, this Sanctuary has been already polluted, and the horns of this Altar
broken down, in the demonstration of the former proof.

Secondly, there is not the least intimation given, that the Apostle should
have any such by or back meaning as this: but that this righteousness of Faith
should be fully taught and apprehended without any consideration of the Law, or
the works thereof, as an ingredient into it.

Thirdly, the works of the Law, are nevertheless the works of the Law, because
performed by Christ. The greatness or holiness of the person working
according to the Law, does not alter or change the nature or property of the
works, but they are the works of the Law, whosoever does them, Christ's being
Christ, does not make the Law, not to be the Law.

Fourthly, this righteousness is said to receive testimony or witness from
the Law, that is, from that part of Scripture, which is often called the Law,
viz. the Books of Moses, Mat 5, 17. and c. 7, 12. (as Calvin here well
interprets) and from the Prophets: therefore it cannot be a righteousness
consisting in the imputation of a legal righteousness, because there will be
found no testimony given either by the Law, or by the Prophets, to such a
righteousness, except it be in aenigmate, a testimony in a riddle, which no
man can find out but by divination, instead of an interpretation (whereas it
is repugnant to the nature of a testimony, not to be somewhat plain and
express; that it may be well understood) But if we interpret this
righteousness of God, to be a righteousness procured or derived upon a man by
Faith o^ believing, there is express testimony to be found given unto it, both
by the Law, and also by the Prophets (as the holy Ghost expressly here
affirms) by the Law: Genesis 15, 6, And he (Abraham believed in the Lord, and he
counted it unto him for righteousness. By the Prophets: Hab. 2.4. But the just
shall live by his Faith.

Fifthly (and lastly) this righteousness of God is said to be unto all, and
upon all (...), by or through Faith, by way of opposition to the works of the
Law, ver. 20. Now between Faith and the Law, or works of the Law, there is a
constant oposition in the writings of this Apostle, Romans 3.27.28. and ag. c.
4.13, 14. and c. 9.32. and c. 10.5, 6. Gal. 2, 16. and c. 3.5. and ver. 11.12.
etc. But between the Law, and the works or righteousness of Christ, there is
no opposition, but a perfect agreement. Therefore that righteousness which is
by Faith, cannot stand in the righteousness of Christ imputed.

CAP. V.
A Fourth Demonstration from Scripture of the avouched Conclusion.
FOurthly, Christ in the sense already disclaimed) for that righteousness by
which we are justified in the sight of God, I argue from Romans 5. ver. 16. and
17. compared together. The gift of righteousness (as it is called ver. 17.)
which is by Christ in the Gospel, is said (ver. 16.) to be a free gift of many
offenses unto justification. From whence I thus reason. That righteousness
which is the gift of many offenses, that is, the forgiveness of many offenses
or sins unto justification, cannot be a perfect legal righteousness imputed
unto us, or made ours by imputation. But the righteousness which is by Christ
in the Gospel, by which we are justified, is the gift of many offenses unto
justification: Therefore it cannot be a perfect legal righteousness made ours
by imputation. The minor is the proposition of the Holy Ghost (in terminis) The
major I demonstrate thus: That righteousness which extends unto a man's
justification by the forgivenes of sins, can be no perfect legal
righteousness imputed: But the righteousness of Christ in the Gospel by which
we are justified, extends unto a man's justification by the forgiveness of
sins. Therefore it can be no legal righteousness imputed. The Reason of the
former proposition (the weakness of which only it must be, that ministers
strength to an adversary for further dispute in this question, the authority of
heaven being too pregnant in the other) is this, because a legal or perfect
righteousness, does not preceed to j^st^^y a man's person by way of
forgiveness of sins: but is of it self intrinsecally and essentially a man's
Justification: yea such a Justification with which forgivenes of sins is not
competible. For what need has he that is legally righteous, or has a legal
righteousness imputed unto him, of forgiveness of sins, when as such a
righteousness excluds all sin, and all guilt of sin from his person?

If it be here objected and said, Christ is imputed unto him and so he is
justified. To this I answer.

First, if we will needs distinguish the effects of the active and passive
obedience of Christ after this manner, so as from the active part of this
obedience, to fetch a perfect righteousness for imputation, and from the
passive remission of sins: yet whether it be any ways reasonable, to invert
the order of these effects, and dispose of them (a^ pleasure) in a cross
method, to their causes producing them, I leave it to sober consideration.
Christ ^^d not first die, and after death keep the Law for us, but he first
kept the Law and then suffered death for us. Therefore i^ we will needs make
the imputation of the one a dist^nct b^n sit from the imputation of the other,
reason require^^, that that which was first purchased, should be first received
or applied, and consequently hat imputation of righteousness should have a
precedence in order, of r^mission of sins.

Secondly, if a man has once sinned (which must needs be acknowledged of every
man that has sins forgiven) it is not any l^gall righteousness whatsoever
imputed, that can justify him: no, if it were possible for him to keep the Law
perfectly in his own person ever after to the days of eternity, this would not
justify him, because such a Justification is repugnant to the express tenor of
the Law. Cursed is the man (faith the Law) that continues not in all things,
etc. Therefore a man that has not been alwa^es righteous, can never be made
righteous by the righteousness of the Law imputed, or not imputed, or
howsoever it may be conceived to come upon him.

Thirdly (and lastly) I answer, if a man's sins be once forgiven him, he has
no need of any imputation of any further righteousness, for his Justification,
because forgiveness of sins reaches home and amounts unto a full
Justification with GOD. This is plain from the words mentioned. Romans 5, 16.
The gift (says Paul) that is, the gift of righteousness (as it is explained
in the next verse) is of many offenses unto Justification, that is, when God
has given men their offenses or debts, or forgiven them (for to give a debt,
or forgive it is all one) he has fully justified them. For that righteousness
which God is said to impute unto men through Faith, is nothing else (being
interpreted) but the forgiveness of sins or the acquiting of them from that
death and condemnation which are due unto them. And this is all the
Justification the Scripture knows or speaks of, the forgiveness of our sins,
or acquitting from condemnation: the genuine and proper signification of which
word misapprehended, has been a maine occasion of leading many out of the way
of Truth in this point. A man may (in a manner) as plainly discern where men's
feet have faild them here, as sometimes where a Horse foot has slipped upon an
ice. For reading in Scriptures of the justification of sinners, or of men being
made just or righteous by Christ, they have conceived that such a thing cannot
be, but by a positive and formal Law: righteousness somewaies put upon them,
and there being no such righteousness indeed any where to be found, but only
the righteousness of Christ, hence they have apprehended, that this
justification must needs be by this righteousness of Christ imputed unto them,
whereas that righteousness which we have by Christ, and wherewith we are said
to be justified before God by believing, is only a negative righteousness, not
a positive, it is nothing else but a non-imputation of sin: which I therefore
call a righteousness, by account or interpretation, as having the privileges,
but not the nature and substance of a perfect legal righteousness.

The Scripture shines with as much cleernesse and evidence of this truth, Romans
4, 6. compared with ver, 7, 8. Even as David declares the blessedness of the
man, unto whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works. A righteousness
without works must needs be a negative or privative righteousness, as is fully
expressed in the following verses. Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven: blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. You see the
imputation of righteousness, ver. 6. is here interpreted to be nothing else,
but a not imputing of sin. And so Calvin upon Romans 3, 21. calls this a
definition of the righteousness of Faith, Beati quorum remissa sunt
iniquitates, that is, Blessed are they whose sins are forgiven. And not long
after, Paulus tradit, Deum homines iustificare, peccata non imputando. that is,
Paul teaches, that God justifies men, by not imputing their sins. The like
description of this righteousness you have 2 Cor. 5. that which ver. 19. he
calls in God, the not-imputing of our sins unto us, he calls in us ver. 21. a
being made the righteousness of God in him. But most plainly Act. 13.38, 39.
Be it known unto you (says Paul to the Jews) that through this man (CHRIST)
is preached unto you forgiveness of sins: which forgiveness of sins he
immediately calls their Justification. And by him all that believe are justified
from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. You
see how he expresses the nature of this Justification we have by Christ, viz.
by the way of negative or privative righteousness (as was said) not a
positive. All that believe are justified from all things, that is, all sins
from which you could not be justified by the Law of Moses. So that that
Justification which we have by Christ in the Gospel, is not a Justification
with righteousness (properly so called) but a Justification from sin, and
from the guilt of sin, and condemnation due to it, when Christ said to men
and women in the Gospel, Thy sins are forgiven thee, then he justified them:
the forgiveness of their sins, was their Justification.

This is the most usual and proper signification of the word, Justify, both
in Scriptures, both these are abomination unto the Lord. Prove. 17, 15. What is
here m^ant by justifying the wicked? not making them righ eous and just men, by
putting a moral righteousness upon them: he that can make a wicked man
righteous or just so, shall be so far from being an abomination to the Lord,
that he shall shine as the stars in the Firmament for ever and ever, ( Dan.
12.3.) Therefore by justifying the wicked in this place can be nothing else
meant, but the making of them just in the rights and privileges of just men,
which are freedom from censure, punishment, and condemnation, as appears by
the opposition in the other member of the clause, and condemns the righteous.
So that by justifying the wicked, is nothing else meant, but the not-condemning
him. So Romans 8, 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen?
it is God that justifyeth: who shall condemn etc. Where you see again the
opposition between being justified and condemned. See likewise Romans 5.9.
Therefore by justifying is nothing else meant but acquiting from condemnation:
and so to be justified and to live: that is, to be freed from death and
condemnation, are made equivalent or equipollent the one to the other. Gal.
3.11. And that no man is justified by the works of the Law, it is evident: for
the just shall live by Faith, that is, shall be justified by Faith (for otherwise
there is no strength in the argument) So again, ver. 21. If there had bin a
Law, which could have given life (that is, could have justified men) surely
righteousness (or Justification should have been by the Law. By his knowledge
(faith Esaias c. 53.11.) shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall
bear their iniquities, that ^s, by bearing the punishment or condemnation due
unto their sins, he shall deliver them from punishment. This opposition we
speak of between justification, and condemnation, is clear in other
Scriptures, as Mat 12.37. Romans 5.16. and else where.

And that this was Calvin's opinion, Justification is complete in forgiveness
of sins, is most evident from many and frequent passages in his writings: by
which it is apparent (against all confidence of contradiction) that he held no
such imputation of Christ's righteousness for justification, as some charge him
withal, except they will conceive of him, that (like unto Rebecca) he had two
nations in his womb, two contrary opinions in his judgment at once. His words
are express again and again, on Romans 4.6. Huc accedit oppositum membrum,
quod Deus homines justificet peccatum non imputando, etc. that is, Add
hereunto the opposite member, viz. that God justifies men by not imputing
sin. And immediately after, Quibus etiam verbis docemur, justitiam Paulo
nihilaliud esse, quam remissionem peccatorum. that is, by with words we are
taught, that righteousness with Paul is nothing else but remission of sins. So
some Popish Authors charge this very opinion upon Calvin, as his error. Alioqui
error Calvinianus est dicere, ril aliud esse justificationem, quam remissionem
peccatorum. Lorin. in Act. 5. v. 31.
Whether this Author was of that judgment or no, which we now ascribe to him,
certain it is, that if he had been of this judgment, he could never have
delivered himself in more significant and pregnant words this way, then these
are. And yet again not long after the former words: Manet ergosalva nobis
pulcherrima sententia, justificari hominem side, quia gratuita peccatorum
remissione coram Deo purgatus sit. that is, This most lovely saying remains
unshaken and safe, that a man is justified by Faith, because he is purged by a
free forgiveness of his sins before God. But we shall meet with a second
opportunity hereafter, for the further insuring this Author unto us, in the
Question now under disputation.

Musculus is as far engaged for the point in hand, as he, on Romans 4.6. Notandum
primo, remissionem peccatorum, esse justitiam nostram i. This is first to be
noted, that forgiveness of sins is our righteousness. And a little after:
ergo justitia Dei est, quae gratis imputatur, non imputari peccatum. i.
therefore the righteousness of God which is freely imputed, is, that sin is
not imputed. And immediately after: Quid autem iustum esse aliud est quam
peccatis esse liberum? i. what is it else to be righteous, but to be freed from
sins, i. from the guilt of them. And yet once more, not far off ergo qui
credit, iustus est et beatus, propter remissioneus peccatorum. i. He therefore
that believes, is RIGHTEOUS and blessed, because of the remission of his sins.
The same Author, upon Psalm. 32. toward the beginning. Iucunducu est, quod
institia et beatitudo nostra est remissio peccatorum per fidem in Christum. i.
It is a sweet thing, that our righteousness and blessedness stands in the
remission of our sins by Faith in Christ. See more of like importance in the
same place. So Luther in his Summarie of that Psalm: Iustitia nostra proprie
est remissio peccatorum seu (ut loquitur Psalmus) peccata non imputare, peccata
tegere. i. Our righteousness properly is the forgiveness of our sins, or (as
the Psalm speaks) the non-imputation, or covering of our sins. So
Malancthon, in his common place of JUSTIFICATION: Justificatio significat
remissionem peccatorum, seu acceptationem personae ad vitam aeternam. i.
Justification signifies remission of sins, or acceptance of a man's person to
eternal life. Again upon the twentieth Article of the Augustan Confession.
Significat iustificatio in his Pauli sententiis, remissionem peccatorum, seu
reconciliationem, seu imputationem iustitiae, hoc est, acceptationem personae.
i. sustification in Paul's saying, signifies REMISSION OF SINS, or
reconciliation, or imputation of righteousness i. the acceptance of a man's
person. And in his Prolegomena upon the Epistle to the Romans, Justi reputamur,
Deo remittente peccata. i. we are accounted righteous, when God forgives our
sins. Hyperius upon Rom 4.6. Declarat Apostolus, imputare ad justitiam, idem
esse, quod non imputare peccata: sponte and graiis ea remittere. i. The Apostle
declares, that to impute for righteousness, is but the same, as not to impute
sins: or freely and willingly to forgive them. Beza himself holds the truth
as fast as any man in this point (though sometimes again he seems to let it
go in some expressions about the imputation of Christ's righteousness) In his
Treatise of the Supper of the Lord: Cuinam iustificationem tribuemus? uni certe
Deo, vnus siquidem Deus peccata remittit. Pofita est autem omnis iustificatio
in remissione peccatorum: et ideo justitia hac in imputatione pofita, justitia
Dei vocatur. i. To whom shall we attribute or ascribe Justification? doubtless
to God alone, because it is God alone that forgiveth sins. And all
justification stands in remission of sins: and therefore this righteousness
which stands in imputation is called the righteousness of God. To. 1.17. and
3, 21. etc. Zanchius in his Common places of Divinity, in the head, concerning
Justification, has this title: Quod justitia fidei nihil aliud sit, quam
reconciliatio cum Deo, quae sola remissione peccatorum constat. i. That the
righteousness of Faith is nothing else, but reconciliation with God, which
stands in nothing else but forgiveness of sins. Mr. Fox our Countryman gives
place to none in holding forth the light of this truth. In his tract of Christ
Justifying, and first Book: Iustos eos accipio quos quotidiana remissio per
fidem accepta, divino conspectui tanquam justos representat. i. I take them for
just or righteous, who by a daily remission of sins received by faith, are
represented as righteous before the presence of God. Again, in the second B ok
of the same Argument, Ideo justicoram Deo consistimus, quod remissa sunt nobis
peccata. i. We therefore stand rignteous before God, because our sins are
forgiven us.

Chamier, Panstratiae, page 907. challenges the Paternity of Trent for denying
remission of sins to be the form, or formal cause of justisication, affirming
and ^vincing this to have bin Augustins opinion. And speaking of himself and
his Protestant party, says thus, Sed ijdem justitiae proram et puppim
constituimus inremissione peccatorum, nimirum quia haec nos apud Deum
constituit justos. i. We (Protestants) place the first and last, the beginning
and end of our righteousness in the forgiveness of ou sins, because this
makes us righteous before God. And a little after, Itaque justitiam nostram,
quatenus constat remissione peccatorum, cum Paulo justificationem: eam autem,
quae perfectione virtutum, sanctificationem appellamus, i. We therefore call our
righteou^^esse, as it consists in remission of sins, with Paul we call,
Justification: but that which stands in any perfection of virtues,
sanctification. Somewhat before the former words alleged: Nos vero quod dat,
admittimus, reciprocart inter se justificationem, et remissionem peccatorum. i.
We admit of what he (Bellarmine) grants, that justification and remission of
sins are one and the else same thing. And again, page 908. Remissio
peccatorum, est justitia imputata i. Forgiveness of sins is that
righteousness that is imputed to us. Stephanus Fabritius to like purpose,
co^menting upon Psalm 32.1. desines justification thus: Justificatio est actio
Dei. qua eum qui in Christum mediatorem credit, ex sola gratia et misericordi
propter satisfactionem et meritum Christi, a peccat is absolvit, et justum ac
innocentem pronunciat. i. Justification is an act of God, whereby of his mere
grace and mercy, for the satisfaction and merit of Christ, he absolves him from
his sins that believes in Christ the Mediator, and pronounces him just and
innocent. Lastly Amesius upon the same Psalm and verse, makes remission of
sins and justification terms equipollent and reciprocal. Descriptio
beatitudinis petitura causa efficiente et continente, quae est remissio
peecatorum, vel justificatio cum ejus effectis etc. i. The description of
blessedness is drawn from the efficient and holding cause thereof, which is
Forgiveness of sins, or Justification, with its effects.

It were easy (I presume) for him that has leisure, God, who deny them
fellowship and communion in so glorious a truth, and would force upon them, in
the very face of their own solemn declarations of themselves to the contrary,
an opinion so inconsistent with the stream of the Scripture, and all sound
reason; but to the truth it self also, by seeking to represent it to the eyes
and consciences of men, as a Beacon upon a hill, or as a Sparrow upon the house
top alone by it self, destitute of Friends and helpers, when as it dwells in
the midst of its own people, and has many of the very choice of those holy and
faithful and chosen ones, that are with the Lamb against the Beast, to stand
for it. So that those odious aspersions of Popery and Arminianisme, are Vipers
that will easily shake into the fire, when the time of shaking comes. This for a
4th Demonstration of our Conclusion from the Scriptures.

CAP. VI.
Containing a Fifth Argument or proof from Scripture, for clearing the
Assertion.
Fifthly, Philip. 39. will yield us plenty of further light, for the discovery
of that truth we seek after in the obscurity of our present Controversy. The
words are: And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God through Faith. In the former verse the Apostle professes what
strange effects the excellency of the knowledge of Christ had wrought in him,
it had caused him to count all things loss, which sometimes he had esteemed the
greatest gain, and the best treasure: yea to despoyle himself, as it were
with a spirit of deep indignation, of all those formerly beloved and
rich-esteemed ornaments, which were unto him as chains of gold about his neck;
and (as he then thought) highly commended him, and made him glorious in the
sight of God and men (he means his Pharisaicall righteousness and legal
observations; his Jewish prerogatives, etc. he was now so far transformed by
the renewing of his mind, by the light of the knowledge of Christ shining in
unto him, that he looked upon all his, former glory, as upon dung, and smelt a
favor of death in those things, which had bin his only confidence and hope
before of life and peace. Now the reason why he favored himself all that
might be in these under-thoughts, and avileing apprehensions of his former
things, and laid on load in this kind all he could, he declares to be this,
that he might win Christ, or make gain and advantage of him. How this his
desire or intent of gaining Christ might be accomplished, he expresses thus,
And may be found in him. Observe: he does not say, that he may be found in his
righteousness, much less in his righteousness imputed to him, but simply in
himself, That he might be found in him: which is an usual expression in
Scripture, of the spiritual estate and condition of a believer, viz. to be in
Christ. Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus.
So cap. 16.7. Who also were in Christ before me, i. were believers, etc. What
it is to be found in Christ, or how it must be with him, if he be found in him,
( viz. when his time is come, for he speaks here of the future, of the time of
his breaking up (as it were) by death) he expresses, 1. negatively thus: not
having mine own righteousness: yet not simply and altogether no
righteousness, that may in no sense be called his own, but precisely and
determinately, no such righteousness of his own, which stands in works of the
Law. Such a righteousness of his own he must be sure not to have, i. not to
trust to, or to shroud and shelter himself under from the stroke of Gods
justice. 2o, affirmatively thus: but that ( i that righteousness) which is
through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith. Here
is not the least jot or tittle of any mention, not the least whispering,
breathing or intimation of any righteousness he should have by the imputation
of the righteousness of Christ, no nor of any righteousness, by or through the
righteousness of Christ: but only such a righteousness as is (...), through
Faith of Christ, or by believing in him.

Now because such a righteousness as this wherein is nothing more required of
men, Christ, might seem a slender and tickle righteousness to adventure so
great a weight as the precious soul upon, and comes far short of that
righteousness of a man's own, which he might make out by the works of the Law:
the Apostle adds by way of commendation of this righteousness, to uphold the
credit and esteem of it in the hearts and consciences of men, that it is the
righteousness of God. i. a righteousness which God himself has found out,
and which he will own and countenance and account for righteousness unto men,
and no other but this: Even the righteousness of God (says he) (...), which
is in Faith, i. which comes and accrues, and is derived upon a man by Faith.
The mentioning of this righteousness the second time, as being or standing in
Faith, is doubtless emphaticall. One reason Joseph gave ( Genesis 41.32.) why
Pharohs dream was doubled by God unto him, was to show that the thing was
established by God: so the reason why Paul mentions the second time (so
immediately upon the former (the consistence or standing of this righteousness,
in and by Faith, in all likely hood was this, to show that this righteousness
certainly will carry it, notwithstanding all the unlikelyhood, and seeming
imperfections of it, and that the thing is fully concluded and established with
God accordingly: Or as it is often in speech between man, and man, when a man
has spoken that which seems improbable to him to whom it is spoken, and may be
conceived that the Speaker was mistaken in his words, and would correct
himself, if he considered what he said, it is usual in such a case, if he
that spoke, spoke advisedly and be able to make good what he said, and means
to stand to it, to speak the same thing over again, and so to confirm and
ratify that which was spoken against both the unlikelyhood of the thing, and
the unbelief of the hearer. It is a passage (I conceive) carried by some such
rule as this, which the Apostle has in the following Chapter, ver. 4. Rejoice
in the Lord always: Now because these Philipians were under great trialls and
afflictions, and so might think it was no time for them to rejoice in, and that
Paul had forgotten himself, and the condition they were in, to speak to them
of rejoicing, therefore to show that he knew well enough what he said, and that
he had weighed his words sufficiently, before he put them down, and that there
was no other cause but why they should rejoice in the Lord, notwithstanding the
fiery trial that was upon them, he redoubles the words of his exhortation.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. So Paul here, having
once affirmed, that the righteousness wherein he desired to be found, was the
righteousness which is by the Faith of Christ, least he should seem to have
spoken that which he would not stand to, or that which he would upon second
thoughts retract, he speaks the same words (in effect) the second time, and
avouceth that very righteousness which is by Faith, to be that righteousness
that he would stand to, and desired to be found with. If Paul had had any mind
or inclination at all, to have placed the righteousness by which he was to be
justified, in the righteousness, of Christ imputed, here was even a tempting
occasion and opportunity to have drawn him into expressions of himself that
way. But we see here is loud speaking, again and again, of the righteousness
of Faith, but altum silentium, profound silence of any righteousness from the
imputation of the righteousness of Christ. This for a fifth proof from
Scripture.

CAP. VII.
Wherein the imputation of Faith for righteousness is further cleared from
the Scriptures.
Sixthly, God imputes for righteousness in Justification, is not the
righteousness of Christ himself (in the sense refused in the first Chapter of
this discourse) but Faith in Christ, I conceive may be clearly wrought out,
and evicted out of all those Scriptures, where Justification is ascribed unto
Faith. Not to heap up places in this kind (which are confessedly many:)
Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by Faith, etc. Romans 3, 28. So
again, Romans 5.1. Therefore we being justified by FAITH, etc. All confess,
that MEN are justified by Faith: and indeed the conclusion thus far, is greater
then can be gaine-said. The pregnant letter of the Scripture is too hard for
any man's contradiction. Now when men say and profess (according to the
Scriptures) that Faith justifies, I demand, what is it they mean by Faith? do
they not mean their believing, or the Act of Faith (usually so called and
expressed) which by the assistance of of the Holy Ghost is raised within them,
and put forth by them? If by Faith in this case, they mean any thing besides
either the habit or act of believing, I confess my soul has not yet entered
into their secret. The Scriptures in the matter of Justification, seem rather
to speak of that which we call the act of believing, then of the habit: and so
learned D^vines (as far as I have observed) generally conceive. Now for men to
say and to profess themselves that Faith justifies, and yet to condemn it
for an error in another, that shall say and hold, that it is an act of Faith
that justifies, (has in my apprehension) as much inconsistencie of reason in
it, as if a man should grant, that Jerusalem once was the joy of the whole
Earth, and yet should censure him that should say, that the City Jerusalem
was ever so: or that should grant, that Paul labored in the Gospel more then
all the Apostles, but would not endure him, that should say, that Paul the
Apostle did so. As Jerusalem, and the City Jerusalem are the same, and Paul,
and Paul the Apostle the same: so are Faith, and the act of Faith but the same:
and if one justifies, certainly the other justifies also.

It may be it will be here said, Faith justifies, do not mean or conceive of
it, as divided or severed from it is object, CHRIST. No more did ever any man
that had but the first fruits of reason given him for his allowance. For a man
to say, that he sees, and yet to affirm, that when he sees, he sees
nothing, is to profess open enmity against common sense and reason. Neither
is it any other in him (whosoever he be) that shall conceive of any act of
Faith, that is not exercised or acted upon its object, either Christ in person,
or Christ in promise, or the like. It is unpossible that any man should
believe, but that he must believe something, or in some person: and so when any
man speaks of Faith or believing, he must of necessity imply the object with,
or in the Act, though he names only the Act, and not the object, as the usual
manner of the Scripture expression is, where Faith or believing is 40 times
mentioned, without addition of the object Christ, or the promise of God in
Christ, or any thing equivalent to either.

Secondly, it may be it will be said, that when men profess and say, that
Faith justifies, their meaning only is, that Faith justifies, instrumentally,
and not otherwise. To this I answer, neither has any thing more bin said
hitherto by me, neither is any thing intended to be said in the sequel, but
according to the rule of this position: Faith justifies. instrumentally.

But thirdly, it may be it will be yet further objected and said, Faith
justifies, their meaning is, that it Justifies, as it takes hold of Christ's
righteousness. I Answer, if this also should be granted (but the Scripture,
as has bin said, never mentions or describes justifying Faith under any
such consideration) yet it is the act of Faith that Justifies. As when a man
puts forth his arm, and reaches a pot or cup with drink in it, wherewith
he quenches his thirst, he may be said to quench his thirst instrumentally, by
reaching out his arm; because this was a means to procure it. So let men put
what meaning or interpretation they please upon their words, when they profess
and acknowledge, that it is Faith that Justifies, if they mean at all as they
say they must mean that it is the Act of Faith that Justifies, because both
that Faith by which a man believes in Christ, is an act of Faith, and again,
that Faith by which a man is instrumentally Justified, is an act of Faith: and
that Faith that lays hold upon the righteousness of Christ, is an act of
Faith too. Therefore let men turn themselves any way, and which way they
please, and make their words to fall either to the North, or toward the South,
if they mean as they say, that faith indeed Justifies, they must mean, that
it is the act of faith that Justifies. And when themselves will say that faith
Justifies, and yet will condemn it for an error in another, that the act of
faith should Justify: they cannot escape the hands of this dilemma, but one of
the horns will gore them; either it must follow, that they do not mean, as
they say: or that they condemn their own opinion and meaning in another: most
true it is, that it is far from truth to say, that faith iustifyeth as it is an
act: and as far from truth it is, to say, that it is not the act of faith that
Justifies.

If it be yet further replied and said, justified by Faith, their meaning is,
that we are justified by that which faith apprehends: and this is far from
saying, that Faith is imputed for righteousness. To this I Answer: 1. if their
meaning be simply and without limitation so, that we are justified by that
which Faith apprehends, when they say, we are justified by Faith, then they
speak more truth, then they are aware of, and (as it seems) more then they
intend to speak. For that Faith justifies is most true: but that whatsoever
Faith apprehends should justify, has no fellowship with truth, (no not so
much as in appearance) For By Faith we understand (or apprehend) the worlds
were made, Heb. 11.3. yet no man will say, that the creation of the world
justifies men.

Secondly, if men ascribe justification in every respect and consideration to
that which Faith apprehends, they utterly overthrow that which generally they
profess, viz. the isntrumental justification of faith. For if any thing that
faith apprehends, justifies every way, both materially, and formally, and
meritoriously, and principally, and instrumentally, etc. Faith shall justify
no ways: and so when men say, they are justified by Faith, their meaning must
be, they are not at al justified by Faith, but by some other thing. Therefore of
necessity it is, that Faith must justify some way: if it justifies any way,
it must of neceility be, by imputation or account from God for righteousness,
because it is all that God requires of men to their justification, instead of
the righteousness of the Law. The fore if God shall not impute or account it
unto them for this righteousness, it would stand them in no stead at all to
their iustificaetion: because there is nothing useful or availeable to any
holy, or saving purpose whatsoever, but only to that where^^ to God has
assigned it. If God in the new Covenant of the Gospel, requires faith in
Christ for our justification, instead of the righteousness of the Law in the
old, and this Faith will not pass in account with him for such righteousness,
both his Commandment and Covenant for believing, and the obedience it self of
believing, will both become void and of none effect; the entire benefit of them
being suspended upon the gracious pleasure and purpose of God in the
designation of them to their end.

CAP. VIII.
Containing the last proof from Scripture, for the Non-imputation of Christ's
righteousness in the sense controverted.
THere is yet one Scripture remaining (happily amongst many more that have not
yet manifested themselves in this Controversy) that seems (yea I verily
believe, imputation of the righteousness of Christ upon (if ever it stands)
viz. the imputability, or transferiblenesse of it from one to another. If the
Scriptures do not only no where establish, but in any place absolutely deny a
possibility of the translation or removing of the righteousness of Christ from
one person to another; this will strike the fatal stroke in deciding this
Question. This I conceive will be evicted with a pregnancie irrefragable from
that Scripture Gal. 3.12. And the Law is not of Faith: but the man that does
them, shall live in them. This Scripture does not barely and simply deny a
deceivablenesle or possibility of translation of the righteousness of the Law,
from one person to another, but denies it emphatically, and with the utmost
advantage of a denial. For it denies a possibility of it to be done, even by
that hand expressly, and by name, (I mean the hand of faith) which was the
ikelyest hand under Heaven to have done it, if the nature of the thing to be
done had not resisted the doing of it. The Apostle denies unto faith it self
the office and power of being a Mediatrix in this case, to derive or carry over
the righteousness of the Law, from one person to another, By which it
appears also, that he had an intent particularly to make the righteousness
of the Law as performed by Christ himself, incapable of this translation or
imputation: because faith never pretended, nor ever could have ground or color
to pretend a deriving or translating of any other legal righteousness from
one person to another for Justification, but only that which was performed by
Christ. If there were any thing in all the world that could have done the thing
that is pleaded for, Faith indeed has the pre-eminence of likely hood to do
it: because it does derive a righteousness from one to another, such a
righteousness as is deriveable, an imputative righteousness you may call it,
because it is such by account or interpretation (I mean, remission of sins:)
this Faith derives from Christ upon him that believes: but for a
righteousness of the Law, it cannot derive, because such a righteousness is
not deriveable.

Let the words and scope of the Scripture mentionedbe narrowly examined, And
the Law is not of Faith: (...), etc. the man that does them, shall live in
them: or (if you would translate the emphasis also which is in the original)
thus: the very doer of them, the man shall live. The former clause, after Paul's
succinct and press manner of expressing himself, is very brief, and
therefore somewhat obscure in it self: but the latter clause eases the burden
of the dificulty, and casts a sufficient light upon it. Whereunto if we add
but the dependence and reference that this verse has upon the former, Paul's
meaning will be found as clear as the noone day. Therefore when he says, the
Law is not of faith, (...) (says the original) by, or out of faith, his
meaning can be no other but this, that the righteousness of the Law does not
arise or come upon any man out of his Faith or by his believing, or that no man
is made partaker of a legal righteousness by believing: but (says he) the
very doer, the man he shall live in (or by) them. He proves the truth of the
former clause, from the express tenor of the Law, or legal righteousness, as
standing in full opposition to any derivation of it from one to another, even
by Faith it self. As if he should say, no legal righteousness can come upon
any man by believing, because it is only the man himself that does the things
of the Law, that shall be justified and live by them: the righteousness of the
Law never goes further (in the propriety or formalitie of it) to the
justification of any man, then to the person of him that fulfills the Law. That
by the word Law, in this place, is meant the righteousness or fulfilling of
the Law (besides that there can hardly be made any reasonable interpretation of
the clause, if this word be taken in any other sense) may appear by the like
acception of the same word, the Law, in other passages of this Apostle, when it
is used upon like occasion. Romans 4.13. for the promise was not to Abraham or
his seed through the LAW. i. through the righteousness of, or obedience unto the
Law viz. that it should be obtained, and enjoyed by any such righteousness: as
is evident by the opposition in the following clause, but through the
righteousness of faith, i. this promise was not made unto him and his seed,
that the benefit and blessing of it should be obtained by the former, but by
the latter righteousness. The word is again used in the same signification in
the very next verse. For if they that be of the Law, be heirs. i. that are for
the righteousness of the LAW. and will stand to be justified by that,
(besides other places without number.)

The scope likewise of the place, and the dependence of the clause with the
former ver. Apostle in the former verse had delivered it for a truth, that no
man could be justified in the sight of God by the Law, i. by the righteousness
or works of the Law, for this reason, because the Scripture says, that the
just shall live by faith. Now because this consequence might seem somewhat
doubtful and insu^ficient, lying open to some such exception against it as
this: what though the just do, or must live by faith, may they not be
justified by the works of the Law too, and live by them also? may not the
righteousness of the Law be made over unto them, by faith, and so compound
righteousness be made for them, of both together? No (says Paul) the Law is
not of faith: there can be no legal righteousness derived or drawn upon men by
faith: and that for this reason, because such a righteousness is by the
express letter and tenor of the Law, consined and appropriated to the person
of him that fulfills it: (...), the man himself that does them, shall live by
them. q. d. there is a repugnancy and contradiction in it ex naturarei, in the
very nature and effence of the thing, that the righteousness of the Law should
^ver be removed or carried over from one man's person to another, though it were
attempted by the hand of Faith it self. God never intended that the Law and
faith should meet together to jumble up a justification for any man. And
whereas it is frequently charged as a matter of deep prejudice upon the opinion
labored for in this discourse, that it magnityeth faith above measure, and
makes an Idol of it: the truth is, that the contrary opinion, which ascribes to
it a power of transferring a legal righteousness, ^^^gnifieth it 7 times
more, and ascribes a power even of impossibilities to it. Faith may boast of
many great things otherwise: and may remove mountains: but for removing any
legal righteousness (in the sense we speak of) it must let that alone for
ever. There is a greater contrariety and indisposition in the several natures
of faith and the Law, in respect of mixing or working together to make up a
Justification, then was between the lion and Clay in Nebuchadnezzars vision.
Dan. 2.43. though in other things they well agree. Repugnantia legis et fidei
est (says Calvin in Gal. 3.12) in causa justificationis: facilius enim aquam
igni copulabis, quam haec duo concilies, homines fide et lege esse justos. 1.
There is a repugnancie between the Law and faith, in the matter of
Justification: and a man may sooner couple fire and water together, then make
these two agree, that men are righteous by faith, and yet by the Law too.
Consonant to this Scripture last opened, is that Romans 4.14. For if they which
are of the Law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise is made of none
effect. Where you see as full and as irreconcilable an opposition, between
the righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness of faith, in respect of
justification, as is between East and West: it is unpossible they should be
brought together. There is a greater gulf fixed between them, then was
between Abraham and Dives: faith cannot go over to the righteousness of the
Law, to join with that in Justification: neither can the righteousness of the
Law, be brought over unto faith. What reason there may be conceived for this
Non-imputabilitie of the righteousness of the Law, See Cap. 21
we shall have a fair opportunity to declare, in the prosecution of our
grounds and reasons, for the point we favor in this discourse: which is the
next thing we have unto.

CAP. IX.
Wherein the first ground or argument for the conclusion undertaken, is
propounded and established.
HAving considered with as much diligence and faithfulness as frailty would
permit, how the Scriptures stand affected and incline in the controversy
depending, we are lead (in the next place) by the hand of a plain and familiar
method, to propound such Arguments and considerations for the confirmation of
the premises, as reason and sobriety of thoughts about the stated Question,
have suggested.

My first ground and argument to prove, that the righteousness of Christ (in
the sense now under dispute, viz. in the letter and propriety of it) cannot be
imputed unto any for their justification. I propound after this manner.

That righteousness which will not fit, and furnish all believers with all
points or parts of that righteousness, which the Law requires of them, cannot
be imputed unto them unto justification.

But the obedience that Christ performed to the mor all Law, is such a
righteousness as will not fit and furnish all believers with all points of
righteousness, which the Law requires of them.

Therefore it cannot be imputed to believers for their justification.

The reason of the former Proposition is, because a perfect and complete legal
righteousness (and such certainly, I mean perfect and complete, that that
justifies, must of necessity be) requires a precise, punctual and through
obedience unto all things in the Law, which any way concerns a man to do. If
there be but a letter, jot, or title wanting in any man righteousness of all
that was his duty to do, that righteousness is not (at any hand) for his
justification. The curse of the Law and eternal vengeance will break in upon
a man, body and soul, as well through the smallest and least-imaginable defects
of a legal righteousness, as through wider breaches, and greater
transgressions, in case a man has not wherewith to secure himself otherwise.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
Law, to do them Gal. 3.10. Therefore there is no escaping the curse of the La^^
by the law, except a man's obedience be absolutely absolute, as well for
constancy as univ^^se, in ad things that are written viz. with reference to
him, and (...) calling. For otherwise, there may be a struct and complete I
(...) righteousness, with (...) the doing (...) Law, in ca^e they have no
(...) As for instance: Adam might have performed, and accordingly have hin
still Justified by a complete Legal righteousness, and yet never have
performed many duties, which the Law required of Eve, for the continuance of
her justification. So Christ ful^filled all righteousness (as himself faith,
it became him to do) and consequently held an exact conformity with the Law,
so that neither Man, nor God himself, could rebuke him of sin: and yet the
Law requires many things of many others both Men and Women, which Christ never
performed, as will appear in the demonstration of the latter Proposition
(which is at hand.)

For the truth therefore of this Proposition that the righteousness performed
by Christ unto the Moral Law, it is so full of its own light, that further
proof will but run over. How many duties are Servants indebted unto their
Masters after the flesh, by the obligation of the Law, which Christ never
discharged or performed, as namely that they should be obedient unto them with
fear and trembling. Ephesians. 6.5. Again, Wives charged by the Law with many
points of obedience toward their Husbands, yea and Husbands with some toward
their Wives, which certainly Christ never performed for them, yea he expressly
declined and refused the doing of some things, as lying without the verge of
his Calling, which the Law requires as matters of special duty from others.
When he was desired ( Luke 12 13.14.) to do Justice, or take up a controversy
between a man and his Brother, his answer was, Man, who made me a Judge, or
divider over you? Implying, that he would meddle with no acts of
righteousness, that lay without the precincts of his Calling. And indeed if he
had (though it was unpossible that ever his foot should have been taken in
that snare) it had overthrown the infinite benefit that now redounds unto the
world, from those acts of righteousness, which were performed by him in his
Calling. So when the people would have taken him and made him King, Joh. 6. he
absolutely refused: and refusing the office of a King, doubtless he would not
take upon him the execution. Therefore what righteousness should Kings and
Magistrates have imputed unto them from Christ to make them just and righteous
in their Callings, when Christ himself refused to perform those acts of
righteousness which are proper thereunto. That which never was done or acted
by Christ, cannot be imputed: that which never had a being, is not capable of
an act of imputation to pass upon it.

It may be some will object, Love is the fulfilling of the Law: for he that
loves another has fulfilled the Law. Romans 13.8. and this fulfilling of the
Law by Love, is such a righteousness as will fit all persons of all Callings
and relations in the world whatsoever. Therefore the perfect Love of Christ,
may be imputed for righteousness unto all, though particular and proper acts
of obedience otherwise be wanting.

But to this I Answer. First, howsoever Love may be termed an Evangelicall
keeping or fulfilling of the Law, because God accepts of it graciously,
wheressoever he finds it in truth, and rewar death it accordingly, yet is it
not a strict, literal, and legal fulfilling of the Law, it is not such a
fulfilling of it, as will hold out weight and measure for any man's
justification in a Covenant of works. For first, the Law requires many duties
from men, and seizes upon them with the Curse immediately upon the first
nonconti^ (...) ^al t^in^s. N^w Love is but one duty (...) and therefore cannot
be many, much (...) Love were such a fu filling of (...) ^^q^ired in a legal
justification (...) believers be justified, not by an (...) by a pers nal*
righteousness: because no (...) is a true believer but he that ^oves his
Brother truly, and whose Faith works by such love. Thirdly, and lastly, if
the Love of Christ were capa^le of that imputation for righteousness, that is
pretended, then will it follow (at least according to the principl ^ of that
Opinion against which we disput^) that the whole active obedience of Christ, I
mean all that righteousness of his which stood in holy actions conformable to
the Law, was in vain: be cause there is no other possible necessity granted of
this righteousness of Christ by these men, but only for imputation. Therefore

Secondly to the objection I answer yet again, that where the Scripture
calls Love the fulfi ling of the Law, it speaks only of that part of the
Law, which we call the second Table: as is no whit less then evident in the
place last named. Romans 13.8.9. But that fulfilling of the Law, which claims
the honor of a justification, whether by imputation or personal performance,
must comprehend as well a fulfilling of the first as of the second Table.

Thirdly and lastly, that proposition, Love is the fulfilling of the Law, is
not propositio sormalis, but causalis and consecutiva (as Logiciaxs speak)
that is, such a proposition, wherein one thing is said to be another, not
because it is precisely the same in nature and being with it, but because it is
the cause of it, and so has the being of the other vertually in it. This kind
of proposition is frequent in Scripture. I am the resurrection (says Christ,
Ioh. 11.25.) The meaning is not, that he was properly and formally the
resurrection, but that he was the cause, means, or Author, of the
resurrection. So Paul saying that Christ is our hope, means only, that CHRIST
is the ground or Author of our hope. 1 Timothy 1.1. In like manner, when he says,
Love is the fulfilling of the Law, his meaning only is, that a spiritual and
unfeigned affection of love, is an inward principle of that nature and
importance which inclines and disposes a man to the performance and practice
of all manner of duties required in the Law. Therefore to say that the Love of
Christ is imputed to men for their fu filling of the Law, or for their
righteousness, is ridiculous. More might be added by way of answer: but the
strength of the Objection is small.

Another thing that (happily) some will object against the argument propounded,
is this: It is not necessary that men should have all particular acts of
righteousness qualified with all circumstances answerable to their Callings,
imputed unto them for their justification. It is sufficient, if they have a
righteousness imputed to them, which is equivalent to such a righteousness.

To this I Answer two things: First, they which speak such things, do not
consider the severity of the letter, the strict and peremptory nature of the
Law. The Law will not know any (...), any thing by way of proportion or
equivalencie: one thing as good as another will not serve the turn. The Law
must have jot for jot, title for title, point for point, letter for letter,
every thing to answer in the most exact conformity to it: otherwise it has a
curse in a readiness wherewith to take vengeance on men, no life or reward.

Secondly, to impute acts of righteousness to a man which are proper to
another Calling, and wholly disagreeing from that Calling wherein God has
placed him, is rather to impute sin unto him, then righteousness. Because
though such acts were righteousness to him that wrought them, yet if I, being
in a different Calling, should be accounted by God to have done them (which is
the Law of imputation) I must be judged by him as one that had transgressed the
bounds of my Calling, and consequently had sinned.

Neither is that reason of any value, which some alledg, righteousness in this
kind, instead of a propriety viz. that God was not punctual and every ways
circumstantiall in inslicting the Curse of the Law, upon the transgression of
it: because they suppose, that by those words (wherein the Curse of the Law is
expressed) Thou shall die the death. Gods meaning was, that he should die an
eternal death (literally) and not by way of equivalencie. Therefore God having
notwithstanding inflicted this Curse by way of equivalencie, and not in the
letter of it, why may he not impute a legal righteousness unto men, that has
only an equivalencie with that righteousness which they should have performed,
though not an exactness with it according to the letter.

For to this I answer: First, that the very foundation that is laid to build
this objection upon, is sandy, and has nothing either in Scripture, or sound
reason to bottom it. From the Scriptures, nothing that I have read, is so much
as pretended that way, viz that God in those words, Thou shall die the death,
must of necessity, precisely and determinatly mean, eternal death, according
to the letter. And by what fire, such a spirit as this is, will be extracted or
drawn out of that body of those words, I do not yet understand. If we judge
of his intent and meaning in those words by the event of things, or manner of
execution, they were meant determinatly, neither of eternal death according to
the letter, nor yet of an eternal death by way of equivalencie, but
indifferently of either, because it was an eternal death only by way of
equivalencie that was inflicted upon Christ for one part of Adam or his
posterity: but upon the other part which perish, it is inflicted according to
the letter.

Secondly upon deeper consideration, it will (happily) be found to be nearer
the truth, to hold, that in those words, Thou shall die the death, God his
meaning was not (at lest determinatly) to threaten eternal death either in one
kind or other, either according to the letter, or by way of equivalencie: but
to have the word Death, taken and understood by Adam, in the extent of the
signification, as it indifferently signifies that evil of the punishment
which was represented and known unto him, by the name of Death, without
limiting his thoughts to the consideration either of the shorter continuance,
or of the everlastingnesse of the duration of it. For as Scotus well determines
in this case) Aeternitas non est de ratione poenae peccatis debitae, sed
peccatores concomitans, qui non possunt ut Christus, vel cum Christo cluctari.
1. Eternity is not of the nature or essence of the punishment due unto sins,
but it follows and falls upon sinners, who cannot wrestle out as Christ did,
or with him. So then, eternity not being essential to that punishment or death
which God threatened, it is no ways necessary that it should be included
(especially in such a precise and determinate manner as the objection
pretends) in the signification of that word, wherein the punishment is
expressed.

But thirdly and lastly, suppose the foundation be gold, yet will it be found
hay and stubble that is built upon it. For what if God should take liberty to
vary from the letter of the Curse, in the execution of it, should threaten
eternal death literally, and inslict it equivalently: this no ways proves,
that the creature who was bound to obey the precepts of the Law, might take the
like liberty to perform one thing instead of another, or that God should
accept any such payment from them (whether made by themselves, or by another
for them,) in the nature of a legal payment. Indeed having received a full
satisfaction for all the transgressions of the Law, he may by a second or new
Covenant accept of what he pleases to estate men in the benefit or blessing of
that satisfaction, and so that which is thus accepted, becomes in this respect
to him that performs it and from whose hand it is accepted, equivalent to a
perfect and complete legal righteousness: because it justifies him (in
respect of all benefits and privileges of a justification) as well as such a
righteousness would have done. But that he should accept on any man's behalf,
as a perfect legal righteousness, the performance of such things, which are
not required of him, neither by the first Covenant of works, nor by the second
of Grace, has neither correspondence or agreement with the one Covenant, or
with the other. A man (me thinks) must have a rare faculty to convert any thing
into the similitude of a truth at pleasure, that can believe or conceive, that
Christ's preaching on the Mount, ordaining Disciples, reproving the Scribes and
Pharisees, working miracles and the like (which were parts of his obedience to
the Law) should be imputed to a woman (^or example) instead of her obedience
and love and faithfulness to her Husband: and that she should be reputed
before God, to have performed all these duties according to the strict form
and exigencie of ^he Law, because Christ performed the forenamed duties, and
these by imputation are made hers.

CAP. X.
A second ground against the imputation of the righteousness of Christ (in the
sense formerly rejected) drawn from the transcendencie of the nature of it.
A Second Reason, active obedience or righteousness of Christ, cannot (in the
parts and propriety of it) be imputed unto any man whatsoever for
righteousness, may be contrived and cast into this frame.

That righteousness which is exactly and precisely fitted to the person and
office of him, that is mediator between God and man, or Redeemer of the world,
cannot be imputed unto any other man for his righteousness.

But such is the righteousness of Christ, a righteousness precisely fitted to
the person and Calling of a mediator. etc.

Therefore it cannot be imputed unto any other man whatsoever for
righteousness unto him.

The minor proposition (I conceive) will be yielded without much striving. If
any man will undertake to find any such flaw in the righteousness of Christ,
that does amount to the least degree of an incongruitie, or inconsistencie with
his office of mediator, attempts no less then the undermining the foundations
of the peace of the world, and laying the hope of the salvation of men in the
dust. Such an High Priest (says the Apostle, Heb. 7.26.) it became us to have
(i. that it was necessary we should have, if we looked for salvation by him)
that is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, etc. And woe unto
the world, if the least either spot or blemish, could be found in this High
Priest, or his righteousness. Therefore I presume that the dear interest
which every man lays claim to in the truth of this proposition, will secure
it from all violence of contradiction from any man.

So that if there be any thing weak and unconcluding in the Argument, it must
be sought for in the major Proposition. Therefore let us cause that to pass
through the fire, and see whether any flame will kindle upon it. The tenor of
this was: that that righteousness which is exactly fitted to the person and
office of a Mediator, cannot be imputed for righteousness unto any other man.
How a conceit of any such imputability should lodge quietly in any man's
thoughts, I confess I cannot comprehend.

The whole generation of Disputers for that imputation, having the
righteousness of Christ imputed, by, being clothed with this righteousness
of Christ, or, with the robes of his righteousness. Now then he that assumeth
this righteousness of Christ unto himself, and apparelleth and arayeth
himself with it, represents himself before God, not in the habit of a just or
righteous Man, but in the glorious attire of him, that makes men just and
righteous, the great Mediator of the world, whose righteousness has heights
and depths in it, a length and breadth, which insinitely exceed the dimensions
and proportions of all men whatsoever. And as John speaking (as is probable) of
his transfiguration in the Mount (or whether it be of any other manifestation
of his glory, it is not much material) uses these words, Joh. 1.14. We beheld
his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father: meaning, that the
glory wherein Christ then appeated, was so supertranscendently glorious and
excellent, that it exceeded the rank and quality of the creature, whether Angel
or Man, and was meet only for him to wear, that was the only begotten of the
Father: i. the natural Son of God, the greatness of the person could not
but have bin acknowledged by that vestment of glory, which he then had on: so
may (and must) it be acknowledged and said of the righteousness of his life,
that it was peculiarly appropriated to him that was the only begotten of the
Father, the great Savior and Redeemer of the world. Neither did that glory of
his which John saw, further transcend the condition of the creature, then the
glory of this righteousness does. Now then for a silly worm, (a sinful and
contemptible creature) to take this robe of unmeasurable Majesty upon it, and
to conceit it self as great in holiness and righteousness as Jesus Christ
himself (for that is the spirit that rules in that opinion, to teach men to
assume all that Christ did unto themselves, and that in no other way, nor upon
any lower terms, then as if themselves had personally done it) whether this be
a behavior and deportment of soul of that grace and acceptance on High, which
many have suffered themselves to be persuaded of; whether it will relish well
in the eye of jealousy or no, I earnestly desire that men would make it a
matter of Conscience seriously to consider and reexamine. All the parts of his
righteousness, all the acts of obedience that he performed, he performed them
as one that had received the spirit without measure, i.e. there was a
weightinesse and worth in them which did fully answer the fulness of that
grace that was given unto him above all his fellows (a title of honor
wherewith the Holy Ghost is pleased to honor the Saints) yea those acts of
obedience, though he wrought them in the humane nature, or as he was Man; yet
by reason of the near neighborhood and straight combination of the God head
in the unity of the same person, they could not but receive excellent
impressions from that also: The righteousness was in all the parts and
circumstances of it, such as became God himself in personal union with his
creature, the humane nature. Now whether that be not to be accounted robbery
(and that of a high nature) for the creature to assume an equality of
righteousness, (whether by imputation or however) with God himself, I leave
to the sober and unpartiall thoughts of men to consider. But especially there
are some streyns in this righteousness of Christ, that cannot be appropriated
or applied unto any other whatsoever without notorious and manifest impiety.
All that Christ taught and preached on earth, was part of his righteousness
and obedience. For I have not spoken of my self (says he, Ioh. 12.49.) but
the Father that sent me gave me a commandment what I should say, and what I
should speak. Therefore when he speaks these and many such like words, I am
the light of the world: Come unto me all that are weary and heavy laden, and
I will refresh you, etc. is it meet for any other to conceive them as spoken by
himself in his own person, but only for him that spoke them. Those which were
words full of grace and truth in that mouth that spoke them and for which they
were fitted, would be words of presumption and blasphemy in any other, if they
were conceived to be spoken either in the Name, or concerning the person of the
speaker.

So that you see clearly, imputation of Christ's righteousness in the propriety
or formality of it in justification, is, not because we deny the righteousness
it self, nor because we deny the necessity of it, nor yet because we less
honor and magnify it, then others, but on the contrary, because we desire to
establish it upon better foundations, and show a plainer and greater necessity
of it, and give more honor and glory to it, then the adverse opinion can do.
If men will needs understand that Esaias 42.21. of Christ's fulfilling the Law:
The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness sake: he will magnify the Law
and make it honorable, there is no such way to raise the interpretation of the
words on high, as to make the righteousness of Christ (in respect of the
letter and formality of it) incommunicable. He that should have taken the Reed
out of Christ's hand, that was put into it instead of a Scepter, and have broken
it in pieces, and given him a Scepter's of gold instead of it, should have
honored Christ more, then they that gave him the Reed: So he that shall
overthrow a pretended use and feigned necessity of Christ's righteousness, and
demonstrate a true and real necessity of it indeed, he no ways derogates
either from the righteousness it self, or from the necessity of it, but
adds weight and authority unto both. It is a special circumstance or
qualification much insisted upon and required in the honor we ascribe or give
unto God, that it be precisely, that honor which is due unto him, or due unto
his Name. Psalm. 29.2. and Psalm. 96.8. because indeed, upon a true account, that
would be found no honor at all unto him, which is not due unto him. He that
shall deny that ever any man lay in that womb of the Virgin, wherein Christ was
conceived and fashioned by the Holy Ghost, besides himself, shall neither
disparage the womb that bare him, nor him that was conceived in it, but should
rather honor both. And so he that shall say, there was never man buried in the
Tomb wherein Christ's body lay, disparageth neither. No more is it any
dispargement or prejudice cast upon the righteousness of Christ, to say that
there was never any man formally justified with it, but himself alone, that it
is a righteousness sit for no man to wear or assume to himself, but only for
the person of him that wrought it. Nay, he that here speaks these things,
exalts the righteousness of Christ on high: and mainteineth the honor that
belongs to it. Therefore (by the way) to charge the crime of Arrianisme upon
this opinion (which some have much ado to forbear) is to frame an accusation
against it, upon the like terms, that Potiphars wife proceeded upon in her
indictment against her Servant Joseph: the foul crime of incontinencie was
laid to his charge, whereas his virtuous offense was nothing else but a high
streine of a chaste behavior. Genesis 39. Or it were, as if a man should be
accused of want of love to the Brethren, who were now ready to lay down his
life for their sakes: greater love then which (as our Savior says) no man
has. There is no opinion that can more dearly sympathize with the Divinity of
Christ, then that that denies the imputation of his righteousness (in the
sense so frequently disallowed)

But some (perhaps) will think sufficiently to salve the congruity or sitnesse
of this righteousness of Christ for imputation to believers, Christ as the
head, and believers as the body or members; and reason after this manner.
Though the righteousness of Christ be too glorious and excellent to be
appropriated unto men, or to be accounted unto them for their personal
actions, as they are men, or as they are sinful: yet as they are members of
Christ, and he their head, they see no inconvenience in it, they may be
ascribed unto them. May not that which is done by the head, be ascribed or
communicated to the whole body?

To this I Answer two things: First, that Christ and believers are a mystical
body, that is, a body only by way of a secret resemblance or similitude with a
natural body. Therefore an universal concent or agreement in all things
between them, cannot be thought on: because then a similitude would be no
longer a similitude, but an identitie: and a mystical body would be no longer
a mystical body, but a natural. Now one difference between them is this:
what any one member of the body natural does, as head, eyes, ears, etc. the
whole may be said to do: when the head studieth, the man may be said to study:
So when the eye sees, or ear hears, etc. yea it is more proper to ascribe
these and such like acts which are exercised by the particular members of the
natural body severally, and the whole person, then to the members themselves
by which they are acted: it is more proper to say, the man sees by the eye,
then to say the eye sees: But in the mystical body, it is otherwise: When
Christ (the Head of this body) wrought miracles, the body could not be said to
have wrought them. So when Paul (a special member of this body) reproved
Peter, the whole body cannot be said to have reproved him: because some of the
members joined with Peter in his sin against Paul in his reproof. The Reason
of which difference is this, because in the natural body; the members make but
one Suppositum (as the Schoolmen speak) or one personal being, and so have
but one and the same numericall principle of all their actions and motions,
viz. the reasonable soul, but a mystical body, being made up of many persons
or personal beings, which have every one entire natural and substantial beings
in themselves (besides their relation of members one to another) and so have
every one principles of their actions really distinct each from other. One man's
will is not really and numerically the same with another: nor one man's grace
really the same with another. And hence it comes to pass, that what one of
these members do, is not necessarily to be ascribed to the whole body, but to
that member only which does it, inasmuch as it has a principle within it
self, which is not numerically the same with the rest.

But secondly, I answer more briefly and plainly to the objection. Though the
benefit of what the head does, be communicated to the whole body, and every
member (for every member in the natural body fares the better for the Head,
and the operations of it) yet that which the head does or works, is no ways
to be imputed or ascribed either unto the hand or foot, or any other member, as
if it were done by them: so does the whole mystical body of Christ, and every
member thereof (even the whole Society and fellowship of believers) reap and
enjoy abundantly the fruit, benefit, and blessing of all that Christ (the
Head) either did, or suffered in the world: forgiveness of sins, peace of
conscience, acceptance into favor with God, adoption, sanctification, hope of
glory, glory or salvation it self (when it comes) etc. all these and the like
are Grapes gathered from that Vine; the active and passive obedience or
righteousness of Christ, furnishes his whole body with all these precious and
pleasant riches: and yet there is no necessity that either his doings or
sufferings should be ascribed or imputed unto them, no more then the labor and
skill of the Be, is to be ascribed unto him that eats the honey.

Again, some urge the consideration of the marriage between Christ and his
Church, (and consequently, every believer) to salve the congruity or sitnesse
of his righteousness for imputation to believers: and reason after this
manner. The wife by marriage, has a right to all that is her Husbands: she is
endowed with all his goods: they are as well hers, as his. Therefore a believer
being married to Christ, has a right and title to all that Christ has, all
that Christ has is his: and therefore his righteousness is his. etc.

To this I Answer two things. First, it is true, the wife by marriage comes to
be endowed with all that is her Husbands: but this endowing of her with all, is
no ingredient into the marriage it self (much less is it the formal cause of
the marriage) but is a fruit or consequent of it. So the right and title which
a believer has to the righteousness of Christ, accrues unto him by, and upon
the spiritual marriage. The marriage must be first made up between Christ and
him (which is done by Faith, or believing) before he comes to have this right
spoken of in the righteousness of Christ. Therefore it cannot be impured unto
him in the very act of believing (which is the golden apple the adverse opinion
strives for) and yet much less before the act of believing (which yet is
affirmed by some great and le^rned abettors of that side) Because in both these
cases, the title we speak of to the righteousness of Christ, should not grow
to a believer, by, or from, or upon his marriage, but either in, or before it.

But secondly, I answer yet further (and close more nearly with the spirit of
the objection) Howsoever by marriage there arises a title unto the wife of all
that is her Husbands, so that it may be said, that all that is the Husbands, is
made or becomes the wifes: yet this is so to be qualified and understood, that
no Law either of natural decency and sobriety, or of a rational expediencie
or behoof to either party, receive prejudice or violation. All that is the
Husbands, is not every ways the wifes by means of her marriage, nor for every
use or purpose, but only in a way of expediencie or beneficialnesse to her. As
for instance: the clothes or garments of the Husband, are the wifes by marriage:
but how? not hers to put on, and wear upon her own person, for so they would
be hers to her own shame and reproach. We know it was prohibited in the Law.
Deuteronomy. 22.5. The woman shall not wear that which perteyneth unto the man, for
all that do so are an abomination unto the Lord thy God. But hers they are,
(and may be called hers) in this sense, as it is a comfort and credit unto her
that her Husband be clothed like himself, and that his habit be according to
his rank and quality. So is it indeed an unspeakable comfort, and a ground of a
glorious rejoicing unto a believing Soul, that her Lord and Husband Jesus
Christ, is clothed with that rich and glorious robe of righteousness, that he
is so holy, so harmless, so far separate from sinners, as he is: but she must
take heed of assuming these things unto her self, otherwise then in the
benefit and comfort of them: she must not think her self as holy, as
harmless, as far separate from sinners, as Christ himself is. The Common or
inferior Priest that should put on and serve in the High Priests garments, was
by the Jews adjudged guilty of death, by the hand of Heaven. As Mr. Ainsworth
cites out of Maimony upon Exodus 28.43. So again, the wisdom and
understanding of the Husband, may be said to be the wifes, by marriage. But how?
not for her to be wise withal, for in this respect it is her Husbands only,
notwithstanding marriage: the woman is not therefore as wise as her Husband,
because the Husbands wisdom is hers by marriage: but it is hers in the benefit
and comfort of it, thus: having a Husband that is wise, she shall live the
better, and more comfortable life with him, she shall be the better provided
for, and the like. So the righteousness of Christ becomes ours by right of our
spiritual marriage with him: but not to be righteous withal (formally) for
this is still his personal propriety, notwithstanding the giving of himself
in marriage to us: but to have the benefit and blessing of communicated unto us,
and derived upon us, both in our justification, adoption, and salvation.

CAP. XI.
A third ground against the pretended imputation, viz. the Nonnecessitie of it.
A third Reason, imputation of Christ's righteousness, is: There is no
necessity or occasion of any such imputation. The truth of the old rule does
not wax old, neither will ever vanish: Deus et natura nihil faciunt frustra.
Neither God the Master, nor Nature the servant, ever make any thing in vain.
If God has sufficiently provided otherwise for the justification of his
people, most certain it is that he does not impute this righteousness of
Christ unto them, for that end: which yet is the only end, for which the
necessity thereof, either is o^ (indeed) can be pretended. That a believer is
sufficiently justified before God, without any imputation of the righteousness
of Christ (I still mean in the letter and formalitie of it) I thus
demonstrate. He that is completely justified by having his sins forgiven, is
justified without the imputation of this active obedience or righteousness of
Christ. This proposition is generally granted: for no man contends for this
imputation (in the sense we speak of) in regard of forgiveness of sins
(neither is there any color for it) but for another purpose, as we shall see
hereafter. Therefore I assume: But a believer is suthciently justified before
God by the forgiveness of his sins: therefore I conclude: There is no need of
this imputation of Christ's righteousness for justification. The latter
proposition, that men are fully justified before God by having their sins
pardoned, has been already proved at large (cap. 5.) by express testimonies
of the Scripture: whereunto we found the judgment of Calvin (with other learned
Divines of the resormed Religion) fully conformable. Here we observed, that to
justify in Scripture dialect, constantly signifies, absolution from guilt and
punishment, but never any qualifying or investing, with a positive or legal
righteousness, either by imputation, or otherwise. To those Scriptures, which
were there produced and insisted upon (being many) yet many more might be added
of like importance, there being no stream of truth running fuller or cleerer
along the Scriptures then this. But because we shall have assistance enough
from those very places alleged, to vindicate the interpretation given against
all that is, or can be objected against it, we will spare that time and labor.

But against the Exposition given of these Scriptures, wherein it was affirmed,
justification of a sinner, but that which stands in remission of sins, or
discharge from the punishment or condemnation due unto them, it is objected:
that forgiveness of sins is indeed a part of justification but not the whole:
imputation of righteousness must be likewise added.

To this I answer: First, that Calvin is as expressly of another judgment as
words can make him: a professed enemy to this biformed or double
justification. On Romans 4. ver. 6, 7. etc. he has these words. Quibus etiam
verbis docemur, justitiam Paulo nihil aliud esse, quam remissionem peccatorum.
i. in which words we are taught, that righteousness (with Paul) is nothing
else but remission of sins. He does not say, that Paul places righteousness
or justification, partly in remission of sins, partly in somewhat else: but
plainly affirms, that that righteousness by which we are justified or made
righteous before God, is NOTHING ELSE but this forgiveness. Again, in his
Institutions. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 21. Iustitia fidei est reconciliatio cum
Deo, quae SOLA REMISSIONE PECCATORUM constat. The righteousness of Faith is
our reconciliation with God, which consists of remission of sins ONLY.

Again in the same Section: Constat, quos Deus amplectitur, NON ALITER fieri
justos, nisi quod abstersis peccatorum remissione maculis purificentur, ut
talis justitia VNO VBRBO appellari queat REMISSIO PECCATORUM i. It is evident,
that those whom God embraces, are NO OTHER-WAIES made righteous, but because
they are purifyed, having their spots washed off by the forgiveness of sins:
so that this righteousness may IN ONE WORD, be called, REMISSION OF SINS.
Again in the following Section. Sic remissionem peccatorum cum justitia
connectit Apostolus, Act. 13.38. ut IDEM PRORSUS esse ostendat. i. The Apostle,
Act. 13.38. does so couple or conjoyne forgiveness of sins with
righteousness, that he plainly shows them to be ABSOLVTELY, OR ALTOGETHER
THE SAME. Again, in the third Section of the same Chapter. Cum (Scriptura)
dicit Deum justificare impium quiest ex side Christi, quis sensus esse potest,
nisi fideibeneficio a damnatione liberare, quam ipsorum impietas merebatur? Et
paulo post: Iustificare ergo NIHIL ALIUD EST, quam eum quireus agebatur,
tanquam approbata innocentia, a reatu absolvere. i. When the Scripture says,
that God justifies the wicked, that is of the Faith of Jesus, what else can be
meant, then the freeing or absolving him from that condemnation by the benefit
of his Faith, which his sin deserved. And a little after (in the same Section)
To justify therefore is nothing else, then to absolve a man from guilt, as one
of approved innocence, who was accused as one guilty. Yet once more: in the
same Chapter. Sect. 15. Hic est fidei sensus, etc. quod intercedente Christi
justitia, impetrata remissione peccatorum, justificatus sit. 1. This is the
meaning of a man's Faith, etc. that by the mediation or intercession of Christ's
righteousness, he is justified by remission of sins obtained. Laftly in the
fourth Sect. of the same Chapter. Quarto autem capite ad Romanos, etc. i. In
the fourth Chapter to the Romans, he first calls (justification) the imputation
of righteousness, and doubts not to place it in REMISSION OF SINS. And
presently citing the testimony of David, Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, etc. commenteth thus upon the words. Illie sane^nonde justificationis
part, etc. i. Questionless he does not here dispute of a part of
justification, but of the whole. The definition whereof he further affirms to
be set down by David, when he pronounces those blessed, to whom a free
forgiveness of sins was given. From whence it appears, that that
righteousness whereof we speak, is simply opposed to guilt of sin, etc. You
see we have not sought far for all this abundance of this Authors mind and
judgment touching the point in Question: all these testimonies (the first
excepted) are found within the compass of one only Chapter, and that none of
the first magnitude neither. He that in the presence of all these witnesses
speaking so distinctly and fully from the Authors own pen, will yet say, that
Calvin ^^^d not remission of sins to be our entire and complete
justification; had need be able to prove to the world, that Calvin's H^ad and
hand were at ods, when these things were written: or that his pen was suborned
and bribed by some adversary to conspire against his meaning, end to betray
his judgment in the point.

Notwithstanding a great Master of the opposite way in this controversy,
Calvin is, from his party, attempts yet by force to bring him through all this
fire and water over to him: and therefore pretends to find more ingenuitie in
Papists and in Bellarmine himself toward this Author, then in men of his own
profession ( Protestants I mean) that are of an opposite judgment to him in
this point. Bellarmine (says he) does confess and acknowledge, that though
Calvin does again and again place justification in remission of sins only,
yet he holds imputation of Christ's righteousness too. To this I answer:

First, that which is here called ingenuity in Bellarmine, I fully conceive to
be nothing else, but a piece of Jesuiticall cunning, to make his adversaries
opinion the more irrational, that so he might have the more advantage against
him in disputation: which will further appear by and by.

Secondly, I conceive, that as Paul in Christian wisdom pleaded his
Pharisaisme, when time was, to help himself at a pinch, though otherwise he
little regarded it: or as Sampson took up the jawbone of an Ass, to revenge
himself of the Philistines, and threw it away when he had done: so this man
findesingenuity in Bellarmines to quit himself in a strcight, seast Calvin
should be taken from him, and to avenge himself of his adversaries in this
Question: but otherwise cares little for it.

But thirdly (and lastly) if either Bellarmines, or his interpreters (who finds
this miracle of ingenuity in him) meaning be, that Calvin holds the imputation
of Christ's righteousness neceslary to justification, by way of merit only, we
are no further adversaries in this point: But if their meaning be (and other it
cannot be without apparent prevarication) that over and besides remission of
sins, Calvin holds a necessity of the imputation of Christ's righteousness in
justification, as a second part or member of it (really distinct from remission
of sins) to make it complete and perfect, this is to burden Calvin with such
an imputation, as is not lightly incident to a considering and learned man, as
he was. He himself in his Antidote against the Counsel of Trent, in their
sixth Session, takes those Fathers tardie with that Logical Soloecisme in their
Divinity, of making the formal cause of justification double, acsi partim
remissione peccatorum, partim spirituali regeneratione justi essemus. i. as if
we were righteous partly by remission of sins, partly by spiritual
regeneration. Now if he should place justification partly in remission of
sins, partly in the imputation of Christ's righteousness: who sees not that
himself is in the same condemnation with his adversaries, and builds up by
example, what he pulls down by reproof? But he washes his hands in perfect
innocence this way: Ego autem (says he) unicam et simplicem esse assero. i.
but I hold and affirm, (meaning the formal cause of justification) to be but
one and simple. Bellarmine indeed does not admit of this purgation of himself:
but will needs find him foul in the business notwithstanding, and
recriminates upon him the same imputation, wherewith he had burdened the
counsel. Quippe qui says he of Calvin, De Justificatione. lib. 2. Call. Inst.
l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 2.
cap. 2.) disertis verbis, justificationem in peccatorum remissione, et
justitiae Christi imputatione, sitam, esse scribat. i. Carvin in express
words, delivers it, that justification consists in remission of sins, and in
the imputation of Christ's righteousness. And here is the interpretation of
that ingenuity, whereof we heard the innocent Jesuit lately accused: we see how
kindly and lovingly he dealt by his adversary, when he would needs give him in
the imputation of Christ's righteousness (by way of sub-intelligence) to
remission of sins, wherein alone he had placed justification. The old adage
was: (...); The gifts of enemies are but guile. Bellarmine was willing to
enlarge Calvin's opinion, and to add more then enough to it, that so he might
make it the fairer mark to shoot at.

But Paraeus fairly delivers this Soldier of Christ out of the hands of that
Romish Champion, Paraeus contr^ Bellarmun. lib. 2, cap 2. Lect. 247.

See the same Author in his T^ract De justi^ia Christi Act. and Pass. p. 179
etc. where he interprets the said passage of Calvin, much after the same manne.


Hinc videre potuit adversarius (says Paraeus) etc. i. Hence his adversary
(meaning Bellarmine) might see and perceive, that saying in his Institutions,
that Justification consisted in remission of sins, and imputation of Christ's
righteousness, his meaning was not, that there should be a double [formall]
cause of Justification, as if we were righteous partly by remissio of sins,
partly by imputation, and neither of them a complete and full Justification
(for so he should fight both against himself, and against the Scriptures) but
his intent was, by two Scripture-termes equipollent, the one to the other, to
express one and the same formal cause, or to join these two expressions
together exegetically (i. So that one might help to explain the other) quia
remissio peccatorum sit imputatione justitiae, et vicissim imputatio justitia
fit remissione peccatorum, test Apostolo. Romans 4. ver. 6.7, etc. i. because
remission of sins is made, by or in the imputation of righteousness: and
again, impu tation of righteousness made in remission of sins, witness the
Apostle: Romans 4.6.7. etc, If this Author be further consulted with in the
sequel, he will tell you more at large, how Calvin places integram
justificationem modo sola remissione peccatorum etc. i. entire and complete
JUSTIFICATION sometimes in remission of sins only, sometimes in remission of
sins and imputation of Christ's righteousness without any contradiction.
Neither is it hard to conceive, how the one may be the sole and entire formal
cause, and the other the meritorious. Which to have been the very express
meaning and mind of Calvin, is so apparent by comparing and laying together
passage with paslage from him, that except a man's conceit were much relieved
and strengthened by his will, he would find it a matter of much difficulty to
think otherwise.

Bellarmine himself, when the pange of ingenuity is but a little of him, can
find out his adversaries opinion clearly enough. For explaining those words
of the Trent Council, wherein it is said, that righteousness does not consist
in Remission of sins only, Reijcitur (says he) sententia Calvini de
justificatione, more forensi, etc. i. Calvin's opinion concerning Justification
after a juridicall manner, is here rejected. And so generally when he
undertakes the confutation of that error (as he calls it) which places
Justification in Remission of sins only; he still charge Calvin with it,
and seldom any other: as on the contrary, when he disputes against that
opinion, which places Justification in the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, he still lays on upon CHEMNI TIUS. Compare the 6 and 7
Chapters together, in his Second BOOK of JUSTIFICATION.

Let me add but onething more here out of the Council of Trent it self,
Calvin, as the Anthor or maintainer of that very opinion, where with we have
labored hitherto to honor him, as with an Lonour which belongs unto him. Or
if Calvin be not conceived to be the man, yet the opinion we shall evince from
hence, to have bin famous in the Reformed Churches, when the Conncell thus
thundered out against it. (...) 11.
Si quis dixerit, hominem justificari, velsola imputatione justitiae Christ's,
vel sola peccatorum remissione, etc. Anathema sit, i. If any man shall say,
that a man is justified, either by the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ alone, or by remission of sins alone, etc. let him be accursed. From
whence observe, first, that to place justification in remission of sins alone,
was an opinion by it self, distinct from the other, that held justification by
the imputation of Christ's righteousness alone. For it is evident, by the
disjunctive particles in this Canon, that the Council, being (as it seems)
good Husbands of their thunderbolts, had an intent to strike down two opinions
at once. And so Bellarmine (as we heard) explains the Council. Secondly,
observe (that which follows close upon the former observation) that either
there was such an opinion then ruling in the Reformed Churches, or at least
taught and maintained by some eminent man (one, or more) amongst them, that
held justification to consist in Remission of sins only: otherwise those
deep-advised sages of the Council, should have but put a dead sly into their
box of ointment, by boltring into the air: and indeed, rather have forged a
weapon for their adversaries, then taken any from them. If it were any
particular and eminent man, they struck at, as an abettor of that opinion,
there can none be pitched upon with greater probability then Calvin, who still
carried matters of Religion against them at that time with a higher hand then
any other. And Bellarmine (as we heard) ingenuously confessed, Calvin by name
to be the man. Thirdly (and lastly) from this passage observe, how some men's
either learning or memory misuseth them, by suggesting to them, that the
opinion pleaded and contended for in this Treatise, viz. the imputation of
Faith for righteousness, or (which is the same) that justification stands in
Remission of sins only, is an opinion confederate with Popish errors.
Certainly those great Agents and Factors for the Roman party, would never have
bin so farte overseene in their solemn and sacred assembly, to have poured out
the vials of their wrath upon the head of an opinion, that was their own.

The importune striving and contendings of some men to make Galvin for them, in
an opinion, whereof (doubtless) his learning was never guilty, have compelled
us to make somewhat the longer labor and discourse of it, for his rescue, and
to set him clear upon his own principles and foundations. If any man remains
yet unsatisfied touching this Authors judgment in the point now under
examination, and desires rather an heap, then enough: it were an easy matter
to make the pyle of testimonies from his own pen yet far greater, even to the
wearying and punishing of such a man with his own desire. Somewhat more then
has bin here delivered, may be found in the first Chapter: where also you may
see this worthy Champion of the truth, accompanied and seconded in this
service, with many of his fellows not much inferior to him. And this bv way of
Answer in the first place to the objection, that Remission of sins, was not
the whole, but only a part of our Justification.

Secondly, I Answer, that from the Scriptures themselves that were alleged, it
may be evidenced, as by express demonstration, that there is no more, no other
part or member of justification, but only forgiveness of sins: that the
nature and substance of it is fully comprehended in this. What can be more
pregnant then that Romans 4 6, 7. etc. Even as David also describes the
blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works:
saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered: Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord will not impute sin. If there
were any thing more belonging to this righteousness which is by imputation,
then only the forgiveness of iniquity, or the covering of sin, would the Holy
Ghost wholly have omitted it and left it out, when he intended a description,
or declaration if it? Especially would he have omitted, that which is the maine
and principal and formal part of it, as the righteousness of Christ imputed
is pretended to be? If a man should prefix such a Title as this before a Book,
or over the head of a Map, A description of the world, etc. and never so much
in all his Book or Map, as once mention Europe or Asia, the chief parts of
the world, but only some obscure and lesser Countries, would it not argue,
that either he wanted wit himself, or else hoped that his Readers would want
it altogether? Or if a Limner should be set on work to draw a man's picture or
portraicture, and should only draw the trunk of his body, without a face or
head upon it, were this the portraicture or description of a man? No more would
Paul (or rather the Holy Ghost) have called the forgiveness of sins, a
description or declaration of the righteousness which is imputed by Faith, if
it had bin only a part, and that the lesser and less material part of it.

It is true, and women, consisting of bodies and souls, are called souls,
Act. 7.14. and elsewhere: But 1. this is never done in descriptions or
declarations of things: as when the Holyghost describes the creation of man,
express mention is made, both of the material part, the dust of the earth,
and likewise of the formal, Gods breathing in his face the breath of life.
Neither in reason is that to be called the description of a thing, which
conceales and silenceth that which is best and the most beautiful part of it,
and only mentions somewhat of inferior consideration in it. Secondly, when
such a figure is used, a part put for the whole, it is seldom or never, that
the worser and more ignoble part is mentioned, but still the formal and better
part, as bodies are no where put for the persons of men, but only Souls:
Except (happily) in two cases: 1. when the whole comes under consideration and
is spoken of, by reason of the inferior part, as sometimes the body of Christ,
or flesh of Christ, is put for Christ himself as man, and for the whole humane
nature of Christ, namely when that which is spoken of him, has its relation to
him, in respect of his body or flesh. Or else 2. when the Holy Ghost would
represent the weakness and contemptiblenesse of the condition of the whole,
then (sometimes) he calls the whole by the name of that which is the weakest
part of it, and the ground or cause of the vanity and weakness of the whole.
As when it is said, that All flesh is grass, etc. by flesh, meaning Men, in
respect of their weak and vanishing condition in this world. Neither of which
cases can be pretended in that description of Justification. Thirdly (and
lastly) when this Figure Synechdoche is used in any of these or the like cases,
a part being put for the whole, it is when things are plain and evident, so
that by the part which is named and expressed, that may readily be understood
which is employed, as easy to be made out, either by other places of Scripture,
or by common sense, as in the instances given. All flesh is grass: by flesh
here, no man can understand any thing else, but men clothed with flesh. So
Acts 7. where Jacob is said to come down into Egypt with threescore and fifteen
souls: no man can think that these souls came with him without their bodies.
But now it is far otherwise in this description of justification commended
unto us by Paul. That by forgiveness of sins, should be meant, both
forgiveness of a man's own sins, and imputation of Christ's righteousness, if
it should be true, yet is it no ways necessary: neither is it any ways
apparent, that these are parts of the same whole, of one and the same
justification: neither is there any thing expressly delivered in any part of the
Scripture to establish it. Therefore it is no ways probable (even in these
respects, that when Paul places a man's righteousness before God in the
forgiveness of his sins, that he should do it by the figure Synecdoche,
only mentioning one part, and implying another.

Again, justification, then when the Scripture says, We are justified by his
blood (as Rom 5.9.) the interpretation must be: we are justified by half
through his blood, but the better of our justification must come another way.
For by his blood or death, we cannot have his active righteousness imputed to
us. So where it is said again (verse. 16.) that the gift (viz. of
righteousness by Christ) is of many offenses unto justification: if the gift
of many offenses, i^ the forgiveness of a man's sins, will not amount to a
justification, without the imputation of a legal righteousness joined with
it, we must give a check to Paul's pen, as the High Priests did unto Pilate,
Joh. 16.21. Write not, the King of the Jews: but that he said, I am the King
of the Jews: So must we say unto Paul, do not write, that the gift is of
many offenses unto Justification: but, the gift is of many offenses, and of
many acts of righteousness too imputed, to Justification. Paul's pen had made
more have then good speed (as we say) to come at Justification before its time.
And thus we must draw blood instead of milk out of many other Scriptures
besides these, to nourish that opinion of the imputation of a formal
righteousness for Justification, if you mean to keep it alive: for the
sincere milk of the word will not nourish it.

Thirdly, that forgiveness of sins is a man's entire and complete
Justification, and that there is no such further piece or part of it, as is
pretended concerning the imputation of Christ's righteousness, will appear
from hence, because that end, for which this imputed righteousness of Christ
is thus brought into the business of justification, viz. to be the right or
title of the justified to their heavenly inheritance, is otherwise supplied by
the wisdom and counsel of God, and that in a way more Evangelical, and of
more sweetness and deernesse to the children of God, viz. by the grace of
adoption, or Sonship (as we shall further show ( God willing) in the reason
following.

Fourthly, active righteousness of Christ imputed unto them for one part of
their justification by it self, and the passive obedience or death of Christ,
for another part, by it self, and so separate and divide the benefit of his
active obedience from that which we have by his passive, in Justification: this
is a method or course to destroy and lose both the benefit of the one and of
the other. For if men substract the righteousness of his life, upon a conceit,
that that will do them service alone (which it will not do, as we shall see
afterward) then must they want it in his death, or in his blood, and so that
will be ineffectuall too If it had bin possible, under the Law, for a man to
have separated those qualifications which God required in the Beast for
sacrifice, as viz. the Sex, the soundness, spotlessenesse, etc. from the Beast
it self, neither would these qualifications, separated from the sacrifice,
have bin of any use to the man; neither would the Beast without these, have
made a sacrifice of acceptance. So neither will the active obedience of Christ
profit men, if they separate it from the passive Joh. 12.24. neither will the
passive it self be found it self, In the cleansing of the Le^e the blood of
the flame Syarrow was to ^e joined and mixed with pure water in an ^^ then
vessel and the person cleansed, to be sprinkled with ^^th. Lev. 14.4.5.6.
that is, an atonement or expiation for sin according to the will and
purpose of God, except we bring in the active to it. For as it is most true
which the Apostle affirms, Heb. 9 22. Without shedding of blood there is no
remission of sins: so is it as true, that without shedding of righteous blood
there is no remission neither. And howsoever the personal union of the humane
nature with the Godhead in the person of Christ, was the great qualification
requisite in his person to make the sacrifice of himself completely
satisfactory for the sin of the world: yet was it (as God willing, we shall
hereafter demonstrate more at large) but a remote qualification in this
respect, there being a necessity (not only in respect of the decree and
purpose of God, but of other ends and conveniences also) that this
qualification we now speak of, the fullfilling of the Law, should intervene
and come between that union and his sacrifice. In the mean time, whilst I
would not have the active obedience of Christ separated from the passive, nor
again the passive from the active, in respect of this common and joint effect
of forgiveness of sins or justification, ariseing from a concurrence of them
both, yet would I not have Christ in his mystery tumbled up together on a heap:
for this would be to deface the beauty and excellency of that wisdom which
shines forth gloriously in the face thereof. I would have every thing that
Christ was, and every thing that Christ did, and every thing that Christ
suffered to be distinguished, not only in themselves, but also in their proper
and immediate effects, respectively ariseing and flowing from them severally. A
plurality of causes may meet together in one and the same effect, and yet the
diversity and difference of their several operations and influences
contributing toward the raiseing and produceing of such an effect, may easily
be distinguished and apprehended. The goodness of the soil, the labor of the
Ox, the Plough, the seed that is sown; the Husbandmans pains in ploughing,
in sowing, his skill in both; the rain given from heaven to water that which
is sown: all these and such like, meet together in one joint and common effect
at the time of Harvest, viz. the Husbandmans benefit or increase. Yet is there
scarce any man so much a stranger to the method and principles of Husbandry,
but can assign to every one of these causes, their proper and special effect,
though all meeting together in that great and common effect we speak of: the
soil is for one purpose, the Ox for another, the Plough for a third, etc. So
is it true, that all that Christ was, and all that he did, and all that he
suffered, meet together in that great and common effect, the salvation of them
that believe: yea, many of them meet by the way, in the justification of such,
before they come to their journeys end: yet to justify the wonderful and deep
wisdom of God, as we ought to do, in bringing about this great work of the
salvation of the world, we must enquire after and find out peculiar and
distinct reasons and ends, for all that variety of things which is to be found
in or about Christ, as why he should be God, and why he should be Man, what
both the one and the other of these peculiarly contributes toward the
salvation of men, why he should be born, why born of a Virgin, why he should
grow up and live till he came to the perfect stature and age of a man, why he
should be circumcised, why fulfill the Law, why preach the Gospel before his
death, why at last he should suffer death; why die upon the Cross; why he
should be buried; why he should rise again, etc. with many more particulars
of like nature that might be mentioned: all which have their special and
peculiar working toward the great work of salvation (as in a benign
constellation every Staire gives out his peculiar influence by himself.) As
all Rivers fall into the Sea and meet there in one, though the course of their
waters lie from all parts under Heaven, from the East and from the West, from
North and South: So whatever Christ was, and whatever he did, spoke, and
suffered, though they are things much differing in themselves, and in their
immediate and proper effects, yet they all meet and center in that common and
glorious effect, the salvation of those that believe. And for men not to
distinguish these in due manner, as well in their effects and purposes, as in
their natures, is not only to confound themselves, but (which is worse) to
confound that most exquisite and admirably-beautifull frame of the Gospel, and
(as it were) of a defenced City, to make a ruinous heap. From the guilt of
which confusion-making in the Gospel, how unpossible it is fairly to acquit
such an imputation of Christ's righteousness as hitherto we have opposed, will
further appear in the reasons ensuing.

Fifthly (and lastly) if remission of sins be but a part of justification,
imputation of Christ's righteousness must be added as another part of it, to
make it perfect and complete: then must the formal cause of one and the same
effect, be double (the absurdity which Calvin, as we heard, truly charged upon
the Trent Counselors, and Bellarmine as falsely recharged upon him) yea (that
which makes the absurdity swell yet higher) one and the same formality, or
formal part of a thing (which is ever most simple and indivissible) shall be
compacted and compounded of two things, not only of a differing, but of a
diverse, yea and of an opposite importance and consideration, (as the sequel
of the business rightly interpreted, will make manifest.) For where there is a
perfect and complete righteousness imputed (as the righteousness of Christ
is, and must be apprehended) there is no place for remission of sins.

CAP. XII.
A fourth reason against the pretended Imputation; it frustrates the grace of
Adoption.
MY fourth ground against the supposed imputation of Christ's righteousness, I
dispose in this Syllogism.

That which dissolves and takes away the necessity and use of that sweet and
Euangellicall grace of Adoption, (...), hold a straight course with the truth
of the Gospel.

But this imputation of Christ's righteousness (in the sense controverted)
dissolves and takes away the necessity, etc. of Adoption. Ergo.

The proposition (I conceive) will be yielded sine sanguine et sudore,
otherwise the sword of the Spirit, the word of God, would soon command it. The
Scriptures speak much of the grace of Adoption, or Sonship, of believers being
made the Children and Sons of God. That we might receive the Adoption of
Sons. Gal. 4.5. And because ye are Sons, ver. 6. Wherefore thou art no more
a Servant, but a Son etc. ver. 7. To pass by other places without number:
Joh. 1.12. But as many as received him, to them he gave power, or prerogative
((...)) to be made [or to become] the Sons of God. Doubtless this grace, or
prerogative of Adoption and Sonne-ship, is not given unto men by God in vain,
not for the sweet sound only that the letter or name of Adoption makes in the
cares: it has relation to some further matter of moment and consequence
depending thereon. It is given as an immediate capacity, or qualification to
those that believe, to make them capable of their everlasting inheritance:
their Sonship is the proper and next ground of that investiture unto them. The
Scriptures are in nothing more express then this. If we be Children, then also
heirs, even heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. Romans 8.17. So
again: Wherefore thou art no more a Servant but a Son and if a Son, then an
heir of God through Christ. Gal. 4, 7. As if he should say, we are therefore
made Sons, or adopted to be Sons, that so by right of this Sonship we might
be heirs of God, and by the right of this Heyr-ship come to inherit that
immortal, undefiled inheritance, which fades not away, with Jesus Christ
himself. The reason or strength of that inference, or consequence, If Sons
then Heirs, seems to stand in this: because though amongst men all that are
Sons, are not Heirs, if we speak of Sons by nature, but only he that is the
first borne: yet Sonship by Adoption (I conceive) has always respect to an
inheritance, a man never adopteth a child, but with an intent or purpose to
make him his heir. So that though in the case of Sonship by nature, it will
not follow, If Sons then heirs, yet in the case of Adoption, it will. And this
(we know) is the case and condition of Believers: they are Sons of God, not by
nature, but by Adoption. Unless (perhaps) we will rather conceive the reason
of the inference to lie in this: that the Apostle argues and concludes upon
the supposition of this truth, that the Kingdom of Heaven, or that inheritance
which God has provided for his Saints, is of another nature, and has a
pre-eminence and perfection above any earthly inheritance, as in a thousand
other respects, so particularly in this, that it may be enjoyed, possessed and
inherited by all the Children of God, though in number never so many, upon such
terms, that every one may enjoy, and possess the whole, and no man's portion or
possession here suffers any loss or diminution at all, though all his Brethren
enjoy the same Portion and possession with him. And in this respect (happily,
with some others) it may be ca^ed (...), the inheritance of the Saints IN
LIGHT. Colos. 1.12. The light of the Sun (we know) is of that nature and
property, that it is enjoyed by the whole world, and by all the Inhabitants of
the Earth, divisim and conjunctim (as we (...)) upon such terms, that no man's
comsort or benefit by it is at all impaired or diminished, because there are so
many thousand thousands in the world, that are partakers of the same benefit
and comfort with them. But every man's enjoyment and possession hereof is as
full and entire to him, as if the Sun shined to him alone, and there were no
other to divide the comfort with him. Doubtless if this property were to be
found in any man's Earthly estate or inheritance, that it would go as far, and
hold out as good measure amongst many, as among few, or as given but to one:
though a man had never so many Children, yet this consequence would hold good,
if Sons, then heirs, he would bestow his whole estate as well upon his
last-borne, as his first. But because there is a defect or imperfection this
way in earthly inheritances, therefore it follows not with men, if Sons then
heirs: but with God it does, because such imperfection has no place, in his
heavenly inheritance. But howsoever, whether the strength of the Apostles
inference in these places, rests either in this, or in the former
consideration, or in any other: evide^t it is that the grace or gift of
Adoption is given by God unto believers for an Evangelical capacity, right,
or title to the Kingdom of Heaven. And therefore whatsoever opinion or notion
rises up, to magnify it self against it, by dissolving and frustrateing the
use, end, and intention of it, is certainly Anti-euangellicall, and not to be
received, though an Angel from Heaven, should bring it. This for the major
Proposition in the syllogism, rather by way of explication, then confirmation:
for being rightly understood, it cannot lightly be denied.

The Assumption follows: But such an imputation of the righteousness of
Christ as is contended for, dissolves the end, and use of Adoption.

This is evident from the express declaration or interpretation which
themselves make of their imputation, who are the abettors and maintainers of
it. For wherefore is this imputation of Christ's righteousness introduced into
the business of Justification? The introducers generally make but one mouth
amongst them, and say, that the righteousness of Christ must be imputed unto
us, that so we may have a right and title to life, or to Heaven, according to
the tenor of the Covenant: Hoc fac, et vive: do this and live. For by remission
of sins (say they, and truly) a man is only delivered from death and
condemnation, due unto sin: but there accrues or grows no right or title to
the Kingdom of Heaven from remission of sins unto any man. And so
apprehending nothing else within reach in or about a believer, meet or fit to
make a plea or title of thereunto, they have compelled the righteousness of
Christ to take this honor and office upon it, in a way of imputation. Neither
indeed is it easy to conjecture or conceive, what other service this
righteousness of Christ imputed should do in justification, or for what other
end or purpose it should be introduced upon such terms, and in such a way,
then to qualify men with a capacity for Heaven. Now then this being the direct
and proper end, use, office, purpose and intent of Adoption, to invest a
believer with a capapacity for Heaven (as has been demonstrated from the
Scriptures) it evidently follows, that whosoever shall offer or attempt to set
any thing else upon this Throne, seeks to dissolve and make frustrate the
counsel and purpose of God concerning the grace of Adoption, in t^^s behalf.
To bring in any other right or title to salvation besides that Adoption of
Sons which we have in Christ, is to depresse or put down the wisdom of God,
and to exalt another instead of it.

If it be here objected and said, that both may stand together, imputation of
a perfect righteousness from Christ, and Adoption both: why may they not
together make a twofold coard, a stronger and more effectual title, then
either alone?

To this I answer, No: they will not twist, or wind or work together: not so
much because of the diversity and contrariety of their natures, as the clay
and iron would not work and mix together in Nebuchadnezzars image (though this
might be a sufficient consideration, I conceive, to build a negative answer
upon, Legalls and Euangellicalls will not join or combine to make a title to
Heaven) but chiefly because either of them, as well the one as the other, is a
complete and entire title within it self. Perfect righteousness, is a
perfect and complete title alone: so is Adoption or Sonship, as perfect and
complete a title alone, as it: As to be the first borne, or heir to an
earthly inheritance, gives as direct and full a right or title to the enjoyment
of it, as the lawfullest purchase can do. Now it is certain, that God never
ordeynes a plurality of means for one and the same end or purpose, when one
means is entire and every ways sufficient for it, neither in the world
natural, nor in the world Spiritual (as the Gospel may be called.) (...) i.
Nature makes one for one, was the old axiom in Metaphysiques. But especially
in the Gospel, you shall find it generally so, that God allows and seals
still but one means, for one purpose (I mean but one adaequate means in one
kind, or in the same relation to the effect) and accordingly upon the bringing
in or position of a second means for the same end or purpose, complains
presently of the abrogateing or making void the other. You shall observe many
such passages and reasonings in the Gospel, as these. If they which are of the
Law be heirs, Faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect. Romans
4.14. So again, Jf the inheritance be of the Law, it is no more by promise.
Gal. 3.18. and ver. 21. Jf there had bin a Law, that could have given life,
surely righteousness should have bin by the Law. Surely, (...): verily,
certainly God would not have gone further then this Law, in procureing life
unto any, if there had bin but a possibility in the Law to have done it.

But I desire to insist a little upon that place, Gal. 2.21 and upon occasion
of the passage, to reason the point a little further. I do not (says Paul)
abrogate the grace of God: for if righteousness be by the Law, surely Christ
has died in vain: A man with his first thoughts, may think the inference
somewhat strange, and that Paul should be too weak and contemptible in his
premises, to be so sore and strong in his Conclusion. For thus a man might
counterargue with him. How does it necessarily follow, that if righteousness
or justification were by the Law, that Christ's death must presently be in
vain? What if there were more means of justification, then one, more doers
open into life, then one, one by Christ, another by the Law? were there any
harm in this? it may be some would enter in at one door, and some at another,
as we do into our Churches: and so neither would be in vain. But to this I
answer, true, if it were with God and his counsels and ways, as it is with
men, such a conclusion would follow such premises but weakly and faintly: but
it being with God and in his ways as it is, it follows roundly, and faulters
not at all. It is with the poor and weak creature called man, in comparison
of the Great and Glorious God in this point, as it is with many poor people in
the City, that live upon the labor of their hands, and work to great shops,
and rich Shopkeepers, in respect of their great Masters, to whom they work. It
is a common complaint, that they work for little, and are content to do it,
fearing least otherwise they might starve: they do much work for a little
profit: but their rich Masters will gain to some purpose, or else they will
not, or care not to trade. So in the case we now speak of, men being a feeble
and impotent generation, and not able to do, what, and as they would, count it
their wisdom to do the best they may: and therefore are content (many times)
to raise great sums of means for bringing of smaller things to pass, it may
be in a double or triple proportion above the level of their ends, because they
are still jealous and doubtful about the success of the means they use:
there are many disticulties and miscariages incident to the manageing of their
designs which they cannot foresee, and therefore when their ends are matters
of any great moment and consequence, or much desired, they heap on means upon
means, and are scarce ever secure, or think they have done enough. Neither is
it any disparagement unto them in the world amongst men like themselves, though
half of their means be lost in the issue, or be found unprofitable and
redundant because men use to bear one with another in such cases, it being one
man's case as well as another from time to time. Yea the Scripture it self
seems to encourage men in the use of variety of means, in regard of the
uncertainty of the succesle. In the merning sow thy seed, and in the evening
withhold not thy hand: for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this
or that. Ecclesiast. 11.6. Suppose a single door through Gods Providence might
be enough and enough to keep off the thief from the rich man's baggs, yet he
makes a double door, and door upon door for that purpose: in this case it is no
pregnant consequence to reason thus: if the single door were sufficient to
secure the treasure from thiefes, the double door, and all the rest of the
doors were in vain. Because though there be no use of these in keeping out the
thief (who perhaps never thought of making any attempt upon the treasure) yet
are they of use to qualify the fears of the rich owner, and to make him
possess his treasure in more peace. But now with God, we know it is otherwise:
he never raises double means for the same end, but alwaits makes (...) (as
was faid) one means for one end: both because he knows, how to attain his
end as infalliably by single means as by double: and besides, because he will
have none of his means or ordinances laughed to scorn, or disparaged in the
least measure, or to be despised or neglected by men. He will not have any two
ordinances of his of the same occupation, because he will have no contention or
emulation between them. Consider that passage, Gal. 3.21 Is the Law then
against the promises (says Paul?) God forbid. No: but how does he prove it is
not? By this argument, because the Law cannot give life. For (says he) had
there been a Law, that could have given life, righteousness should have been
by the Law: clearly implying, that if the Law could have given life, which is
the proper office and calling (as it were) of the promise to do, then indeed
it had bin against it, and an enemy to it, and would have taken it is work
(which is it is glory) out of it is hand. But now since it serves quite for
another purpose, the Law and the Promise agree well enough together, and do
not enter-meddle one with another work. So you see the ground and bottom of
the Apostles reasoning in the forenamed place: Jf righteousness be by the Law,
then Christ has died in vain. He supposes, and calls that an abrogateing and
making void any the counsels or ordinances of God, when another thing is set
up with them, to bring the same end to pass, or to serve in the same place and
office, whereunto they are appointed. And doubtless by authority and warrant
of the same ground, we may set this parallel proposition at the right hand of
that of Paul: If our right and title to Heaven be by imputati on of Christ's
righteousness, then does God give the grace of ADOPTION in vain. And this for
our fourth argument against that Imputation.

CAP. XIII.
Containing the fist and sixth grounds against the said imputation, viz. the
taking away the necessity, 1o, of Repentance: and 2o, of Christ's death.
GOD (says Paul. 1 Cor. 14.33.) is not the Author of confusion, but of peace.
Repentance is an Evangelical plant of his planting, and of absolute necessity
unto salvation. Except ye repent (says our Savior Luk 13.3.) ye shall all
likewise perish, etc. Secondly, it wants little (if any thing) of the like
certainty, because of the evidence of truth in it, that such an imputation of
the righteousness of Christ, as is pretended and pleaded for by some, wholly
dissolves and cuts off the necessity of Repentance. For he that has a perfect
and complete righteousness of the Law imputed unto him, upon such terms,
that it shall be as much his, being imputed, as if he had personally wrought and
fulfilled it himself, what color or pretense can there be, why or how, he
should stand in need of any repentance? The righteous (says Christ) need no
repentance. If Adam had kept the Law, he had needed no repentance more then
Christ himself needed: and those that were in Christ and kept the Law in him,
as exactly and perfectly as he did, what need of Repentance have they, or can
they have, more then he? For if the exact and perfect obedience of Christ be
the true ground and reason why Christ himself needed no Repentance: and this
obedience of his, in all the exactness and perfection of it, be as truly
theirs by imputation, as it was his, or as it could have been theirs by
personal performance: unpossible it is, but if it were a sufficient ground of
a non-necessitie of Repentance in the one, it must be the same in the other
also. He that is as righteous as Christ is (which those must needs be that are
righteous with his rightsousnesse) needs no more repentance then Christ
himself needs. I see not what in a way of sober reason, can be opposed
against this argument That was a desperate Answer, which a zealous defender of
that Faith made to save the life of his opinion being assaulted by this
argument (but it was rightdown dealing howsoever, and faithfulness to his
principles, in their great distress) that Believers being perfectly righteous
in Christ, have indeed no need of Repentance.

If it be objected, and said, that notwithstanding the imputation of a perfect
righteousness from Christ, believers have their personal sins and faileings,
which Christ had not: and in respect of these, they need not daily and
continual Repentance. To this I answer: True, Believers indeed stand in need
of daily Repentance, in respect of their personal sins and failings, which
are daily: but they that have an entire, and perfect-Law-righteousnesse imputed
to them, have no such need in any respect. Therefore Believers are not the men,
that have any such righteousness imputed to them. Certainly they that have the
perfect fulfilling and observation of the Law imputed unto them by God, cannot
stand guilty before God of any sin or breach of this Law: because in the
imputation of a perfect righteousness, there is an universal non-imputation
of sin apparently included. Besides, if God does impute a perfect
Law-righteousnesse to men, it must be supposed that the rights and privileges
belonging to such righteousness do accompany it, in the imputation: so that
the person to whom such imputation is made, stands really invested and
possessed of them. Otherwise God should impute the shells without the kernel,
and give empty titles without the substance of honor: Now one maine privilege
of a perfect Law-righteousnesse is, to invest with a full and entire right unto
life, out of its own intrinsecall and inherent dignity and worth: which is a
privilege wholly inconsistent with the least touch or tincture of sin in the
person that stands possessed of it. Therefore where such a privilege or right
is, there can be no occasion or necessity of Repentance, because Repentance
presupposes sin.

If it be yet said further, imputation of Faith for righteousness, will be
as much shaken by this Objection, as the imputation of Christ's righteousness
for righteousness, because if Faith be imputed for, or instead of the
righteousness of the Law, it must bring likewise and derive all the privileges
of such a righteousness upon the person, to whom such imputation is made.
Therefore that privelege also, which excludes the necessity of Repentance.

To this I answer, by denying the consequence of that which is brought to
justify the Exception. When the Scriptures say that Faith is imputed, for, or
instead of the righteousness of the Law, the intent and meaning is not, as if
God either imputed, or accepted or accounted Faith, for the self same thing
which the righteousness of the Law is intrinse cally and formally, or as if
God in this imputation either gave or accounted unto Faith: any power or
privilege to justify, out of any inherent or internal dignity or worth in it,
(which is the intrinsecall and formal property of a Law-righteousnesse) but
the meaning only is, that God upon a man's Faith, will as fully justify him,
that is, acquit him from death and condemnation, as if he had perfectly
fulfilled the Law. He that believes may be as fully and perfectly justified,
as he that fulfilleth the Law, and yet not be justified in the same manner, or
upon the same terms. He that fulfilleth the Law, and thereby is justified, is
justified out of the inherent and internal dignity of that which justifyeth
him: but he that is justified by Faith, is not justified by the inherent
dignity, or merit of that which justifyeth him, but by the free and gracious
acceptatio^ of it by God, for that which is justifying in it own nature, and by
virtue of its inherent worth and dignity. So that although Faith be imputed to
a man, for, or instead of the righteousness of the Law, and he by such
imputation of his Faith, be justified: yet it does not follow, that therefore
he is justified upon the same terms every way, as he should have been, had he
been justified by the imputation of the righteousness it self of the Law.
Wherefore the imputation of Faith for righteousness, may well stand with
personal sins in him, to whom this imputation is made, in respect of which
sins he remains continually obliged to Repentance: but the imputation of a
perfect legal righteousness, for righteousness, makes a man perfectly and
legally righteous, in the letter and formalitie of it. And this is that kind
of righteousness, which absolutely excludes all consistencie of sin in the
same person with it: and consequently leaves no place for Repentance. This for
the fifth ground or reason against the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ in justification ( sensuliterali.

A Sixth ground against the same imputation of the active obedience of Christ,
is: it takes away the necessity of his death. If men be as righteous as Christ
himself was in his life, there were no more necessity of his death for them,
then there was either of his own death, or of the death of any other, for
himself. If we were perfectly just or righteous in him, or with him, in his
life, then the just should not have died for the unjust (as the Scriptures
speak) for whose salvation there was a necessity he should die: but he should
have died for the just, for whom there was no necessity why he should die.
This Reason the Apostle expressly delivers. Gal. 2.21. If righteousness be by
the Law, then Christ died in vain. I desire the unpartiall Reader to observe
narrowly the force of this inference made by the Holy Ghost: If righteousness
(or, justification) be by the Law, then Christ died in vain. Men cannot here
betake themselves to their wonted Sanctuary and Refuge, to say that by the Law,
is to be understood the works of the Law, as performed by a man's self in
person: Nay their own interpretation here will betray their opinion into the
hand of this Reason, that fights against it. For by the word Law, in this
place, understand the works of the Law, as performed by Christ, the consequence
will rise up rather with the greater strength and power against them. If
righteousness were by the works of the Law, as performed by Christ, that is,
if the imputation of them were our complete and absolute righteousness, the
death of Christ for us had bin apparently in vain, because the righteousness of
his life imputed, had bina sufficient, and every ways a complete righteousness
for us.

Neither can it be here said, that Christ should die, that so the
righteousness of his life might be imputed to us. For certainly this
righteousness of his life was as capable of such an imputation, before and
with out his death, as after, or with it. For what defect or impediment can be
conceived, that should hinder it? Adams sin (according to the principles of
that opinion against which we argue) was capable of imputation, as soon as ^t
was committed: and why should the righteousness of Christ require any further
qualification or recommendation to put it off upon the like terms, but only
the working and performance of it?

If it be yet said: but the persons of men had not bin capable of this
imputation, without the death of Christ: therefore there was a necessity of this
death of his, in this respect. To this I Answer: True indeed, the persons of
men, are not capable of this imputation, without the death of Christ: but
neither are they made the more capable by it. But if this righteousness of
Christ we speak of, were in it self imputable (in the sense contended for)
why should not the persons of men, be capable of the imputation thereof in the
midst of their sins, as well as Christ was capable of the imputation of their
sins, in the midst of his righteousness? Especially considering, that (as it
appears from Romans 5.14.) the grace and gift of God which is by Jesus Christ,
saves by a stronger and higher hand, then sin condemns.

CAP. XIV.
Opening a Seventh ground against the pre-refused Imputation, viz. the taking
away of forgiveness of Sins.
THat opinion which makes and constitutes men perfectly and completely
righteous (with allegall righteousness) as righteous as Christ himself
(though it be but quoad veritatem, non quoad modum (as some of that way think
to distinguish themselves safe, yet it comes to the same in this respect)
leaves no place for forgiveness, or remission of sins, in persons so made
righteous: it evacuates that high and sovereign power of God (at least in the
use and exercise of it toward those that believe) whereby he forgiveth sins.
God (we know) forgave Christ no sin: why? because he was perfectly righteous,
and in him was no sin (as John speaks, 1 John 5.3.) Therefore if men be
righteous with the same righteousness, wherewith Christ was righteous, as
completely righteous as he, they have no more sin to be pardoned, then he had.

If it be said that God first gives remission of sins unto men, and then
imputes this perfect righteousness unto them. To this exception, answer has
bin made already, Cap. 5. Sect. 2. To that which is there delivered, I add:
that Christ has taught us to pray for forgiveness of sins, even after this
imputation of righteousness (if any such thing were) except we will say, that
he framed that pattern of Prayer (usually called the Lords Prayer) only for
the use of infidels and unbeleevers. Now to ask forgiveness of sins of God,
and yet to conceit our selves as righteous as Christ was, is rather to mock
then to worship him, whom we pray unto.

If it be here objected (as the like objection was made against the fifth
ground, Imputation of Faith for righteousness, as to the Imputation of the
righteousness of Christ for that purpose. For if faith be imputed for, or
instead of the righteousness of the Law, must it not derive a righteousness
upon the person to whom such imputation is made, as perfect and complete, as
the righteousness of the Law it self, and consequently, as the righteousness
of Christ himself? How then does that opinion leave any other place for
remission of sins in those that believe, then that which stands for the
Imputation of the righteousness of Christ? Are they not both under the same
condemnation this way?

Not to repeat what was so lately delivered in full for satisfaction and
Answer to this Objection: I yet further add (ex abundanti) that when Faith is
said to be imputed for righteousness in justification, instead of the
righteousness of the Law, it is evidently employed, that it is not the
righteousness of the Law it self that is imputed for righteousness, but
another thing, Faith by name, instead of it. Now any other righteousness, or
any other thing imputed for righteousness, besides the righteousness of the
Law, will apparently bear a consistencie of sin with it, and so leave a
place for forgiveness of sins: but the righteousness of the Law excluding the
former, cannot give entertainment to the latter. When a perfect sanctification
is imputed to a Man for his justification, that Man can be no more reputed or
thought to have sin in him, then to be obnoxious to death and condemnation,
which is most opposite to justification. But when that which either is no
sanctification, or at most but an imperfect sanctification, is imputed for
righteousness in a man's justification, there may be as full a justification,
as perfect a deliverance from death and condemnation, as in the former case,
and yet place left in the person so justified, for an inherencie of sin: and
consequently, for the forgiveness of it.

CAP. XV.
Enforceing an Eight Reason against the Imputation questioned, viz. a manifest
compliance with that dangerous error, That God sees no sin in his people.
WHat communion has light with darkness (says the Apostle) and what concord
has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. Imputation of Christ's righteousness,
which we oppose, were from Christ, doubtless it would have no intelligence, or
compliance with any opinion so opposite to him and his truth, as this, That God
sees no sin in his people. The opinion it self, is an error so gross and
like the darkness of Egypt, that it is even palpable and may be felt.
Therefore we will not spend time in arraigning it as guilty, which is already
so generally condemned. But that the opinion, against which the face of this
discourse is set, is of the same confederacy with this, and gives the right
hand of fellowship to it, nay, leads and caries men directly into it, will
clearly appear by this Demonstration.

Whosoever is perfectly righteous, or as righteous as Christ is, in him God can
see no sin.

But every believer (says this opinion which we impugn) is as perfectly and
completely righteous, as Christ himself is: Therefore in such God can see no
sin.

You see in this Syllogism, how the imputation of Christ's righteousness, in
the sense contended for by many, brings in that error with a high hand: and
therefore is to be cut off from the Sanctuary of God. And those that will hold
and maintain such an imputation, and yet cry out upon, and condemn the
opinion of Gods not seeing sin in his Children, are (in a spiritual or moral
sense) like those Idolaters of old, that caused their own Children to pass
through the fire. Ismael was not the more natural and genuine fruit of Hagars
womb that bare him, then this conclusion o^ tenet, that God sees no sin in
his Children, is of that opinion, which mainteyneth men to be completely
righteous, by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, in the letter and
formality of it. But as sometimes it comes to pass, that a man falling into
love with a woman that has a great charge of Children hanging upon her, having
married the mother, would willingly wrangle or beat the Children out of doors,
and turn them off to beg: so it is often seen, that when men have
unadvisedly embraced an opinion, seeming in their eye a beautiful and lovely
truth, and did not at first, before they were wedded to it, apprehend and
consider what rugged and harsh consequences it had attending upon it, they
shift and turn and wind themselves about every way, to quit themselves of
that dishonorable charge, wherewith they find themselves by reason of their
opinion, encumbred withal. But how men that will own an imputation of a
perfect righteousness, can with any tolerable appearance of reason, shift off
from themselves the opinion of Gods not seeing sin, in those that are clothed
with it, is (I confess) beyond the line of my apprehension. If God could see
no sin in Christ, because he was perfectly and completely righteous, how he
should see it in any that are as completely and perfectly righteous as he, and
that with the same righteousness wherewith he was righteous, is a riddle that
cannot be made out, but by him that plougheth with a better heyfer then yet I
have met with any.

CAP. XVI.
Propounding a ninth Demonstration against the pretended imputation: viz. the
confounding of the two Covenants.
IT is true, God with men, that of the works with that of grace, and (vice
versa) that of grace, with that of works. These conceive that God never made
more covenants then one, with man: and that the Gospel is nothing else but a
gracious aid or relief from God, to help man out with the performance of the
first Covenant of works: so that that life and salvation which is said to come
by Christ, shall in no other sense be said to come by him, but only as he
fulfilled that Law of works for man, which men themselves were not able to
fulfill: and by imputation, as by a deed of gift, makes over that his perfect
obedience and fulfilling of the Law, to those that believe; so that they in the
right of this perfect obedience, thus made theirs by imputation, shall come to
inherit life and salvation, according to the strict and rigid tenor of the
Covenant of works, Do this and live.

But as far as I am able to conceive, men may as well say, there was no second
Adam, really differing from the first, as no second Covenant differing really
from the first, and that mount Sina in Arabia, is the same mountain with mount
Sion in Judaea, and that the Spirit of bondage is the same with the Spirit of
Adoption, and that Isaak and Ishmael were but the same Child. If the second
Covenant of Grace, were implicitly and tacitly contained in the first, then the
meaning of the first Covenant, conceived in those words, Do this and live,
must be thus: Do this, either by thy self, or by another, (thy surety) and
live. There is no other way to reconcile them, or to reduce them into one and
the same Covenant. If this were Gods meaning in the first Covenant, that
keeping the Law, either by a man himself in person, or by another, should
equally serve the turn, and a man should live by either, then 1o, it must
follow that a Mediator was promised before the fall: for this Covenant was
struck with man in Innocence. 2o, that Adam either understood not his Covenant
that was made with him: or else knew of a surety and redeemer before his fall;
at least as being in a readiness for him, in case he should fall. 3, if
keeping the Law either by a man's self, or by another, were (in Gods meaning in
that Covenant) a sufficient means of life, then any other surety, any other
Mediator, would have made the reconciliation as well as he that was God and man:
For God might have created a mere man with abilities to have kept the Law, as
fully as Adam or any of his posterity was bound to do. 4 (and lastly) if the
fulfilling of the Law by any surety whatsoever, were a sufficient means of
life unto Adam and his, then was the death of Christ no ways necessary:
because Christ had perfectly kept and fulfilled the Law before his death.

Again 2, Faith and works, are really the same: whereas the Scripture from
place to place, makes the most irreconcilable opposition between them.

But it may be there are some, that are more shie of this consequence: that
stick not to hold the imputation of Christ's righteousness (in the sense
opposed) and yet demuire upon an identitie of the two Covenants: they do not
conceive this to be the fruit of that womb. Wherefore to prove, that the
mother has no wrong at all, in having this dead child laid by her side, for
her own, I thus reason. Where the parties covenanting are the same, and the
things covenanted for, the same, and the conditions or agreement the same,
there the Covenants are every ways the same. But if the righteousness of the
Law imputed to us, be the agreement or condition of the Now Covenant, all the
three, persons, things, conditions, are the same. Therefore the two Covenants,
first, and second, the old and the new, are every ways the same: because as
concerning the other two, the parties Covenanting, and the things covenanted
for, it is agreed on both sides, that they are the same.

If it be Objected and said: That the righteousness of the Law imputed from
another, and personally wrought by a man's selse, are two deffering conditions:
therefore it does not follow, that the Covenants should be the same.

To this I Answer, that the substance of the agreement, will still be found
the same notwithstanding: the works, or righteousness of the Law are the same,
by whomsoever wrought: If Adam had fulfilled the Law, as Christ did, he had bin
justified by the same righteousness, wherewith Christ himself was righteous.

If it be yet said: that Imputation in the second Covenant, which was not in
the first, makes a real difference in the condition. To this I answer two
things in two words: 1. Imputation of works or of righteousness, is not the
condition of the new Covenant, but believing. If imputation were the condition,
then the whole Covenant should lie upon God, and nothing should be required on
the creatures part: for imputation is an act of God, not of men. 2. I answer,
that if it were granted, that the righteousness or the works of the Law
imputed from Christ, were that whereby we are justified, yet they must
justify, not as imputed, but as righteousness or works of the Law. Therefore
imputation makes no difference in this respect. Imputation can be no part of
that righteousness by which we are justified, because it is no conformity with
any Law, nor with any part or branch of any Law (especially of any Law that Man
was ever bound to keep.) Therefore it can be no part of that righteousness by
which he is to be justified. So that the condition of both Covenants will be
found every ways the same, (and consequently both Covenants every ways the
same) if justification be maintained by the righteousness of Christ imputed.

CAP. XVII.
Wherein three Arguments more are managed against the already-impugned
Imputation.
THere is no kind of error, God, or of an entire sympathy with the honor of
Christ. Knowing that enemy against which we conflict and wrestle in this
discourse, to have as much or more of that advantage, then most other opinions
have, that are as legitimate as it: I conceive it necessary in that respect, to
arm and employ the more reasons and arguments in this warfare and service.

Therefore in the Tenth place, against the Imputation so much contended for. I
oppose this Demonstration. That for which righteousness is imputed to those
that believe, that cannot be imputed unto them for righteousness: But the
righteousness of Christ is that for which righteousness is imputed to those
that believe: Therefore it self cannot be imputed for righteousness. The
Assumption (I presume) no man will deny, except those that deny the
righteousness of Christ, to be the meritorious cause of that righteousness or
justification, which is conferred upon men: an opinion to which no man (I know)
ever said, live, but only Socinus and his peers. The Major Proposition I
demonstrate thus: If it be unpossible, that the thing merited, should be the
same thing with that which is the meritorious cause of it, then it is not only
untrue, but unpossible, that the righteousness of Christ should be the
righteousness of a believer.

Sed verum prius: Ergo et posterius.



For the consequence in the Major Proposition, it is so evident in common
apprehension, that to labor any further illustration of it, were but to light
up a Candle to the Sun. Because the righteousness of Christ, and the
righteousness or justification of a Believer, stand in that relation we speak
of, the one to the other, as the cause to the effect: the righteousness of
Christ being the (meritorious) cause, and the righteousness of a believer or
person justified, as the effect merited and effected by that cause. And for the
Minor, that is every whit as evident and undeniable, as it, viz. that the thing
merited, cannot be the same with that which is the meritorious cause of it: for
so the same thing should be the meritorious cause of it self: a conclusion so
broad, that there is no apprehension so weak, but has strength enough to
disclaim.

Neither can it be here said, righteousness of Christ cannot be meritorious of
it self simply, yet being a righteousness wrought by Christ, it may be the
meritorious cause of its own imputation, and this imputation may be the formal
cause of the justification of a believer. For to this, an answer is ready:
that suppose it should merit it is own imputation, (though this be very
unproper, and requires an interpretation more then abounding with charity, to
make truth of it any ways) yet is not this imputation that, which men say is
imputed for righteousness unto any man, but the righteousness it self of
Christ. Therefore if the righteousness of Christ be the meritorious cause of
that righteousness which is imputed to a believer, and this righteousness
which is imputed be the righteousness of Christ, then it is evident that the
righteousness of Christ, must be (directly and plainly) the meritorious cause
of it self.

Again (in the Eleventh place) to second the former argument with another like
unto it. righteousness of Christ be imputed to a believer for righteousness
in his instification, then the meritorious cause of his justification is
imputed unto him for righteousness: But the meritorious cause of a man's
justification cannot be thus imputed unto him: Therefore the righteousness of
Christ cannot be thus imputed neither. The truth of the Major Proposition the
former Argument will maintain against any contradiction: besides, it is
pregnant with an innate evidence of truth. The reason of the Minor, is this:
because the meritorious cause being a kind of efficient (as is confessed on all
hands) cannot be either the matter or the form of that, whereof it is
efficient. Wherefore if the righteousness of Christ be the
meritorious-efficient cause of our justification, unpossible it is, that by any
contriving or casting, or bringing about either by imputation or otherwise, it
should ever be found or made either the matter or the form of this
justification. For this is famously known to be an indispensable and inviolable
Law amongst the four kinds of causes, material, formal, final and
efficient: that the two former only do ingredi compositum or effectum, and are
parts reiconstitutae, i. are intrinsecall and essential parts of the effect,
or thing produced: and that the two latter, viz. the final and efficient, are
all ways extrinsecall, and stand without. As for example: when a Plaisterer or
Painter whites a wall, the effect of his work is the whiteness of the wall,
or the wall as made white. Now into this effect, this whiteness of the wall,
there is none of the efficient causes producing lt, either any part of it, or
any ingredient into it; neither the plaisterer himself, who is the principal
efficient cause of it, nor his brush or pensill, which is the isntrumental
efficient cause, nor the money or wages he receives for the doing it, which is
as the meritorious efficient cause of it. None of all these, is any
intrinsecall or constituting part of the effect, neither as the matter, nor as
the form thereof. The whiteness applied or put upon the matter or subject,
viz. the wall, by all the three efficients (according to their several
operations about it) is the form, or formal part of it: and the wall it
self, whereunto this form is joined, coupled, or applied, by the said
efficients, is the matter or material part of it. So in the justification of a
sinner, neither is God himself, who is the principal efficient of this effect
of justification; neither is Faith, which is the iustrumentall efficient of it
(for God is said in Scripture to justify men, by or through it, Romans 3.30.
which for the most part are symptomaticall particles of the
instrumentall-efficient cause) neither is the righteousness of Christ, which
is the meritorious effi^ient cause of it, none of these are either matter or
form, or any constituting cause of justification: but only remission of sins,
or absolution from punishment, as the sorme applied unto, or put upon the
matter: and the matter or subject it self, whereunto this form is applied by
all the 3 efficients spoken of, according to their several and distinct manner
of working, viz. the person of the believer. This Argument, to him that
understands, and will seriously consider, that unchangable Law, mentioned of
the 4. kinds (...) rally acknowledged by the contrary-minded themselves in this
Controversy.

But that Christ should be reputed before God to have sinned in me, seems unto
me an assertion so uncouth and un-Christian, that a Christian had need to
borrow the ears of a Pagan to hear it with patience. However, the untruth of
it is thus made manifest: If Christ be reputed before God to have sinned in me,
he must be reputed to have had a being in me: for as operatio consequitur esse,
i. the operation of a thing follows and depends upon the being of it; so he
that supposes, or reputeth a person to have done any thing, either good or
evil in another, must necessarily suppose or repute him to have had a being
there.

But what being Christ should be reputed by God to have had in me being yet an
unbeleever, is a speculation too high for me to attain unto.

Again, imputation, I oppose this consideration. If the active obedience of
Christ be imputed unto me in my justification, then is the passive imputed
also. For there can be no sufficient reason given, why the one should be taken,
and the other left. Neither are the adversaries themselves partial (in this
point) to the one above the other: they (generally) allow place for both in
their imputation. But that the death or sufferings of Christ, are not in the
letter and formalitie of them, imputed unto me, I thus demonstrate.

If the death and sufferings of Christ be imputed unto me then may I be
accounted or reputed to have died and suffered in Christ.

But I can at no hand be reputed to have died or suffered in Christ: Therefore
the death and sufferings of Christ are not imputed unto me (I mean still in
the letter and formality of them, as I would be understood in the ma^or
proposition also)

The reason of the sequel in that proposition, is evident from the former
argument. To have any thing imputed to a man in the letter and formality of it,
and to be reputed and taken as the doer or sufferer of what is so imputed, are
termini aequipollentes, et sese mutuo explicantes, are expressions that differ
not in sense, but relieve one the other in their significations.

The Reason of the minor, that no man is to be conceived or said to have
suffered in Christ, is this, because in Christ we are justisied and absolved
from punishment: and therefore cannot be said to have been punished in him. He
has made us freely accepted in his beloved Ephesians. 16. Therefore he poured not
out his wrath upon us in his beloved. And by his stripes we are healed, (which
is contrary to being wounded or punished. 1 Pet. 224. And to say that we
suffered, or were punished in Christ, is (in effect) to unsay, or gainsay, what
the Gospel every where speaks touching our Redemption and de^iverance from
punishment by Christ. In what sense the sufferings of Christ may be said to be
imputed tobeleevers, is (...) plained in the Second part cap. 3. Sect. 7.
He that knows how to reconcile these two, may undertake to make light and
darkness friends, and needs not fear miscarying in his design: that God
should freely forgive us our sins, and yet punish us for them, and that to
the full, (which must be said by those, that will say, we were punished in
Christ. If Christ were punished for us, or in our stead (which is the Scripture
language 2 Cor. 5.21, who made him sin for us,) doubtless we our selves can
in no sense (wherein words and truth will agree) be said to be punished, or to
have suffered in him.

One Reason more, and no more of this Chapter.

If the righteousness of Christ (in the sense so oftexpressed) be imputed to
us, then are we justified (at least in part) by the Ceremonial Law. This
consequence is too good to be denied: because part of that righteousness which
Christ wrought, stood in obedience to the Ceremonial Law: he was circumcised,
kept the Passover, etc. Therefore, if the righteousness of Christ be imputed
unto us in the letter and formality of it, that part of his righteousness,
which stood in obedience ceremonial, must be imputed also.

But that we are not justified, either in whole or in part by the Ceremonial
Law, is a truth so near situate to every man's apprehension, that it needs not
be brought nearer by force of argumentation.

If it be replied, that there is no necessity that any part of his
righteousness Ceremonial should be imputed, because his moral righteousness
is sufficient for imputation. To this I answer:

First, there is no warrant or rule in Scripture thus to rend and tear in
pieces the one half from the other, that which was one entire and complete
righteousness in Christ: and to take which part we please to our selves, and
leave the other as a cast piece.

Secondly, if that part only of the righteousness of Christ, which stood in
his obedience to the Moral Law, be imputed unto us for righteousness in our
justification, then will there not be found the same way or means of
justification for the whole body of Christ: but the believing Jews before
Christ's death, must be made righteous or justified with one kind of
righteousness, and the Gentiles with another. For the Jews before the death
of Christ, had a necessity of both parts of this righteousness to be imputed
to them in their justification (supposing their justification had stood in such
an imputation, as some stand up to maintain) as well ceremonial as moral. But
that the Jews should be justified with one kind of righteousness and the
Gentiles with another, as there is no color of reason (that I know) to
maintain, so there is substance and strength of Scripture to oppose, Romans
3.22.30.

Thirdly (and lastly) that righteousness of Christ, which is called Moral, if
separated and divided from the other part which is Ceremonial, was not a
complete and perfect righteousness in him: because it became him to fulfill
all righteousness) as well ceremonial as Moral) Mat 3.15. So then, if men
should be justified, only by the Moral righteousness of Christ imputed, it
would follow, that we should be justified before God with an incomplete and
half-righteousnesse. Therefore if the Ceremonial righteousness of Christ, be
not (in the letter of it) imputed unto us for righteousness, in our
Justification; neither can his Moral righteousness make matter of any such
imputation.

CAP. XIX.
Propounding Five further demonstrations of the Conclusion undertaken for.
THe Conclusion undertaken in this discourse,

If the righteousness of Christ, in the letter and formality of it, be imputed
for righteousness unto us in our just ^fication, then are our sins imputed
to Christ after the same manner, viz. in the letter and formality of them, in
his death or condemnation. This consequence is blameless: because there is the
same reason of the imputation of our sins to Christ, that is of the imputation
of his righteousness to us: at least, such is the confession general of those
that are pleased with opposite thoughts in this question, (as was formerly
signified.) But that our sins are not imputed to Christ in any such manner,
viz. in the letter and formality of them, I thus demonstrate.

If the sins of men be imputed to Christ, in the letter and formality of them,
then God looks upon him and reputes him in his sufferings as one that truly and
really had provoked him and sinned against him. Even as our adversaries are wont
frequently to express themselves concerning believers, by reason of that
righteousness, which they say is imputed tot hem, viz. that God looks upon
them and considers them, as having really and truly fulfilled the Law.

But God does not look upon Christ in his sufferings or reput^ him as one that
had truly and really sinned against him. Therefore our sins are not imputed
unto him after any such manner in his sufferings. The truth of the Assumption I
thus make manifest: If God looks upon Christ in his death, as one that had
truly sinned against him, then he looks upon him as one having deserved the
death he suffers. The reason of the consequence is apparent: because as to sin,
and to deserve death, are termini convertibles, expressions of the same
importance: so to look upon a man as a sinner, and as one that has deserved
death, are but the same look.

But that God does not look upon Christ in his sufferings, as one that had
deserved that things he suffers, is evident:

First, because as Christ offered himself without spot unto God, so God looked
upon him in that his offering. Otherwise, if he had overlooked that
spotlessenesse of his, and imputed sin unto him in stead thereof. What had this
bin, but to have put darkness for light, and call good, evil? which to
affirm, or once to conceive of God, may be called the first^orne of a
blaspemous ignorance.

Secondly, if God looked upon Christ, as having deserved death,

Thirdly (and lastly) if God looked upon him in his death, as deserving to die,
then did Christ suffer death, not for our sins, as they are ours, but as they
were his (by imputation.) Whereas the Scriptures every where testify of his
suffering death for our sins, but never for any sin of his own, no more by
imputation then by inhesion. And the truth is, look in what sense our sins may
be said to have bin imputed to him in the same sense they may be said to have
bin inherent in him: yea the inherencie of them in their punishment upon him
(wherein they stuck close to him indeed) is all the imputation the Scriptures
know, or speak of. He laid upon him the iniquity of us all Esa. 53.6, viz. in
the punishment due to it and deserved by it. So again: Who himself bare our
sins in his own body, etc. 1 Pet. 2.24. that is, the punishment of our sins (as
we shall have occasion to show further, God willing in the second part of this
discourse.)

Let this reason also be laid into the balance,

If the righteousness of Christ, be, in the letter and formality of it imputed
unto us in our justification, then does God look upon us as worthy of that
justification, which we receive from him.

But this is an unclean saying: therefore the former, out of which it is
brought, is unclean also.

The consequence in the major Proposition, is like Mount Sion, and cannot be
moved. For if God reputes me to have kept the Law, as perfectly as Christ did,
he must conceive of me, as worthy of my justification. For as the fulfilling of
the Law, and deserving justification, are but the same, Romans 4.4. So the
reputeing of a man to have done the one, is the reputeing of him to have
deserved the other.

The reason of the minor Proposition (if it be not reason enough it self) viz.
that God does not look upon us as worthy that Justification which we receive,
is this: because then God should show us no grace or favor at all in our
Justification (Rom 4.4. with Romans 11.6.) but if any favor be showed, it is
only in this, that he reputeth us worthy to be Justified, or puts a worthiness
upon us for Justification. Whereas the Scripture expressly affirms, that God
justifies, not the worthy, but the ungodly, that is, the unworthy, Romans 4.5.

Against the foresaid imputation,

If men be formally just by Gods act imputing Christ's righteousness unto them,
then do men become formally sinful by the like act of God imputeing Adams
sin unto them (for no reason can be given of any difference.)

But men are not made formally sinful by Gods act of imputeing Adams sin
unto them (because then an act of God should be, as it were the life and soul
of that sin, which is in men) Therefore men are not made formally just or
righteous by any act of God imputeing righteousness unto them.

The Argument (I conceive) is of no easy solution to those who maintain the
imputation it self of this righteousness, and not the righteousness imputed,
to be the form of justification. Which yet I conceive to be an apprehension
every whit as rational, as that which on the other hand, maintains the
righteousness it self of Christ imputed, to be this form. For whether we
conceive of justification, either under the notion of a relation, being a new
condition come upon the person justified (which seems to be the best and truest
notion of it) or whether we conceive it as a passion (besides which two I know
no predicament a I nature that can be put upon it) certainly no righteousness
whatsov^ (properly so called) much less the righteousness of another then of
the person justified, can be the form of it. It is unpossible that one
predicament, or predicamentall being, should inform another: and that
righteousness, whether we speak of that which is habitual, or that which is
actual, belongs neither to the predicament of relation, nor to that of
passion, is better known to Logicians, then to be made matter of disputation.

The oil in the cruse does not yet fail. imputation.

If justification consists partly in the imputation of Christ's righteousness,
partly in remission of sins, then must there be a double formal cause of
justification, and that made up and compounded of two several natures, really
differing the one from the other.

But this is unpossible. Ergo.

With the rod of this Argument Calvin scourged those Fathers of Trent for
joining regeneration or infusion of grace with remission of sins, in
justification (as we heard before) which supposing him a man but tolerably
sound or sober in his intellectualls, is a demonstration in abundance, that his
meaning never was, to place Justification in any imputation of righteousness,
really distinct from remission of sins: but that his apprehensions in this
point, were praecise et formaliter the same, with this Country-mans of latter
times, who calls Remission of sins, that righteousness which is imputed:
Remissio peccatorum, est justitia imputata. Chamier. Panstrat. t. 3. l. 21.
cap. 19. see. 10. Idem sunt justificatio, et Remissio peccatorum. Vismus Cat.
part. 2. Qu. 60. sect. 3.
Whose meaning (by the way) is not (as some of the opposite party in this
cause, have caught and quarreled with like expressions from others) as if God
in justification, did imputeremission of sins unto men, and in this sense,
remission of sins should be called the righteousness which is imputed: but
that God really remitting and forgiving men's sins, such remission and
forgiveness, may well be called an imputed righteousness, partly because it is
no absolute, legal, or text- righteousness, but a righteousness by
interpretation, or construction of favor: partly because such a righteousness
as it is, it is notwithstanding given, in the strength and mediation of the
righteousness, merit, and satisfaction of another, which is Christ.

Let us yet hear (and not be weary) what both reason and Religion can further
speak against this imputation so much spoken for.

If such imputation be necessary in justification, etc.

But there is no necessity of bringing in such an imputation into justification
in respect of any of these. Therefore it is brought in without any necessity at
all: and consequently must (of necessity) be cast out again.

The Protectors of it themselves assign no other necessity of it, but only in
respect of Gods justice. God (they say) cannot salva justicia, with the safety
of his justice, pronounce a man righteous, that is not righteous (their meaning
is) according to the strict and literal righteousness of the Law. But to this
I answer:

First, that there is nothing at all necessary to be done either by God
himself or by man, about the justification of a sinner, by way of satisfaction
to the Justice of God, since that one offering of Christ of himself upon the
cross. Otherwise there must be found somewhat defective or wanting in that
satisfaction. If the justice of God be fully and every ways satisfied, and
provided for by the death of Christ, as concerning the Justification of
sinners: doubtless there remains nothing further as necessary to be done,
either by God, or by man, or by any other creature, for the satisfaction of the
same Justice. Therefore if God should impute the righteousness of Christ unto
men in this case, some other end or pretext for it must be sought out, not any
provision for, or satisfaction to his justice. The infinite valor of Christ's
passives, must not be abated or drawn down, to make way for an imaginatie
exaltation of his actives. The necessity of Faith to Justification (which is a
necessity confessed and acknowledged by all) ^^y^th not in reference to Gods
Justice, as if any man satisfied that, either in who^e or in part, by
believing: but the necessity of it respects either his wisdom, or the
counsel of his will (as the Apostles expression is, Ephesians. 1.11) He judged it
not meet (not counted it unjust) to save men in any other way by the
satisfaction of Christ, then by the way of Faith. This is the WILL of him that
sent me (says our Savior Ioh 6.40.) not the righteousness or Justice, of him
that sent me, that every man which sees the Son, and believes in him,
should have everlasting life. If there were nothing else to h^nder, but want of
satisfaction to divine justice, doubtless the whole world should be saved,
Vehemens in De^ est ad homini benefaciendum affectus: quem eousque puratus est
extendere qu^^^l IVSTICIA vlle modo permittit. Corvin, Cersur. Anatom. p. 79.
without any more ado. And therefore (by the way) that saying of Arnoldus, in
his Censure of Molineus p. 79. is deeply taxable (except he can best ^^e
himself, to make an a^tonem^nt for the hardness of his text, with a soft
interpretation) There is (says he) a strong affection in God, to do good to
man: and this affection he is still ready to act or exercise, as far as ever
his justice will give him leave.

Secondly, whereas it was said, that God cannot, justice or truth, pronounce a
man righteous, that is not so indeed with a legal righteousness, literally
and properly so called, I answer that doubtless he may as well and as truly
pronounce and call that man righteous, that wants a literal or legal
righteousness upon him (especially supposing he has another righteousness,
holding any analogy or proportion thereunto) as he may account any man's
uncircumcission, circumcission. Rom 2.26. Or call the un-circumcised Gentiles
the circumcision. Philip. 3.3. O^ pronounce and call John Baptist, Elias. Mat.
11.14. Or call the two witnesses, two O live Trees, and two Candle-sticks,
Revel. 11.4. besides other instances in Scripture of like interpretation,
without number) Now as Christ spoke as truly, when he called John Elias, as he
should have done, if he had called him, only John: and the Holy Ghost spoke as
truly when he called those that believe, though uncircumcised in the flesh, the
circumcision, as if he called them, the uncircumcision, or as if they had bin
literally circumcised: So may God with as much righteousness and truth,
pronounce and call or account a man righteous, that is not strictly, properly,
or literally such, if he has any qualification upon him, that any way
answers or holds proportion in any point with such a righteousness, as he
should do, in case this man had this legal righteousness, as he should do,
in case this man had this legal righteousness upon him in the absolutest
perfection of the letter. For as in those and such like Scripture instances,
the ground of the communication of the Name, is only some particular agreement
between either the persons or things, not an universal concent or identitie
in all things: So when God pronounces or accounts a man righteous, it is not
necessary that he should be literally, properly, morally and every way
RIGHTEOUS: it is sufficient to bear out the justice and truth of God in giving
either the Name or esteem of a righteous man unto him, if his person be under
any such relation or condition, Idemsunt, habere temissionem peccarorum, et
esse justum. Vrsinus Cat. part. 2 Qu. 56. Sect. 1. Idem sunt justificatio et
remssio peccatorum, ibid. Q. 60. Sect. 3.
as belongs to a legal righteoussesse or which a legal RIGHTEOUSNESS would
cast upon him. Now one especial privilege or benefit (we know) belonging to a
perfect legal righteousness, is to free the person in whom it is found, from
death and condemnation: Do this and thou shall live: and he that has his
sins forgiven him, is partaker with him in the fulness of this privilege is
as free from condemnation, as he: and may with truth and propriety of speech
enough, in this respect, be either called or accounted a righteous man.

Thirdly (and lastly) answer might be made (in few words) that forgiveness of
sins, is a true, yea and a complete righteousness, in the kind, though it
be not a through conformity with the moral Law. Remission of sins, is a
passive righteousness, as absolute and perfect in the kind of it, as any
active righteousness, which consists in an entire observation of some Law. And
for him that has once sinned, or ever failed in the observation of the Law,
there is no other righteousness appliable unto him, or whereof he is capable,
but only this passive righteousness of forgiveness of sins. Which for all
other ends, purposes, advantages, privileges whatsoever, is as effectual to
him that is invested with it, as the active righteousness it self could be,
except only for selfe-boasting, and glorying in the flesh: which is a privilege
(if it must needs be so called) altogether inconsistent with, and numeet for
the lapsed, weak, and sinful condition of man. So that God when he has
forgiven any man his sins, may with abundance both of justice and truth,
pronounce and call him a righteous man, though he be as far from that legal
righteousness, as the East is from the West.

CAP. XX.
Containing the 21, 22, 23, and 24 Reasons to prove the imputation of Faith,
and the non-imputation of the righteousness of CHRIST.
TRuth may have many Reasons for her, But they shall proceed no further (says
Paul of men that resist the truth. 2 Timothy 3.8.9.) and gives this sign or
reason of their period approaching: for their folly shall be manifest unto all
them, etc. Men that either are, or would be esteemed wise, will own nothing
that is foolish, when the folly thereof is made manifest unto them. Now as
some things are more visible and easier to be seen or discerned then other,
for the manifestation whereof a lesser light is sufficient, whereas things
less perceptible, require an advantage of light more condensed and fortified,
to make a clear and distinct representation of themselves to the sight: so are
some truths in Religion better prepared and fitted for the understandings and
judgments of men in themselves, and consequently the errors opposite to them,
have a more pregnant inconsistencie with reason: and for the discovery of
such, both errors and truths, a weaker and fainter light of argumentation, is
(for the most part) sufficient: but again there are other truths, whose
situation lies at a greater distance from those (...), common principles of
reason, or that have a more subtle and less perceptible connection with them,
and for the manifestation of these (together with their opposite errors) to the
judgments and consciences of men, many times the most strongest and cleerest,
and-most multiplied light of discourse and argumentation, is found less then
enough. Therefore let us yet contend with some further demonstrations, to bring
the conclusion labored for, into a clear and perfect light, that it may be no
charge or trouble at all, to the minds and thoughts of men to receive it.

That which having bin done in our own persons,

But the righteousness of the Law, pretended to be imputed from Christ, in
justification, had it been wrought by our selves, in our own persons, could
not have been our justification, nor any part of that righteousness by which
we were to be justified.

Therefore this righteousness of Christ cannot be made our justification, nor
any part of it, by imputation from him.

The major (I conceive) has more reason in it, then to be denied. If a
personal fulfilling of the Law, could have bin no justification nor part of
justification to us, certainly an imputative fulfilling of it could not have
bin either. The imputation of a thing from another cannot add any strength or
virtue to it, above a personal acting or working, yea the nature and intent of
imputation (in the sense we now speak of it) is only to supply the defect of
personal performance, therefore it cannot exceed it.

For the minor; that the righteousness of the Law, which was performed by
Christ, could not have bin our justification either in whole, or in part, in
case it had bin performed by our selves, is evident from hence: because man
being once fallen by sinning against the Law, and made obnoxious to
condemnation, can never be raised or recovered again by ten thousand
observations of this Law. The Law was able to have given life, had it always
bin fulfilled, and never broken: but unto him that had once failed in the
observation of it, though he had bin made able to have kept it ten times
afterward, it had no power at all to give either life or justification. The
guilt of that sin wherein he had once sinned, could never have bin purged by
any Law-righteousnesse: noactive obedience whatsoever, would ever have bin an
atonement for him. Without shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins.
Heb. 9.22.

Let me join another argument of the same lineage and stock with the former.

That which men are not bound by any Law or command of God to do in their own
persons,

But men are not bound by any Law or command from God to observe the Moral Law
for their justificatio^. Therefore the observation of it cannot be imputed unto
them from any other, for any such end.

The reason of the major proposition (if the conclusion sticks there) is:
because imputation, in the sense it is still taken by our adversaries in this
controversy, must be found out and ordained by God to supply personal
defects and inabilities. But where there is no Law or command given unto men to
obey, there can be no personal defect: It is no sin or defect in any man,
not to obey, where he has no command: and consequently there is no place, nor
occasion for any imputation to supply it.

For the minor, there is both substance and appearance enough of truth in it,
to privilege it from being a proposition of any further contention or strife.
Most evident it is from the whole course and current of the Scriptures, that
man in his lapsed condition, since the fall, had not the Law of works, or the
observation of the Moral Law imposed upon him for his justification before
God, but the Law of Faith only. The moral Law, as it has received a new
authority and establishment from Christ, obliges and binds the conscience
under the Gospel to the observation thereof by way of duty and thankfulness
unto God: but neither now nor at any time since the fall, did it ever bind any
man to the practice of it, for his justification. And therefore where it is said
Romans 2.13. that the hearers of the Law are not just before God, but the doers
of the Law shall be justified: the meaning is not, as if God exacted the strict
observing of the Law for their justification, or that none should be justified
without such an observance, but either 1o, the words may be conceived spoken in
a kind of ironie, as if God did deride the hope and confidence of all those,
that should stand upon any such doing of the Law, for their instification: A
man that promises a reward or matter of benefit, upon such terms and
conditions, which he knows will never be performed, by him that undertakes
the performance of them, rather derides the pride and ignorance of his
presumption, then really intends the collation of what he seems so to promise.
To this interpretation Beza much inclines in his marginall note upon that
clause. Or else 2o, the meaning of those words, the doers of the Law shall be
justified, may be only this: that God will accept, justify, and save only
such, who out of a sincere and sound Faith toward him by his Christ, shall
address themselves to serve and please him in a way of obedience to his Laws.
In this sense (which I rather conceive to be the express intent of the Apostle
in the words) the doing of the Law is mentioned, not as the means or
meritorious cause of the justification adjoining, but either as a condition,
sine quinon, without which justification is not to be expected: or rather as an
outward sign and manifestation of the persons, that shall be justified, but in
another way, viz. by Faith. Thirdly (and lastly) by the Law in this place, the
doers whereof (as is said) shall be justified, is not meant the Moral Law only
(which restreyned signification was simply necessary, to have given the clause
any color of opposition or contradiction to the proposition mentioned) but the
whole Mosaicall dispensation, consisting (according to the common distribution)
of Ceremonialls, moralls, and judicialls. The observation of all which, no man
(I think) ever affirmed to have bin imposed by God upon men for their
justification. But I fear we stand too long about oyling a wheel, which would
run merrily enough without it. Let us rather hear the voice of a new argument
speaking.

Jf God requires only Faith of men to their justification, then he imputes this
Faith unto them thereunto.

But God requires only Faith to justification. Ergo.

The consequence in the Mayor Proposition, is blameless, for this reason:
because to impute unto iustsfication, and to accept unto justification, are
somewhat differing in sound, but nothing at all in sense and signification. Now
if God should require faith of men, and only Faith to their Justification, and
not accept it thereunto, he should make a bargain or Covenant with men, and
refuse to stand to it when he had done: his overtures would be fair and
gracious, but his intentions would be to seek, and no where in Scriptures to be
found.

If it be here replied and said: that though God requires only faith of men to
their justification, yet he requires somewhat more and besides, at the hand of
another thereunto: therefore that which he imputes unto men for their
justification, is not necessarily that which he requires of themselves, but
rather that which he requires of another for them.

To this I answer: if it were the righteousness of Christ (which is presumed
to be the thing required of another) and not the faith that is required of
themselves, that God imputes for righteousness unto them in their
justification, then may this righteousness of Christ be imputed for this end
and purpose, before, yea and without the faith of any man. For it is certain,
that the Faith of men adds no virtue or vaiue to the righteousness of Christ:
therefore if this be that which God imputes for righteousness in
justification, it may be imputed as well without faith, as with it: and so men
might be justified without believing.

Neither will it help in this case, to say, imputation follows the will and
pleasure of God: and therefore the righteousness of Christ is not imputed unto
any, but to him that believes, because the will and pleasure of God is, not to
make imputation of it in any other way, or upon any other terms. For

To this I answer: if the will and pleasure of God be to make no imputation of
the righteousness of Christ, but upon the condition of Faith intervening: then
is it evident, that this righteousness is not imputed unto justification to any
man, because the condition of faith must necessarily intervene, and come
between. So that if this righteousness of Christ were (as our Adversaries would
have it) imputed unto men, yet it must be only toward Justification, not unto
it: for by their own affirmation, it is faith that has the next and most
immediate connection therewith.

Secondly, if God suspends the imputation of Christ's righteousness upon the
performance of the condition of faith, and then makes this imputation: then
faith does not take hold of the righteousness of Christ imputed, but first takes
bold of it, and then the imputation follows after. Which 1. is contrary to
the express judgment of some of the learnedest of their own party: Who
affirm this imputation of Christ's righteousness by God, to precede the
condition of faith, or act of believing in men. Deus primum imputat
satisfactionem Christi: deinde in nobis efficit sidem, qua^ illamimputatam
applicemus. Vrsinus Cat. part. 2 Qu. 60. sect. 5. Fides ex part nostra hanc
justitiam. Sic sia Deo imputatam, apprehendit solummodoet applicat. Dr. Pride.
Lect. 5. de Instificat. Sect. 11.
Secondle, if faith should first take hold of the righteousness of Christ,
before it be imputed, and then the act of Gods imputation should supervene upon
it, and the believer not be justified, till this act of Gods imputation had
passed upon him: then must it be conceived, that a man may have the
righteousness of Christ upon him by faith, and yet not be justified by it. For
if the will of God be, not to impute the righteousness of Christ unto
Justification, but upon the condition of faith performed, and this condition is
performed by laying hold on the righteousness of Christ (not yet imputed) by
faith: it evidently follows, that a man may lay hold on the righteousness of
Christ by faith, and yet want that which is essentiality requisite to his
Justification (according to this opinion) viz. Gods imputation of this
righteousness unto him, which (as the opinion teaches) follows the
apprehension thereof by faith, and is not precedaneous to it.

Again, imputation of Faith in the sense insisted upon, I plead the Apostles
plea and Argument, Romans 4.

That which was imputed to Abraham for righteousness in his Justification,

But the Faith of Abraham was imputed to him for righteousness, etc. Ergo.

Whether both these Propositions, in the direct sense here employed, and with
relation to the conclusion issuing from between them (as they are here laid
down) be not the genuine and unwrested Doctrine of the Apostle Paul, and that
over and over, in that 4th chapter to the Romans, and whether the choycest
learning, as well ancient, as modern, has not sealed and subscribed hereunto,
I refer the Reader to a diligent perusal of the second Chapter of this
discourse, for his satisfaction: where likewise he may see the ashes of the
contrary interpretation consumed and burnt up with the fire of the trial. So
that (I conceive) here needs no addition of any thing to strengthen either
the one Proposition or the other, above what has bin there delivered.

CAP. XXI.
Wherein the last reason against the Imputation of Christ's righteousness, viz.
the non-imputability of the Law, is propounded and maintained.
IF the righteousness of the Law be not imputable, or deriveable (in the letter
and formality of it) from one man's person to another, then cannot the
righteousness of Christ be imputed to any man in Justification, after any such
manner.

The consequence cannot lightly be denied by him that will but grant light not
to be darkness. Therefore I assume:

But the righteousness of the Law is not imputable from one man's person to
another.

Therefore the righteousness of Christ is not imputable (much less imputed) to
any man in his Justification.

This Argument was mentioned in our Scripture proofs, cap. 8. where you shall
find it built upon that Foundation of truth, Gal. 3.12. The reason or ground of
which non-imputability, or untransferiblenesse of the Law-righteousnesse, we
found express in the very tenor and plain words of the Law it self: (...).
i. the very man that has done them, shall live by them [and no other.] From
which inference or addition, no man's understanding can (with reason) abstain.

But it is like we must here again prepare to battle, and shall be assaulted
with this Objection.

If the transgression of the Law be imputable from one man's person to another,
then may the righteousness of the Law be imputed also, after the same manner.
For what should cause a difference between the one and the other in this
respect?

But that the transgression of the Law is imputable from one man's person to
another, is evident from hence, because the sin of Adam in eating the
forbidden fruit, is imputed to his posterity. Ab actu ad potentiam validissima
est consequentia. Ergo.

Give me leave to deliver my last Argument, out of the hand of this Objection:
and so we shall draw toward a Conclusion of this first part. In my answer, I
shall address my self to both the Propositions: but chiefly insist upon the
instance that is brought to prove the Minor, to demonstrate the insufficiency
and impertinencie of that for that purpose.

For the former Proposition (not to let pass incerta procert^, that which is
weak, with the credit and reputation of strength) I answer therefore to it,
that the consequence in it is not so tight and pregnant, (as happily is
conceived) or as the confidence of the demand annexed by way of confirmation,
seems to import. The imputablenesse of the transgression of the Law, were it
granted, is no concluding demonstration of the like imputablenesse of the
righteousness, or obedience performed unto it: and then this Proposition will
not be found any such Oracle of truth.

First, in the tenor of the Law, there is no such emphaticall restraint of the
guilt or punishment due unto the transgression of it, to the person of the
transgressor, as there is of the reward promised to the observation of it, to
the person of the observer; as we heard in the clause cited from Gal. 3.12.
(...), etc. i. the very man that has done them, shall live by them: It is no
where found on the other hand: (...), etc. the very man that transgresses
them, shall die for his transgression. As if God in giving the Law, had left
unto himself a liberty and scope to derive and carry the guilt and punishment
due to the transgression of the Law, as far as he pleased: but had no intent to
extend the reward promised to the fulfilling of it, beyond the person of the
fulfiller. Some indeed conceive, that Adams standing in obedience to the Law,
had bin the standing and perpetual confirmation in grace, of all his
posterity. If this opinion could be made to appear any thing more then
conjecturall Divinity, I grant that then, in respect of the intent and purpose
of God, the righteousness of the Law had been as imputable, as the
transgression of it, but this will not prove it such in the nature of it, but
only by way of Covenant: and so the consequence in the proposition will still
languish and be infirm. But though I can be confident with Paul, to call
Christ, the last Adam. 1 Cor. 15.45. Yet I am somewhat tender to call Adam, the
first Christ. To say that Adam by his righteousness should have merited the
justification of himself and all his posterity, is (I take it) to make him
somewhat more then a figure of him that was to come. But to say, that by his
transgression, he merited the condemnation both of himself and posterity, is
no such hard saying (I conceive) in the cares of any man. Therefore however,
the righteousness of the Law is not as imputable, as the transgression of it.

Secondly, whereas demand was made, Law, and the transgression of the Law, that
the former should not be as imputable as the latter, the obedience, as the
transgression? I answer, there may be this conceived as a ground of difference
between them, in that respect. Sin or disobedience to a Law is ever greater
in ratione demeriti, in way of demerit or desert of punishment: then obedience
or subjection to a Law, is in ratione meriti, in deserving a reward. One that
takes a purse, or murders a man by the high way side, deserves to receive more
in punishment, then a thousand deserve in reward, that suffer men to travail
peaceably by them. Though he that dishonestly refuses to pay a debt where it
is due, may deservedly be cast into prison: yet it does not follow, that he
that keeps touch and pays at his day, deserves to be exalted to a Throne. So
might Adam by his transgression of the Law, merit death and condemnation to
himself and posterity: and yet not have merited life and salvation to both, by
his obedience. The reason of which difference is evident: because if he had
obeyed and kept the Law, he had only done that which was his duty to do: and
this (by our Saviors rule, Luk 17.10) makes but an unprofitable servant. i. (I
conceive) is no ground to demand or challenge any great matters at his masters
hand, except it be by Covenant or promise from him. Adams obedience to the Law,
was a debt due unto God from him, several ways, and in sundry respects or
considerations. First, God was his sovereign Lord, and had absolut power over
him, to command him what service or obedience he pleased. Secondly, he was his
maker and Creator, and had given him his being: and in this respect had full
right and title to employ him as he pleased. Thirdly, God had bin liberal and
exceeding bountiful unto him, many ways: he created him in his own image and
likeness: furnished him with principles of righteousness: made him Lord over
the works of his hand: placed him in a Paradise of all delight and contentment.
In all these respects, Adam was a debtor, yea and more then a debtor unto God,
of that obedience unto his Law, which he required of him. Now the greater
debtor Adam was unto God, the more and greater bands and engagements were upon
him, to make good that obedience which God required of him, to his Law: the
less meritorious had this obedience bin, in case Adam had stood and performed
it: and the more demeritorious also was his transgression and disobedience.
Therefore that consequence in the major proposition of the objection,

If the transgression of the Law be imputable, then is the obedience imputable
also, is so far from being legitimate, and solid, that the imputablenesse of
the transgression of it, rather overthrows the imputablenesse of the
obedience of it, then any ways proves or establishes it. For the more
imputable, that is, punishable, the transgression of it is, the less
imputable, that is, rewardable, is the obedience of it. So that you see, now we
have touched the hollow of the right thigh of the Objection, how it halts right
down upon it. And you see withal, how we might fairly and honestly discharge
our selves from having any thing more to do with the Minor Proposition, or
with the instance of the imputation of Adam's sin, which was insisted upon for
the proof of it: because if either Proposition be disabled, the glory of the
whole Argument is laid in the dust.

Notwithstanding, because the imputation of Adams sin to his posterity (as
it is ordinarily phrased) is conceived to be a master vein in this
Controversy, and is frequently produced to prove the imputation of Christ's
righteousness (by way of analogy or proportion.) I shall be willing to lay
down with as much brevitie and plainness as I can, how, and in what sense
only, either the Scriptures themselves, or sound reason, will countenance the
notion of that imputation. The issue will be, that neither the one nor the
other will be found, either to own or favor any other imputation of Adam's
sin to his posterity, then we have hitherto granted of Christ's righteousness
to those that believe: The righteousness of Christ, is imputed, i. is made
over or given to those that believe, not in the letter or formality of it (as
has bin often said) but in blessings, privileges and benefits, purchased of
God by the merit or mediation of it. So the sin of Adam is imputed to his
posterity, not in the letter and formality of it (which is the imputation
commonly urged) but in the demerit of it, i. in the curse or punishment due to
it (which is the imputation commonly urged) but in the demerit of it, i. in the
curse or punishment due to it, or deserved by it. Therefore as concerning this
imputation of Adams sin, I answer.

First, the Scripture no where affirms, either the imputation of Adams sin to
his posterity, or of the righteousness of Christ to those that believe:
neither is the phrase or manner of such speaking, any ways agreeable to the
Dialect or language of the Holy Ghost. For still in the Scriptures, whersoever
the word or term of IMPUTING is used, it is only applied unto, or spoken of
something of the same persons, to whom the imputation is said to be made, and
never (to my remembrance) to, or of any thing of another, Romans 4.3. Abraham
believed God, and it was IMPUTED to him for righteousness, i. his own
believing was imputed to him, not another man's. So verse 5. But to him that
works not, but believes, His Faith is IMPUTED to him for righteousness. So
Psalm. 106.30, 31. Phineas stood up and executed judgment, etc. and that (viz.
act of his) was IMPUTED to him for righteousness. i. received a testimony from
God of being a righteous and holy act. So again, 2 Cor. 5.19. not IMPUTING
their trespasses (i. their own trespasses) unto them.

Secondly, imputed, as viz. sin, folly, and so righteousness, or the like,
etc. the meaning of the phrase is not to be taken concerning the bare acts of
the things, as if (for example) to impute sin to a man, signified this, to
repute the man (to whom sin is imputed) to have committed a sinful act: or, as
if to impute folly, were simply to charge a man to have done foolishly: but the
phrase of imputing, when it is applied to things that are evil, and attributed
to persons that have a power of judicature over those, to whom the imputation
is made (in which posture only, to my remembrance the word is found in
Scripture) signifies, the charging of the guilt or demerit of what is said to
be imputed, upon the head of the person to whom the imputation is made, with an
intent of inflicting some condign punishment upon him. So that to impute sin
(in Scripture phrase) is to charge the guilt of sin upon a man with a purpose
to punish him for it. Thus Romans 5.13. Sin is said not to be IMPUTED, whilst
there is no Law. The meaning cannot be, that that act which a man does, whether
there be a Law or no Law, should not be imputed to him. The Law does not make
any act to be imputed, or ascribed to a man, which might not as well have bin
imputed without it. But the meaning is, that there is no guilt of any act
charged by God upon men, nor any punishment inflicted upon men for any thing
done by them, but only by virtue of the Law prohibiting or restreyning it. In
which respect the Law is said to be the strength of sin, viz. because it
gives a condemning power against the doer, to that, which otherwise would have
had none, 1 Cor. 15.56. So again, Job 24.12. when it is said, that God does
not lay folly to the charge of them (i impute folly to them) that make the
souls of the slain to cry out, etc. the meaning is not, that God does not
repute them to have committed the acts of oppression, murder, etc. For
supposeing they did such things, it is unpossible but that God should repute
them to have done them: but the meaning is, that God does not visibly charge
the guilt of these sins upon them, or inflict punishment for them. So 2 Samuel
19.19. When Shimei prays David not to IMPUTE wickedness unto him, his
meaning is not, to desire David not to think he had done wickedly in railing
upon him (for himself confesses this in the very next words) but that David
would not inflict that punishment upon him, which that wickedness deserved.
This was that non-imputation of wickedness which Shimei desired of David So
when David himself pronounces the man blessed, to whom the Lord IMPUTES not
sin, his meaning is not, as if there were any man, whom the Lord would not
repute to have committed those acts of sin, which indeed they have committed:
but that such are blessed, upon whom God will not charge the demerit of their
sins in the punishment due to them. So yet again (to forbear further
citations in this point) 2 Cor. 5.19. when God is said, not to IMPUTE their
sins unto men, the meaning is not, that God should not repute men to have
committed such and such sins against him: but this, that he freely discharged
them from the punishment due unto them By all which testimonies and instances
from the Scriputres, concerning the constant and solemn use and signification
of the term imputing, or imputation, it is evident, that the M^nor Proposition
in the Objection, viz. that the transgression of the Law is imputable from one
man's person to another, has no such clear or certain soundation in the
Scriptures.

imputation of Adam's sin to his posterity, which is brought for the
confirmation of it, I answer also,

First, that either to say that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to his
posterity (of believers) or the sin of Adam to his, are both expressions (at
least) unknown to the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures. There is neither line, nor
word, nor syllable, nor letter, nor tittle of any such thing to be found there.
But that the faith of him that believes, is imputed for righteousness, are
words which the Holy Ghost counts neither error, nor heresy to use.

But secondly, because I would make no exception against words, further then
necessity (I mean a necessity of making provision for the truth) enforces
(I do not like that any man's words that will take salt, and be made savourie
by interpretation, should be cast out upon the dunghill: though I know a man
that has received this measure, pressed down, heaped up, and running over,
from many) gran, that there are expressions in Scripture concerning both, both
the communication of Adams sin with his posterity, and of the righteousness
of Christ with those that believe, that will fairly enough bear the term of
imputation, if it be rightly understood, and according to the use and
importance of it in Scripture upon other occasions (as we lately cited many
instances) but as it is commonly taken and understood by many, it is no current
language, but occasions much error and mistake.

Concerning Adam's sin or disobedience, Romans 5.19. And so by the obedience of
Christ, it is said (in the same place) that many shall be made righteous. But
now if men will needs exchange language with the Holy Ghost, they must see to
it that they make him no loser. If when they say, that Adams sin is imputed
to all unto condemnation, their meaning be the same with the Holy Ghosts, when
he says, that by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners, there is no
harm done: to exchange upon such terms, is not to rob. But it is much to be
suspected, nay it is too evident by what many of themselves by way of
interpretation speak, that the Holy Ghost and they are not of one mind,
touching the imputation or communication of Adams sin with his posterity, but
that they differ as much in meaning, as in words. If when they say, that Adams
sin is imputed to all unto condemnation, their meaning be, plain and right
down this, that the demerit or guilt of Adams sin is charged upon his whole
posterity, or that the punishment of Adams sin, redounded and ran over (as
it were) from his person to his whole posterity, a maine part of which
punishment, lies in that original defilement wherein they are all conceived
and borne, and whereby they are made truly and formally sinners before God: if
this (I say) be the meaning of the term, Imputation, when it is applied to
Adams sin, Transeat, let it pass. But if the meaning be, Adams sin is imputed
to his posterity, i. that sinful act wherein Adam transgressed when heat the
forbidden fruit, is in the letter and formalitie of it, and as it was Adams
own personal sin, imputed to his posterity, so that by this imputation all
his posterity are made formally sinners, before any part of the punishment of
that si^ne comes upon them: this is an imputation, which (I am certain) the
Scripture will never justify, neither in the letter of it, nor in the spirit of
it: yea and reason it self rises up against it with a high hand.

The equity (on Gods part) for the involving of Adams posterity, God, or yet
of absolute or pure prerogative) but a certain mixed act between both seems
to be founded upon 3 things: Sine dubio potuit Deus, si sic ei visum fuisset,
Adae peccatum, aut ipsi condonare, aut in ipso tantum ulcisci, posterisque
omnibus gratiam salutarem, co neutiquam obstante, liberare gratificari. Dr.
Twist.
and yet none of them the act of Adams sin, nor yet the imputation of it. But
1o, the demerit or sinfullnesse of the sin: which is a thing much differing
from the act of it: the act of it being principally from God him elfe, and that
by way of efficiencie properly so called (as all Divines unanimously agree) but
the sinfulness of it wholly from the creature. Secondly, the straightness, or
narrowness, or scantnesse of Adams person: Thirdly (and lastly) that special
and near relation that his posterity had to his person. From the posture (I
conceive) or standing up of these (or the like) circumstances before God, may
be demonstrated the equity of his proceedings, in involving or binding over,
as well Adams posterity, as his person, in and to the same condemnation and
punishment with him for his first sin.

First for the fulness and weight of the demerit or sinfulness of it: it is
almost unconceiveable of what aggravations it is capable of, if all those
circumstances and considerations were but made to speak home, which are able
to charge it in this kind. Some we touched toward the beginning of this
Chapter: and many others there are, which I do not purpose now to insist upon,
because the sinfullnesse of this sin, is generally confessed and acknowledged
by all, though it be true also, there are some circumstances on the other hand,
which do much case and lighten the provocation and offensi^^nesse of it, as we
shall have occasion to show hereafter in the second part.

Only I desire to mention one thing, Adam has this peculiar streyne or burden
of sinfulness in it, wherein it justifies the sin even of the reprobate
Angels themselves, being (in that respect) a sin more intolerable then
theirs, These wicked Angels were entrusted but with their own portions,
respectively, and therefore what they sinned, they sinned to themselves, they
sinned away and ruined only their personal estates in blessedness. But Adam had
a deerer and deeper engagement upon him, to keep him upright: he had the
estates of all his posterity put into his hand: and knew, that if he sinned and
fell, he should draw thousands thousands of souls after him into the same
perdition with him: and those such, the things of whose peace, safety and
welfare, the Law, of nature it self obliged him to provide for, with more care
and tenderness, then of all other creatures whatsoever, being those that were
to be his own natural children, even flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone:
the engagement of which relation the Apostle averreth (in this respect) 2 Cor.
12.14. where he says, that Children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but
Parents for the Children. If it be esteemed a sore brand (as well it may) upon
the wickedness of Jeroboam, that he made Israel to sin: and yet this was no
other making to sin, then what possibly might (and ought) to have bin
resisted and withstood, by those that were drawn to sin by it: then must it
needs be a far soarer charge upon the sin of Adam, who made not Israel only,
but the whole world to sin: and that in such a way, and by such a making,
against which there was not the least strength or power in the world to make
the least resistance or opposition.

So then the exceeding sinfulness or demerit of this sin of Adam being
granted, it cannot be judged any ways unequal in God or repugnant to the
rules of justice, to inflict an unanswerable measure or weight of punishment
upon it. Punishment is a kind of payment or recompense for an injury or loss
sustained. J paid (or restored) says David, Psalm. 69.4.) the things that I
never took. i. I went under censure, and was punished in my good Name and
otherwise, for offenses whereof I was never guilty. The like phrase of
restitution by way of punishment, you shall find Job 20.18. So that now to
require or take in punishment, valuably to the loss or injury a man has
sustained, has thus far no appearance of unrighteousness in it.

Therefore 2o, Adams person, of how small receipt or capacity his vessel was,
to contain that abundance of wrath, or that fullness of punishment, which God
might lawfully require, for the great injury or dishonor done unto him in that
mighty sin: and this will bring you to confess and acknowledge this further,
that either God must sit down by the loss (as we use to say) and want means
of coming again into his own, or else he must look out beyond Adams person,
for more to be joined in the punishment with him, to supply (as it were) that
was wanting in him, in that respect. In civil and politic States, it is not
more usual then equal and reasonable, that when the offense is of a very high
nature, as in the case of Treason and the like etc. the punishment should not
be confined to the person of the offender (which how great soever, is ever
less then an offense of that nature) but be further extended, until the
quality of the offense be somewaies answered. Upon this ground of equity (I
conceive) it was, that God would not be satisfied with the personal
destruction (though in a way of extraordinary judgment) of Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, their sin of rebellion against Moses and Aaron, riseing to a greater
height then so: but involved their Families their wives, their Sons, their
little ones, yea their Tents and all their goods, in the punishment with them.
Numb. 16.27, 32, 33. with Deuteronomy. 11.6. Indeed for Korahs Children (at least for
some of them, it seems from Number. 26.11. that they had withdrawn themselves
from their Fathers Tent and company, before the judgment came, and so escaped.
But for the Families, wives, Children, little ones, yea tents and all the goods
of the other, yea and all those persons that remained and were found with Korah
whether Children or others; when the stroke of Divine recompense came; together
with all his goods, were cast in together into the scale of the punishment to
make weight for the height and hey nousnesse of the sin. The like is to be
conceived in the case of Achan's sin. Ios. 7.24.25. If the personal
punishments of these men would have held out just and full consideration with
their offenses, it is no ways probable, but that the punishing hand of God
wou^d have stayed there, and not have bin stretched out further. In like
manner, if the person of Adam had bin as great and large, as his offense, so
that he had ^in able himself to have borne the fullness of the punishment,
which his sin deserved: I conceive it most likely that God would have deserved
and satisfied himself in point of justice, out of his person alone, and not
have arrested all his posterity for the debt. Because the most district justice
that is in God, can but require and exact from the creature offending, that
degree or measure of punishment for sin, quae est internimium et parum, which
holds a just and even proportion with it. And if the person of the creature
offending, be able to pay the whole reckoning and sum it self, the like
justice seems to require, that it be not demanded elsewhere, nor any others
without their consent be charged with contributing to it. So that if we shall
suppose the person of Adam to have bin punishable according to the height and
full extent of his sin, and yet will say, that God had power to charge this
sin upon his posterity, this must be understood of such a power, as indeed
God has by way of absolute prerogative and soveraigntie of dominion over the
creature, not of any power he stands possessed of in a way of regular and
ordinary justice.

If it be here objected: God has thus seized upon Adam himself and all his
posterity with him, and has involved them together, and made them all
contributers in the punishment due to the first sin, yet does not all this
punishment in the utmost extent of it, answer (in strict consideration) the
demerit of that sin: so that that which God has done in this kind, is no
sufficient means to heal the wound of that dishonor which he received from
the hand of the creature.

To this I answer: First, if this be a truth (as for the present I have
nothing in a strict way of arguing to oppose against it directly) that
notwithstanding God has fallen thus heavily upon Adam and al his, yet has not
hereby made himself any full satisfaction for the offense committed against
him: this rather tends to ease and justify these proceedings of God in
punishing as well Adams posterity as his person, for his offense, that is, for
the demerit of his offense, then any ways infringeth or impleadeth any thing
therein. So that we shall not need, for the clearing of Gods justice in
troubling all Adams posterity for Adams sin, to have recourse to a supposed
imputation of the act of this sin unto them, the sinfullnesse or demerit of
it (which as has been said, is a thing far differing from, and indeed
contra-distinguished against the act of it) is abundantly sufficient thereunto.

Yet secondly I answer withal: that though the punishment of the sin poured
out upon Adams posterity as well as his person, will not hold out full weight
and measure with the sinfullnesse or demerit of it, in which respect God may
seem still to be behind hand with the creature, and not to have repaired his
breach sufficiently: yet who sees not but that he has made a far more
abundant provision for the vindicating of his glorious greatresse, by causeing
this dreadful tempest of his displeasure to rain upon all flesh, then if
Adams person alone had bin rained upon in this kind, and the expressions of his
indignation had reached no further. We have a common saying: That where it is
not to be had, the King must loose his right. Certainly if the great and
terrible God ever paid any sin home in wrath and vengeance, he is not behind
hand with this sin of Adam.

Thirdly and lastly, God may be said to have made, or given himself full
satisfaction, in pouring out this fulness of wrath upon Adams sin, not upon
his person only, but whole posterity also: because he requires nothing more by
way of any further satisfaction for that sin, but only the abiding or
suffering of that wrath and punishment which he has inflicted upon it, by Adam
and his posterity. This shows that he is perfectly eased of that his great
adversary. At least wise, where he complains not, nor makes any further
demand, we cannot say that he is unsatisfyed. That sacrifice which he required
of his Son Jesus Christ for the taking away or purging the sin of the
world, was not required by way of addition to that punishment, which he had
inflicted upon Adam and all his; as if Christ with his sufferings, and men with
theirs, should together make up one and the same entire satisfaction unto God
for Adams sin. No, the Scripture calls it (...), that is a vice-ransom, or
counter-ransom, i. a satisfaction instead of a satisfaction. 1 Timothy 2.6. which
implies, that that wrath which God had already poured out upon the world for
sin, was in the nature of it and would have bin, had his mercy bin pleased to
have suffered his justice to go on with the full execution of it, and to have
received at large. This for answer to the objection: and for the second
particular; upon which the equity of Gods proceedings in involving as-well the
whole posterity of Adam as his person in the punishment due to his first sin,
may well be built (as has bin suid) viz the narrowness of Adams person.

in the business) is, the peculiar and near relation of the posterity of
Adam to his person. His posterity was so nearly and entirely his, when the
sin was committed, and the judgment first poured out upon it, that they were
in his person, and as it were a part, or somewhat of it. The time was, when all
men were but one Adam: as Augustine expresses it: Adam erat nos omnes. i. Adam
was us all. Augustine. De Peccat. Merit. et Remiss.
And again, Omnes eramus ille vnus Adam. i. We were all that one Adam. And the
whole generation of mankind, is but Adam, or Adams person interpreted, or
expounded at large: and may with as good propriety of speech be called Adam, as
the nation of the Jews is often in the Scripture called Jacob. So then it
being granted, 1o that the sin of Adam was exceedingly sinful and
demeritorious. 2o, that his person (properly taken) by reason of the scantnesse
or narrowness of it, was not capable of the fullness of that wrath, which that
sin deserved, and which it stood best with the glory of God, should be executed
or poured out upon it: it cannot be thought any ways unrighteous or unequal,
that his posterity should be arrested also, and taken into Communion with his
person in the punishment inflicted, to supply that which was wanting in it.
That God should not be stinted or straightened in making provision for his own
glory in the punishment of sin, but that he should punish till he makes
himself whole, at least till he comes as near into his own, as conveniently
he may, there is no man can judge unequal or unjust. Now then Adam, who was
the sinner, having of his own, whereof or wherewith to make satisfaction, I
mean a posterity, which was so fully, so entirely, and (as I may say) so
identically his own, that it was as yet rather himself then his; it cannot
but be thought equal and meet, that God should father seize upon these, to do
himself right, then upon the Angels or any other kind of creature that had
not that near and special relation to the transgressor. As in the case of the
sin of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, (and so of Achan) before mentioned, the
personal punishment of the offenders not holding out proportion with the
nature and quality of their offenses: there is no man but must needs conceive
it more agreeable to justice, that their own families respectively, and those
that had the nearest relation to them, should be taken to make up the
exemplarinesse of the punishment, till it was increased and raised to the line
and level of the offense, then any other family or person, that stood at a
further distance from them. God, in a fair and reasonable construction,
involving Adam and his posterity in the punishment for his sin, did but
involve Adam himself, or his person only, because his person and posterity,
when this punishment was executed, were but one and the same Adam. This is the
third and last particular, upon which the equity of God, in punishing as well
Adams posterity, as his person, for his sin, seems to be grounded, viz. the
peculiar neerenesse and relation between his person and posterity.

Me thinks there is a joint intimation of all the three, Romans 5.12. Wherefore as
by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed
upon all men, in that (or rather, according to the best translations and
expositions, in whom) all men have sinned. Here is first the demerit of this
sin implied, in that death is said to enter into the world by it. There is
nothing in sin to draw death and condemnation after it, but only the demerit
or sinfulness of it: as for the act it self, whereunto this sinfullnesse
cleaves (for malum semper habitat in alieno fundo, as one says, evil is
always found with somewhat that is not evil) this is directly and efficiently
from God himself (as has bin said) and therefore death is no wages due to
this: neither would it, in case it were imputed to any man, bring any guilt or
condemnation upon him.

Secondly, it being further said, that death being entered into the world,
passed (...), upon all men, or over all men, it shows, that Adams single
person, was not sufficient or able to bear the fullnes of that punishment,
which the sinfullnesse-of his sin had deserved: otherwise death (doubtless)
would have stopped there, and have gone, or passed on no further.

Thirdly and lastly, where it is added in the close, as the reason why death,
being gotten into the world, should pass directly toward men, and should
prevail (in special manner) over them, and that over them all (without
exception) viz. because that in him, i. Adam, all men had sinned: this
implies, that had not men bin in the loins of Adam, who was the sinner, or
otherwise had no special or near relation to him, this death had had no more
right or advantage against them, then against other creatures.

So that now, these things duly considered, imputation of Adams sin, or
rather of the act of Adams sin: (for otherwise it is nothing to the purpose
(so much spoken of and urged in this case) to his posterity, is not the ground
or cause of the punishment that is fallen upon his posterity for it (neither
is there the least little in the Scriptures founding that way) but chiefly that
special communion they had with him in his nature (having then their several
beings respectively in his loins) and consequently in his sin. (...), See
more of this in the Second Part. cap. 2. Sect. 11, 12, 13.
in whom all have sinned (says Paul.) Therefore now the ground of that
punishment or condemnation which is come upon all men, is not the imputation of
Adams sin, much less of the act of Adams sin (as before we distinguished,
but if any imputation be in this case, it is of every man's own sin in Adam,
for it was not Adam alone that sinned, but all sinned in him it is every man's
own sin that is imputed to him, and for which he is punished. As Levi
himself is said to have paid tithes in the loins of Abraham his Father, not
that Abraham's paying of tithes was imputed to Levi, Heb. 7.9.10. so neither is
it to be said, that Adams sin is imputed to his posterity, but rather that
this posterity themselves sinned in Adam; and it is but every man's own sin,
not Adams, that is imputed to him. To make a bare and district imputation of
the act of another sin, the adequate and sole ground and foundation of that
heavy judgment and punishment that is laid upon all men in this kind, is not
so much to represent God to the minds and consciences of men, as a district,
just and severe Judge (which with their interpretations may be affirmed of him)
as to make him so far to take pleasure, or to delight in blood, and in the
ruin of his creature, that he will take occasion, even where none is, to slay
and to destroy with death And of the two (doubtless) it were less
dishonorable unto God, to conceive or say of him in this case, that he fell
thus heavy in wrath and judgment upon the whole posterity of Adam, because he
would do it, or because it was his absolute will and pleasure so to do: then
to pretend or conceive the bare imputation of the act of Adams sin, the cause
or reason of it. For in the former, the absolute power or Soveraigntie of God
over the creature, is plainly asserted (though perhaps in terms somewhat harder
then many ears will well bear) but in the latter, there is only a cold and
hungry pretense alleged, to bear out one of the greatest and most weighty
acts of judgment that ever God exercised. Of the two it is less dishonorable
to a Prince or Monarch, to profess a power above Law, then to exercise it
under a pretense of justice. And what is there more in the imputation of Adams
sin, to make the punishment of it upon all his posterity, an act of justice
in God, or to ease the conceit of absolute Sovereigntie, then if there were no
such imputation at all? Or suppose God should repute me to have sinned in Adam,
and because he so reputeth me, shall execute judgment upon me; in case I did
not so sin, as God reputeth me to have done, it had bin altogether as much
justice in God to have punished me without any such reputing me to have sinned,
as with it. But in case I did sin (as the Scripture testifies to my face I
did) now there is no necessity or occason why God should impute Adams sin
unto me, to make me capable of punishment: the imputation of this my own sin
is abundantly sufficient. Besides, suppose I could not be truly said to have
sinned my self, being yet in the loins of Adam, and so my own sin not to
be imputed unto me: yet my communion with Adam in his nature, or my near
relation to him, being one of his children and posterity, upon the former
supposition, that Adams sin was not punishable to the height in the punishment
of his person only, is a full and sufficient ground to bear out the justice of
God, in laying all that punishment upon me he has done. But of all conceits or
apprehensions in this point, that has the least consistencie with sobernes and
truth, which makes the impuputation of the act of Adams sin, which act was more
from God, then from Adam, as has bin said, though the sinfulnes of this act,
was wholly from Adam, and not at all from God) to his posterity, to be the
reason and ground of that fore punishment wherein they are all included and
involved: as if Gods reputing a world of men to have done that, which indeed
was from himself (and therefore could at no hand be sinful) were a sufficient
ground in justice and equiti^, to bring the guilt of everlasting death and
wrath upon them.

The sum of all that ^ath bin reasoned at large in this Chapter, the
imputablenes of the transgression of the Law (were it granted) from one person
to another, does not necessarily evince the like imputability of the obedience
of the Law. 2. that in Scripture, there is nothing said to be imputed unto any
man but that which was his, before the imputation. 3. that to impute, does
never signify the bare ascribing or setting over any act good or bad, unto any
man: but a suitable dealing by the person, to whom the imputation is made,
according either to the merit or demerit, of such an act. 4. that therefore,
neither the act of any man's obedience nor disobedience to the Law, can either
in Scripture language, or propriety of speech, be said to be imputed to any
other, then to the persons themselves, obeying and disobeying. 5. That the
Scriptures are altogether silent concerning the imputation of Adams sin to his
posterity. 6. That reason it self fully demonstrates, any such imputation, to
be no sufficient or tolerable ground or reason, why God in a way of justice
and equity, might involve Adams posterity with his person, in the punishment
due to his sin. 7. (and lastly) that there are other grounds hereof both more
agreeable to reason, and to the rules and principles of common justice and
equity: so that there is not so much as the least degree of any necessity, to
bring the Imputation of Adams sin (in the sense pressed by our adversaries for
their turns) upon this theater

The Conclusion resulting from the constellation of these particulars, is
easily discerned to be this, that the Imputation of Adams sin to his posterity,
is no better Argument to prove the imputation of Christ's righteousness (in the
sense questioned) to believers then the imputation of Christ's righteousness, is
to prove, the imputation of Adams sin: and that neither the one nor the other
(in the sense urged and opposed) have any firm footing either in reason or
Religion.

The end of the first part.
THE SECOND PART,
CAP. I.
Wherein is contained a brief proposal of the Particulars in this Second Part.
HAving brought forth our strength, both of Scripture and Reason (seconded in
both with sufficient authorities of men of best esteem) as well to overthrow
the conclusion set up by the Adversary in the Question debated, as to establish
that which we have undertaken for and oppose against it: it remains, that for
the making good the ground which we have gotten, we should disarme our enemies,
and take away those weapons from them wherein they trust, by answering those
Scriptures and Reasons which are usually chosen for the service of this
warrefare, and whereby some endeavor as well to build up, what we have
labored hitherto to throw down, as to cast down what we have to built up.
The truth is, that no cause or truth reigns in fullness of glory and peace,
till all the enemies thereof be, either reconciled or put under his feet. In
consideration whereof. I shall no ways smoother or dissemble any objection of
the adverse party, as far as I know, they have yet pleaded, or can conceive,
they may possibly plead yet further for themselves in the point depending, nor
seek to gain the least advantage to my self by cutting the hair, or
diminishing the strength of any argument, I shall propound against my self to
answer: but rather on the other side, shall show all fairness and
faithfulness in relieving my adversaries, in their oversights and as far as
my ability extends endeavor to supply that which is wanting on their part,
in maintenance of the cause they have undertaken.

I shall therefore in this Second Part of my Work: first lay down and prove
(with all convenient briefness that may be) some conclusions, which have
special relation to the Question depending, and will give a further light of
insight therein, and which will be as foundations or grounds to frame answers
upon, to several objections that are, or may be made, against the decision
maintained in this Discourse.

2. I shall lay down and open some distinctions, which will make a clear and
lightsome way for the truth through the darkness of many difficulties, which
seem to oppose it on every side, as well from the Scriptures, as reasoning
otherwise.

3. I shall lay down the nature and purport of Justification, in the several
causes and carriages thereof according to the Scriptures, as far as I am able
to conceive.

4. I shall briefly propound and answer the Scriptures that are conceived to
make against the opinion contended for in this Treatise, according to the
tenor and importance of the former grounds and distinctions.

5. And lastly, I shall with like brevitie close the whole business, by
propounding and answering the reasons and Arguments, that seem chiefly to lie
against, the Doctrine hitherto maintained.

CAP. II.
Some Conclusions laid down, and proved for the further clearing of the Point
in Question, and for answering sundry of the Objections following.
HE for whose sins a plenary satisfaction has been made (either by
himself, or another for him, Suum cutque tribuere; to give to every one his
own, i. that which in a way of equity and right is due from us unto them. Now
when we have injured or damnified any man in any of his rights, or things
belonging to him, there is nothing more due to him from us, then that which is
his own, i. that which is fully valuable to the injury we have done unto him.
Therefore he that tenders a valuable consideration, or satisfaction, for an
injury done to another, is just according to the height and utmost exigencie
of justice, and consequently as just as he that never was injurious, or did
wrong.

There is no medium, or middle condition or standing, beteewne a perfect
absolution and freedom from all sin, and a perfect and complete
righteousness; ipso facto, is made perfectly and compleately righteous. See
Mr. Gataker against Gomarus p. 34. And Mr. Bradshaw Iustisi. p. 78. etc.
The reason of this is evident: nothing can any way diminish or prejudice the
perfection of righteousness, but only sin: as nothing can hinder perfection of
light, but darkness in one degree or other, or perfection of sight, but
blindness in some degree or other. So that as the air when it is free from all
degrees of darkness must of necessity be perfectly and fully light, and a
man that is in no measure or degree blind, must needs be perfectly sighted: so
he that is perfectly freed from all sin whatsoever must of necessity be
compleately and perfectly righteous withal. It is unpossible to conceive a man
defective in any part or point of righteousness, and yet withal to conceive
him free from all sin, sin and righteousness being in subjecto capaci
contraria immediata, as Logicians speak. The Scriptures themselves still make an
immediate opposition between the two Natures or Conditions we speak of, Sin,
and righteousness, never acknowledging, or so much mentioning aany third
between them. As by one mansdisobedience (says Paul) many were made sinners;
so by the obedience, of one shall many be made righteous. To findout a third
estate between sina nd righteousness, we must find out a third Adam, from
whom it should be derived. An estate of neutrality here, is such an estate or
condition, as the man in the Moon enjoys.

Adam, See Mr. Gataker against Gomarus p. 28.
whilst his innocence stood with him, and till his fall by sin, was
compleately righteous, and an estate of justification before God; yea, for the
truth and substance of righteousness, as righteous, as he could or should have
been, if he had lived to this day in the most entire and absolute obedience to
the Law. His righteousness by this means had been of a longer continuance,
but not of any greater perfection or truth. Even as the second Adam, the Lord
Christ himself, was as compleately and perfectly righteous from the womb and
so from his first entrance upon his public ministry as he was at last when
he suffered death. And had there been any defect or want of righteousness in
Christ at any time from his conception to his death it must needs have been
sinful (all absence of righteousness necessarily including a presence of
sin as the absence of light a presence of darkness answerable thereunto)
and consequently the great work of the salvation of the world had miscarried
in his hand. To say that Adam was not perfectly righteous, and consequently in
a justified estate or condition before God, until his fall by sin, is to place
him in an estate of condemnation before his sin, there being no middle or
third estate between these two. Justification and Condemnation, as the
Scriptures evidently imply in many passages as Romans 5.18. Deuteronomy. 25.1. Romans
33.34. etc. in all which places (with some others) you shall find an immediate
opposition between them. But especially this appears from Romans 8.1.2.
compared with verse 3. and 4. where you will find Justification described by
non-condemnation, or freedom from the Law of sin and death: if there were a
third estate or condition, between justification and condemnation,
noncondemnation would not so much as necessarily imply justification, much
less be used as a clause or term equivolant thereunto. Therefore to grant,
that forgiveness of sin puts a man into the same estate and condition
wherein Adam stood before his fall (which is generally granted by men of
opposite judgment in this controversy, and nothing granted, neither in this,
but the unqeustionable truth) is to grant the Point in question, and to
acknowledge the truth labored for throughout this whole Discourse.

Perfect remission or forgiveness of sins includes the imputation or
acknowledgement of the observation of the whole Law, See Mr. Gataker against
Gomarus p. 27.28. Omnia mandata factadeputantur, quando quicquid non fit,
ignoscitur. Aug. Retra. l. 1. c. 19.
even as the imputation of the Law fulfilled, necessarily includes the
non-imputation of sin, or the forgiveness of all sin, in case any has
been committed For how can he be said to have all his sins fully forgiven
who is yet looked upon or intended to be dealt withal, as one that has
transgressed, either by way of omission, or commission, any part of the Law,
and he that is looked upon, as one that never transgressed any part of the Law,
neither by omission, nor commission must needs be conceived or looked upon as
one that has fulfilled and kept the whole Law which is nothing else but to
have a perfect righteousness, or (which is the same) a perfect fulfilling of
the Law imputed to him. So that besides that perfect remission of sins, which
has been purchased by the blood of Jesus Christ for those that believe, there
is no need of (indeed no place for) the imputation of any righteousness
performed by Christ unto the Law, because in that very act of remission of
sins, there is included an imputation of a perfect righteousness: or to
speak more properly, and with Scripture exactness, that act of God whereby he
remitteth and pardons sin, is interpretatively, nothing else but an
impuattion of a perfect righteousness or of a fulfilling of the Law. Compare
Romans 4. ver. 6. with ver. 7. and 11. Even as that act of the Physician by which
he recovereth his patient from his sickness, may with full propriety of
speech be called that act, whereby he restores him to his health: this
expression were but a plain interpretation of the other, and no more nor any
thing else in substance, but it. And so that Act, by which the Sun dispells
the darkness, may indifferently be called that act, by which he fills the
Air with light. And as the Physician does not heal the disease by one act,
and recover or restore health by another act, really differing from it, but
does both by one and the same act, healing the disease, and restoring, of
health, being but two differing names or considerations of one and the same
thing; In like manner, God does not heal sin, that is, forgive sin by one
act, and restore the life of righteousness, that is, impute righteousness by
another act at all differing from it, but in and by one and the same punctual
and precise act, he does the one and the other; forgiveness of sins, and
imputation of righteousness; being but two different names, expressions, or
considerations of one and the same thing. And as it is but one and the same
person that is sometimes called Jesus, and sometimes Christ, and the person
Jesus, is sometimes called by the name of Christ, to import and signify, that
he is an anointed one; and again, the person Christ, is sometimes called by
the name Jesus, to signify that he is a Savior: even so one and the same act
of God is sometimes called forgiveness of sins, and sometimes an imputing of
righteousness, and the forgiveness of sins is sometimes called an imputing
of righteousness, to show and signify that a man needs nothing to a complete
righteousness, or justification, but the forgiveness of his sins: and
again, the imputing of righteousness, is sometimes called the forgiveness of
sins, to show that God has no other righteousness to confer upon a
sinner, but that which stands in forgiveness of sins. So that these two
terms or expressions; imputing righteousness, and forgiving sin, do but
aid and assist one the other toward a full explication of the nature and
importance of that act of God, which sometimes goes under the one name, and
sometimes under the other.

If it be here demanded:

1. That there is as express and complete a righteousness in the Law, as
ever Christ himself performed: yea, a righteousness more proper, and
appropriable to all sorts and conditions of men, than that personal
righteousness which Christ himself performed (as was showed at large in the
former part of this Treatise) And what if it be said, that God, in remission of
sins through Christ from and out of the Law imputes to every man that
believes, such a righteousness as is proper to him? This I am certain, is a
thousand times more agreeable both to reason and to the Scriptures, then to
hold an imputation of such a righteousness, that is, of such a systeme and
frame of actions, which were indeed a righteousness to him that wrought them,
the Law requiring them of him, but can be a righteousness to none other person
whatsoever, the Law requiring the same acts for no man is therefore just or
righteous, because he does the things which the Law simply requires, but
because he does those things which the Law requires of him, in reverence to
his personal condition, calling, and relations in every kind. A man may be as
wicked and sinful by doing that which the Law requires of another man, as by
doing that which the Law prohibiteth unto all men. But of this enough already.
But

2. To the Objection propounded, I answer, further, that to say God cannot
impute a righteousness which never had a being, i. which never was really and
actuually performed by any man, is to deny that he has power to forgive
sins. Because for givenesse of sin is an imputation of righteousness (as
has been proved) yea, and of such a righteousness which as the Scripture
teaches us, is without works, ( Romans 4 6. Romans 3.28 etc.) i. a
righteousness, not consisting or made up of any works performed to the Law by
any man: and what is this, but such a righteousness, as never had a being?

He that is fully acquitted and discharged from his sins, See Mr. Gataker
against Gomarus p. 27.34. etc.
The Reason of this is evident also. Death is the wages of sin, and of sin
only, being due to no creature in any other respect nor upon any other term
whatsoever: and therefore cannot in a way of ordinary justice be inflicted by
God upon any creature, but for sin.

Now he that is free from death, and no ways obnoxious thereunto, See Mr.
Bradshaw Iustific. p. 79.
cannot but be conceived to have a right unto life, there being neither any
middle condition between death and life, wherein it is possible for a
reasonable creature to subsist, nor again any capacity of life, but by some
right and title thereunto. Adam whilst his innocence and he stood together, and
whilst he was free from sin, had a right and title unto life, yea, and had
the possession and fruition of it given unto him; (for how could he be
threatened with death, Genesis 2.17. who was not actually possessed of life) though
he had not yet performed the Law; either by himself or any other for him, in
any such sense as is contended for by some, as of absolute necessity to give a
right and title unto life: and if he had not a right unto life by his freedom
from sin, but was to purchase this right by an actual fulfilling of the Law,
it would be known, what quantities of obedience to the Law he must have paid,
before he had made this purchase, and how long he must have obeyed and kept the
Law, before this right and title unto life would have accru'd unto him. For had
he lived a 1000. years in his integrity and uprightness without the least
touch of any transgression, he had still bin a debtor of obedience to the Law,
upon the same terms that he was at the beginning, and the least interruption
or breach in the course of his obedience, had even now been the forfeiture of
that life he enjoyed. So then this position also is unquestionably true, that
there needs no other righteousness, but only the forgiveness of, or freedom
from sin, to give a man a clear and lawful title unto life.

Notwithstanding the Scriptures of the new Testament, seem to place the
immediate right or capacity which believers have to the Kingdom of heaven,
and eternal glory, rather in the grace of Adoption or Sunship vouchsafed by
God unto them through Jesus Christ, then in any righteousness whatsoever (even
remission of sins it self not excepted, (as was proved more at large in the
12th. Chapter of the former part of this Treatise. The reason whereof may
(happily) be this: because the life and blessedness which come by Jesus Christ
to the world through Faith, are of a far higher nature, excellency, and
worth, than that life which was covenanted by God with Adam, by way of wages
for his work, or obedience to the Law; and therefore require a higher, and
fuller, and richer capacity or title in the creature, to interesse him therein,
than that did. Work or labor faithfully performed, is sufficient to entitle a
man to his wages, or hire: the labourer (says Christ) is worthy of his hire:
but the gift of an inheritance, requires a special grace and favor, no less
than of an Adoption to make a man regularly, and according to the usual course
of humane transactions capable thereof.

That satisfaction which Christ made to the justice of God for sin, See Mr.
Gataker against Gomarus. p. 4.15.25. And Paraus de Iustit. Christi. Act. and
pass. p. 168. and 180.
consists only in that obedience of his, which he performed to that peculiar
and special Law of mediation which God imposed upon him (which we commonly,
though perhaps not altogether so properly call his passive obedience) and not
at all in that obedience or subjection which he exhibited to that common Law of
nature, which we call moral. This is evident; because nothing can be
satisfactory to divine justice for sin, but that which is penal, without
shedding of blood (says the Apostle, Heb. 9.22) there is no remission, and
consequently no satisfaction: for doubtless where there is satisfaction; there
is, and may be remission. Now that that obedience or subjection which Christ
exhibited to the moral Law, was no ways penal to him, is evident from hence:
Penal to him in respect of his Godhead it could not be, the divine Nature
being no ways passive in it self, nor capable of punishment. Again, in
respect of his humane nature, this obedience could not be penal, because it
was required of man in his innocence, and imposed by God upon Adam before his
fall: yea, and still lies, and shall he to the days of eternity, upon men and
Angels, yea and upon Jesus Christ himself in their glorified conditions. Love
(which the Apostle affirms to be the fulfilling or keeping of the Law) never
falls away. Therefore to make obedience to the moral Law, penal, is to
affirm, that man was punished; and that by order and appointment from God
before his fall, or before he sinned, and that the glorified Saints and
Angels, yea and Jesus Christ himself are now punished in heaven.

Besides, the Scriptures themselves no where ascribe this satisfaction we speak
of, or the work of Redemption, nor any part or degree of it to the holiness,
innocence, or active obedience of Christ, but still to his passive. See Romans
3.25. Romans 5.6, 8. 2 Cor. 5.21, Ephesians. 1.7. Ephe. 2.16. Col. 1.14. Heb. 2.14.
Heb. 9.12.14.26. Heb. 10.10. 1 Pet. 2.24. 1 Pet. 3.18, 1 John 1.7. Revel. 1.5.
etc. Besides many other places of like importance, See Mr. Gataker against
Gomarus, p. 8.19.20. etc. Qui vero obedientiae activae, aut sanctitati nativae,
meritum justitia ascribun^, mortem Christi fine dubio inanem reddunt. Par. de
Justice. Christi Activa and Pas^va. p. 181.182.
that they are all figurative, and by a Synechdoche, express the whole by
mentioning only a part. Therefore I shall not further insist upon this here.

If Christ had fulfilled and kept the Law for us, i. in our steed till the
utmost period of his life, there had been no occasion or necessity of his
dying for us. There is no light clearer than this. For if we stand before God
by virtue of the perfect obedience of Christ's life imputed to us as our own
righteousness and obedience to the Law, perfectly righteous, we are no more
obnoxious to the curse of the Law, and consequently have no need of any
satisfaction to divine justice, nor of any remission of sins by blood. Duo
ista pronustciata, Christu^ sanguinis effusione redemit nes ab execratione
legis, and Christus obedientiam pr^stitit pro^^^bis, implicant contradictionem.
Piscator.
There needs nothing more to a perfect justification, than a perfect
righteousness, or a perfect fulfilling of the Law. This the Apostle clearly
lays down, Gal. 2.21. If righteousness be by the Law (whether performed by
our selves, or by another for us, for there is the same reason of both in
respect of justification) then Christ is dead in vain. This proposition is so
clear, and full of the light of its own truth, that both Piscator, and Pareus
heretofore, and Mr. Gataker of late, have not simply affirmed, but with more
than an ordinary confidence avouched, that to hold an imputation of the active
obedience of Christ amounts to no less than an abrogation of his death. But
this consequence also (I remember) I have argued more at large in the 13. Chap.
of the former Part of this Treatise, and therefore for the present leave it.

That Union and Communion which true believers have with Christ, or to hear as
they do. In like manner there is not the least show or color of pretense, to
build a necessity of the imputation of Christ's righteousness to believers,
upon that union and communion which they have with him, or to conclude and
infer, that because believers have union and communion with Christ, therefore
his righteousness must be theirs in such a sense, that they may have the
denomination of righteous therefrom, or be constituted and made righteous
therewith. May it not be said with as much reason, that because believers have
union and communion with Christ, therefore his soul and his body must needs be
imputed to them, yea and his wisdom, and his power, and his glory imputed to
them also, so that they are esteemed by God, as wise, as powerful, as glorious
by virtue of such imputation, as Christ himself is.

That union and communion which believers have with Christ, the imputation of
Christ's righteousness is no more to deny or any ways to obscure their union and
communion with Christ, than to deny that the miracles which Christ wrought are
imputed to us, or than to deny that a man sees with his hands, or heals with
his heels, is a denying that the members of the body have any connection, union
or communion, with the head.

The sin in of Adam is no where in Scripture said to be imputed to his
posterity: Adam only excepted, who for diverse reasons was an exempt person) or
else in a propagation of his nature defiled therewith, or lastly, in that
punishment or condemnation that is come upon the world by it. But as for any
such imputation of it, by virtue whereof, precisely considered, and simply as
an act of Gods justice, all his posterity should be constituted and made
formally sinners, neither do the Scriptures acknowledge, nor sound reason
admit. The former clause of this Conclusion is unquestionable. The Scriptures
wheresoever they speak of Adams sin, and the relation of it to his posterity,
wholly abstain from the term of imputation, neither do they use any other
word or phrase in this Argument of like signification and importance with it,
at least in that notion and sense, wherein it is so frequently used by many in
this controversy. But first, they acknowledge a communion between Adam and
his posterity (except the before excepted) in this sin, in respect whereof, the
sin may as well be attributed to any, and to all of his posterity, as to Adam
himself, as Abraham's act of paying tithes to Melchizedeth, is ascribed to
Levy being in his loins, as well as to Abraham himself. And to say as the
thing is (says the Holy Ghost, Heb. 7.9.) Levy also which receives tithes,
paid tithes in Abraham. The truth and propriety of which saying, he makes good
by this demonstration in the next words. For he was yet in the loins of his
Father [Abraham] when Melchizedech met him. It is not here said, that Abraham's
paying tithes, was imputed to Levy, but that Levy himself paid tithes (in
that act of Abraham's) as well as Abraham. So that this act of paying tithes,
was as well Levies act, as Abraham's, and is imputed to him not as Abraham's act,
but as his own. In like manner the Scripture plainly affirms, that all
Adams posterity sinned in Adam (in that first sin of his especially) Romans
5.12. but it no where affirms, that Adams sin is imputed to them. Their
own sin in Adam, may with good propriety of speech, and safety of truth, be
said to be imputed to them: but that Adams sin, otherwise than as it is or
was theirs, as well as his, by reason of that subsistence and being they had in
him or in his loins, should be imputed to them, has neither ground in
Scripture, nor consistence either with reason or truth.

That old rule in Metaphysiques, Operatio rei consequitur esse rei, i. the Acts
or operations of things still follow the being of things, and are
proportionable and suitable thereunto, is sound and rational, and of perfect
agreement with that Scripture Reason, cited from Heb. 7.10. There are several
kinds of beings and subsistences of things. A thing may have its being, either
in causis, or extra causas, i. either in the causes of it only, or out of the
causes viz. when it is actually produced and in a complete being. Again,
those things that have their beings only in their causes, may have their being
either in their supernatural causes only, as the counsel, purpose, and power
of God; or in the natural causes also, that is, when such things have an
actual and complete being, which according to the common course of nature and
providence, are able and apt to produce them. Thus in Winter, the Rose may be
said to have a being in the root of that shrubbe that is apt to bear it in
Summer, the natural season for such births Thus Levy (as we heard) is said to
have been, i. to have had a being, in the loins of Abraham. And this all
mankind, even Adams whole posterity, had a being and subsistence in Adam. Now
there are none of these kinds of beings and subsistences of things, but have
their acts and operations proportionable and proper to them; the perfecter
being, the perfecter and less dependent operation. Things that have an actual
and complete being out of their causes, act, and work of themselves, their
causes that produced them, as such, having no communion or fellowship with them
in their actions: Things that have their beings only in their causes, act and
operate in, and by, and with these only, as having their whole dependence on
them, and subsistence in them, yet are these acts and operations of things in
their causes only, as truly theirs, though not as perfectly and compleately
theirs as they are the causes themselves, in and by whom they were performed.
Thus Levy did as truly pay tithes in Abraham, as Abraham himself did, in
whom he paid them, otherwise we make the Scripture less true, in affirming
the one, then the other. So that act of eating the forbidden fruit by Adam, was
as truly the act of all his posterity, as his own, though not so compleately
and perfectly theirs, as his, he having no dependence on them, or subsistence
in any of them therein, but they all depending on him, as one in and by whom
God had given them all their beings, and having their subsistence in him, as
the natural productive root of all their actual and complete beings. The
Fathers generally have taught this inexistence or being of all men in Adam.
Fuit Adam, and in illo perierunt omnes. Amb. in Luc. lib. 7. Adam erat nos
omnes: omnes eramus ille unus Adam. Certum manifestumque est, alia esse propria
cuique peccata, in quibus hi tantum peccant, quorum peccata sunt, aliud hoc
unum, in quo omnes peccaverunt, quando omnes ille unus homo suerunt. Aug. de
Peccat. Merit. and Remis. l. 1. c. 10. In Adamo omnes peccavimus ib. c. 13. Si
parvuli, quod vera fides habet, nasiuntur peccatore^, profecto eo modo quo
sunt: peccatores, etiam pravaticatores legis illius, quae in Paradise lata est,
agnoscuntur, Aug. de Civi. l. 16. c. 27. Qui non fuerit regeneratus, interibit,
anima illa de genere ejus, quia testamentum meum dissipavit, quando in Adam cum
omnibus etiam ipse peccavit, ib.
There being then a certain and unquestionable truth, in this, that Adams
sin, was the sin of his posterity, as well as of his person, this the
Scripture affirms and holds forth unto us, as one maine ground and
consideration, why and how the world comes to be involved in the guilt and
punishment of Adams transgression.

2. Adams sin comes to relate or to have reference to his posterity, in
matter of pollution and defilement, and consequently of guilt and punishment by
natural descent and propagation from him. Adams person, the fountain and
springhead of all his posterity, being corrupted and poisoned with him,
except God should have wrought miraculously and above the course of nature,
either by a through purging of the fountain, before any stream issued from
it, or by dissevering and untwisting (as it were) the poison from the waters,
in the very point and moment of their issue and source (neither of which he was
any ways bound to do) could not but send forth streams of like corruption
and defilement with the fountain it self. This the Scripture plainly
teaches in many places. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not
one, Job 14.4. God himself by his ordinary power cannot do it. So our
Savior, Ioh. 3.6. That which is borne of the flesh [corrupted and weakened by
sinne] is [by the course of nature, whereunto God himself has righteously
consented] flesh, i. a creature or thing of the same sinful and weak nature
and condition with it. And (to forbear other texts of like importance this
way) the Apostle, Romans 5.19. expressly affirms, that by the disobedience of
one (meaning Adam) many were made sinners: not by the imputation of the Act of
his sin to them (this is neither Sun, nor Moon, neither Scripture, nor
good Reason) but by corrupting and defiling his own person, by reason whereof,
all that are borne of him in a way of natural dissent and propagation, must
needs be borne sinners.

3. (And lastly) death and condemnation are justly come upon the world, no so
much (to speak properly, and with the Scriptures) for Adams transgression, as
by Adams transgression, partly as this transgression of his was the sin and
transgression of the world (as has been already said and proved) partly as by
means of this sin, the world, I mean all the sons and daughters of men that
are borne into it, are become personally (and so compleately sinful. In this
sense, it is said, that by the offense of one death reigned (viz. over all) by
one) Romans 5.17. and so that death passed over all, in that all had sinned, ver.
12. And again, that judgment came by one unto condemnation, ver. 16. And that
all men by nature are children of wrath, etc. Ephesians. 23. If men can find any
propriety in the word Imputation, to signify any of these three
Considerations, let the sin of Adam be said to be imputed to his posterity, I
shall no ways contradict it: but for any such imputation, as is pretended and
pressed by many, by which men should be constituted and made formally sinners
before God, and the sin no ways looked upon as theirs, but only by means
of such imputation. I neither find the Scriptures affirming, nor am otherwise
able to comprehend.

Though justification and salvation came unto the world by Christ the second
Adam, Adam, yet are there many different considerations and circumstances,
between the coming and bringing in of salvation by the one, and of
condemnation by the other. The Apostle himself gives instance in two
particulars wherein they differ greatly, Romans 5.15.16. And besides these, there
are many others. As first, the sin of Adam, by which he brought condemnation
upon the world, was as well the act of all his posterity as his own, in which
respect they may as truly be said to have brought condemnation upon
themselves, as Adam, but that obedience, by which Christ brought salvation into
the world, can with no propriety of speech, nor with any consistence of truth,
be said to have been theirs, or performed by them, who are saved by it, so
that these cannot now be said with any more truth to have saved themselves,
then if they had not been saved at all. It is said indeed, that God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. But it is no where
said, that the world was in Christ reconciling it self unto God. 2. Adam by
his sin brought condemnation upon those who were in his loins, and had a
natural being in him: but Christ by his obedience brought salvation unto them,
that had no such relation to him, nor any being or subsistence in him, either
natural or spiritual (which is by faith) but were wholly aliens and strangers
from him, yea and enemies to him. 3. All those that are condemned by Adam had
their being in him altogether, at one and the same time. Caine was not in Adam,
before Judas, nor Judas after Caine, but amongst those that are saved by
Christ; there is an order and difference of time in respect of their ingraffing
into him: some are sooner, and some later in him. Andronicus, and Iunia Paul's
Cozens, were in Christ before him, Romans 16.7. 4. That disobedience of Adam by
which he brought condemnation upon the world, was active: but that obedience by
which Christ brings salvation to the world, is passive, as has been already
proved, and may further appear by comparing, Romans 5.19. with Phil. 2.8. etc.
5. And lastly, the whole weight of the Redemption and salvation of the world by
Christ, depended upon the merit and satisfactorinesse of that obedience of his
by which it was procured, and not at all upon any relation of those to him or
seminall involution or comprehension in him, for whom it was procured but the
burden of the condemnation coming by the transgression of Adam, depended not
only (or not so much) upon the demerit, or offensivenesse of the transgression
but upon the relation of those to him who were condemned by him, as having a
true natural and seminall being in him or in his loins, when he transgressed.
So that though the sin of Adam had bin of an inferior nature and of less
demerit and provocation in the sight of God than it was, yet might Adams
posterity justly have bin involved in the same condemnation by it, wherein now
it is, but if the obedience or sufferings of Christ had been of less value,
merit, acceptance or satisfaction then they were, the redemption and salvation
of the world, could not have been carried out, or obtained by them.

Hence the different manner of the Scriptures speaking of the one and of the
other, Ephesians. 4.32. But when it speaks of the condemnation of the world by
Adam, it no where says, that God for Adams sake, subjected the world to death
and condemnation but only thus, By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, Romans 5.12. And again, through the offense of one many are dead,
ver. 15. Again, By one man's offense death reigned by one, ver. 17. with many
the like, still using terms and expressions, which do not necessarily import
the sin of Adam to have been the meritorious or demeritorious cause, (though
this be not denied) but rather the isntrumental and mediating cause simply of
this condemnation. It is true, the virtue and efficacy of the passive
obedience of Christ it self, whereby the salvation of the world is purchased,
is many times expressed by the fame propositions or particles of speech, By,
and Through, as Rom 5.11. By him we have received the atonement, etc. but
there is nothing more frequent in the Scriptures then to speak that sparingly,
and in general terms only in one place, which it speaks fully, and with
exactness, in another. But when it uses expressions constantly of one and the
same line and importance, and never rises higher, there can be no ground from
the Scriptures, of conceiving any thing above or beyond such expressions, in
any subject; as on the other hand, when we have expressions that are richer and
fuller, and more distinct in any place, we are not to measure or confine our
apprehensions and understandings of things to those that are lower and more
general. As in the case in hand, the more frequent expressions are, that, by
Christ, or through Christ, and so by his blood, or thorough his blood, etc. we
have Redemption, or Remission of sins: yet must we not from hence conclude,
that therefore Christ, or his blood are barely an isntrumental cause or means
of Redemption, and have nothing of merit in them, because these particles, by
and through, usually signify an isntrumental efficiencie, and no more: the
reason is, because the Scripture elsewhere supplieth that which is wanting in
such expressions as these, and represents to us that special and peculiar
kind of efficiencie, which we call meritorious in Christ and his sufferings.
And had it bin simply the demerit or offensivenesse of Adams sin that had
brought the judgment or condemnation upon his posterity, there can hardly any
reason be given, why the sin of the Angels that fell, should not have brought
the like judgment and condemnation upon their whole creation: because
doubtless the sin of these Angels, was every whit as demeritorious, and full
of provocation, as the sin of Adam was.

And therefore (by the way) they that use our English Translation only, had
need be admonished, OFFENSE (as the Original (...), is five or six times
translated in that one Chapter, Romans 5.) not, as commonly it is taken, in an
active signification, or sense, as if it were either simply or principally the
offensivenesse of Adams sin to God, or the height of the demerit thereof,
that inclined or moved him to bring death and condemnation upon the world for
it, but rather in a passive (which is the sense that the Original directly
leads unto) i. for a sinful stumbling (as it were) or miscarriage, not out
of envy, malice, or other sinister end or intention, which are the maine
aggravations of a sin, and raising the offensivenesse of it to the greatest
height, but out of an inconsiderateness or incogitancie, which though it be no
cloak for sin, yet is it a root of the least bitterness or provocation,
from whence it is lightly possible for sin to spring. And doubtless (to
speed this Conclusion as fast as we can) the consideration of that difference
between the first and second Adam, which we have in hand, I mean in respect
of the great disproportion between the demerit of the one, and merit of the
other, is the ground and bottom of that notable and comfortable difference
between them, wherein the Apostle so triumphs, Romans 5.15. reasoning and
raising up himself and others after this manner: but not as the offense, so
also is the free gift, viz. in respect of an equal efficacy and power in the
one to condemn, and in the other to justify and save: there is a great
difference between them in this regard; For if through the offense of one,
many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by
one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. i. (...), etc. q.d. If the sin
of Adam being but a (...), an inconsiderate stumbling, or a sin proceeding
from incogitancie, and Adam hmselfe but one, has yet been able to involve
many. i. his whole posterity, all that shall be borne of him, in death and
condemnation; much more must it needs be conceived, that the grace, i. the
gracious intent and purpose of God toward men, and the gift by that grace,
viz. of righteousness and justification, by such a man as Jesus Christ is, who
is both God and man, should abound unto many, i. justify and save with far
greater efficacy power, and authority, (and as it were) with an higher hand,
all those that by spiritual regeneration and a true faith shall descend from
him. The stre^ngth of of the Apostles reasoning and inference in this passage
Scripture, lies in this. The salvation of the world (faith he) must needs
proceed with far higher hand by Christ, then the condemnation of it did, or
does by Adam; Because 1. The foundation and ground work of the one, was the
free and gracious intent and purpose of God, which is a stronger, and more
active and lively principle or spring to set all the wheels and work on going
that depend upon it then a permissive decree only, which (as seems here
intimated and employed) is the maine foundation the other ( viz. the
condemnation of the world by Adam) had, in respect of God. This permissive
decree, though it be as clear as the other, in respect of the event and
coming to pass of such things as are comprehended in it, yet is the motion of
it but slow and heavy in comparison of the other. Gods permissive decrees are
chiefly executed by second means, or by occasion, of his withdrawing himself
and leaving the creature to it self: but his gracious decrees have his heart
and soul and strength, and might in their execution. And secondly, (that which
is the more proper and immediate cause of the difference here laid down by the
Apostle) the condemnation of the world, as touching matter of provocation and
offense given unto God, proceeds only in the demerit and strength (...), of
one inconsiderate act of sin, and that (...), from one only mere man,
whereas the salvation of the world, advances in the strength of such a
righteousness, atonement, or justification, as was procured indeed by one
man, but this one man was Jesus Christ, who is valuable with thousand thousands
of men, and ten thousand times ten thousand thousands. So that what he has
purposely, and with all his might done for the justification and salvation of
the world, must needs be of an incomparable far greater efficacy to carry
these before it, then the stumbling, or unadvised sin of one poor, mere,
and mean man (in comparison) can be to procure the condemnation of it.

Only I desire that it should be here considered and remembered, that there is
nothing said in all this Conclusion, any ways to extenuate, either the demerit
or guilt of Adams sin, beneath their just proportions and degrees, but only
to show, that there is a great excess of merit in the obedience of Christ,
above the rate and proportion of demerit in the disobedience of Adam.

There being these and other differences between Adam, in his condemning the
world, and Christ in his Act or Work in saving it: it is evident that all such
arguments or reasonings which are drawn from specialites and particularities
of agreement between them, are invalid and insufficient, except they have some
other foundation to bear them.

That which makes a true and lively Faith isntrumental in Justification, to
it, whether descent, property or act, but somewhat that is extrinsecall, and
purely adventitious, viz. the force and efficacy of that will, good pleasure,
ordination, covenant, and appointment of God in that behalf. As it was neither
the stature nor comeliness of Aarons person, nor his descent from Levy, nor
his grace, nor his wisdom, nor his knowledge, nor any service formerly done
by him, either unto God, or his Church, nor any thing that in any propriety of
speech could be called his, that made him an high Priest, but Gods calling him
unto, and investing him with that honor and function; he might have been all
that he was otherwise, and might have done all that he did otherwise, and yet
without this anointing and appointment from God, another might have been high
Priest, and not he: So might Faith have been Faith, both in the Original and
descent of it from the Spirit of God, as likewise in all that native beauty
and excellency that belongs to it, yea and put forth all those acts, which
otherwise it puts forth, as to bring men to Christ, to lay hold of Christ, etc.
and yet never have attained the honor that is now put upon it, never have
been isntrumental in Justification. And as the same anointing or calling from
God, which were conferred upon Aaron, would have made any other man Priest,
though of another Tribe, though less graceful of person, of meaner gifts and
abilities every-wayes than Aaron was, had they been conferred upon him; so had
any other grace, as love, patience, temperance, or the like, the force and
power of the same covenant or ordination from God to assist them, it cannot be
conceived, but that any of these would justify as effectually, as faith it
self now does. Therefore it is unquestionably evident, that Faith does not
justify, as it relates to Christ or as it apprehends him, or redemption by
him, or the like, because all these, and such like properties or acts as these
are essential and natural unto Faith (I mean to such a Faith as we speak
of) and that Faith which has not, or does not all this, is no true, lively, or
effectual Faith, or isntrumental in justification: Wherefore, if Faith should
justify in regard, or by virtue of any of these, it should justify by it
self, or by some dignity, quality, or act that is proper to it, or inherent in
it. Hence it is that Scripture still suspends the justifying power or property
of Faith, upon the will, free grace, and good pleasure of God, but never upon
any act or quality proper to it self. This is the will of him that sent me
(says our Savior, Ioh. 6.40.) that every man that sees the Son, and
believes in him should have everlasting life, etc. clearly implying. 1. That
it is not any seeing of Christ, either corporally or spiritually, nor any
believing in him that could carry eternal life, had it not the efficacy of
the will of God to strengthen it thereunto. And 2 that had this Will of God
fallen in conjunction with any other grace, or act of grace besides Faith they
would have carried eternal life; after the same manner, and with as high an
hand, as believing now does. Naamans leprosy was cureable only by the waters
of Jordan, why? because the will and decree of God concerning this effect were
upon these waters, and upon these only; Abana and Pharpar, or any other River
whatsoever would have done as much, had the same decree of God concurred with
them. When causes have an intrinsecall and natural power and efficacy to
produce their effects, it is very improper (if not ridiculous) to ascribe such
effects to the will and good pleasure of God. As to say it is the will of God,
that the grace of patience should make a man patient, or the grace of humility,
should make a man humble, or that such an element as we call fire, should
burn, or the like, though there be a truth in them; yet there is so little
savor or weight of truth in them, that such sayings are not worthy the holy
Ghost, and neither these nor any of their fellows of like importance to be
found in the whole Book of God. So to say, that it is the Will of God, that
believing in Christ should justify, and so save men, if believing in Christ
simply as it is believing in Christ did it, were an eccentricall expression,
and no where to be paralleled in the Scriptures, I might add many other
Scriptures, as Ioh. 1.12. where it is said, that to those that received Christ,
i. that believed in him, God gave the power or prerogative to be his Sons, i.
decreed that such should be Sons unto him, and by virtue of such a decree,
really made them such upon their believing; which clearly shows, that
believing in Christ, as such, does not make a Son of God, but receives this
power or prerogative by especial gift from God: which gift might have been
given to any other grace, as well as believing. So Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are
saved, through Faith, viz. in Christ: therefore Faith does not save simply, as,
or because Christ is the object of it, but by the efficacy and force of that
gracious and good pleasure of God whereby he has covenanted with his creature
that such a Faith shall save it; which good pleasure or Covenant of God with
men concerning Faith, is called, Romans 3.27. the Law of Faith which Law is that
which gives it that strength and power which it now has, to justify and save.
It were easy to make this pile of Scriptures large: but those that have been
touched, are sufficient to show which way they generally incline in this
particular.

Neither is that common plea, viz. that Faith justifies in relation to its
object, or as it receives and apprehends Christ, or Christ's righteousness,
or the like, of any value, if it be duly considered. The strength of the
argument is usually bound up in this similitude. As the hand is said to enrich
a man, because it receives the money or treasure, whereby he is enriched; so
Faith must needs be said to justify, because it receives Christ, who is our
righteousness, and by whom we are justified. To this I answer, that it is not
simply the taking silver or gold with the hand, that enricheth a man, no nor
the silver or gold so taken, that simply enricheth him. A man may be never the
richer for receiving great sums of money of silver and gold; nay, a man may
be much the poorer and more miserable for receiving or taking money, if he
receives or takes it contrary to the Laws: As when a thief breaks into an
house, and takes away much treasure with him, or puts forth his hand to take a
man's purse by the highways side; his hand in these cases cannot be said to
make him rich because it receives treasure: neither does the treasure so
received make him rich, but poor and miserable, because now he is obnoxious to
the sentence of the Law, and ownes his life and all he is worth besides, unto
it. Therefore if a man's hand enricheth him by receiving that which does enrich
him, it does it not simply as it receives it (for then it should do it
always, and in all cases whatsoever) but it does it by virtue of that Law, or
agreement of the state where he lives, which secureth a man in the quiet
possession and enjoyment, of such money or treasure, as he lawfully receives
to his own use. So, though Christ be a treasure of righteousness and
justification in himself it does not presently follow, that whosoever takes
hold on him, or believes in him, should presently be made righteous, or
justified by him: but here must intervene some Law, Covenant, or Decree from
God, to establish and authorize such a believing or laying hold on him to be a
man's righteousness or justification. We do not suppose they can, but for
argument sake we will suppose, that if the Devils should believe on Christ,
hoping, or expecting to be justified by him as men do, who believing are
justified, yet they should be never the nearer any justification by him, though
he be a treasure of righteousness. Why? because God has made no Law, Promise,
Covenant, or agreement with them, that they should be justified by Faith:
therefore if it were possible for them to believe as men do, yet Christ would
be no more any righteousness unto them than now he is.

Much more might be said (and may be said elsewhere) for the evidencing of this
Conclusion: but here I would hasten. In the mean time I desire to explain my
self a little further; touching this Conclusion, only in two words. When I
deny that Faith justifies in its relation to its object, or as it lays hold
on Christ; I am far from saying, or conceiving that any Faith should
justify, but that only which lays hold on Christ; yea, I grant, and verily
believe, that whereas there are many other acts of Faith besides believing or
laying hold on Christ, as viz. to comfort and strengthen and purify the hearts
of those that believe, and the like, yet that decree or good pleasure of God,
which (I conceive makes Faith justifying, concurres with it toward this great
effect, only in that act of laying hold on Christ, and not in any of the
other. So, that in this sense, I grant and hold that Faith may be said to
justify, as it lays hold of Christ comparatively, viz. as this act of Faith
is distinguished, from those other acts, which it likewise produces; it does
not justify, either as it comforts, or as it purifies the heart, etc. but
only as it relates to Christ, and lays hold on him. This only is that
which I deny, that this act of Faith, whereby it receives or lays hold on
Christ, has that in the nature, or inherently in it, or any otherwise, or by
any other means, then from the will and good pleasure of God, which makes it
availeable unto justification.

It has no foundation, Cap. 19. Sect. 1.2.
but chiefly, because it is given in with both hands by the chief masters of
that way of Imputation which we oppose. Christ (says Bishop Downham Tract of
Iustifica. p. 40.
) was made sin, or a sinner, by our sins, not formally (God forbid) but by
imputation, etc. And Bishop Davenant De Iustit. Habit. ^^einhaerent. Desp. c.
24. p. 33. Voluit Christus peccata ita in se suscipere, ut non inde peccator,
sed hostia pro peccato constitueretur. idem. p. 333.
calls it a thing repugnant to the salvation of men, and blasphemous once to
imagine, that Christ should be made wicked, [ i. formally a sinner] by any
imputation of sin to him. And a little before, he makes the impu^ation of
sin to Christ, to stand in the translation of the punishment of sin, and
curse of the Law upon him. And in another place, Christ was willing so far to
take our sins upon him, not as to be made a sinner hereby, but [onely] a
sacrifice for sin. So that if the men with whom we have to do in this
business of imputation, would but stand their own ground, and walk peaceably
with their own principles, we should soon comprimize. For their great maxim
is, that in that manner wherein our sins are imputed unto Christ, in the same
Christ's righteousness is imputed unto us. If so, then are not we made formally
righteous by any righteousness of Christ imputed to us because Christ is not
made formally a sinner by any sin of ours imputed to him.

Faith does not only (if at all declare a man to be righteous, or in a
justified estate, but is the very means by which Justification or
righteousness is obtained, so that no man is to be reputed (nor indeed is) a
person justified in the sight of God (specially if we speak of years of
discretion) until he obtaines this grace of justification, by believing. This
is the constant Doctrine of the Scriptures: and there is not one of many of our
Reformed Divines that do oppose it. He that believes not (says our Savior
himself, Mar. 16.16.) shall be damned. If Justification were in order of time
before faith, it might very possibly be that many might escape damnation, who
yet never believed, because they might die in that interim of time, which is
supposed to lie between a man's justification, and his believing. The like
argument might be framed from that passage also, Ioh. 8.24. Except you believe
that I am he, you shall die in your sins. But there are other texts of
Scripture so pregnant for this truth, that there is no rising up with reason
against them. Therefore we conclude (says the Apostle) that a man is justified
by Faith, without the works of the Law, Romans 3.28. That which he had labored
hitherto, and labors on in some Chapters following, to prove, was not how,
or by what means a man might know, or be declared, either to himself or
others that he is a justified person, but how and by what means he might come
to be justified. These two are of a very far differing consideration and
importance. It is of a thousand times more concernement to a man to be
justified, than to know that he is justified. Besides, if the Apostles scope
and intent here had been to argue the declaration, or to propound the means
of a discovery or manifestation of a person justified, and not simply to prove
and show, how and by what means justification it self is to be attained,
there can no reason be given, either why he should have excluded the works of
the Law, or insisted upon Faith, rather than many other graces, as love,
patience, etc. especially why he should have insisted on Faith only; without
the association of other graces. For it is certain, that obedience to the Law,
and so love, patience, temperance, humility, etc. are as effectual, nay, have
a pre-eminence above Faith it self, for the discovery of a man in the estate
of Justification. Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my
faith by my works, Iam. 2.18. Therefore works are more easy to be seen, and
more apt for discovery or manifestation, then Faith: for that which discovers
or makes things manifest, is light ( Ephesians. 5.13.) whereas that which needs
manifestation, is darkness in (comparison) and therefore the more unfit and
incapable of being a means for the discovery and manifestation of other
things. So elsewhere, love is represented as a grace of special use and
service this way, I mean for the discovery and manifestation of justification,
or of a man in a justified condition, but is never mentioned, as of any use for
justification it self. We know that we have passed from death to life because
we love the brethren, 1 John 3.14.) The Scripture does not any where ascribe
the like discovery of justification, unto Faith: but justification it self it
ascribes unto Faith again and again. Therefore being justified by Faith,
etc. Romans 5.1. So ver. 2. so Gal. 3.8. The Scriptures foreseeing that God would
justify the Gentiles by faith, etc. It would make a sense very unsavory and
weak, to carry the interpretation of these words, thus. The Scriptures
foreseeing that God would declare by Faith, that the Gentiles were justified:
neither would such a sense any ways accommodate that which follows.

But I hasten, Gal. 2.16, We knowing that a man is not justified by the works
of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, Even we have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, etc. not because we
were righteous or justified, or that we might know our selves to be justified,
but that we might be justified by the faith of Jesus. If the Apostle should
here speak of a declarative justification, there is no relation why he should
have excluded the works of the Law, these being every whit of as declarative
an importance this way, as believing it self, nay, above it (as we proved
before) and the Scripture it self plainly intimates: Little children (says
John) let no man deceive you, He that does righteousness is righteous, etc. i.
is thereby, viz. by his doing righteousness, declared to be righteous or a
person justified: it is no where said in such a sense, that he that believes,
is righteous. Therefore it is evident, that the opposition which this Apostle
still makes between the works of the Law, and believing, in the point of
justification, is not at all in respect of the notification or discovery of it,
either to the justified themselves or others, but simply and absolutely in
respect of the effecting it. Besides, to make Paul say thus, that they had
believed in Christ, that they might know that they had been justified by
believing in him, is to make him speak at a very low rate of reason, and
understanding, and not much short of contradictions. For with what tolerable
congruity or construction of reason, can a man be said, to believe with this
intent, or for this end, that he may know he is justified by believing? The
doing of a thing for a certain end, is no means to certify, or assure any
man, that the end is, or shall be, much less that it has already been
obtained, by the doing it. Much more might be argued both from the Scriptures,
and reason, and testimony of Authors for this Conclusion, if it were either
necessary or seasonable in this place.

Neither are the things that can be objected against it, God justifies the
ungodly, the meaning is not as if the person to be justified must needs be
ungodly, i in the midst of his profaneness, in the very nicke and instant of
time, wherein God justifies him. But God may be said to be he that justifies
the ungodly, because he has found out a way and means whereby to juftifie
sinners and ungodly men, viz. Faith in Jesus Christ, which neither the Law
knows, nor could ever the wisdom of men or Angels have imagined. The
justification of the ungodly is ascribed unto God, as an high and excellent
clogium of his wisdom and goodness; as when Christ is said to save sinners,
the meaning is not, that men are actually wicked and sinful, when salvation is
actually conferred upon them, but that he affords means to those that are
sinners, as viz. the grace of Faith, Repentance, etc. whereby they may be (and
many are) saved.

Or else secondly Answer might be, that God may be said to justify, not only
when he absolves and perfecteth the act or work of justification i. when he
passes a sentence of absolution upon the believer, but even when he begins
it, i. when he first touches, moves, or incline the heart to believe, upon
which justification properly so called, depends and follows immediately. Now
before and until this supernatural touch or motion of the heart from God, a
man in strictness and propriety of speech may be called, ungodly. It is a
common rule among Divines for the interpretation of many Scriptures: In
Scripturis, saepe fieri dicitur, quod fieri incipit. In Scripture that is often
said to be done, which is only begun to be done, and whereof the cause only
is yet in being. Thus Prove. 11.2. Shame is said to come, when pride comes,
viz. because pride is the cause of shame; and Tit. 3.5. God is said to have
saved men, when he has conferred regeneration, or the washing of the new birth
upon them, because regeneration is a means of salvation; besides many like
instances that might be added. In like manner justification may be said to
come, when Faith comes; and God may be said to justify, when he gives men
Faith, whereby they shall be justified, etc. In this sense therefore God may be
said to justify the ungodly, because he gives Faith unto men being yet
sinful, whereby they are justified.

Thirdly, (and lastly) Further answer might be, that there being no prioritie
of time at all but only of nature between a man's believing and his being
justified; so that in the very first instant and touch of time wherein he can
be conceived truly to believe, he is to be conceived justified also; God may
as properly be said to justify the ungodly, though he justifies only those
that believe, as to give Faith, or the grace of believing unto the ungodly. The
reason is plain, because in respect of time, a man is as immediately ungodly
before his justification, as he is before his believing, though he be not
justified,

The later Objections against the Conclusion in hand, is, if a man has the
Spirit of God given him, before he believes, he must needs be justified
before he believes: otherwise it must be said, that a man may have the Spirit
of grace and sanctification, and yet be in an estate of wrath and condemnation.
And that a man has, and must have the Spirit of Grace before he believes, it
is evident, because otherwise he could not believe.

To this I answer, first, by concession, that a man is not able of himself,
and without the special presence and assistance of the Spirit of grace, to
raise an act of a true believing in his soul.

But secondly, by way of exception, I answer two things, first, that though a
man cannot believe, without the gracious assistance of the Spirit of God, yet
does it not follow from hence, that there should be the least imaginable
distance, or space of time, between a man's receiving the Spirit, and his
believing, wherein he should remain liable to condemnation, because the first
touch of the Spirit upon the soul, and the act of believing, may be, (...),
and stick as fast and close together in respect of time, as the scales of
Leviathan do in respect of place, which (by the description and testimony of
God himself, who best knows their composure and frame) are so near one to
another, that no air can come between, Ioh. 41.16. The Sun was not first
made, and afterward shined: but his shining in respect of time, is as ancient
as his creation, there was not the least distance or space of time between,
wherein any thing could be done, or the least motion performed. So may the
coming of the Spirit of Grace unto the soul, and the act of the souls
believing, touch in one and the same point of time (an infinite power being able
to work any thing in a moment) in which case it is evident, that there is no
place for the inconvenience mentioned in the objection, viz. that a man endued
with the spirit of grace should for a time be in an estate of condemnation,
except he were justified before he believes.

2. Heb 6.4.) that is, may have many great and excellent workings of the holy
Ghost within them, and upon them; so may men to whom the grace of justification
(and salvation upon it) is intended by God, have the like workings of the
Spirit upon them for a time, and yet have no work at all upon them truly
saving. i. which has an essential and necessary connection with salvation. And
till some such work as this is wrought, though the Spirit of God be in them,
yet are they under condemnation, and dying in their present condition, without
somefurther work of grace should certainly perish. Now though there may be
many workings of the Spirit of God in men before they believe, which may be
called Saving in regard of their issue and event; yet is there none formally
saving, that is, that has salvation promised unto it, till Faith it self be
wrought. The first touch of any work upon the soul, that is, either truly
sanctifying, or necessarily saving is that whereby the soul is enabled to
touch upon Christ for its justification; neither is the habit of Faith first
planted in the soul by the holy Ghost, and afterward, the soul enabled by
it, 'to exercise and put forth an act of believing whereby it, is justified:
but as the common and more probable opinion is, that fruit-bearing trees, were
at first created with ripe fruits upon them, so does God at first create both
the habit and act of faith in the soul in the same moment of time, and not the
one before the other. So that the first act of believing whereby the creature
is primarily justified, is not raised out of any preexistent habit or grace of
Faith, as all after acts of believing are, but is as immediately the product or
effect of the power of God as the habit of Faith it self is; even as the
fruits which (according to the opinion mentioned were created with and upon
their trees, did not grow out of these trees, nor were produced in a natural
way by them, as all after fruits growing upon them were, but were as proper and
immediate effects of the creative power of God, as the trees themselves. So we
see at last, that the conclusion laid down, is no ways prejudiced nor shaken
by either of these objections.

The sentence or curse of the Law, was not properly executed upon Christ in his
death, but this death of Christ was a ground or consideration unto God,
whereupon to dispense with his Law, and to let fall or suspend the execution of
the penalty or curse therein threatened. This is evident, because the threatening
and curse of the Law, was not at all bent or intended against the innocent or
righteous, but against transgressors only. Therefore God in inflicting death
upon Christ, being innocent and righteous, did not follow the purport or intent
of the Law. If he had inflicted death upon all the transgressors of the Law,
this had bin a direct execution of the Law, because this was that which the Law
threatened and intended. But God in spareing and forbearing the transgressors,
(who according to the tenor of the Law, should have bin punished) manifestly
dispenceth with the Law, and does not execute it. As when Zaleucus (the Locrian
Lawgiver) caused one of his own eyes to be put out, that one of his Sons eyes
might be spared, who according both to the Letter and intent of the Law, should
have lost both, he did not precisely execute the Law, but gave a sufficient
account or consideration, why it should for that time be dispensed with, and
not put into execution. In this sense indeed Christ may be said to have
undergone or suffered the penalty or curse of the Law: 1o, it was the curse or
penalty of the Law, as now hanging over the head of the world, and ready to be
executed upon all men for sin, that occasioned his suffering of those things
which he endured. Had not the curse of the Law either bin at all, or not
incurred by man, doubtless Christ had not suffered at all. Again 2o; (and
somewhat more properly) Christ may be said to have suffered the curse of the
Law, because the things which he suffered, were of the same nature and kind (at
least in part) with those things, which God intended by the curse of the Law,
against transgressors, namely death. But if by the curse of the Law we
understand either that entire systeme and historical body (as it were) of
penalties and evils, which the Law it self intends in the term, or else
include and take in the intent of the Law as touching the quality of the
persons, upon whom it was to be executed; in neither of these senses did Christ
suffer the curse of the Law, neither ever has it, nor ever shall be suffered,
by any transgressor of the Law that shall believe in him. So that God required
the death and sufferings of Christ, not that the Law properly, either in the
letter or intention of it, might be executed, but on the contrary, that it
might not be executed, I mean upon those, who being otherwise obnoxious unto
it should believe.

Neither did God require the death and sufferings of Christ as a valuable
consideration whereon to dispense with his Law toward those that believe, God
might with as much justice, as wisdom (if not much more) have passed by the
transgression of his Law without consideration or satisfaction. For him that
has a lawful authority and power, either to impose a Law, or not, in case he
shall impose it, it rather concern's in point of wisdom and discretion, not to
see his Law despised and trampled upon without satissaction, then in point of
justice. No man will say, that in case a man has bin injured and wronged, that
therefore he is absolutely bound in Justice, to seek satisfaction, though he be
never so eminent in the grace and practice of Justice: but in many cases of
injuries sustained, a man may be bound in point of wisdom and discretion, to
seek satisfaction in one kind or other. Austin of old, and D. Twist of late,
besides many other Orthodox and learned Divines See Mr. Gataker Defense of Mr.
Wotton. p. 59.60.
, hold, that God, if it had pleased him, might have pardoned Adams
transgression, without the atonement made by the death of Christ. Therefore
according to the opinion of these men, it had bin no ways contrary to the
Justice of God, nor derogatory to the glory of it, if he had freely pardoned
it, without any consideration or atonement. Only it is true, his requiring
that full satisfaction which has now bin made by Christ, is very suitable and
agreeable to that nature in him which we call JUSTICE, or severity against
sin: and if he had pardoned sin without it, he had lost or passed over an
opportunity of the declaration and manifestation of it to the world, but had
done nothing repugnant to it, or to the prejudice or disparagement of it. And
thus far I can willingly subscribe to the opinion. But whether such a free and
satisfactionlesse condonation may be conceived to have had any possible
consistence with the wisdom of God, (and therefore whether it had bin simply
possible or no) I am yet somewhat unsatisfied. For a man to over-slip an
opportunity, that might lawfully be taken hold of, and managed by him to some
special advantage to himself, either in point of Reputation, Estate, etc. or
the like, is repugnant to the principles of sound wisdom and discretion, but
not of Justice; at least not of Justice properly so called. And the Holy Ghost
(Heb. 2.11.) making it a thing so well becoming God ((...) etc. i. For it
became him, etc.) intending to bring many children unto glory, to consecrate
the Prince of their salvation through sufferings, i. not to save men without
the death and sufferings of Christ, seems rather to ascribe this carriage and
method of the business to the wisdom of God, then to his Justice. But because
confidence requires better grounds, then present conceptions and apprehensions,
I forbear further contending about the point in hand, for the present.

Only I desire this may be considered and remembered, as fully evident from the
tenor of the Conclusion last estsblished, that neither did the Law require of
Christ the suffering of those things which he suffered, nor were the things
which he suffered every ways the same (though in consideration, value, and
importance, the same fully) with those, the suffering whereof the Law threatened
against all transgressors.

CAP. III.
Certain distinctio^s propounded and explained, necessary for the further
understanding of the business in question, and the clearing of many
difficulties incident to it.
THe word Justification is taken in a double sense: actively, or passively: In
the active signification (as far as concern's the question in hand, and as
the Scripture use of it extends in the great business of the Justification
of a sinner before God) it most usually signifies that act of God, whereby he
justifies, i. absolveth a believing sinner from the guist of, and punishment
due to, his sins. It may, in this active signification, signify also, any
act of any other efficient cause of Justification whatsoever (of which kind
there are many, as we shall show afterward) whereby it operates or contributes
any thing, toward this effect, the justification of a sinner. Yea to this
active signification of the word, may be referred the act of the form it
self, or formal cause of Justification which also in a way proper to it, may
be said to justify.

In the passive sense, justification may signify the effect it self of any or
of all the former actions, but most properly and frequently it signifies, that
comcompleate and entire effect wherein all their several influences and
contributions meet and center together, viz. that alteration or change which is
made in the person, or rather in the estate or condition of a person, when he
is justified; which effect, alteration, or change, stands in this, that
whereas he was before the passing of such an act upon him, a man under the
guilt of sin, and liable to condemnation, now he is a free man, acquitted and
discharged from both. In the former sense, justification is atributed to God 1
Romans 8.30. Whom he has called, them also he has justified, etc. and ver. 33.
it is God that justifies, and so to Faith often. In the latter sense, it is
attributed to, or spoken of men. Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by Faith,
etc. and ver. 18. Even so by the righteousness (or justification) of one, the
free gift came upon many to the justification of life. i. to the full
discharge and acquitting them from all sin, upon which life and salvation
always follow. So that if the Question be asked what our justification is, or
wherein it stands, it must first be inquired, what justification it is, that
the Question intends, for active justification is one thing, and passive
another, and answer is to be made accordingly: In like manner remission of
sins, signifies either Gods act, whereby he remitteth a manssinnes: or else
the effect of this act in and upon him, whose sins are so remitted. And
generally all actions, either have, or in sufficient propriety of speech, may
have the same name with their proper passions or effects (yea and sometimes
with the relations resulting from them). As calefaction, frigefaction, etc. It
is true, there are several other acceptions and significations of the word
Justification, besides absolution from sin, when it is, or as it may be used
in other cases, or upon other occasions: as Christ himself is said to have bin
justified 1 Timothy 16. who yet had no sins forgiven him: and Abraham is said to
have bin justified by works. Jam. 2.21. who yet had not his sins forgiven by
or through his works. So a man that is falsely accused, may be justified, and
yet have no offense forgiven him, as Christ was by Pilate when he professed
that he found no fault in him. Luk 23.4. But in the case and Justification of a
sinner before God, the word justification still signifies and imports,
absolution from, or remission of sins, together with the punishment due to
them: Neither can there any instance be produced from the Scriptures, of any
other signification.

Justice, or righteousness, God, it signifies sometimes, that universal and
absolute holiness and integrity of his nature, which makes him infinitely
averse from doing any thing, little or much, contrary to the true rules of
Justice and Equity, and inclines him only to do things agreeable hereunto. Thus
it seems to be taken. Psalm. 11.7. For the righteous Lord loves
righteousness, etc. So Dan. 9.14. Rove. 16.5. besides many other places.
Sometimes again (and that very frequently) it signifies, that nature in God
which we commonly call truth, or faithfulness, in keeping promise. Thus it is
taken, Psalm. 36.6. Thy righteousness is like the great Mountains. i. thy
truth in thy promises can never be shaken, or removed: Thus Heb. 6.10. God is
said not to be unrighteous, i. (as Paraeus well interprets) not unfaithful in
his promise, etc. So again, 1 Ioh. 1.9. God is faith full and Just to forgive
us our sins, i. constant in his promise this way. Thirdly, by the
righteousness of God, is often meant that gracious affection and disposition
of his toward his people, by reason whereof he is still propense and
inclineable, to do them good, as either to relieve and support them in
trouble, or to deliver them out of trouble, or the like. And this (doubtless)
is the most frequent signification of the word of all other. Thus Psalm. 145.7.
They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing
of thy righteousness, that is, of thy clemency and grace toward thy people.
So Psalm 51.14. Mica. 6.5. besides other places without number. Fourthly, that
gracious purpose and intent of God toward his elect, for giving them saving
Faith in due time, is sometimes called the righteousness of God. Thus, 2 Pet.
1.1. those believers to whom Peter writes, are said to have obtained like
precious Faith with him, through the righteousness of God, etc. Fifthly, (that
which is of most concernment to the question in hand) by the righteousness of
God, is sometimes meant, that Justification, or that way, method, or means of
Justification, whereby God Justifies, and makes men righteous. Thus Romans 3.21.
The righteousness of God which is without the Law, i. that way and course
which God has found out for the Justification or making men righteous, which
consists not in the observation or works of the Law, is said to be manifested,
being witnessed by the Law. ( i. the writeings of Moses) and the Prophets. So
the verse following: the righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of Jesus
Christ. In the like sense the word is also used Rom, 1.17. Romans 10.3. In all
which places (with their fellows) by the righteousness of God, is meant that
Justification, or way of making men righteous, which God himself out of his
special wisdom and grace, has found out and recommended unto the world, as
being far differing from that way of Justification, which the wisdom of the
flesh and the thoughts of men run so much upon, viz. by works and observation
of the Law. In the same kind of expression, men's own righteousness, signifies
( Romans 10.3.) that way or means by which they intend or seek to be Justified.

Some Divines of great worth and fame, affirm, Iustitiae ve^abulum, in
Scripturis, se mper notas Dei bonitatem, Miseri^ordians, salutem and
redemptionem: nunquam vere adhibetur ad id significandum, quod vulgo iustitiam
dicimus, ne^pe affectum illum quo Deus ad scelera et peccata. vindicanda
propendet: irae and iudicij vocabula ad hoc significandum potius adhibentur.
Cameron: Myroth: in ve. 21. cap. 3. ad Romans p. 178.
that the word Iustitia, Justice or righteousness, in Scripture, never
signifies, that which is commonly called Justice in God, that is, that nature
or affection in God, which inclines him to punish, or take vengeance on sin;
(this they say is usually expressed by those terms, wrath and judgment) but
either the goodness, mercy, and salvation of God, or the like. But whether
this observation will stand or no, I make some question. For in the sixth place,
I conceive that sometimes, that very affection in God mentioned, viz. his
severity against sin and sinners, is expressed by this word, righteousness.
In this sense the word (I conceive) may well be taken. Romans 3.25.26. etc. that
he ( i God) might be Just, and a Iustifier of him which is of the Faith of
Jesus. that is, that God might appear and be declared to be a severe Judge and
punisher of sin, and yet justify and acquit all those from sin, who
believe in Jesus Christ. Seventhly, Christ himself sometimes seems to be
called the righteousness of God, as Esa 42.21. The Lord is well pleased for
his righteousness sake. So Esa. 51.5. etc. Now Christ may be called the
righteousness of God, because he is the great Author or Mediator of that
righteousness or Justification which God vouchsafes unto the world. Lastly,
the society and company of those that are made righteous or justified by God
through Christ, are called the righteousness of God: 2 Cor. 5.21. of which
phrase we shall speak further in this Distinction.

Again 2o, this word Justice or righteousness, when applied to men, sometimes
signifies, that general frame of the heart or soul, consisting of all those
holy dispositions and affections, which are found in some degree, in every
true-borne child of God. In this sense God himself attributes righteousness
unto Noah Genesis 7.1. Thee have I seen righteous, etc. In this sense
righteousness is opposed to the corrupt and sinful frame of the heart in the
estate of unregeneratenesse, and a righteous man to an unregenerate man. This
sense is obvious in Scripture. Secondly, the fruits, works, or actions, arising
from such a frame of heart, are sometimes called, righteousness. Thus it is
used. Act. 10.35. 1 Ioh. 3.7. and elsewhere. Thirdly, that particular and
special disposition, which inclines a man to deal uprightly and according to
the rules of equity, with all men, and is opposed to fraud, violence,
oppression, etc. together with the work and fruit of such a disposition,
sometimes goes under the Name of Justice or righteousness. See Genesis 30.33.
Deuteronomy. 1.16. Esa 33, 15. besides many other places. Fourthly, (and with more
concernment to the point in hand) Justification it self (in the passive sense
declared in the former distinction) is sometimes (by a metonymie of the cause
for the effect) expressed by the word, righteousness. Thus Gal. 2.21. If
righteousness ( i. Justification) come by the Law, i. by the works of the Law,
then Christ is dead in vain. So Romans 10, 4. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness ( i. for Justification) to them that believe. So ver. 5. Moses
describes the righteousness which is of the Law, etc. i. shows wherein that
Justification consists, which is to be attained by the Law, if men will seek
to be justified by it: So again. To. 5, 17, The gift of righteousness, i. of
Justification: and ver. 18, by the righteousness of one, etc. i. by the
justifying of one (as the former translation reads it, and that I conceive more
agreeably to the original (...).) or rather by one justifying, i. by one
procurement of Justification, the gift came upon all men ( viz. that believe)
unto Justification of life: meaning, that Christ by one and the same means
used for the justifying of men, purchased and procured the Justification of all
those that should believe, be they never so many, and that such a
Justification, which shall be accompanied with salvation: See more instances of
this signification of the word. Romans 8.4. Romans 9.30. Romans 10.10. 1 Cor. 1.30.
etc. with diverse others. Thus also, in the same propriety of speech, to make
righteous and to justify, are but the same: as to make wicked and to condemn.
Compare Romans 5. ver. 19. with ver. 18. Fifthly, sometimes Christ himself is (by
an ellipsis of the efficient or procuring cause very usually in Scripture)
called the righteousness of men. i. the Author or procurer of their
Justification or righteousness: as Ier. 23.6. 33.16. etc. In the same figure
of speech, he is elsewhere called our hope, our life, our sanctification, our
redemption, etc. i. the Author, and procurer of all these respectively. Sixthly,
by a metonymy of the cause for the effect, or of the antecedent for the
consequent (a common dialect also in Scriptures) as well the benefits, and
rewards of a man's righteousness, in the first and third acception of the word,
as the blessings and privileges which accompany that righteousness which we
have by the merits of Christ in our Justification, are sometimes expressed by
the term, righteousness. Thus Job 33.26. God will render unto man his
righteousness. i. will recompense and reward every man's uprightness and
integrity, with suitable blessings, and expressions of his love So Psalm. 112.9.
His righteousness remains for ever. i. the praise, and other rewards of his
righteousness, shall be durable and lasting. So Gal. 5.5. We through the
Spirit wait for the hope of the righteousness of Faith. i. for the great and
royal privileges promised by God (and accordingly hoped for by us) to that
Justification which is by Faith in Jesus Christ, See the first Chapter of the
former part of this discourse. Sect. 4. p. 12.
etc. Seventhly, the word righteousness, in some construction of words with
it, has no precise or proper signification, distinct and apart from the word
with which it is joined, but together with that word makes a sense or
signification of one and the same thing. Thus in the phrase of imputing
righteousness ( Romans 4.6.11. etc.) the word imputing, See impedit ira. etc. p.
43.
does not signify one thing, and righteousness another, but together they
signify one and the same act of God, which we call, free justifying: So that
to impute righteousness, is nothing else but freely to justify: and
righteousness imputed, free justification (passive) It is th^^ in many idio
m's and proprieties of languages. In that Hebrew phrase of covering the feet,
Judge. 3.24. 1 Samuel 24.3. Neither of the words are to be taken in any proper or
peculiar signification, but together they signify one and the same thing, and
that differing from the proper signification of either of the words. Many other
instances might be given in several phrases or forms of speech the true sense
and meaning whereof is not to be gathered from the proper signification which
the words have severally in other constructions, but from the concurrence and
joint aspect of them in that phrase. Thus the Scripture phrase of going in to a
woman is not to be interpreted, according to the significations of the words,
in other sentences or constructions of speech; but according to the importance
which they still jointly have when they are found together.

Eighthly (and lastly) the word, righteousness according to the propriety of
the Hebrew stongue, which often uses abstracts for concretes, signifies
sometimes a Society or company of righteous or iustifiedones, sometimes of just
or upright ones. In the former sense you have it, 2 Cor. 5.21. That we should
be made the righteousness of God in him, i. a company of righteous or
justified persons, made such by God, through Jesus Christ. In the latter sense
you have it Esa 60.17. where God promises to his Church and people to make
their exactors righteousness i. a generation or company of men that should
deal righteously and fairly with them. In this dialect of speech, poverty
(for so it is in the original) is put for a company of poor men. 2 Kings
24.14. So Captivity for a company of Captives. 2 Chr. 28.5. Deuteronomy. 21.10. and in
sundry other places. So again, circumcision for circumcised: Phil. 3.3.
election for elected, Romans 11.7. with the like.

So that as well in studying as arguing the Question in hand, great care must be
had, that we be not entangled and lose our selves in this multiplicitie of
significations of this word, righteousness, which is a word almost of
continual use and occurrence in the business of Justification, and yet of
such an ambiguous and different signification and importance, See sect. 4. See
Pareus De Iusti. Christi Active et Passive: p. 180. D. Prideaux Lect. 5. de
Iustifi. p. 162. Mr. Eradshaw Iustifica: p. 68, 69. etc. Mr. Forbez.
Iustificate. 25. p. 111, 112, etc
that without much heedfulnesse, it may occasion much stumbling and miscariage
in our understanding.

The righteousness or obedience of Christ is twofold, o^ of two kinds: the
one Divines call Iustitia personae, the righteousness of his person: the other
Iustitia meriti, the righteousness of his merit. The terms of Active and
Passive, wherein this Distinction is commonly conceived, are not altogether so
proper, because even in that obedience which we call Passive, Christ was in
some sort active, as willingly and freely submitting himself unto it.
Notwithstanding the Distinction might pass well enough in these terms,
Obedientia Christi duplex ^st: altera, quam vi legus communu, qua creatura
rationalus, verus homo cum esset; altera, quam vi legude mediatione peculiarus,
sive pacti de redemptionis negotio initi, quam neris humani Mediator et
Redemptor, Dro Patri, debu^t et exhibuit, Gataker against Gomarus, p. 4. See
further p. 15. (...) p. 25. ibid.
The righteousness of his person is that, whereby he iustifyeth himself only,
or is himself righteous: the righteonsnesse of his merit, is that whereby he
iustifyeth others. The former consists partly of that integrity of nature
which was in him, partly of that obedience which he performed to the moral
Law, or that Law which is generally imposed upon all men. The latter, of that
obedience or subjection which he performed to that peculiar Law of
Mediator-ship, which was imposed upon him alone, and never upon any man
besides. For it is evident that Christ both did and suffered many things, not
simply as he was man, but as he was Mediator: especially his voluntary
submission of himself unto death for the ransom and atonement of the world,
was the fulfilling of the great commandment in the peculiar Law of
Mediator-ship, being no ways bound by any precept in the Moral Law thereunto.
If Christ had been bound as man, or by the Moral Law, to die for the sins of
men, his death had bin ineffectuall for others. For certain it is, that no man
discharges another man's debt, Qui obedientiae activae aut sanctitati nativae,
meritum justitla ascribunt, morrem Christi sine dubie innnem reddunt. Pareus De
Justice: Christi Activ. and Pass. p. 181.182. etc.
by paying his own: and our Savior himself, injoyneth his Disciples, when
they should do only that which was commanded them, though they should do this
to the uttermost, yet to say that they were unprofitable Servants, they had
done but that which was their duty to do. Luk 17.10. Besides, he that
maintains, that Christ was bound by the moral Law to die for the sins of
men, says (in effect) that if he had not died, he had bin a sinner, and
deserved to have bin punished himself: and so extenuateth and abaseth to the
dust the infiniteness of that grace, which the Lord Jesus Christ manifested
unto the world, by his dying for it.

If it be objected and said, that other men are bound to lay down their lives
for the truth when they are called thereunto, and so for one another. 1 John
3.16. and this must needs be by the Moral Law: therefore Christ stood bound by
the same Law to do the like.

To this I answer, 1o, that men considered simply as men, and not as sinners,
or as men that have sinned, were not bound by any Law whatsoever to lay down
their lives at all, nor upon any occasion whatsoever: because God by promise
had settled the inheritance and possession of life upon innocence and
integrity, for ever. Therefore as the Apostle reasons in another case. Gal. 3,
21. Is the Law then against the promises of God? God forbid. So is it to be
conceived in this case, that the promise of God being, Dee this and thou shall
live, there was no Law that should contradict it, that is, that should enjoyne
a man being innocent, and doing all things required in the Law, to die or part
with his life, upon any terms whatsoever.

Therefore secondly, that obligation or commandment which now lies upon men
to part with their lives, either for witnessing the truth, or upon any other
occasion, was not originally any branch of the Moral Law; but partly by reason
of the interveening of sin, but especially by reason of the great benefit of
the redemption of the world from sin by Jesus Christ, it is now a superadded
duty (amongst many others) somewaies reducible to the Moral Law, but not
properly or directly contained in it. And thus the Scripture it self plainly
determines. For speaking of this duty, of laying down a man's life, in case
the spiritual (yea or perhaps the temporal rall necessity of some men do
require it (and doubtless there is the same reason of all other cases in this
kind) it grounds the equity and obligement of it, upon the grace and benefit of
Redemption by the death of Jesus Christ. Hereby have we perceived love, that he
laid down his life for us: THEREFORE we ought also to lay down our lives for
our Brethren. 1 John 3.16.

So that (in the third place) Jesus Christ being universally free from sin in
and from the first instant of his conception to his death, and having none (nor
any need of any) to die for his redemption, could have no tie or obligation
upon him from the Moral Law, to lay down his life upon any occasion
whatsoever, in as much as this Law in the first institution and imposure of it,
requires death of no man upon no occasion but for sin (neither did it then
require this by any way or duty, but of threatening) neither does it now require
it of any man, but upon the supposall of sin, and that great deliverance from
sin, brought into the world by another, Jesus Christ.

Fourthly (and lastly) I answer yet further; that no man has ever any calling
from God by virtue of the Moral Law, as now it stands with all the additions
and improvements of it, to lay down his life, either for witnessing the truth,
or for the benefit of the Brethren, or for any other possible end or purpose,
when that end (whatsoever it be) for which this laying down a man's life seems
to be required, may be as well, that is, as Lawfully, and as sufficiently
provided for in another way. For certainly neither does the Moral Law, nor God
himself by virtue of any commandment in this Law, require of men at any time,
to die like fools: and what is it but to die like a fool, when a man shall
give his life for that, which might as well, and as effectually be procured by
him in another way? If therefore it be conceived, that Christ might be called
God by virtue of the Moral Law, to lay down his life for witnessing or
sealing the truth, I answer, that Christ could have as sufficiently provided
for the honor and advancement of Truth another way, as by his death, viz. by
the inward illumination and conviction of the judgementsand consciences of me^
by his spirit. Therefore he had no call by the Moral Law, to die for this end.
If it be yet objected: but the salvation of men his Brethren, could not be
provided for by him in any other way, but by his death only: Therefore in this
regard and for this end, he might be bound by the Moral Law, to die: To this I
answer (as before in part) that the Moral Law considered as simply moral, i.
as requiring only those duties of a man, which were required of him in his
estate of innocence, threateneth all sinners (without exception) with death,
without giving the least intimation or hope of any to die for them; so far is
it from imposing it by way of duty upon any man whatsoever, to die for them.
Therefore whatsoever may now be conceived to be imposed upon any man by way of
duty in this kind, does not arise from the original and native morality of the
Law, but from that alteration and change which the grace of redemption by Jesus
Christ, has made in the estate and condition of men, by reason whereof many
general principles and impressions of the preceptive or directive part of the
Law, are improved, and extended to many d^t^es, which were not at first
comprehended or intended in them. From all which duties it is evident, that the
Lord Christ, considered simply as a man, or as an innocent and sinlesse man, or
as having his condition no ways altered or made better by any Redemption by
any another,

Thus at last we have (I conceive) sufficiently cleared and established both
the truth and necessity of the distinction last propounded, viz. of the
righteousness of Christ, into that which is commonly called Active, wherein
his personal integrity and holiness is absolved, and made perfect; and that
which is called Passive, which is the righteousness of another Law differing
from that which is called Moral, and was performed by him, merely in relation
to the justification, or righteous-making of others. The truth and necessity of
the distinction, might be further evicted from the Scriptures, as from these
and such like. Esa. 53.11. 2 Cor. 5.21. Heb. 7.26. Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 3.18. etc.
By all which passages it is evident, that Christ does not justify others by the
moral righteousness of his person whereby himself was made righteous, but by
that other righteousness, which we may call mediatorie, satisfactorie,
passive, or meritorious; and yet with all that this righteousness it self
could have done nothing this way, but upon presupposall of, and inconsistence
with the other, (as will hereafter further appear) But because this has bin
sufficiently performed by others Pareus de Justice. Christi Act. et Pass. P. 181.
, and the distinction it self is granted and acknowledged by the learnedest
Bish: Davenant De Justice: Habit. c. 28. p. 364. Argum. 3. Mr. Bradshaw
Iustific. p. 67.72. etc. Bish. Downham Iustific^ c. 1. c. 2 Section 9.
of those that are (or at least, sometimes seem to be) of opposite judgment
in the maine of the controversy depending, I thus leave it.

Only I desire to remember you of the Item Pareus gives De Justice: Christi
Act: et Pass. p. 180.
out of his observation touching this Dictinction; that the neglect hereof
causes much confusion, and encumbreth the Doctrine of Justification with many
difficulties and inconveniences, and renders it hardly defensible against the
Papists and other adversaries to the truth of it. Therefore in managing the
present Question about imputation, special care must be had, that we neither
use our selves, nor admit from others, these words, the righteousness of
Christ, but with an eye to this Distinction.

A thing may be said to be imputed to a man in several respects and
considerations. First, imputed to him, when he himself and none other, is
simply, and without reference either to reward or punishment either reputed or
pronounced the doer of them. This sense of imputation is not unproper, yet do I
not remember the word any where in the Scriptures so used. But in this sense,
as well the Active as Passive obedience of Christ, are by God imputed to Christ
himself, and to no other: and the sins of believers themselves, to
themselves that have committed them respectively, and to none other.

Secondly, a man's doings whether good or evil, may be said to be imputed to
him, when he is either actually rewarded, or punished because of them, or else
is looked upon by the Judge, as one that shall in due time either be rewarded
or punished for such doings, except some reasonable and just occasion, shall in
the mean time intervene, to alter either of these purposes concerning him. In
this sense Shimei makes request to David, that he would not impute folly to
him, that is, that he would not punish him for that foolish act of his reviling
him. So the sins of unbelievers may be said to be imputed to them, when
either they are punished by God in this world, or else cast into Hell for them.
In this sense also, the sins of the elect themselves before they believe, may
be said to be imputed to them, because they are looked upon by God, as persons
yet liable to condemnation for their sins, and that should in time actually
be condemned, except by the precious benefit and advantage of Gods patience and
long sufferance toward them, they should come truly to believe in Jesus
Christ before death.

Thirdly, Another man's trespass or offense may be said to be imputed unto us,
when either we are challenged or looked upon as advisors, counselors, or
furtherers of him thereunto, or otherwise are hardly dealt with or punished, as
if we had bin accessory in some such way: And so another man's virtue, learning,
valor, and well-deserving in any kind may be said to be imputed unto him, who
is conceived or looked upon, as the chief Author, teacher, or incourager of
the other, in any of these. In this sense the fair and hopeful carriage of
King Ioash toward the beginning of his Reign, may be imputed to Iehojada the
Priest. 2 King. 12.2. with 2 Chapter 24.2. Thus the knowledge and courage which
were found in Peter and John are (in effect) imputed to Christ himself by the
Priests and Rulers. Act. 4.13. In this sense also the victory won by the valor
and courage of the Soldiers, is often imputed to the General or chief
Commander.

Fourthly, one man's sin (and so his virtuous act) may be said to be imputed
to another, when this other, through ignorance or mistake, is looked upon as
the man that had performed either the one or the other, and is either censured
or punished, or else honored, or rewarded accordingly. In this sense King
Porsenna's hostile attempt against the Romans, may be said to have bin imputed
unto his Scribe or Officer by Scaevola, when upon a mistake he slew him,
supposing him to have bin the King. I do not remember any instance for this
sense of the word imputation, in the Scriptures.

Therefore Fifthly, one man's wickedness or ill deserts, may be said to be
imputed unto others, when they are any ways punished, or worse dealt with in
consideration thereof: as on the contrary, a man's worth, virtue or
well-deservings in any kind, may be said to be imputed to others, as viz. his
children, kinsfolk, friends, etc. when they are considered, and well dealt
with in any kind, because of their relation unto such a man. In this sense
David may be said to have imputed Ionathans kindness unto Mephibosheth his
Son, when he preferred him to honor, in consideration thereof: and so the
wicked act of those that accused Daniel and caused him to be cast into the
Lions Den, may be said to have bin imputed unto their wives and children, by
the King, when he caused them also to be cast into the Lions Den for it. Dan. 6
24. So the sin of Achan, to his house and Family. Ios. 7. and the sin of
Dathan and Abiram to their wives and Children. Number. 16. In this sense likewise,
Paul wills Philemon to impute to him (for so the word signifies (...), Phil.
ver. 18.) any wrong or injury that his servant Onesimus had done him, meaning
that he was willing and ready to make satisfaction for it. In this sense of
imputation (and in this only) the sins of men may be said to be imputed unto
Christ, viz. because he suffered the things which he did suffer, in
consideration of them: and these sufferings of his again may be said to be
imputed unto us, because we are rewarded, that is, justified and saved in
consideration of them. But that either our sins, should be therefore said to
be imputed unto Christ, because he is reputed by God to have committed them, or
that his righteousness, whether active, or passive, should be therefore said
to be imputed to us, because we are reputed by God to have done or suffered the
one or the other, In this sense the imputation as well of the Passive, as Active
obedience of Christ, are elsewhere denied in this Treatise. See Part 1. c. 10
Sect. 4, etc.
has neither footing nor foundation either in Scripture or reason.

Sixthly, taking the word imputation in a large sense, imputed to a man, which
essentially and directly conduces either to the benefit or punishment, which
accrueth unto him, from that which is more properly and immediately imputed to
him. In this sense, when the wife or children of a man that has well deserved
of a state or Family, are any ways rewarded or well dealt with in
consideration of his desert, not only the deserts themselves, but his ingenuous
and liberal education, together with his virtuous dispositions, as essentially
requisite to make him a man capable of such deservings, may be said to be
imputed to them. i. they have a benefit accrueing to them from such education
and dispositions of his, though not immediately, but by the intervening of
those worthy acts and services performed by him. In this sense not only Achans
sinful and sacrilegious act of taking away the wedge of gold and Babylonish
garment, but the bitter root it self that bare this cursed fruit, I mean his
covetousness, may be said to have bin imputed unto all those of his house,
that were punished with him for that sacrilege, In this sense likewise as well
the habitual holiness of Christ's person, as the moral righteousness or
active obedience of his life, may be said to be imputed to those that believe
in him, because these were essentially and directly requifite, to make his
death and sufferings, justification and life and salvation to them, as has bin
further opened in the former part of this Treatise. But because this
signification of the word is somewhat remote and unusual, and has no manner
of counteuance from the Scripture, Piscator, Paraeus, with other learned and
Orthodox Divines, have simple denied all imputation of the active
righteousness or obedience of Christ, and (doubtless) the Doctrine of
Justification, as it is laid down in the Scriptures, would not at all suffer,
if the expression were laid aside altogether.

Seventhly, a thing may be said to be imputed to a man when he is looked upon
or dealt with, as if he had some true worth or qualification in him, whereunto
there are special privileges belonging, when as yet he has not, the worth or
qualification indeed, but comes to have right to the privileges notwithstanding
in some other way. In this sense righteousness is said to be imputed to him
that believes, Romans 4.6.11. etc. that is, he that truly believes in Christ,
is looked upon by God, and partly has, and partly shall have and enjoy all the
privileges and blessings which do belong, and are annexed by covenant or
promise, unto a perfect and complete Law-righteousnesse, though there be no
such righteousness found in him, because Jesus Christ by his death and
sufferings has purchased a right and title for him to these privileges and
blessings: which title is actually derived and settled upon him, upon his
believing. So that to say, God imputes righteousness to a man, is but (in
effect) to say, that God looks upon him with the same grace and favor,
wherewith he would look upon him, if he were properly and legally righteous
indeed, and had never sinned, and intends all the further privileges and
blessings of such a righteousness unto him. In such a sense as this, when a
man take's likeing to, and loves another man's child, and intends to settle his
estate upon him, he may be said to impute Sonship unto him, because though he
be not his Son, yet he confer's the rights and privileges of a Son upon him,
as viz. fatherlike affection, and his inheritance.

Eighthly, imputed to a man, for, or instead of another, when the rights and
privileges which originally and properly belong to the one, are yet exhibited
and conferred upon him, upon the performance of the other: or again, when upon
the committing of one offense, he is charged with the guilt and inconveniences
of another, the guilt and evil consequences whereof are more notorious and
manifest. Thus he that provideth not for his own, especially for his household,
has the sin of denying the Faith, i. the Gospel, imputed unto him (1 Timothy
5.8.) because the evil consequences of both sins are much the same, but yet
are more readily acknowledged, as likely to arise from the latter. In this
sense also the Faith of him that believes, is said to be imputed to him for
righteousness ( Romans 4.3.5. etc.) because the same privileges, which
originally and more apparently did belong unto, and were settled by God upon a
legal righteousness, or immunity from sin, do now belong unto, and are
settled by Covenant and promise from the same God, upon believing.

Ninthly and lastly, any matter of profit, benefit or advantage, which any
ways accrueth, or is coming toward a man, whether by way of due debt, or of
free donation and grace, or the like, may be said to be imputed unto him
accordingly. Thus ( Romans 4.4.) the reward, viz. of justification and life, is
said to be reckoned, or imputed to him that works, ( i. that shall deserve it
by a perfect observation of the Law) of debt, and not of grace. The meaning is,
that if any man should be rewarded by God with life and happiness, upon his
perfect obedience to the Law, such a reward would be generally taken and looked
upon by men, as no matter of grace or favor from God, but as a matter of right
and due debt to such a man.

There is no word or term (to my remembrance) belonging to the dispute in
hand, or to the Doctrine of Justification in general, more encumbered with
variety of significations then this of Imputation, and consequently more
obnoxious to mistake and misunderstanding. There is scarce any proposition can
be framed, wherein this word is used indefinitly and without special
limitation or explication, but may both be granted and denied, according to a
different sense and acception thereof. As for example, such propositions as
these. The active obedience of Christ is imputed. The active obedience of
Christ is not imputed. The passive obedience of Christ is imputed, The passive
obedience of Christ is not imputed, etc. are either true or false, according as
the word imputed, is understood and taken in them. Therefore special care must
be had how and upon what terms this word passes, or be admitted in the
present Controversy.

Obedience to the Moral Law may be said to be required of men two ways, or in
two respects: justification, that a man thereby may be esteemed perfectly
righteous by God, and accordingly have all the privileges of a complete
righteousness conferred upon him. Secondly, by way of sanctification, that he
may testify and express his subjection unto God, and his unfeigned desire of
pleasing him in all things. In both respects this obedience was required of
man, in his estate of innocence, and is still required of the Holy Angels,
yea and was required also of the Lord Jesus Christ himself. Compare Mat. 3.16.
with John 15.10. etc. But since the fall of man, it is not nequited of him, by
way of justification (in the sense expressed) but only in a way of
sanctification. This is evident by these a consideratios. First, because a man
being once touched with sin, and failing in the least point of obedience (as
all men were, and did in the fall) is not capable of any such obedience to the
La^, whereby it is impossible for him to be justified, no, though he should
keep the Law with all possible exactness ever after to the worlds end,
without the least failing in the least point of obedience thereunto: the
condition of a legal justification being, that a man must continue (a carcere
ad metas, from the very first entrance upon his being, to the last end thereof)
in all things that are written in the Law to do them, so that the least trip
or stumbling throughout all his course, wholly dissolves and overthrowes such a
justification. Secondly, because God has opened another way for the
justification of sinners, viz. Faith in Jesus Christ, and certain it is, that
he never sets up one way against another, or one ordinance against another, so
that what he intends should be effected by one, he should intend to be effected
by another also, as has bin argued and proved more at large, in the former
part of this Treatise. cap. 12. Sect. 2. etc.
Therefore to affirm, that the fulfilling of the Law is required of any man
either by himself or by another in his stead, for his justification is to
affirm, either that a man that has sinned, has not sinned, or that which God
has said, he has unsaid.

Christ may be said to have kept the Law, justification, two ways, or in a
double sense: either 1o, for us: or 2o, in our stead. In the former sense, it
may be admitted, that Christ kept the Law for our justification, but not in the
latter. The former sense only imports, that this obedience of his had an
influence into our justification, and did contribute that which was of absolute
necessity thereunto; which has bin explained, and granted, and (in part)
proved formerly. The latter sense imports, that the keeping of the Law, was
primarily required of every man for his justification, since the fall, and that
God, in respect of the personal disabilities of men for such performance in
reference to such an end, sent his Son Jesus Christ to perform it in their
rooms and places. Which supposition stands convict of a manifest untruth in
the former Distinction, and elsewhere in this Treatise. Part 1. cap. Sect.
Distincti. 7.


The Justification of a sinner (I mean Passive) though it be but one and the
same entire effect, yet may it be ascribed to many (and those very diff^rent)
causes respectively, according to their several influences, and differing
manner of concurrence thereunto. God may be said to justify, Christ may be
said to justify, yea the Holy Ghost in a true and proper sense may be said to
justify, Faith may be said to justify, the Minister may be said to justify,
(as well as to save, 1 Timothy 4.16.) remission of sins may be said to justify,
etc. Whatsoever contributeth any thing, more or less, either in a superior or
inferior way, toward the raising and producing any effect, the effect it self
may not only according to truth, but in ordinary propriety of speaking be
ascribed unto it. It is as true to say (and not unproper) that the sling in
David's hand, or the smooth stone which he slang, or his act of slinging, killed
Goliath, as to say, that David himself killed him, though it is true, David was
the principal efficient in this action, and the other were but inferior and
isntrumental. So that to reason thus, Christ iustifies, therefore Faith does
not justify: or thus, Christ is our righteousness, therefore Faith is not our
righteousness, or remission of sins is not our righteousness, etc. is as if
a man should argue after this manner. It is God that makes rich, therefore
money makes not rich, or a diligent hand makes not rich, which yet is a
truth, and is affirmed by the Holy Ghost, as well as the other. Or thus, It is
God that purifieth the heart: therefore man purifieth it not, neither does
Faith purify it, nor do afflictions purify, etc. Or thus, The Physician
recovered the sick: therefore his Physique did not recover him. It is a weak
reasoning, a positione causae principalis, ad remotionem accessorie. Christ may
Justify, and Faith may justify, and remission of sins may justify: yea
Christ does not justify without Faith, nor without remission of sins, more
then either o^ these justify without Christ, though it be true, Christ
justifies after a manner peculiar to himself, and Faith and Remission of
sins, each of them after a manner proper to it self, and the manner, of
Justification which is proper to Christ, is more excellent and of superior
consideration, to the manner wherein either Faith or Remission of sins
Justify. Therefore the argument does not follow, from the affirmation of
Justification by Christ, to the negation of the same Justification by Faith, or
any other thing: but it well f^llowes, from the affirmation of the peculiar
manner of Justification which is proper to Christ, to the negation of the same
manner, as belonging either to Faith, or to Remission of sins, or any thing
besides. This arguing is substantial. Christ Justifies by way of merit, or
satisfaction, or atonement for sin: therefore neither Faith, nor remission
of sins, nor any thing else justifies, either by way of merit, satisfaction,
or atonement. Therefore care must be had to distinguish the simple act, from
the peculiar manner, of Justification.

CAP. IIII.
Containing a brief Delineation or survey of the entire body of Justification,
in the several causes of it, according to the tenor of the Conclusions and
Distinctions laid down in the two former Chapters.
AS well to give a full and free account of mine own judgment, Justification,
and the whole carriage of it in the Scriptures and counsel of God, as also to
furnish my Reader with some further and cleer^r light, whereby to comprehend
the darkness, and to discover the insufficiency and weakness of those
arguments, that either are brought from the Scriptures, or otherwise framed,
against the maine Conclusion defended in this Treatise: I thought it not amiss
to enlarge the Discourse by one Chapter the more, wherein to delineate and
represent (according to the model of my weak insight into so great a mystery)
that fair piece or frame wherein the grace, justice, and wisdom of God have
sweetly conspired for the justification of a poor sinner. And because the
perfect knowledge hereof (I mean of the gracious design of God in and about
the Justification of a sinner) depends upon the knowledge and right
apprehension of the several causes concurring and contributing thereunto (as
indeed the true knowledge of all things whatsoever, arises from the knowledge
of the causes thereof) I desire leave to premise some few general rules
touching the number, nature, and property of causes in general, but only such,
which are generally acknowledged and subscribed unto by sober men that have had
their wits exercised in discerning things agreeable to reason, and who can be
no ways suspected as partial, or any ways engaged, either on the right hand
or on the left, in the Disputes agitated in this Discourse.

The first rule I lay down concerns the number of causes in general,
efficient, 2o, the final, 3o, the material, 4o, the formal. The sufficiency
of which division of causes in general, might easily be argued and made good
by demonstration, but that it has been done by many before me, and besides
has now for many ages bygone, bin admitted by men of reason and learning,
into the same honor of unquestionable truth, with their (...) i. their first
and most undoubted principles of Reason.

My second rule respects the different habitude or relation in general,
efficient and final causes do never ingredi compositum, i. are never any part,
any thing of the substance, of the effect produced but are always extrinsecall
thereunto, and have their beings distinct from it. As on the other hand, the
material and formal causes, are always intrinsecall to the effect, and
together make up (as it were) the entire substance and essence of it. As for
example: The Carpenter who is the efficient cause of the House that is built,
and so his Axe, Saw, Hammer, etc. are no parts of the house: neither is the
conveniencie or accommodation of the dweller or owner, which is the final
cause of the House, any part of it; which appears thus, because the house may
stand, and be the same house that it is, though the Carpenter that made it be
dead, and though it had neither dweller nor owner belonging to it. But the
timber, Brick, stone, etc. which are the material cause of it, and the order,
or method wherein they are contrived and wrought together in the building by
the workman: which is the formal cause, are the essential and constituting
parts of the house: so that if either of these should be altered or taken away,
the house it self must be altered, and taken away with them.

My third Rule touches the absolute incapacitie in every one of these causes,
formal, nor the material, nor final cause of it. So again, that which is
the material cause of a thing, cannot be the formal cause of that whereof it
is the material, nor yet the efficient or final: and there is the same
consideration of them all. Neither the Carpenter, nor his skill, nor his Ax,
nor his Hammer (which are all efficients) can be the matter of the house he
builds with them: neither can the timber or stones, which are the material
cause of it, be the efficient cause also. etc. It is true, in some cases, and
in an unproper and metaphorical sense, the same person that in one
consideration is the efficient cause of a thing, may in another consideration
be the final cause of it. As when a Carpenter builds an house for himself to
dwell in, in a sense he may be called both the efficient and final cause of
this house. But this is an unproper expression, and according to Grammatical
and express importance of the words, not consonant to truth. For if we speak
properly, the Carpenter cannot in this case be said to be the final cause of
his house, because the nature and propriety of the final cause is, to receive
it is being, by and from that, whereof it is the cause, and not to have a
subsistence and being before it, as the Carpenter has before the building of
his house. Therefore the final cause of the house under instance, is the
Carpenters conveniencie of dwelling, which is a thing of another nature, and
far differing from his person. The like interpretation must rule to make
exactness of truth of that common saying in Divinity, that God is the
efficient and final cause or end of all things, See sect. 6* of this c.
which the Scripture expresses by calling him Alpha and Omega, Revel. 1. But
for the rule it self last laid down, if rightly understood, it is universally
and unquestionably true, that one and the same thing cannot possibly stand in
more relations of causality then one, to one and the same effect, no more then
one and the same point of Heaven can be both East and West, or North and South,
in respect of the same Country or place.

The 4th and last Rule I desire to lay down, Justification, can hardly be
thoroughly and clearly understood.

The first general head of causes, which we called the Efficient, admits of
more divisions and subdivisions, and conteynes more species of causes under it
(which are yet all efficients) then any of the other, yea then all the other
three together. The truth is, that there is such an endless variety of the
kinds of efficient causes, that it is very difficult to find them all out, or
to give fitting names to many that may more easily be found. It shall suffice
for our present occasion to mention some few divisions of them.

First, of efficient causes, some are principal, which works independently
and from it self (I speak now in respect of created causes only: because
otherwise, all causes whatsoever have a dependence upon God in their working
toward the effect, having other efficients under it, which work likewise
toward the same effect, but depend upon it (the principal cause) in their
working: and these are causes less principal, or isntrumental. The Carpenter
is the principal efficient cause of the house, his Axe, Saw, and Hammer, etc.
are but isntrumental efficients: because though these conduce and contribute
somewhat toward the building of it, yet they are assumed and ordered in their
working by the Carpenter, and would do nothing if they were not acted and moved
by him, whereas himself works independantly, being acted and guided in his
work by a principle within himself. It is true, in a sense the Carpenter may
be said to depend upon his instruments in working, viz. as being unable to
work or build without them: but in point of causalitie, that only is counted a
dependence, when a thing is either assumed, supported, or directed by another
in it is efficiencie: none of which can be verifyed of the Carpenter in respect
of his instruments wherewith he works.

Again, of causes efficient, whether created or increated, principal or less
principal, some are natural, some artificial, and some moral. By the
efficient natural, I mean that cause which has it is efficiencie, or
contributes toward the effect, by the exercising or putting forth^ of some
power that is natural and essential to it. Thus the Sun is the natural
efficient cause of the light in the air, and of all other sublunarie effects
which it produces, because it produces them all only by the exercise and
putting forth of such principles, as of light, motion, influence, etc. as are
natural to it. In this sense, that kind of efficient which otherwise is
called voluntary, i. that works freely and with the knowledge of its own
working, and is contradistinguished to that which is purely and simply
natural, may sometimes, and in respect of some effects, be termed natural
also, as viz. when it acts toward any effect by any faculty, principle, or
power that is natural to it. In this sense David may be called the natural
efficient cause of the motion of the stone, wherewith Goliath was slain: Yea
the increated efficient cause himself ( God I mean, who in other respects, is
termed the supernatural efficient) may in this sense be called the natural
efficient or producing cause of the world, (and so of all other effects
whatsoever produced by him) viz. as he effects them either by that power, or
by that authority which are natural or essential to him.

Secondly, the efficient cause artificial, is that which produces its effect
by the exercise of some acquired or superadded principle or habit of art. But
of this kind of cause we shall have no use in the business of Justification,
therefore we pass by it.

Thirdly (and lastly) the moral efficient cause, is that which contributes
toward an effect, by inclining or moving the will or desire of the natural
efficient cause (capable of such motion) toward the doing or effecting of any
thing. Thus first the wages for which a workman contracts to build an house or
the like, and secondly, the hope he has of receiving this wages upon the
performance of this work, and thirdly the inward disposition which is in the
workman, to undertake such a work in consideration of such wages (with the
like) may all be called moral efficient causes of that work or effect,
whatsoever it be, that is performed by him. So the love and kindness which
Jonathan in his lifetime showed to David, were the moral e^^^cient causes of
that favor which David showed to Mephibosheth his Son. With this kind of
causa^ity, the greatness of the sin of Sodom and Gomorrah, together with the
severity which is in the nature of God* against such sins and sinners, was
the cause of that horrible destruction that came in fire and brimstone upon it,
and the sin of Achan the cause both of his own ruin, and of his whole
Family, with infinite more of like consideration.

For that likewise is to be known and remembered, for our better understanding
of the business of Justification when we come to it, that this impulsive or
moral efficient cause is of two sorts or kinds: First, that which moves the
natural efficient from within himself, to do such or such a thing, which
Logicians call (...). Secondly, that which from without moves or inclines him
accordingly, which they call (...). As for example, when a man upon the
knowledge or sight of another man's misery in any kind, is persuaded to
administer comfort or relief to him, the misery of the man being known to
him is the latter kind of cause of that comfort or relief which he
administers; and the inward tenderness or compassionatnesse of his nature
toward those that are in misery, is the former. Of both these kinds of
efficients, there may be many, in respect of one and the same effect, some more
principal, i. more effectually moving, and some less; as will clearly
appear in the ease of Justification.

Thirdly, which contributeth toward the effecting of it, but yet does not
reach the effect it self, but by the interposall and mediation of another. The
next and immediate cause, is that which produces the effect, without the
interveening of any other cause between. Thus a man's eating and drinking, are
the remote causes of his health and strength, by means of a good digestion,
distribution, and incorporation of what is so digested, into the several parts
of the body coming between, which latter are the nearer and more immediate
causes thereof. So the capacity and diligence of an Apprentice in learning his
Trade, are remote causes of that estate or subsistence, which afterward he
raises by working upon it: and consequently of all that good which he does in
any kind, with his estate so gotten. So that abstinence or temperance which the
Apostle speaks of; 1 Cor. 9, 25. in him that striveth for masteries, is the
remote cause of all those victories and prizes which he obteyneth and carries
away, by running, wrestling, etc. And generally whatsoever prepares or
qualifies the natural efficient for the producing or accomplishing of any
effect, may properly be called a remote cause of the same. And in this respect,
the personal holiness, and the active obedience of Christ to the Law, may be
called the efficient causes of Justification, but causes remote, not immediate,
because they qualifyed him for such sufferings, whereby this great effect of
justification was procured, but had no immediate influence thereinto.

Only that is briefly to be remembered concerning this division of causes
efficient, that as there may be many remote causes of one and the same effect,
so there may be many immediate and conjunct causes also, (though some great
Artists conceit otherwise Keckerman System. Logic. l. 1. c. 15. p. 146.
but these must still be of several kinds. The principal and isntrumental
causes are alike immediate, in respect of the effect jointly produced by them,
etc. And the first, or increated cause, God, is ^like immediate in every
effect, with the created cause that is most immediate to it.

There are many other Divisions and kinds of this first head of causes, which
we call efficient, as 1o, there is the efficient solitary, and the efficient
in consort or association with other causes. 2o, the efficient which has a
proper, natural, and direct tendencie toward the effect, which they call
efficiens perse: and the efficient which falls in on the by, and concurr's
toward the effect, but accidentally, and besides any natural inclination it
has toward the raising of the effect, which they call causa per accidens. 3o,
there is a kind of efficient which they call subordinata, i. of an inferior
order, in respect of another cause that is of a superior; and coordinata, i.
such a cause, as is of the same rank and order with another, etc. besides
diverse others; which I insist no further upon, because I conceive the Doctrine
of Justification may be sufficiently delivered and understood without the
particular knowledge of them.

The second general head of causes mentioned, Justification, amongst those
that are much dissenting in judgment about other causes thereof, I shall pass
over this cause with the more brevity.

The final cause or end of an effect or thing caused, or of a thing to be
effected or caused, is either that which is called Finis perse, that is, such
an end as the effect is naturally and of it self apt to produce, and raise: or
else that which is called Finis per accidens, that is, such a thing and end,
which follows upon, and may be in some sort said to be produced or occasioned
by the effect, but yet is a thing of that nature and importance, which does not
answer the nature and propriety of the effect by which it was occasioned or
produced. Thus the hardening of reprobate and wicked men, and so the increasing
of their condemnation etc. are accidental ends of preaching the Gospel, or of
the Gospel preached, because they are often occasioned and somewaies caused and
produced thereby, but do not answer or suite with the nature and propriety of
the Gospel or preaching thereof, which are sweet and gracious. As on the
contrary, the softening and melting of the hearts of men, and so the
furtherance of them in the ways of salvation, etc. are ends pers^, or proper
ends of the preaching the Gospel, because they are not only produced by it,
but likewise are things that sympathize in nature and property therewith, and
sweetly answer the tenor and importance of such an action.

Again secondly, of final causes or ends per se, some are primarily such,
etc. more properly so called: others again are secondarily such, and less
properly so called. The final cause or end primarily and properly so called,
is that which the principal efficient intends to accomplish and to attain, by
means of such or such an effect produced by him. And this again is double, or
of two kinds. First, that which is more principally so intended by him;
Secondly that which is less principally intended. The end less principally
intended, is that which is intended with reference and subordination to some
further end, as viz. to that which is more and most principally intended: as on
the contrary, the end more principally intended, is that which has inferior
ends subservient to it, and destinated to the effecting of it. Thus the house
it self which the work man builds for himself to dwell in, is the less
principal end of his labor in building and his own conveniencie of dwelling
or otherwise, is the more principal, because the house was intended chiefly in
relation unto this. So the sorrow which Paul wrought in the Corinthians by his
Epistle (1 Cor. 7.9.) was the less principal end of his writing, and their
repentance the more principal, because that was intended by him, as a means
conducing unto this. And that end which is intended simply for it self, and
without any subordination or reference to another end beyond it, is the
supreme, Sovereigne, and most principal end of all, as the glory of God is to
himself in all his works, and should be to the creatures also in all theirs.

But secondly, the final cause or end less properly socalled, is that, to
which or to whom, or for whose good, the end properly so called, is intended.
Thus the patient or sick person, is the end of that recovery or health, which
the Physician seeks to procure: and the elect, the end of the great
dispensation of God in Christ: and in this sense God himself is said to be end
both of this, and all other his dispensations whatsoever.

The third general head or fountain of causes, this kind of matter (matter
properly so called) is proper to, and only found in that kind of nature or
being, which we call a substance, as the Heavens, the 4 Elements and all things
that are compounded and made of them, and is it self always a substance. The
matter of a thing unproperly so called, is that which has some kind of
analogy or proportion only to that which is matter properly. In this sense,
that other nature or kind of being, which we call accidental, as actions,
passions, qualities, figures, relations, etc. may be said to have matter, as
viz. either their subjects wherein they have their existences and beings, or
their objects, upon, and about which they act, work, or are exercised: or
thirdly (and lastly) the parts whereof some of them do consist, and are made
up. In the first sense, the wall may be called the matter of the whiteness
that is put upon it, and the fire, the matter of the heat that is in it, and a
man the matter of the learning or knowledge that is in him, etc. In the second
sense, the wall is the matter of that act of the Painter or Plaisterer, whereby
he made the wall white; and so the servant or slave of old, was the matter of
that act of manumission, whereby his Mr. set him at liberty, and made him free;
and the elect of God both men and women are the matter of the act of God,
whereby he saves them. In the third and last sense, the several parts of
whiteness that are in the wall, as the whiteness that is above, and the
whiteness that is beneath, that which is on the right hand, and that which is
on the left, with that which is in the midst, are the matter of that area or
whole extent of whiteness which is in the wall. In this sense, the three lines
whereof a triangle is made, is said to be the matter of the triangle, and
letters and syllables to be the matter of a word, and words the matter of a
sentence etc. But there is no accident whatsoever, that has any matter
properly so called: nor any actio^ any other matter properly or unproperly, or
however called, but only the subject, matter or object, on which it is acted,
and wherein it is terminated and received. What has been said concerning this
material cause, is dilligently to be remembered, and carried along with us to
the business of Justification; because it much concern's one vein of the
Question or controversy depending.

The fourth and last head of causes, Justification) is allwaies a thing of that
inferior nature or being, which we call accidental or adjunctive, Because it
is still sustained in ir's being, in some other nature which is substantial,
and has no subsistence in, or by it self, yet has not this form the
denomination of a form always in regard of the subject, wherein it has it is
being, and to which it gives a kind of being also, as learning gives a man his
being learned, etc. but in regard of that action or motion whereby it is
introduced into the subject, and is therefore called the form of an action,
motion, or alteration, not because it gives any other kind of being to any of
these (for it rather receives it is being from them) but only a being known and
distinguished from all other actions, or motions whatsoever. For actions, or
motions; as calefaction, frigefaction, and so Redemption, Justification,
salvation, etc. are severally known and distinguished one from another (and so
from every other action or motion whatsoever besides,) by that proper form,
impression, or alteration which they introduce and make in their subjects or
objects about which they are exercised and acted respectively: as the heat or
warmth which is caused in my hand by the fire, makes that action of the fire
by which it is caused, not simply to be, but to be known to be that action
which we call calefaction or warming, and none other, i^ being unpossible that
such a form or impressi^n as heat is, should be introduced into any subject,
but by such an action, as calefaction or warming is. In this case the heat
which is caused in my hand, may be called the form of calefaction, not because
it gives a being unto it (which is the proper notion and consideration of a
form) but rather because it receives it is being from it, and so gives it a
manifestation or distinction from other actions, which is one property of a
form properly so called, according to the known maxim in Logique, which
teaches us, that the form includes or presupposes 3 things, 1o, the being of
a thing. 2o, the distinction of it. 3o, the operation of it. Posita forma, tria
ponuntur: 1, esse res 2, distinctio rei. 3, operatio rei.
And doubtless the term or notion of a form, can in no other respect (or at
least, in none so proper) be ascribed unto actions or motions, as in this: viz.
because those qualities, impressions, alterations, relations, etc. which they
cause and produce in their subjects, have this analogy or proportion with
forms properly so called, that they give distinction unto them, as these do to
those things or natures which they inform; though in another respect they be
opposite to them (as has bin said) forms properly called still giving a being
to the things whereof they are forms, whereas these forms appropriated to
actions, always receive their beings from them.

So then to ask or inquire concerning the form of any action, as
Justification, Redemption, or the like, what it is, is but to ask, what is the
name, nature, property, or condition, of that effect, impression, or
alteration, which is immediately and precisely caused and produced by it, in
that subject matter, whether person or thing, whereon it is acted. Thus to
ask, what is the form of that action which we call frigefaction or
cold-making, is but to ask, what the name and nature of that impression or
alteration is, which is caused thereby in that subject, whereon it works. And
that (happily) may be one maine reason of the difficulty which is apprehended,
and of the intricatenesse and confusion that are found amongst many writers
touching the form of Justification, because the forms of Actions are seldom
made matter of Question or inquiry, either in Philosophy, or Divinity, or in
any other Art or Science, as far as my weak learning and memory have taken
notice: neither do I remember (for the present) any Question on foot at this
day, touching either the matter, or especially the form of any action, but
only this of Justification: Nor have I met with any, which do so much as
plainly, perspicuously, and distinctly, declare and explicate, what they mean
by this form of Justification: whereby it may (I conceive) easily come to
pass, that Authors may be at a loss one of another, and scarce one of many
clearly understand the mind and meaning either of his fellow or his opposite,
in this point.

Having with what convenient brevity we could, Justification as it lies in the
veins of the Scriptures: Come we now roundly and cheerfully on, to draw up
the Doctrine it self, according to the direction and importance of what has
bin delivered herein.

I begin with the efficient causes of Justification, which are many, and those
of very different consideration. Happily it will not be necessary, if possible,
to insist upon all, that stand in this relation of causalitie unto it,

The Principal natural efficient cause (according (...) the description of
this cause given) of Justification, is God himself, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, considered is one and the same simple and entire essence: though this
act of justification (as that of creation, and some others besides) is in
special manner appropriated to the first person of the three, the Father, as
other acts are to the other two persons, Redemption to the Son, Sanctification
to the Holy Ghost, etc. in both which notwithstanding, all the three persons,
being but one and the same int^re and undivided essence, must needs be
interes^ed. Thus Romans 8.33. where it is said, that it is God that justifies,
it is meant by way of appropriation of God the Father, because there is mention
made of Christ the second person, immediately, it is Christ that is dead, etc.
Now that God is that kind of cause of Justification, which has bin attributed
to him, and no other, is evident from the description of this cause formerly
laid down Sect. 4. of this Chapter. For 1o, that he is a cause of
Justification is the consent of all men without exception: besides the
Scripture lately cited Romans 8. is full and pregnant this way, It is God that
justifies. 2o, that he is neither the matter, nor the form of Justification,
is sufficiently evident of it self, neither did ever any man affirm either
the one, or the other of him: and besides, we shall clear this further, when
we come to inquire after these causes. 3o, that he is not the end or final
cause of Justification, appears from that property or condition of this cause,
mentioned Sect. 3. viz, that it is to be atteyned or receive it is being, by
means of that thing whereof it is the end: which cannot be verified of God or
his being, in respect of Justification, inasmuch as these no way depend upon
it. This likewise will further appear, when we come to lay down the final
cause. Therefore 4o (and lastly) he must of necessity be the efficient cause of
Justification, there being no fifth kind of cause whereunto he should be
reduced.

Secondly, justification of a sinner; but himself projecteth the whole frame
and carriage of all things, yea and manageth and makes use of all things
instrumentally concurring or belonging thereunto. It is God that justifies the
Gentiles by or through Faith. Gal. 3.8. so Romans 3.30, etc. God makes use of
Faith, and so of his word, and of the Ministers of his word, to produce Faith
in the hearts of men, and consequently to justify them: but none of these can
be said to act or make use of God, in or about this great effect.

Thirdly that he is the Natural efficient cause of Justification (according to
the notion and description of this cause given Sect. 5.) is evident because in
the exercising or putting forth this act of Justification, he acts and
works out of that authority and power which are essential and connaturall to
him, and not out of any superadded or acquired principle of art or otherwise,
whereof he is wholly incapable. It is true, he is moved to the exercise of this
act of ^ustifying men, by somewhat that is extrinsecall and not essential to
him, viz. the intercession of the death and sufferings of Christ: yet the act
it self in the exercise of it, proceeds by virtue of that authority and power,
which are estentiall to him (as has bin said) No creature can be said to
justify or forgive any man his sins no not by Christ, but God alone. Who can
forgive sins but God only? Mar. 2.7.

Fourthly, Justification, as it is an act of God, is that infinite love,
goodness, mercy, sweetness, and graciousnesse in God himself toward his
poor creature, Man, looked upon as miserable, and lying under condemnation for
sin. This was the moving and procuring cause of the gift of Christ, and his
death and sufferings, from him, and consequently of that justification, which
is procured and purchased by Christ and his sufferings. So God loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life, [ viz by Justification through him] Ioh.
3.16.

Fifthly, the external Moral or impulsive efficient cause of this act of God,
is the Lord Jesus Christ himself, in, or through his death and sufferings: or
(which is the same) the death and sufferings of Jesus Christ, God looking upon
Christ as such, and so great a sufferer for the sins of men, is thereby
strengthened and provoked, to deliver those that believe in him from their
sins and that condemnation which is due unto them, i. to justify them. The
Scripture is clear in laying down this cause. Even as God, for Christ's sake,
freely forgave you viz. your sins, i. justified you. Ephe. 4.32. Those words
for Christ's sake, are a plain and perfect character, of that kind of cause we
now speak of. This with the former i. both internal and external, impussive
or moving causes, are joined together. Romans 3.24. And are justified freely by
his grace (here is the inward impulsive cause of Justification) through the
Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, viz. by means of his death and sufferings:
here is the outward moving cause we speak of. Neither can the Death and
sufferings of Christ, with any show of reason, or with any tolerable
construction or congruitie of speaking, be referred to any other cause in the
business of justification, but the impulsive only. He that would make Christ
the isntrumental cause of Justification, Mr. Walker Socinian. discovered, etc.
p. 138.
discovers himself to be no great Gamaliel in this learning, and had need
thrust his Faith out of doors (as he does in many places) and not suffer it to
have any thing at all to do about his Justification, least his Christ and his
Faith should be corrivalls, and contend for pre-eminence therein. And yet more
repugnant to reason is it, to make either Christ himself, or any
righteousness of his whatsoever, either the matter, or material cause of
Justification (which yet the Socinian Discoverer does Ibid. p. 139
) or the form, or formal cause thereof, which is done by some others. But
that is a streyne of unreasonablenesse above all the rest, to make either
Christ or his righteousness, both the formal and material cause too, of this
great act of God we speak of, the Justification of a sinner, these causes
being of so opposite a nature, and different consideration (as has bin
described) and yet even this conceit also has found enterteynment with some.

To this kind of cause we now speak of must be reduced also the active or
personal righteousness of Christ, as far as it has any influence into, or
any ways operates toward the justificatio^ of a siner. For though it be not
satisfactory simply and directly in it self, nor contributing any thing
immediately by way of merit, toward the Justification of a sinner (the reasons
whereof have bin former^y given) So that God is not thereby provoked or moved
to justify any man: yet falling in conjunction with that other righteousness
of Christ which we call passive, and making his blood to be the blood of a Lamb
undefiled, and without spot (1 Pet. 1.19.) it cannot be denied, but that here
and in this consideration it has some kind of an impulsive and moving
efficiencie toward Justification, qualifying (in part) the sacrifice of Christ
for that fulness and height of acceptance with God.

The great misery of the poor creature, man, lying under condemnation for
sin, cannot properly be conceived or called any cause of his justification:
yet is it somewaies reducible to this external impulsive cause in hand,
inasmuch as that goodness and graciousnesse of God we spoke of, was hereby
occasioned and moved to take some course for it is Justification and salvation.

Concerning Faith, Justification (which is the sixth and last kind of efficient
we shall insist upon) and so it has bin more then once represented in this
Treatise: yet we meet with many expressions concerning Faith even in the best
and most approved writers, which do not so much sympathize with the
isntrumental, as the impulsive efficient. Thus Musculus speaking of Abraham,
Ob eam ^dem (s^. qua promittenti Deo sirmiter credidit) justus est a Deo
reputatus, Musc. in Genesis 15. ver. 6.
says, that he was reputed righteous by God, FOR that Faith, whereby he firmly
believed God promising. Aretius thus, Imputavit ei justitiam, quod est fidem
gratam habuit, adeo ut justum eum haberet justitia imputativa. Aret. ad Romans 4.
God imputed righteousness to Abraham, that is, accepted his Faith: and
again: a Faith so firm and pious, was imputed to Abraham for righteousness:
In all which expressions, with many others both in these and other Authors, of
like importance, there seems rather an impulsive or persuasive, then an
isntrumental efficiencie, ascribed unto Faith. The Scriptures themselves also,
in respect of other favors blessings, and deliverances, vouchsafed by God unto
Believers, seem (at least in many places) to ascribe rather an impulsive, then
isntrumental efficiencie unto Faith, in the procuring of them. So Daniel was
brought out of the Den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, BECAUSE he
believed in God. Dan. 6.23. In like manner the Prophet Hanani to King Asa: The
Ethiopians and the Lubims, were they not a great host with Charets and horsemen
exceeding many? yet BECAUSE then did rest upon the Lord, he delivered them
into thine hand. 2 Chr. 16.8. See Jer. 39.18.2 Chr 31.18. etc. 14 11. with many
others. Notwithstanding elsewhere, this Faith of Believers, the Holy Ghost
makes rather isntrumental, then impulsive, and that in respect of such favors
also. Many instances whereof are found in that one Chapter, Heb. 11. By Faith
they passed through the Red Sea. ver. 29. By Faith the walls of Jericho fell
down, 39. Again, ver. 33. it is said concerning, Gideon, Barak, Sampson, etc.
that through Faith they subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, stopped the
mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, etc. For reconciling this
seeming difference in the Scriptures, it may be said, that the isntrumental
and impulsive efficients are not so opposite, but that sometimes, and in some
cases, the isntrumental cause may put on the consideration of an impulsive
also, and as well move a man to do a thing as assist him, or be made use of by
him, in the doing it. Thus a competent strength of men, may as well move a King
to give battle to an enemy, as assist him in the battle, and obteyning the
victory. So a Carpenter or other artificer, having tools or instruments
thereafter, may be persuaded or moved by them (in part) to undertake some piece
of work, which otherwise they would not. And thus Faith (I conceive) may in
different respects, be looked upon, either as an isntrumental, or as an
impulsive cause in Justification. As it is a ground or reason, why God
justifies one man, when he justifies not another (for the believer is always
justified, and that because he is a believer, and the unbeleever not) so it
has the nature of an impulsive cause: again, as it is subservient to the
counsel or decree of God concerning Justification, and is accordingly made use
of by him in the act of Justification (for he is said to justify men by and
through Faith, Romans 3, 30, etc.) it puts on the nature and consideration of an
isntrumental cause properly so called. True it is, Faith is not an impulsive
or moving cause in Justification of the same kind, nor after the same manner
that Christ and his sufferings are: these are impulsive and moving in a
superior way, by way of merit, and consequently of Justification simply, and
therefore are at no hand to be reckoned amongst the isntrumental causes
thereof, whereas Faith moves only in an inferior and under way, and by such a
motion, wherewith causes properly isntrumental sometimes move (as has bin
said) and therefore mooveth, not properly to Justification, or to Justification
simply, but comparatively, that is, to the Justification of such and such men,
viz that do believe.

Other causes there are instrumentally inservient unto Justification, as viz.
the word of God that is preached, the preaching it self of this word, the
Minister by whom this word is preached, the sight apprehending or understanding
of this word, the operation or work of the Holy Ghost by which this word is
made effectual in the heart and soul of a believer: and generally whatsoever
tends or contributeth toward the work of Faith in the soul, may be called
isntrumental, in or about Justification, according to the importance of the
old maxim, Quod est causa causae, est etiam causa causat^. But how the
Sacraments should become isntrumental causes or means of Justification, must
be known by inquiring at the Oracle at Rome: for neither the Scriptures, nor
the Reformed Religion have any of this learning in them. This briefly for the
efficient c^uses of Justification, which is the first general head of causes,
among the four.

Secondly, Justification, all parties, as far as I know, are (upon the
matter) agreed also: For though one may discover, and put upon account, more
intermediate or subordinate ends or final causes hereof, then another: yet no
man denies (at least can with reason deny) but that the Glory of God, which is
the general, great, and sovereigne end of all things whatsoever, has the
pre-eminence also amongst and above all the ends of Justification, that can be
named, or enter into the heart of man to conceive. The great subordinate end,
and which lies fairest and fullest in view to the sight of all men, is the
advancement of the creature, or persons justified, to that exceeding height of
glory, and endless happiness, in the entire and satisfying enjoyment of God,
which himself was graciously pleased to ordeyne them unto from the beginning,
and to prepare and make them meet for, in time. Besides these two, there might
be diverse other more appropriate and particular ends, both in respect of God,
the Iustifier, and the elect of God, the Justified, assigned, as in respect of
God, the manifestation of his abundant pardoning grace or mercy tempered with
justice, etc. in respect of the creature Justified, deliverance from wrath or
punishment due to sin, a way making unto Adoption, and fatherlike grace and
acceptance with God, with all the sweet privileges and blessings depending
hereon, etc. but because there is no question or controversy stirring about
these, and the Doctrine of Justification may be competently known and
understood without a particular enumeration of them, I forbear to make it
matter of further labor to the Reader, to insist upon them.

The chief contention and dispute amongst Reformed Divines in the business of
Justification, viz. the material, and the formal, but especially about the
latter. Therefore

Thirdly, Mr. Walker Socinianisme discovered, etc. p. 139.
concerning the matter or material cause of Justification; the Socinian
Diseoverer, with some others, conceive they cast a spirit of honor upon the
righteousness and satisfaction of Christ, by settling this relation of
causalitie in respect of Justification, upon them: but doubtless much upon the
like terms of mistake, with those mentioned by our Savior Ioh. 16.2. who
should think that they did God service, when they killed his best servants. For

First, by making these the matter, See Part 1. c. 17. Sect. 1.2. etc.
or material cause of Justification, they divest and spoil them of the honor
of that causalitie, which is proper and peculiar to them, and 7 times more
honorable, then that which is this way attributed to them, viz. of that
causalitie, which we call, meritorious. This is evident by the tenor of the
third Rule formerly laid down in the second section of this Chapter, whereby
it appears, that no one cause whatsoever can put on more habitudes or
relations of causality then one, in respect of one and the same effect. So that
if the righteousness of Christ be the meritorious and impulsive cause of
Justification (which is granted on all hands without exception; even by the men
against whom we reason) it can at no hand be deemed the material cause also.
Because the meritorious and impulsive cause, is a kind of efficient, as both
has bin lately proved, and besides, is generally so notioned and acknowledged
by all: neither can it be reduced to any of the other 4 heads of causes, with
any tolerable congruitie or color of reason. It was never heard of to this
day, that any efficient cause was the matter of the effect produced by it.

Secondly, the righteousness of Christ, whether Active or Passive, or both,
cannot be the matter of Justification, because the matter of a thing is always
En^ incompletum, an incompleate and imperfect entitie or being, until the
introduction and union of the form with it, which still gives perfection of
being and existence to it. But the righteousness of Christ, take it in what
otion, or under what consideration you please, has an entire, perfect, and
complete being; neither can it fall under imagination, what form it should be
capable of, that by union with it should add beauty and perfection to it.

Thirdly (and lastly) if the righteousness of Christ be the matter of
Justification, it must be either matter properly, or unproperly so called.
Matter properly so called, which they call materia ex qua, it cannot be,
because this kind of matter, 1o is proper to substantial natures or beings
only. 2o, is it self always a substance. 3o, is always a part of that
nature or thing whereof it is the matter. 4o, (and lastly) is still the
inferior, weaker, and viler part thereof. Whereas Justification (in the first
place) being an act, has only an accidental, not a substantial being: and
consequently is not capable of matter properly so called, as no act or action
whatsoever besides is. Secondly, the righteousness of Christ, was never
conceived to be in praedicamento substantiae, to be a substantial nature, but
an accidental form or quality: and therefore cannot be matter (properly so
called) of any thing. Thirdly, the righteousness of Christ cannot be a part of
Justification, because Justification (as has bin said) is an action, and the
righteousness of Christ a form or quality: and most certain it is that one
predicamentall nature or being, cannot be a part of another. Therefore the
righteousness of Christ cannot be this matter of Justification we now speak
of Fourthly (and lastly) it is furthest of all from all color or appearance of
truth, that the righteousness of Christ, in what composition or union soever
it shall be found, should be the weaker and less worthy part thereof, being of
that infinite perfection and worth, which we all acknowledge, and ascribe unto
it: Therefore certainly it is no matter of Justification properly so called.

Secondly, materia in qua, or materia circa quam. Matter in the former notion,
imports only the subject of a thing, that is, a substantial nature, as
supporting some accidental form or being in it. In this sense fire is said to
be the matter of the heat that is in it, and a man to be the matter of the
learning or knowledge which he has, etc. But this is most unproper and least
used sense or signification, of the word MATTER, of all other. In the latter
notion, the matter of a thing, is the object, or that thing, upon which any
thing acts, or about which it is conversant or exercised. In this sense, wood
or timber may be said to be the matter of the Carpenters art or employment, and
his Scholars the matter of the Masters instruction, etc. This kind of matter
is most commonly and properly attributed to acts that are transient, and with
motion and alteration: though it may be ascribed to that other kind of act
also, which is without alteration, and is called immanent, in which sense,
books or the knowledge of things contained in them, may be said to be the
matter of the Scholars industry or study, and the persons predestined to
be the matter of that immanent act of God, which we call Predestination, etc.

Now that the righteousness of Christ, cannot in either of these notions or
significations of the word matter, be the matter of justification, it is
evident. First, not in the former, because Justification, is not the subject
wherein this righteousness inhereth, or whereby it is supported in being: the
righteousness of Christ has no dependence at all, in respect of the being of
it, upon Justification. Not in the latter, because that act of God whereby he
justifies a sinner, is not acted or exercised, upon or about the
righteousness of Christ, nor terminated in this, neither is there any change
or alteration made in the righteousness of Christ by that act of God, whereby he
justifies a sinner; which yet must be, if it were that matter we now speak
of, that is, the object of Justification. Because Justification being a
transient act in God, it must of necessity make some change or alteration in
that upon which it falls or is acted, whatsoever it be: the truth is, that
the righteousness of Christ, being (as has bin proved) the efficient
impulsive cause of Justification, rather acts and works upon God, then he
upon it, when he justifies any man. Therefore doubtless the righteousness of
Christ can in no sense, agreeable to truth and ordinary construction of speech,
be called the matter of Justification.

Wherefore (in the last place) concerning the matter of, or material cause of
Justification, ^ustification, that is either God himself, or the person that
is to be justified. For as for that kind of matter, which we called ex qua,
matter properly so called, Justification, being an act, or action, is
altogether incapable of it, as has bin already said. Neither has any action
whatsoever any material cause at all, in this sense. It remains therefore,
that the matter of Justification, must be of that kind of matter, which is
less properly so called, whereof there are but these two species, or sorts,
(as has bin said) the matter in qua, and the matter circa quam, i. the the
subject, and the object. If we take the subject of Justification, or him on
whom the act it self of Justification, in respect of the production and being
of it depends, and will call that the matter of it, then God himself must be
the matter we inquire after: because the act of Justification, in respect of
the raising and bringing forth of it, depends only upon him. But this (I
confess) is a very uncouth and proper expression, to call God the matter of
justification; neither has the tongue or pen of any man (I conceive) ever
taken any pleasure in it. Or if by the subject of Justification, we understand
the subjectum recipie^s, that is, the subject receiving, and wherein the act of
Justification is terminated (which is as proper a signification of the word, as
the other the old tried rule being, that actio est in patiente tanquam in
subjecto) then the subject and the object will prove but one and the same, viz
the person that is to be justified, that is, the believing sinner. Thus it is
in all other actions likewise; the subject receiving the action or impression
of the Agent, and the object upon which the Agent acts or works, are still
the same. And for any other matter of Justification, besides that which has
bin now assigned, viz. the sinner who believes, I verily believe there is none
to be found: who though he be, both the object and subject (in the sense given)
of Justification, yet may he more properly be called the matter of
Justification, as he is the object, then as the subject thereof, because the
notion of matter, better agrees (of the two) to that which is called circa
quam, or the object, then to the other, which is the subject. And this for the
matter or material cause of Justification, the person to be justified, or
believing sinner.

Fourthly (and lastly) to make forward toward the consideration and inquiry
of the formal cause of Justification,

First, for the Popish opinion, which (as Bellarmine describes it from the
Counsel of Trent, subscribing himself also with both hands unto it) Certe
concilium causam formalem justificatio^^, in ipsi us justitie infusione
constituit, etc. Bellarm. De Iustific. lib. 2. c. 2. versus sinem.
places the formal cause of Justification, in the infusion of inherent
righteousness, I shall not make it matter of long confutation. The opinion is
built upon another opinion, as rotten as it, viz. perfection of inherent
righteousness: for if this be found to be imperfect (and it will never be
found other, till this mortal has put on immortality) the credit of that
other opinion is lost, and that by consent of their own principles: who teach
that in Justification men are made perfectly and compleately righteous. So that
any one sin, little or great, venial or mortal, proceeding from any one of
their justified ones, utterly overthrowes the opinion of their Church touching
the formal cause of Justification. It stands them in hand, if they desire to
build up this determination of their Council with authority and honor, to
raise the level of another enterprise of theirs, and to prove, not only a
possibility, but a necessity also of a perfect observation of the Law of God,
by those that are justified and regenerate. When they have quitted themselves
like men in this, and have laid the foundations of such a necessity firm and
strong, we shall (happily) then consider further of their Doctrine touching the
formal cause of Justification: in the mean time we shall be at liberty to
make inquiry after a better.

Yet Secondly, Socinian Discoverer touching the same business, to be no whit
better, but rather at a far deeper defiance both with reason and truth. The
formal cause of Justification (says he) Mr. George Walker Socinian.
Discovered. p. 139.
is that communion between Christ and us, and that reciprocal imputation of
our sins to Christ, and of his righteousness and full satisfaction to us,
which communion arises and flows from the spirit which God sheds on us
through Christ, which spirit dwelling in us (in some measure, so as he dwells
in the man Christ, from whom he is derived to us) does make us one spiritual
body with Christ; and works in us Faith, and all holy graces and affections,
by which we adhere and cleave to Christ, and apply and enjoy his
righteousness, etc. Doubtless here is a great deal too much matter to make a
good form. The essential character of a form or formal cause is to be a
single simple and uncompounded being: whereas that which is here presented to
us, for the form of Justification, is rudis indigestaque moles, an indigested
heap of compositions. Surely this form is so deformed, that the Author need
nor fear any corrivall or competitor with him for it.

Quin sine rivali, seque et sua solus amabit. For 1o, if the Justification we
speak of, or the form of it, stands in that communion which is between
Christ and us, then Christ himself is justified with the same Justification,
wherewith sinners are justified and consequently has sins forgiven him,
as well as they. Because that communion which is between Christ and us, who
believe, is but one and the same Communion, and wherein Christ partakes as well
as we. Therefore if the same form of Justification be found in him, which is
in us, the same Justification must be found in him, or on him likewise.

2o, That communion which is between Christ and those that believe, cannot be
the formal cause of Justification, because it is no righteousness, nor
conformity with any Law, either directly or indirectly, either properly and
precisely, or by way of equivalencie, and interpretatively: himself likewise
affirming ( p. 138) that in the act of justification God makes men righteous by
the perfect righteousness and full satisfaction of Christ) expressing hereby
(if be expresses any thing) the formal cause (at least. according to his own
apprehension) of Justification. So then the communion which is between Christ
and us, being a far differing thing from the righteousness and full
satisfaction of Christ, it follows, as well agreeably to his own pen, as to
the truth it self, that the Communion he speaks of is not the formal cause
of Justification.

3o, The formal cause of Justification, Justification, and consequently the
effect of God who justifies or exercises that act, that is, of God the Father
(as himself rightly supposes p. 137.) whereas that Communion between Christ
and us (which he speaks of) arises and flows (as himself also
acknowledges in the passage cited) from the Holy Ghost. Therefore unpossible
it is that this Communion should be theformall cause of Justification.

4o, This Communion between Christ and us, is a consequent of our
Justification, and takes not place, has no being, till after we be fully and
compleately justified. This himself likewise (upon the matter) acknowledges
in the words cited, affirming, that it arises and flows from the Spirit
which God sheds on us through Christ, etc. Now that the Spirit is not shed upon
us till after, or upon our believing (and consequently till after we be
justified, for Justification follows Faith as close as imagination it self
can imagine) is evident from those and many the like Scriptures. This spoke he
of the Spirit which they that believed in him, should receive, etc. John 7.39.
And God which knows the heart gave them witness (viz. that they truly
believed, as appears from the former verse) in giving unto them the Holy
Ghost, even as he did unto us. Act. 15.8. Then Peter said unto them, Amend your
lives and be Baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ for the
Remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. (Act.
2.38.) They were to believe before they were Baptized: but the receiving of the
Holy Ghost is promised after. See further to this purpose, Act. 6.5. Act.
8.15.16. Act. 11.17. with the 15. Act. 19.2. etc. So then, the Communion that
is between Christ and us, flowing from the Spirit which God sheds on us
through Christ, and this act of sheding being still performed by God after or
upon our believing, and consequently after or upon our complete Justification,
it undeniably follows, that this Communion cannot be the formal cause of our
JUSTIFICATION because this is accomplished (and accomplished it cannot be
without the formal part or cause of it in being) before the other receives
it is being.

5o, Christ and us, were the formal cause of Justification, Christ himself
might be truly said to be justified, by the same act of Justification with us.
This is evident, because the Communion spoken of relates as well to him as to
us, and is inherent in him, as much as in us: and whatsoever partakes of the
same form, or formal cause with another, is (doubtless) in respect of this
form capable of the same denominatio^ with it. If the form of that
Justification be as well, or as much in Christ, as it is in us, Christ may as
well be said to be justified thereby as we. But to say that Christ should be
justified by that communion which is between him and us, is (...), a hard;
saying to the tender cares of Christians. Therefore certainly, though that
Communion which is between Christ and us, be a sweet and precious thing, yet
is it not the formal cause of Justification, no more then Samuel was therefore
Isaak Abraham's Son, because he was a good Son like him. And

6o. If the Communion between Christ and us, be the formal cause of
Iustificatton, then is not the reciprocal imputation of our sins to Christ,
and of his righteousness and full satisfaction to us, this cause also; which
is yet affirmed by the same Author and with the same breath. This consequence
is pregnant and conquering: because this reciprocal imputation, is an act of
God the Father (and so supposed by the Author himself, and if rightly
understood, not with any variation from the truth) whereas the Communion
mentioned, flows from the Holy Ghost, (as has bin already observed, and is
here likewise expressly affirmed.) Now unpossible it is that two acts really
differing the one from the other, should ever so combine or incorporate, as to
make the form, or formal cause of any thing, (which as has bin said) is
always a single and simple being, and void of composition. This reason stands
in force, though we take his reciprocal imputation, which he joins with his
communion, to make up the form of Justification, in a passive sense, viz. for
the effect of that act of God, whereby he makes that reciprocal imputation.
For neither can two effects really differing, ever so complie or consent
together to simplisie one the other, as to raise a third thing or being
between them of simplicity enough, to make the formal being of any thing.

7o, Neither can this reciprocal imputation, taken by it self, be the formal
cause of Justification, because 1o, it comprehends and includes two several
and distinct acts of God, or two distinct and several effects of two such acts
of his, The imputation of our sins to Christ, is an act or effect, really
differing from the imputation of his righteousness and satisfaction unto us.
This is evident: because as the rendering Christ obnoxious unto death, is a
thing really differing, and of opposite consideration, from the making of us
righteous, and capable of life; so the acts by which these are effected, must
needs be really differing also the one from the other. Now (as has bin already
argued) it is unpossible that any form, or formal cause, should be made of
any plurality of ingredients, or be a composition made of several things
really differing the one from the other. 2o It is impossible that this
reciprocal imputation should be the form we inquire after, because, only the
believing sinner (as has bin fully proved Sect. 16. is the matter of
Justification. Now the form of a thing (at least the accidental form, which
is the kind of form under inquiry) is always found in conjunction and union
with the matter proper to it, and never in any other. Christ therefore being no
believing sinner, and consequently, no fitting or possible matter for the form
of that Justification (whereof we speak) to be coupled with, it cannot be that
the imputation of our sins to him, should either be this form it self, or
any part of it. 3o, No imputation whatsoever, nor of whatsoever, can be the
form of Justification; 1o, because it is no righteousness, either in one
kind or other, neither a righteousness literally or properly so called, nor
yet a righteousness by way of interpretation: whereas the form of
Justification (whatsoever it be) must of necessity be a righteousness, either
of the one kind or of the other. It is true, a righteousness imputed,
(supposing such imputation) is a righteousness: but the imputation of this
righteousness, can be noe righteousness. Therefore no imputation whatsoever
can be the form of Justification. 2o, Every form, or formal cause gives
according to the nature of it, a suitable denomination to the subject, whereunto
it is united; as heat gives the denomination of hot, to the fire, and learning,
the denomination of learned, to the man endued with it, etc. But no imputation
gives any suitable denomination to the persons to whom it is made, or in whom it
inheres; men are not said to be imputed this or that, for any imputation made.
Therefore imputation is noe form at all; and consequently not the form or
formal cause of Justification.

8o, The Author himself within a very few lines after the words lately cited
from him, falls off from his reciprocal imputation, and affirms, the
righteousness of Christ it self, to be this formal cause of Justification
calling it, our formal righteousness. But this is but one drope of that
powreing shower of contradictions, which has fallen from his pen upon that
discourse, and stands in swamps and plashes all over it.

9o, Justification, there is not the least mention to be found of forgiveness
of sins, as neither within the whole compass of that draught of the Doctrine
of Justification, which in several pages together of the discourse mentioned,
he presents unto the world; as if Justification and remission of sins, were
like Samaritan and Jew, which have no dealings one with another. Ioh. 4.9.
Whereas Reformed Divines generally, (and I think) I may say, without
exception, never handle the Doctrine of Justification, especially never
profess to assign or explicate the formal cause thereof, without mention
making of remission or forgiveness of sins, conceiving them to be things of
the most arct and nearest affinity that may be, as indeed they are.

The opinion and description last cited, touching the formal cause of
justification, contains matter of more particular grievances, then have yet
bin touched or complained of. But because I conceive the unreasonablenesse of
it, a sufficient caution and security against the infection and propagation of
it, and that no man will ever be so hard put to it for a formal cause of
Justification, as to take up that, I shall therefore for the present, with that
chastisement and correction which it has already received, let it go.

But thirdly, Neither can that opinion stand, which makes the imputation or
application of the righteonsnesse of Christ, Justification. (a) We teach, that
Christ's righteousness, both habitual and actual, by which he was formally
just, is the matter; and the imputation thereof ^s the fo^me of Justification.
Bish. Downham. Tree. of Iustifi. lib. 1: c. 5. Sect. 2.

See more to this purpose immediately following, where he cites also the
Magdeburgenses and Scharpius, as being of the same judgment with him.


Against this opinion we argued in the latter part of our refutation of the
former: where we evictingly proved, that no imputation whatsoever, or of
whatsoever, could possibly be the form of Justification. The plea is at hand,
in the last Section, save one; therefore I repeat nothing thereof. Only I add
as of further consideration, against this opinion, 10, that if the
righteousness of Christ be the matter of Justification (which the opinion
maintains) and the imputation hereof the form, then one righteousness must
be the form of another righteousness: because the form of Justification (as
has bin often said) must needs be a righteousness (and so is acknowledged,
and termed by the Author himself) For the righteousness whereby a man is
formally just, is inherent in himself, etc. Bish. Downham, Vbi supra.
So that if the matter hereof be a righteousness, and the form a
righteousness also, one righteousness must inform another, which is (I
conceive) a greater burden of absurdity, then the reason of any considering
man can bear.

Secondly, if imputation be the form, and the righteousness of Christ the
matter of Justification, then that which is less perfect and of an inferior
being, shall be the complement and perfection of that which is more perfect,
and of a superior being: it being a general and known maxim, that the form
still actuateth the matter, and adds a further degree of being and perfection
unto it. Now this imputation we speak of, being (and that by the full consent
and acknowledgment of the Authors of the opinion) somewhat inherent in the
person justified, and intrinsecall to him, For the righteousness whereby a man
is formally just, is inherent in himself: for what is more intrinsecall then
the form? Bishop Downham, Iusti. lib. 1. c. 5. Sect. ^.
must needs be of inferior worth and value to the righteousness of Christ.
Neither indeed can it well be conceived, how any thing at all should be for
mall, or of a perfecting or actuating nature, in respect of the righteousness
of Christ.

Thirdly, neither do the Scriptures any way favor this opinion, or complie
with it in any expression found in them: nor do I find the Authors themselves
so much as pretending any Scripture approbation of their judgment in this kind.

Fourthly (and lastly) if the judgment of the late Bishop of Sarisburie (a
learned man, doubtless, though a Bishop) be of any authority, he is
absolutely declared against the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and
pleades for the righteousness it self imputed as the formal cause of
Justification. The most perefect obedience (says he) Christi Mediatoris in
nobis habitantu, atque per spiritum sese nobu unientis persectissima
obedientia, est formalu causae justificationu nostrae. Bishop Davenant, De
Justice. Habit. c. 22. p. 313.
of Christ the Mediator, dwelling in us, and uniting himself by his Spirit to
us, is the formal cause of our Justification, etc. And if his testimony be of
any value, Reformed Authors generally are of a concurrent judgment with him
herein. Haec communis est nostrorum omnium sententia, Christi obedientiam and
justitiam nobis imputatam, esse formalem causam Iustificatiopis. Idem ubi
supra. p. 312.
Notwithstanding.

Fourthly, that neither is this opinion, which makes the righteousness of
Christ imputed the formal cause of Justification, of any such entire
consistencie with the truth (besides the counterpoyse of the authorities and
judgments of the Authors standing up for the former opinion) may be evidenced
upon these grounds.

First: that which is an efficient cause of Justification, cannot be the
formal cause also. This is clear by the tenor of that general rule, laid
down Sect. righteousness of Christ, is an efficient cause of Justification,
has bin already proved; and besides, is (upon the matter) so acknowledged by
the Authors themselves of this opinion, who generally grant it to be the
meritorious or impulsive cause thereof.

Secondly, they who maintain the righteousness of Christ imputed to be the
formal cause of Justification, must of necessity hold, the believing sinner,
or the person to be justified, to be the material cause thereof, upon which
supposition, I thus reason: No one and the same individual form, or formal
cause, can possibly inform two several subjects, really distinguished the one
from the other. But Christ himself, and the believing sinner, are two several
subjects, really distinguished the one from the other. Therefore the same
individual form of righteousness cannot inform them both. Neither can it be
here said: that Christ and the believer are in this case considered as one and
the same body or subject, and so one and the same form of righteousness may
inform them both. For to this I answer 1o, that that though Christ and the
believer be one and the same mystical body, yet are they not one and the same
natural body, and therefore are not capable of one and the same natural
form. As though man and wife be one flesh (as the Scripture speaks) and so
one body, viz. in a civil sense or consideration; it does not therefore
follow, that this one body is capable in both the parts or members of it, of
one and the same individual natural quality or form: because though they be
one civilly, yet they are two distinct persons or subjects naturally. The wife
is not not wise by the wisdom, or strong by the strength of her Husband, she
may be both simple and weak, notwithstanding the contrary perfections in her
Husband. Yea in the natural body it self, though all the members, be but one
body (as the Apostle speaks) yet the properties or qualities that are found
in one member: as for instance, the organicall faculty of seeing in the eye,
are not found in others, as in the hand, foot, or the like.

And 2o, righteousness did inform both Christ and the believer, because they
are one body, then one and the same sinfullnesse or corruption of nature might
inform them also, upon the same ground: and so Christ should be sinful and
corrupt with the same sinfulness and corruption of nature which are found in the
believer. Therefore the objection laid in, is of no value. Thirdly, if the
righteousness of Christ be the formal cause of Justification, the^ the
meritorious cause of a thing, may be the formal cause of it also. For the
righteousness of Christ (as has bin often said, and once sufficiently proved,
and generally is confessed) is the meritorious cause of Justification. But that
that meritorious cause of a thing, can never be the formal cause also of the
same, is fully evident from hence; because the formal cause is always
intrinsecall ( what is more intrinsecall then the form? says Bishop Downeham,
as we heard before) and contrarily the meritorious cause, always extrinsecall.
Now as it is impossible, See Sect. 2. of this Chap.
that he that is always without the doors, should at any time be within: so is
it unpossible also, that that cause, whose essential charactar and property
it is, to be always extrinsecall, should be intrinsecall at any time, or in
any case whatsoever.

Fourthly, if the righteousness of Christ be the formal cause of
Justification, then is a Believer to be reputed righteous with the
righteousness of Christ. This Proposition is evident, it being proper to every
form, to give a suitable denomination to the subject. But that a Believer is
at no hand to be reputed righteous with the righteousness of Christ, or with
the same righteousness wherewith Christ is righteous, I thus demonstrate and
prove: He that may lawfully be reputed righteous, with the same righteousness
wherewith Christ was righteous, may lawfully be reputed never to have sinned.
The reason of this Proposition is, because that righteousness which either
supposes or admits sin in the same subject with it, can be none of the
righteousness of Christ; the essential property whereof was to be his
righteousness who never sinned. But that it should be lawful to repute any
justified person under Heaven never to have sinned, is so notorions an untruth,
that men need no further light (I conceive) to comprehend the darkness of it.
Therefore the righteousness of Christ imputed, is not the formal cause of
Justification.

Fifthly, righteous with that righteousness where with Christ himself was
righteous, then are they righteous with a meritorious righteousness. For
themselves grant the righteousness of Christ to be meritorious. But that men
are not formally righteous with a meritorious righteousness, I thus
demonstrate. He that is formally righteous with a meritorious righteousness,
may lawfully have the merit of such righteousness ascribed unto him, and be
himself reputed the meritor of whatsoever is due upon just account to such a
righteousness. But the merit of the righteousness of Christ cannot lawfully
be ascribed unto any man, nor any justified person lawfully reputed the meritor
of all that is due to that righteousness. Therefore no man is formally
righteous with the righteousness of Christ. The assumption in this argument is
unquestionable, and has our Adversaries themselves friends to it: certainly no
man is to be esteemed or reputed one that has merited or contributed any thing
by way of merit toward the salvation of the world, which is that which is due
to the righteousness of Christ (at least in the judgment of those who oppose
in the present controversy) The reason of the former proposition, is that old
approved maxim in Logique. Dansformam, dat consequentia formam. i. he that
gives the form of a thing, gives all such things with it, which do accompany
and follow this form. Now the Redemption and salvation of the world, is that
which accompanies and follows, and which still belongs to the
righteousness of Christ. Therefore he that gives this form to any man in the
formalitie of it, gives the redemption and salvation of the world to him with
it.

If it be here objected and said: its true, the Redemption and salvation of the
world, follow the righteousness of Christ, as it was performed by him, and
personally inherent in him, not as it is imputed to men that believe.

I answer, 1o, that in this objection, the Question is begged, and that
supposed, which is the maine hinge of the controversy, viz. the imputation of
the righteousness of Christ in the formalitie of it: a Position that stands
convicted (in the former part of this Treatise) of manifest untruth, by the
testimonies of many witnesses, both Divine and humane.

2^, I answer yet further, that the meritoriousnesse of the righteousness of
Christ (supposing such a property in it) must needs be essential to it and
inseparable from it. It is not an adventitious or contingent property, but
connaturall to it, seated and rooted in the very intrinsecall and constituting
principles of it. So that whatsoever be done with it, whatsoever becomes of it,
to whomsoever it be imputed, this meritoriousnesse of it goes along with it,
and may be ascribed to whomsoever the righteousness it self may be ascribed.
Yea, supposing this property we speak of, this meritoriousnesse, in the
righteousness of Christ, we must consequently suppose it to be so essential
and intrinsecall to it, that the righteousness it self must needs be
destroyed and turned into another righteousness of an inferior kind and
importance, if that be separated from it. As suppose a piece of gold to be of
such a value, as (for example) worth ten shillings (or the like,) to whomsoever
this piece shall be given, there must of necessity the value or worth also of
ten shillings, be given therewith unto him, the just value and worth of a
thing being inseparable from the thing it self, at least the thing it self
inseparable from it.

3o, It would be known by what warrant either of Scripture or good reason, men
should make this a point of their Faith, that God, when he imputes the
righteousness of Christ unto men, should strip it naked of the
meritoriousnesse of it; and so make it a righteousness more worth-lesse and
vile, then any positive righteousness whatsoever, consisting of works, can
be. For it is essential to every such righteousness, whether performed by men
or Angels, or by whomsoever to be meritorious, at least of the justification
of the person in whom it is found. This lies full and fair in that of the
Apostle, Romans 4.4. To him that works i. that perfectly observes the Law, the
wages is not counted by faver, but of debt. Therefore i^ the righteousness of
Christ, when it is imputed to believers, be divested of that which is the glory
of it, above all other righteousness, I mean the meritoriousnesse of it, it
suffers loss and disadvantage, and is not at all exalted or magnified, by
imputation. This for the objection.

Sixthly, righteousness of Christ be the formal cause of justification, this
must be verified either of the moral righteousness of Christ alone, or of his
Ceremonial righteousness alone or of his Mediatory righteousness alone or of
all, or some two of these together. But neither the moral righteousness of
Christ alone, nor his ceremonial righteousness alone, nor his mediatorie
righteousness alone, nor all, nor any two of these righteousnesses together,
can be the formal cause of Justification: therefore no righteousness of
Christ whatsoever is to be looked upon in any such relation of causalitie, in
respect of justification. The proposition in this syllogism (I conceive)
carries the light of it is own truth with it, The enumeration of the several
species or kinds of righteousness in Christ, is sufficient. As for his
original, and habitual righteousness, I comprehend them both under his
moral. Therefore if the conclusion stick's, the assumption is to be blamed for
it. But that this also is blameless, I thus demonstrate, by the several parts
of it.

First, that his Ceremonial righteousness alone should be formal in
justification, never as yet (I conceive) entered into any man's head or heart,
to conceive. Therefore (I presume) we may spare the arguing of this member,
without any prejudice at al to our cause.

Secondly that his mediatorie righteousness alone (which consists in his
passives) should be the cause inquired after, is not (to my knowledge) affirmed
by any of that judgment we oppose in the depending controversy. But
howsoever, the truth of it thus appears: because the formal cause always
gives a suitable denomination to the subject. But no justified person can be
called mediatorily righteous: therefore a mediatorie righteousness is not the
formal cause of justification.

Thirdly, by the same argument, it is as manifest as heart can wish, that
neither can both these righteousnesses together, be that formal cause we
speak of: nor has any man every et adventured either his credit or his
conscience upon this opinion. Therefore here also we will borrow confidence:
and make restitution, when an adversary shall reasonably demand it.

Fourthly, See cap. 18. Sect. 3. of the first part.
that his moral righteousness alone as distinguished and separated from his
Ceremonial, cannot be this formal cause, is evident: because then the
believing Jews, who lived before Christ's coming in the flesh, and the
believing Gentiles since, should not be justified with one and the same
righteousness from Christ. For the Jews, who lived before the dissolution of
the Mosaical oeconomie by the sufferings of Christ, were as well bound to the
observation of the Law Ceremonial, as Moral: and therefore could not be
justified by the imputation of a moral righteousness only. Again on the
other hand, those that have lived since the promulgation of the said
dissolution made by Christ, were not only free and not bound to the Law
Ceremonial, but were strictly bound from it, and from the observation of the
rites and usages therein commanded. Therefore for these to have the observation
of Mosaicall rites and Ceremonies imputed to them, is to have rather sin,
then righteousness, imputed to them.

Fifthly, by this last consideration also it appears, that the two last named
righteousnesses of Christ, Ceremonial and Moral, cannot be so cast or run
into one, or so conspire together, as to make the formal cause of
Justification we seek after. The believing Gentiles since the promulgation of
that Gospel, must have no Ceremonial threads woven into the piece of
righteousness, whereby they must stand justified in the fight of God.

Lastly, that neither can his moral and mediatorie righteousness so comport
or complie together, as to raise a third kind of righteousness between them,
that should make the formal cause of Justification so much questioned and
contended about, may be sufficiently apprehended by what has bin already
delivered. For that righteousness which shall be supposed to be compounded of
these two, must necessarily be conceived to be a Mediatorie righteousness at
the least. For there must be nothing lost of the vigor, strength, or perfection
of either, in the composition. But that no Mediatorie righteousness can
possibly be formal in justification, was fully evinced and concluded in the
fifth argument.

Seventhly (and lastly, imputation which has bin opposed in this Treatise,
that the general current of Reformed Divines runns with an opposite stream to
this opinion, and with one mouth deny the righteousness of Christ imputed to
be the formal cause of Justification. Who ever of our writers (says Doctor
Prideaux Quis unquam e nostru, nos per justitiam Christi imputatam, formaliter
justificari asservit? Dr. Prideaux, Lect. 5. p. 163.
) affirmed, that we are formally justified by the righteousness of Christ
imputed? And Bishop Downham a great hyperaspistes also of imputation, charge
it upon his adversaries as a depravation of their Doctrine lib. 1. of Iustifi.
p. 39. Sect. 1.2.
(he means his own, and other Protestant Divines) that they will needs, with
the Papists, make them hold, that we are formally righteous by that
righteousness, which is not in us, but out of us in Christ, which is absurd.
And a little after, marveiles at them, how they could be so absurd, as to
conceive so absurdly of them (himself and other Reformed Divines he had spoken
of) as if they held, that the righteousness of Christ it self should be the
formal cause of Justification. Now that both these testimonies are so far
true, as they avouch the more general opinion of Protestant Divines, to stand
against formal Justification by the righteousness of Christ imputed, will
further appear by the explication of the fifth and last opinion touching the
cause under dispute, which now follows: Therefore

Fifthly (and lastly) there remains yet another opinion to be considered of,
The Authors judgment touching the formal cause of Justification.
as the formal cause of Justification. And that this opinion has both the
fairest and largest quarter in the judgments and writings of Protestant
Divines, as also most agree-ablenesse with the truth, we shall (I trust) make
evident, without much wearisomnesse of Discourse. For the former of these, the
more general consent of Reformed Authors, (besides what has bin already
delivered for the Justification hereof from many of the Authors themselves, in
the first and fifth Chapters of the former part of this Treatise) I shall
satisfy my self (and I hope my Reader also will take part with me in this
satisfaction) with the testimonies only of two of eminent note amongst them,
both (I conceive) without exception, and of sufficient learning and integrity
to be believed in a matter of as great importance as this; the one of them a
forreiner, the other an English Divine, the one being of the same judgment
himself, the other (in part) dissenting; the one dead, the other yet living.

The former of the two is David Paraeus, sometimes chief Professor of Divinty
in the University of Heidelburgh: who in his tract concerning the Active and
Passive righteousness of Christ, having laid down his judgment (in the
controversy depending) thus (p. 176) Superest Quarta sententia etc. quod
justificatio tota sit, remissio peccatorum propter hanc satisfactionem nobis
imputatam. Hanc sententiam, ut veriorem, simpliciorem, a^ tutiorem amplects me
profiteor etc. Parens De Iustit. Christi Act. et Pass. p. 176. 177. Possem huc
affer re Authoritates Patrum etc. Possem quoque afferre co^sensum Lutheri,
Melancthonis etc. p. 178.
that remission of sins for the satisfaction of Christ imputed to us, is our
whole and entire Justification, and argued accordingly (p. 177) in the
following page, adds as follows. I might here produce the Authorities of
the Fathers, who likewise place our righteousness (meaning, in Justification)
in the alone forgiveness of sins for the death of Christ: and accordingly
cites several testimonies out of Austin, Occumenius, and Ambrose. And
immediately after these testimonies, thus: I might also allege the consent of
Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bullinger, Calvin, Martyr,
Musculus, Hyperius, Vrsine, Olevian, etc. from whose Doctrine in the point of
Iustificatiou, I do not vary a nails breadth. So that the light of this man's
reading and judgment together, could discover no other opinion touching the
formal cause of Justification, either in the Fathers, or any the chief
Protestant writers in his time, but that it should stand only in Remission of
sins.

The latter of the two mentioned, is Mr. Thomas Gataker, a man of approved
learning and integrity amongst us: who in Mr. A. Wottons Defense against Mr.
Walkers Charge, lately published in Print by him, acknowledges (p. 58) that
howsoever for his part he deemeth it erroneous (and so do I too, taking the
word Justification, in that large sense which it seems he does, where he
argues against the opinion, as viz. in his Animadversions upon the disputes
between Piscator and Lucius, p. 9. besides sundry other places in his
writings) to hold that Justification consists in remission of sins, yet
that Calvin, Beza, Olevian, Vrsine, Zanchie, Piscator, Pareus, Musculus,
Bullinger, Fox, and diverse others of great note and name, yea whole Synods of
ours are found so to say: adding further, and yet were these men never yet,
that I ever heard or read, for so saying, condemned as Heretics, much less
as blasphemous. Heretics, but had in high esteem, as their worth, parts and
works well deserved, by those that therein dissented from them.

To this I might (if need were) add Mr. Authony Wotton, a man of much labor,
diligence, and dexterity in searching out the judgments and opinions of
Protestant writers touching the great Point of Justification (as appears by
that learned piece of his, intit'led, de Reconciliatione peccatoris, etc.) who
in the 3, 4, 5, and 6 Chapters of the second book of the first part of this
work, has mustered together a greater troop of Reformed Authors then either
of the other, and from their own pens respectively, has made them all speak
distinctly and plainly, the same things touching the formal cause of
Justification, which the two former Authors (as we heard) ascribed unto some of
them.

Now for the declaration and proofe-making of this opinion,

1o, That Justification, being an action, has no form, or formal cause at
all properly so called, that is, has no substantial form, nor yet any form
that is properly a part of it, because this is proper only to substantial
natures and beings. See Sect. 8. of this Chapter.

2o, That there can in no other respect or consideration be ascribed any form
or formal cause unto Justification, but only as it mak's an alteration in the
person, or rather in the condition of the person justified. See this also
further explained in the forenamed Section of this Chapter.

3o, That that alteration, or change, which is made in the condition of the
person justified by his Justification, that is, that which the immediate,
proper, and precise effect, of that act of God whereby he justifies, in or
about the person justified, is, and nothing else but this is, or can with any
coulor of reason and congruitie of speaking, be called, the form or formal
cause of Justification. Of this also you have some further account in the 8
Section of this Chapter.

4o, That is especially to be remembered, that we do not in this inquiry,
seek after the form, or formal cause of Justification simply, or of
Justification largely taken, but of that particular and special kind of
Justification, whereby a believing sinner is justified by God through the
redemption which is in Christ Jesus. For if we take Justification in a large
sense, it is evident, that remission of sins cannot be the formal cause of
it. Because in such a sense of the word Justification, a man may be said to be
justified that is, acquitted and cleared, who has noe sins, or sin at all
forgiven him, viz. in case he has bin falsely accused. And so on the other
hand, a man may have his offense or offenses remitted and forgiven, and yet not
be justified, I mean with any such kind of Justification, as we now speak
of, viz. that is built upon a just and plenary satisfaction for the offense
given. But otherwise, any remission of an offense upon what terms soever, may
(in a large sense) be called, a Justification, viz. See more of this Cap. 3.
Sect. 1. of this second part.
as the word connoteth, and many times (even in the Scriptures themselves)
signifies a discharge or absolution from punishment.

5o, (and lastly) whereas there may be a double or or twofold Justification
ascribed unto God, the one we may call Declarative or Pronunciative, the other,
Constitutive, it is the formal cause of the latter, rather then of the former,
which we inquire after. The difference between these two Iustifications, may
be thus conceived: that which I call Constitutive, has a precedencie in the
order of nature (and for the most part, of time also) before the other, and is
some kind of cause thereof. When God is said to justify the sinner or
ungodly, (as Romans 4.5.) it is meant of his Constitutive Justification, not of
his Declarative: For God never declares or pronounces a sinner righteous,
till he has made him righteous, which is the proper act of that which I call,
Constitutive Justification. Again, when Christ says, by thy words thou shall
be justified. Mat. 12.13. and James concerning Abraham, that he was justified
through works; these and such like passages speak of a declarative
Justification. The formal cause of Gods declarative Justification, cannot be
conceived to stand in remission of sins, because remission of sins is
always precedaneous to it, and therefore cannot be the effect of it, and so
not the formal cause thereof, according to the 2 and 3 grounds premised. The
formal cause of this kind of Justification, is rather the knowledge in those
to whom such declaration is made (whether it be the person himself that is
justified, or some other) of remission of sins granted unto him, concerning
whom such declaration is made.

Only (to prevent cavilling) that is acknowledged, that even that which I call
Constitutive Justification, may in this sense be called declarative also, viz.
as the grounds, terms, and conditions upon which it proceeds, are declared and
made known by God in his Gospel. But by declarative Justification, I mean
only such an act or expression of God, whereby he declares the actual
Justification of those or any of those that have their sins forgiven them.

These things remembered, the truth of the opinion mentioned, and undertaken
for, which was, that Remission of sins is the form, or formal cause of
Justification.

First, if Remission of sins be the first, immediate, and precise effect of
that act of God whereby he justifies a sinner, in or upon the sinner so
justified, then is Remission of sins the proper formal cause of
Justification. This consequence is built clear and strong upon the third
particular premised. Therefore I assume: But remission of sins is the first,
immediate and precise effect of that act of God, whereby he justifies a
sinner, in or about the sinner so justified. Ergo etc. The reason of this
latter proposition is, because there is no other imaginable effect, that should
interveene, between such an act, and the effect specified. The Scriptures
themselves make an immediate connection between Gods act of Justification, and
the sinners exemption, or absolution from his sins, that is, from the guilt
and punishment due unto his sins, when they call Justification, a
Justification from sin. Be it known unto you, men and Brethren (says Paul.
Act. 13.38.) that through this man is preached unto you remission of sins;
and by him, all that believe, are justified from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Where we see that Justification is
immediately and directly, from sin, i. from the guilt or condemnatorie power
of sin. The like expression you have Romans 6, 7. He that is dead, (...), is
justified from sin. So that this is the first privilege or blessing, that
comes upon a sinner by means of his Justification, or of that act of God
whereby he justifies him, the remission of his sins: and consequently must
needs be the form of his Justification.

Secondly, that which gives the denomination of justified, to those that are
justified, must needs be the form, or formal cause of Justification. The
reason of this proposition, is apparent: it is still proper to every form, to
give a suitable denomination to the subject. Suitable I mean, not only to the
form it self, but to the action or motion also, whereby this form was
introduced into the subject. As for example: whiteness in a wall that was made
white out of some other color, gives the denomination of whited, unto the
wall: which does not answer the form it self only, which is whiteness, but
that action also of the Plaisterer or Painter, which we call, whitening.
Therefore it is evident, that the form or formal cause of this act of
whitening, is the whiteness, or whitednesse of the wall. Thus far then the
ground is firm under us. Let us therefore go forward, and assume: But
remission of sins gives the denomination of justified, to those that are
justified. Therefore remission of sins is the form, or formal cause of
Justification. The assumption I thus further demonstrate.

If a sinner be therefore and thereby justified, because he has his sins
remitted unto him, then remission of sins gives the denomination of
justified, unto him. This consequence is pregnant, because that always gives
the denomination, by the means or reason whereof, the subject is so, or so
denominated. I assume: But a sinner is therefore and thereby justified,
because, or in that he has his sins forgiven him. Ergo. The reason of the
latter proposition is, because that Justification we speak of, being still
opposed to condemnation (as has bin formerly observed from the Scriptures)
must needs stand in a vindication or exemption from punishment, which being
interpreted, is nothing else, but the having of a man's sins forgiven. For
there is no exemption from punishment at the hand of an infinite Judge for him
that is guilty, but by having his sins forgiven: as on the other hand, the
forgiveness of sins, is a full exemption in this kind.

Thirdly, justified which is caused therein by that act whereby God justifies
him, must of necessity be the form, or formal cause of his justification.
The third particular premised, is a sufficient light whereby to see the truth of
this proposition, Therefore I assume: But remission of sins, or absolution
and acquitting from punishment (which are interpretatively the same) is that
alteration or change which is made in the condition of a person justified by
that act of God whereby he justifies him. Ergo this alteration or change is
the formal cause of justification. The reason of the latter proposition is
this. Justification being (as I suppose is confessed on alhands) a civil or
politic act, as all actions of Judicature are, must needs produce a civil or
politic effect answerable to it. Al acts and actions beget only in their own
similitude and likeness. A natural action cannot produce a moral effect: nor
a moral action, a natural effect. Neither can a civil or politic action,
produce either a natural or moral, but only a civil or politic effect.
When a Judge acquits (and so when he condemn's) a man from a crime or
accusation brought in against him, this makes neither any natural nor moral
change in the person of him that is so acquitted, except it be occasionally and
by accident, as when by such a sentence of absolution a man is recovered out of
those fears, which were prejudicial to his health whilst he lay under danger
of the sentence of the Law, or the like: but properly and directly such an act
produces a civil or politic change in his condition. For whereas he was
before in danger of the Law, and obnoxious unto punishment, he is now at
liberty and free therefrom. So when a believing sinner is justified by God, the
effect of this act of God, is not any natural or moral change made upon him,
but a change in his estate and condition. Now there is no other change that can
be imagined should be made in the spiritual estate or condition of a man, by
the act of Gods Justification falling on him, but only his acquitting from the
guilt of sin, and punishment due unto the same. Before this act of God passed
upon him, he was under the guilt of sin, and obnoxious to the wrath of God:
but by the coming of this upon him, he is absolutely free and exempt from danger
that way.

Fourthly, justified person, formally and completely just or righteous before
God, is (questionless) the formal cause of Justification. This proposition is
greater then exception, nor will (I conceive) be denied by our keenest
adversaries in the maine. I assume therefore: But remission of sins is that
which makes a justified person formally and completely righteous before God.
Therefore this is the formal cause of Justification. The reason and ground of
the assumption is this: because he that stands as clear, and as free from
sin, or the guilt of sin, in the sight of God, as he that having lived a 1000
years, should always have observed the Law, and never transgressed in the
least point, is (doubtless) formally and completely righteous in the sight of
God. Now that remission of sins gives this privilege to him that has received
it, in as full and amplea manner, as the exemplified observation of the Law, or
any other of the longest continuance that is imaginable can do, has bin more
then once demonstrated in this Treatise, especially in the fifth Conclusion laid
down in the second Chap. of this second Part. Sect. 6. p. 8.

Fifthly, If remission of sins be a perfect and complete righteousness, then
is it the formal cause of Justification. This proposition is much of the same
spinning with the Major in the former argument, and so partaker of like
evidence of truth with it. Neve^-the-lesse (once to light up a candle whereby to
see the Sun) the reason of it, is briefly this: be-because no perfect or
complete righteousness can be found in any man that has sinned, but that
which is given and conferred by God upon him in his Justification: and that
which is in this way conferred upon him, is (without contradiction) the formal
cause thereof. Therefore let us make forward: But remission of sins is a
perfect and complete righteousness: therefore (doubtless) the formal cause
also of Justification. The minor proposition has often already bin exalted upon
the Throne of evidence and unquestionablenesse of truth: yet if you desire a
little of what is more then enough, take this for a further demonstration of
it. That righteousness which needs not fear the presence o^ most district
Judgment of God, is (doubtless) a complete and perfect righteousness. But
remission of sins is a righteousness that needs not to fear the presence
or districtest judgment of God. Therefore it is a perfect and complete
righteousness. The Sun at noone day shines no cleerer light, then both
these propositions do truth. For the former, I make no question but
contradiction it self will be ashamed to oppose it. Peccata sola separant
inter hominem et Deum, quae solvuntur Christi gratia, per quem mediatorem
reconciliamur, cum justificat impium. Aug De Pecc. Merit. et Rem: l. 1. c, 20.
That righteousness which will hold out weight and measure, by the standerd of
Heaven, no man (I presume) will call defective or imperfect. And for the
latter, who can with any reason lift up a thought of heart against it? For what
cause has any man to fear any displeasure or hard sentence from God, who has
all his sins fully pardoned? There is nothing can separate between God and
his, creature, but only sin: and when this is taken away, what shall hinder,
but that there should immediately ensue a perfect union of love and peace
between them?

Sixthly, righteousness which God imputes in the Justification of a sinner,
then is it the formal cause of Justification. But forgiveness of sins is
the righteousness imputed by God in the Justification of a sinner. Ergo. The
ground of the sequel in the first proposition is this, because the
righteousness which God imputes in Justification, must needs be the formal
cause thereof, otherwise it must be said, either a man is formally just by some
righteousness of his own, or which he has not received from God: or else that
he is not made righteous in or by his Justification, but afterward. The minor,
is the assertion of the Holy Ghost (almost) in terminis, Romans 4. For that which
ver. 6. is called, Gods imputing righteousness, ver. 7. is interpreted to be,
his forgiving iniquities, and covering sin.

Seventhly, If remission of sins reaches home unto and be given unto men by
God for their Justification, then is it the formal cause thereof. This is
evident: because by the formal cause of Justification, we mean nothing else
(as has bin often said) but Justification passive, or that gift which by God
is given unto men (and by them received accordingly) in and by that act of his
whereby he justifies them. So that if remission of sins be that which is
given unto sinners by God, for, or unto their Justification, it must of
necessity be conceived to be the formal cause thereof. Therefore I assume:
but remission of sins is given by God unto men for their Justification, and
reaches home unto it: Therefore it must needs be the formal cause thereof.
This latter proposition again, is (in effect, and well nigh in terms) nothing
but what the Holy Ghost himself affirms, Romans 5.16. And not as it was by one
that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment was by one unto condemnation:
but the free gift is of many offenses unto Justification. that is, God by the
free gift, that is, by the free forgiveness of men's sins, does fully
justify them. The free gift of offenses, or the forgiveness of sins, could
not be said to be unto Justification, except a man were fully and entirely
justified thereby.

Lastly, if remission of sins, and the non-imputing of sin to those that
have sinned, be expressions of one and the same importance, and signify the
same privilege, estate, or condition, of a person justified, then is remission
of sins the formal cause of Justification. The strength of this consequence
lies in this, that the Holy Ghost describes or interprets the
righteousness which God imputes in Justification, by the non-imputation of
sin. This is evident by comparing Romans 4.6. with ver. 8. And it was proo^ed
before (in the sixth argument) that the righteousness imputed by God in
Justification, must of necessity be the formal cause thereof. Therefore it
undeniably follows, that if remission of sins, and the non-imputing of
sin, be expressions of one and the same condition, that remission of sins
is the formal cause of Justification. Now that the importance of these two
expressions is but one and the same, is apparent enough without proof. For
what does God more, or otherwise, in remitting sin, then he does in not
imputing it? or what does he more or otherwise in the not-imputing of sin,
then he does in remitting it? Not to impute sin to him that has sinned, can
implie nothing else, but not to charge the demerit or guilt thereof upon him:
and what does remission of sins import either more or less? And hence
(doubtless) it is, that David sets the same Crown of the same blessedness
upon the head of the one and the other. Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, whose sin is covered Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes
not iniquity, etc. Psalm. 32.1.2. Romans 4.7.8.

Much might be further argued both from the Scriptures and otherwise,
justification in Remission of sins: but inasmuch as this tasque has bin
learnedly and thoroughly performed by another Mr. Wotton, De Reconciltat. Part
1, lib. 2. c. 3.4.5.6.7.8.
(though in another languag) and to ease the present discourse of length and
tediousness what we may without any sensible de r^ment to the cause
undertaken, I forbear. And the rather, because whatsoever I am able to
conceive may possibly with any color or pretext of reason be objected against
the opinion, has (for the most part) bin already answered or cleared, or else
will be found answered in the two following Chapters. As

First, righteousness: ou shall find satisfaction touching this, in the
second Chap. of this latter part, in the 4 Conclusion. Sect. 4.

Secondly, righteousness of Christ is to be joined with remission of sins,
to make the complete form of Justification. See this cleared at large Cap.
11. of the first part.

Thirdly, Justification, and therefore not the formal cause. See whereof to
make a sufficient answer to this, Sect. 8. and Sect. 29. of this Chapter,
where it is fully prooved, that the formal cause of Justification, must needs
be the consequent of Justification, that is, of that act of God whereby he
justifies.

Fourthly, that the righteousness of Christ imputed, is this formal cause,

Fifthly, imputation of this righteousness is the formal cause. The
inconsistencie of this with the truth, is evicted, Sect. 22. of this Chapter.

Sixthly, Christ and believers, is this formal cause. How little communion this
has with the truth, has bin showed at large, Section 18, 19, 20, 21. of this
Chapter.

Seventhly, That Justification may be, justification. See the opinion set
clear of this objection, in the latter end of Sect. 1. of the 3 Chap. of this
second part, as also Sect. 29. of this present Chapter.

What further may be objected, I do not (for the present) apprehend: but ready
and willing I am to take any thing into a serious and unpartiall consideration
that shall be tendered unto me as matter of further question, or difficulty in
the business: In the mean time, out of all that which has bin reasoned at
large in this Chapter concerning justification and the several causes thereof,
some such description of it as this may be framed, wherein the attentive Reader
may observe, either all or the greatest part of the causes insisted upon,
briefly comprehended.

Justification is an act of God, whereby having out of his own unspeakable
free grace and goodness toward poor miserable sinners, given his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ to make atonement, or satisfaction for them by his
death, in consideration of this atonement, freely pardons and remitteth the
sins of all those that believe in him through Jesus Christ preached, or
otherwise revealed by the Holy Ghost unto them. CAP. V.
Where in the Scriptures alleged for the imputation of Christ's righteousness
or active obedience in Justification, are cleared and answered, and the true
sense and interpretation of them respectively established, according to the
judgment of the best Expositors of the Protestant party.
ALL error and mistake in matters of Christian Religion, God in the Scriptures
has well said, but is by men not well understood. And as Gregory long since
well observed it in matter of practice, Cum vitium virtus putatur, culpa fine
me^n cumulatur. Greg Do Paster. Cur. l 3. c. 1.
that when men conceive of sin under the notion of a duty, there it is
committed with an high hand, and without measure; the reason whereof is,
because conscience and concupiscence are then in conjunction, which (for the
most part) are in opposition about the committing of sin, whereby the course of
it is somewhat broken and impaired: so it is likewise in point of judgment,
when men conceive of their by-thoughts and misapprehensions, as countenanced
from Heaven in the Scriptures, their confidence lifts up it self very high;
and the mildest contradiction, is little less then an abomination unto them.
The reason whereof I conceive to be this: the opinion in this case being their
own, must needs have a strong and perfect sympathy with all the powers of
nature yet unsanctified, and so must needs engage these: and then again, being
looked upon as a truth of a divine parentage, and issuing from God, by means of
this apprehension, it engages all the powers of Grace, and of the new man also
to contend for it. And thus, what by the nature and substance of it on the one
hand, being erroneous and sinful; and what by the appearance and show of it on
the other hand, being as if it were indeed spiritual and divine, it is apt to
transport a man with an ecstasy of zeal even above himself for the
maintenance of it, and to inspire him with resolutions of sacrificeing credit,
Name, estate, friends, himself upon the honor and service of it, in case it
be opposed.

Now amongst many signs that might be given of an opinion of that very frame
and constitution we speak of, darkness for substance, and light in appearance,
this is one of frequent observation; when the maintainers of it are ambitious
to heap up citations of Scripture proofs, without end, and to overwhelm their
adversaries with Divine testimonies. For as the saying is, Nusquam est, qui
ubique est, he that is every where, is no where: so it is much to be suspected,
that such an opinion is no where in the Scriptures, which is pretended to be
every where. When men sharke about for Scriptures, and cannot find those that
willingly and freely offer themselves in the service of an opinion, but labor
and toil (as it were) in the fire, to redeem the defect of full and pregnant
proofs, with multitudes and numbers of such as they can find, it is a ground
of much suspicion, that the opinion is not of God, but of men.

The Scriptures are many, which are mustered up by the Masters of that way of
Imputation which we oppose, for the service of their opinion: but amongst them
all there is not one that comes roundly on, or that speaks plainly or
directly to the business in hand: which is a plain sign that it is not
indeed they that speak at all, but the spirit of the men that speaks in them,
whatsoever they seem to speak in this kind. I make no question but I shall be
able to give a thorough and perfect account of what I now affirm, by a
particular examination of the Scriptures themselves alleged in that behalf.

The greatest part of them (I conceive) have bin occasionally touched already,
and in part cleared, in this discourse. But because a true and solid
understanding of them, carries the maine stroke in the Question and
controversy depending, I thought good to assign an entire Chapter for the
interpretation and solution of them: so that the Reader may more readily know
where to find, and whither to repair for explication of them al together. I
begin with those usually alleged from the old Testament, which are not many.

The first place is Psalm. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven,
Psalm. 32.1, 2. Answered.
whose sin is covered: Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not
transgression, etc. The covering of sin, mentioned in the middle clause, is by
some conceived to be the righteousness or active obedience of Christ, which God
imputing to believers, covers all their sins therewith: To this I Answer:

1. That some of our best Expositors conceive all the three expressions here
mentioned to be but synonymous, i. of one and the same signification and
importance; and yet with all conceive this variety to be emphaticall, and to
note that abundance of Grace in God, whereby our sins are forgiven. Doctor Ames
in his sixth Document upon this Psalm, carries the tenor of these passages
thus Mag^a est Dei gratia qua peccata nostra remittuntur, Hoc eo ipso innuitur,
quod ta^ emphatica repetitione et quasi congerie verborum declara^ar: quia rei
tantae nulla sufflcis Orationis forma. Amesius in Psalm. 32. Document. 6. Et ^ex
Gratia Dei abundans est ad ^mnia [peccata] tollenda, levat, tegit, et non
imputat.
. And Luther in his Summarie of the Psalm is not far from it. Iustitia
nostra proprie est remissio peccatorum, seu (ut loquitur Psalmus) peccata non
imputare, peccata regere. Luther. in Sum. Ps. 32. Peccatorum remissionem
tribus loquendi generibus exprimit, quae tamen omnia in idem cadunt. S^ph.
Fabrit. in Psalm. 32.
Parcus likewise, on Romans 47. is of the same judgment, and cites Ambrose with
him.

2. For those two expressions, not-imputing of sin, and covering of sin,
Calvin holds them to be the same in sense and signification, and that they are
of the same importance with those other Scripture phrases, where God is said
not to remember sin, to blot it out, to cast it behind his back, or into the
depths of the Sea, and the like: and moreover cites Augustine, as his
Predecessor in this Interpretation. Peccatorum non recordari, est ea non
postulare ad poenam. Id ipsum alibi dicitur, proij ere post tergum, delere in
star nubu, demergere in profundum maris, non imputare, tectumque habere. Certe
si punit Deus peccata imputat: Si vindicat, recordatur; si ad judicium vocat,
tecta non habet, etc. Atque in hune modu^ interpretatur Augustine. claru verbis,
etc. Calvin. Inst. lib. 3, c, 4.
So that none of all these (with twen^y more that might be put to them) never
dreamt of the righteousness of Christ, lying so close under this covering of
sin.

3. Neither can sin be said to be covered with the righteousness, i. the
active obedience of Christ, since, according to the grounds and principles of
that very opinion against which we argue, sin is wholly dissolved and taken
away by the imputation of his death, or passive obedience; and this before the
imputation of the active obedience be made unto us. See for this cap. 5. Sect.
2. of the first part of this Discourse. Now that which is wholly dissolved and
taken away, needs no further covering in respect of God, nor indeed is capable
of any.

4. The righteousness or active obedience of Christ, is so far from being a
covering of sin, that it is rather a means of the discovery of it, and by the
light and absolute purity and perfection thereof, sets off sin with the
greater sinfullnesse, even as the Law it self does. Therefore

5. (and lastly) if it be conceived necessary to place any emphaticall
difference in this expression of covering of sins, from the other two, of
forgivenes of sin, and not imputing sin, I conceive it most agreeable to
Scripture notion, to assign this peculiarity of importance to it: that by
covering of sin, is meant Gods gracious expressing himself to a man that
has sinned, especially in a way of outward prosperity and peace. It is most
probable, that by covering of sin, somewhat should be meant, which is contrary
to that which the Scripture expresses by a discovery of sin. Now it is
evident from these (and many like places more) Ezekiel. 16.57. Ezekiel. 23.10.29.
Job. 20.27. Esa. 57.12, etc. that by discovering of sin, is meant the
executing of judgments, or inflicting of punishments upon sinners answerable
to their sins; which may well be called a discovering of sin and wickedness,
because neither the sinners themselves, nor yet others, are ordinarily capable
of any knowledge or apprehension to purpose of the demerit and vileness of
sin, but by means of the severity of God expressing it self in visible
judgments upon those that have sinned. Therefore by covering of sin, both
here and elsewhere, is meant nothing else (doubtless) but Gods expressing of
himself to persons that have sinned, upon their Repentance, in ways of Grace,
favor and love, as if they had not sinned, nor provoked him. To this purpose
when he shows any outward favor or countenance to men, as by protecting them
from dangers, or delivering them out of trouble, or the like, he is said to
justify them: Justifying the righteous, to give him (or, by giving him)
according to his righteousness, 1 King. 8.32. compare herewith 2 Chronicles. 6.23. So
that here is no shelter or covering for the Doctrine of Imputation in this
Scripture.

Again, Ier. 23.6. and 33.16. are alleged. And this is his Name whereby he
shall be called, the Lord our righteousness.

I answer that neither is there any color in these words for the pretended
imputation. Ier. 23.6. and c. 33.16. cleared.
For

First, it is not here said, that the righteousness of the Lord, shall be our
righteousness, nor that the righteousness of the Lord shall be imputed to us
for righteousness, no; here is altum silentium, profound silence as concerning
any imputation.

Secondly, it is wholly repugnant both to the Grammatical and Rhetorical
importance of the expression and words, as likewise disagreeing from the
Scripture phrase, and manner of speaking in the like cases, to put such a sense
or interpretation upon them as this. Christ is our righteousness, by
imputation, Christ can in no tolerable construction of speech be said to be
imputed to us (the imputation of a person was never heard of) therefore cannot
be said to be imputed to us for our righteousness. But

Thirdly (and lastly) the plain and direct meaning of the place, is this. This
is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness, that is,
He shall be generally acknowledged and celebrated by his people the Jews (for
the Prophet speak's particularly of these, as is evident in the context) as the
Great Author and procurer of that righteousness or justification in the sight
of God (for righteousness is very usually put for justification, as was noted.
cap. 3. Sect. 3. of this second part.) upon which abundance of outward glory,
peace, and prosperity should be cast upon them. This interpretation is
agreeable to the Scripture phrase, and manner of speaking in the like cases. For

First, the attributing or imposition of a Name upon either thing or person,
often notes the quality or property in either, or some benefit redounding from
either, answerable thereunto Schema est propheticu^, quo, nominu quasi peoprij
impositione, rei aut personae, de qua agitur, qualitas aut fatum indicetur.
Med. ^. Apocalypse. p. 84. Solet Scriptura dicererem quampiam vel personam, hoc
vel illo nomine vocatum iri, non quod habitura sit illud nomen, aut tali nomine
vulgo appellanda sit, sed quod vere ac plane habitura sit rem tal^ nomine
significatam. Perer. in Genesis p. 848. Sect. 30.
( His name shall be called, wonderful, Counselor, etc. (Esa 9.6.) that is,
he shall be acknowledged and looked upon by men, as an actor and doer of things
very strange and excellent, as one that is able and ready to give the best
advice and counsel to those that shall repair unto him in difficult cases,
etc. See of like importance and expression Ezekiel. 48.35. Mat. 1.21.23. Apoc.
8.10. with many others.

Secondly, There is no phrase or expression more familiar in Scriptures, quam
effectum praedicare de cansa in resto, that is, then to attribute an effect to
its cause or Author, by a verb substantive only, or to affirm the effect of
the cause directly. Thus Christ is said to be our hope. 1 Timothy 1.1. To be our
life. Col. 3.4. To be the resurrection. Joh. 11.25. To be our peace. Ephesians.
2.14. To be the glory of his people. Luk 2.32. with many the like: meaning
that he is Author, purchaser, or Procurer of all these. So when he is said to
be our righteousness, there can no other construction be made of it but this,
that he is the Author or procurer of our righteousness. Calvin is express for
this interpretation of this passage. All these expressions (says he) Omnes
ist^^ locutiones peraeque valent, justificari nos Dei gratia, Christum esse
justitiam nostram, justitiam morte ac resurrectione Christi nobu acquisitam.
Calvin, in Gal. 3.6.
carry the same sense and meaning, that we are justified by the grace of God,
that Christ is our righteousness, that righteousness is procured for us by
the death and resurrection of Christ, etc. See more of this interpretation
before, Cap. 3. Sect. 2.

Thirdly (and lastly) that by righteousness in this place, is meant that
Justification which stands in remission of sins, and that by Christ's being
called, the Lord their righteousness, is only meant, that through him God
would be reconciled to them and pacified with them as concerning all their
provocations, appears from the like tenor of other Scripture passages. For
usually, when God promises deliverance, and outward prosperity to this people,
after long and sore afflictions (a^ he does in the former part of this verse,
and in the two verses following) he makes mention of his grace and favor
toward them in the free pardon of their sins, and of his being pacified
toward them, these notwithstanding. Which grace and favor of his in being
reconciled unto them, expressing it self in abundance of outward peace and
glory, is often called his righteousness, because he confers it upon them: and
sometimes their righteousness, because they receive it from him. Compare Esa
45.8.24.25. Esa 46.13. Esa 48.18. Esa 51.5.6.8. Esa 54.17. Ier. 50.20.19. Jer.
51.10. etc. with many others.

Some have dug for the treasure of imputation in the field of that
Scripture, Esaias 45.24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness
and strength. But

First (to omit the several readings, Esa. 45.24. answered.
and interpretations accordingly of this Scripture, which show that it is no
pregnant foundation to build so disputable a point of Faith upon) I answer,
that neither is here the least air or breathing of that imputation so much
wondered after: nor do I find any intimation given of any such business here
by any Expositors I can meet with.

Secondly, the plain and direct meaning of the place is (doubtless) this, to
show that when God should communicate the knowledge of himself in his Son
Jesus Christ unto the world (whereof he spoke in the words immediately
precedent) they should generally have this resentment of the means of their
salvation and peace, viz. that they receive them of the free grace and donation
of God by Jesus Christ, and not of themselves, or by the merit of their own
righteousness: which was a vein of leven, where with the greatest part of the
Jewish lump was (for the present) levened. So that for a man to say, In the
Lord I have righteousness, imports only a profession made by him of his free
Justification and salvation by God, in, and through Christ: As it follows
ver. 25. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified; And this also
is (upon the matter,) Calvin's Exposition upon the place, who writes thus:
Because righteousness and strength are the two maine points of our salvation,
the faithful acknowledge God to be the Author of both in them, etc.

The last Scripture that I know produced from the old Testament, Esa 61.10. I
will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God: for he
has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the
robe of righteousness, Esa 61.10. opened and ceared.
etc. These garments of salvation, and robe of righteousness, are conceived to
be the righteousness of Christ imputed to believers, and as a robe or garment
put upon them, wherein and whereby they stand justified in the sight of God.
But I answer;

First, that this clothing with the garments of salvation, and covering with
the robe of righteousness, are expressions concerning chiefly (if not solely)
the Church of the Jews in their restoration and deliverance from the
captivity of Babylon (if not from that greater captivity under which they lie
at this day) as the whole carriage of the Chapter from the beginning to the end,
Suscipit inse vates person am Ecclesiae Sionu Babylone liberata, etc. Muscu. in
Esa 61.10.
makes it fully manifest. And so Musculus with other learned Expositors,
carry the interpretation of this verse with the particulars contained in it.
The Prophet (says he) takes upon him the person of the Church of Sion
delivered from Babylon, etc. And a little after, coming to expound those
metaphorical clauses mentioned, he has (or, as he renders it, when he shall
have) clothed me with the garments of salvation, and covered we with the robe
of righteousness, he writes as follows: The meaning is, Sensus est; cum
servaverit et, redemos it me, justitiamque suam, id est, singularem probitatem
et bonitatem erga me declaraverit, etc. ibid.
when he shall save and redeem, and declare his righteousness, that is, his
faithfulness and goodness toward me, etc. So that by cleathing with garments
of salvation, and covering with a robe of righteousness, is not meant any
inward or spiritual blessing or privilege, wherewith God should gratify or
enrich his Church, as Justification by Christ is, but an external and
temporal. Neither by the robe of righteousness, are we to understand, the
whole and entire obedience of Christ to the moral Law (there being neither
word, syllable, letter, or tittle any ways leading or inducing to such an
interpretation) but the effect of the righteousness, that is, of the truth and
faithfulness, or else of the goodness and graciousnesse of God (both which
are usually expressed in the Scriptures, by the word righteousness as was
before observed. cap. 3. Sect. 2.) viz. their deliverance from their
captivity, together with their peace and safety, and many other sweet and
comfortable privileges thereupon.

Secondly, if we carry these metaphors of garments and robe, in a spiritual
way, and understand them of Justification by Christ, the promise that is
supposed to be contained in them (and a promise doubtless there is, though
conceived in the common prophetical streyne of the time past, to show the
certainty of it to be equal to things that are already done) and to be made
unto the Church, will not be suitable or proper thereunto. Because the Church of
Christ, is already, and at all times clothed with the robe of the
righteousness of Christ (in such a sense) that is, is in a justified condition
by him. Yea, her Justification by Christ, is that which gives her, her very
being, as she is his Church. Therefore for God to promise unto those, that are
already justified by Christ, a robe of righteousness by which they should be
justified, is as if he should promise Heaven to his elect Angels, who are
already fully possessed thereof and confirmed in their possession, or promise
reasonable souls to men, who cannot be men without them. So that (doubtless)
it is no spiritual privilege (at least not Justification by Christ of all
other) that is here promised to the Church of God. But

Thirdly (and lastly) if we understand the passage now under consideration of
an external deliverance (as we heard Musculus and other Interpreters do) the
metaphor will be found sweet and lively, possessors of their own land: of
poor, he will make them rich, of vile and contemptible, he will make them
honorable, etc. The full and entire happiness of which new condition, the
Prophet by the figure synecdoche, expresses by the change of their garments
according to the usual manner of the Scripture, which often signifies the
estate or condition, by the garments proper to it. As Junius has well observed
in his annotations upon Esaias 22.17. Dignitas, ut ab insignibus vestimentis
cognoscitur, ita Synecdochic^egrave; in Scripturis designatur vestirnentorum
appellatione. Iunius. Annot. in Esa. 22.17.
As ominencie of place or office (says he) is known by garments suitable and
proper to it, so is it in the Scriptures, by a synecdoche, often signified and
expressed thereby. As when GOD threatened Shebna with the loss of his great
Place, and with Captivity, and that he would put his servant Eliakim into it,
he expresses this investiture of Eliakim into this new condition or office,
thus: And I will cloth him with thy Robe, and strengthen him with thy Girdle.
Esa 22.21. To pass by all other Scriptures, wherein the observation of Iunius
mentioned, might be exemplified; the Book of the Revelation represents unto
us, both the dignity of Christ himself, and likewise of his Saints, after the
same manner, by robes and garments, and that more then once or twice. And in
the midst of the 7 Candlesticks, one like unto the Son of man, clothed with
a garment down unto the feet. Revel. 1.13. This represents the great dignity
of Christ. In like manner the honor of his Saints and faithful ones is thus
expressed, cap. 3, 4, 5. And they shall walk with me in white: for they are
worthy. He that overcommeth, shall be clothed in white array, etc. So the
dignity of the 24 Elders is represented by their clothing in white raiment.
cap. 4.4. Again, the whole multitude of Saints out of all Nations are said to
stand before the Lamb clothed with long white robes (robes I conceive of the
same importance with these robes of salvation in Esa) and Palms in their
hands, cap. 7.9. ^o also cap. 19 14. where it is said, that it was granted to
the Lambs wife (the Church) that she should be arrayed with pure white linen
and shineing, which is said to be the righteousness of the Saints, cap. Revel.
19.7, 8. cleared and answered by the way.
19.7.8. it is evident that nothing is spoken or meant concerning Justification
by Christ, or his righteousness, but only that great honor and reward is
hereby signified, which Christ was now pleased to confer upon his Church and
Saints, who were justified by him long before. The pure, fine, and shining
linen, is said to be the righteousness of the Saints, to show that the great
glory, honor, and dignity which Christ now conferreth upon his Church, is the
gracious and bountiful reward of her Husband, by him given unto her, in
consideration and remembrance of her righteousness, that is, her holiness,
faithfulness, zeal, constancy, etc. under the persecution of the Beast, and
great Apostacy of the Christian world. It is an usual manner of speech in
Scripture, to express the reward of a thing, by the Name of the thing it
self, whereof it is a reward. Thus Numb. 22.7. the Elders of Midian and Moab,
are said to have departed, having Divinations (for so it is in the original)
in their hand, that is, the money or reward of Divinations. So 2 Samuel 4.10.
Good tidings, is put for the reward of good tidings. Again, Revel. 13.10. Here
is the patience and Faith of the Saints, that is, the reward and recompense of
the patience and faithful cleaving of the Saints unto Christ, when they shall
see vengeance executed upon their enemies, and themselves made Actors in it.
Many other instances in this kind have (I remember) bin else where in this
Treatise Part 1. c. 1. Sect. 4.
drawn together. So the pure and shining linen (that is, the bright glory
wherewith the Church is now invested) is said to be the righteousness of the
Saints, because it is the reward of it. This to be the plain and direct
meaning of the place, might be further argued from that ratiocinative particle,
FOR: For the linen is the righteousness, etc. In which words it is evident
that there is a reason given of the grant made to the Church mentioned in the
former part of the verse, viz. that she should be so arrayed or clothed, that
is, dignified: this reason is said to be, the righteousness of the Saints. It
is as if it had bin said; that the Lamb's wife should be thus gloriously
recompensed, is nothing but that which well agrees with the righteousness and
bounty of God, who thus liberally and bountifully rewards and returns his
righteousness into his bosom, as he had promised. This place (doubtless)
parallel's with that, cap. 3.4. These shall walk with me in white: for they
are worthy. The worthiness of the one, and the righteousness of the other,
are but the same, and both are assigned as the reason of the honor done unto
them. The riches j^llitie, and prosperous condition (whilst it lasted) of
Babylon or Rome, is likewise expressed by the metaphor of garments. And that
great City that was clothed in fine linen, and purple and scarlet, etc.
Revel. 18.16. By all which Scriptures diligently compared (with many more of
like expression that might be added) it is more then manifest, that by those
metaphors of garments and robes in Esa, there is nothing meant touching the
inward and spiritual condition of the Church, much less his Justification by
the active righteousness of Christ imputed. And indeed it may seem very
strange to build a dogmaticall point of Faith upon figurative and metaphorical
expressions, there being no plain or to pregnant Scripture confirm or warrant
it

As for those expressions in Paul, of putting on Christ, Induere Christu^, hic
significat, virtute spiritus ejus vndique nos muniri qua idonei ad omnes
sanctitatis parts reddamur. Calvin. in Romans 13.14. Quemadmodum quotquot
circu^ciduntur, Mose^ induunt, hoc est, Mosis se profitentur esse discipulos,
ut secu^du^ illius institutionem ambulent: ita qui baptizantur, Christum
induunt, profitentes se illius discipulos, etc. Musculus in Gal. 3.27.
Romans 13.14. Gal. 3.27. etc. there is neither of them speaks of Justification;
but the former of sanctification, and the latter of profession: both which, if
they were not apparent enough unto any man, that shall but a little consider
the context in either place, might further have bin prooved without much
labor. Let Calvin, Musculus, and other Protestant Interpreters be consulted
with about them.

We have found nothing in those Scriptures of the old Testament, which are
looked upon with an eye of the greatest confidence, for the building up of that
imputation, which we endeavor to cast down. Let us pass from Prophets to
Apostles, and consider, whether they also be not made to speak the minds of
other men, and not their own, when they are made to speak for this imputation.
The far greatest part of testimonies brought against us out of the new
Testament, are lodged within the compass of that one Epistle to the Romans:
the rest are but few.

The first place alleged by some is that, Romans 3.21.22. But now is the
righteousness of God made manifest without the Law, having witness of the Law
and of the Prophets, Even the righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of
Jesus Christ. etc. By the righteousness of God (say they) is here meant, the
righteousness or active obedience of Christ, who is God, imputed to all that
believe, etc.

I answer, Romans 3.21. cleared.
First, this Scripture has bin already fully opened, in the first part of this
Treatise, cap. 4. throughout, where upon due examination, it was found to
speak plainly for the imputation of Faith for righteousness, but no ways for
the imputation of the righteousness of Christ for any such purpose.

Secondly, Some by the righteousness of God in this place, understand the
truth and faithfulness of God in keeping promise. This was the exposition of
Ambrose long since. And that this faithfulness of God is frequently in
Scripture called his righteousness, has bin already observed, 3. cap. Sect. 2.
p. 93.

Thirdly, (and lastly) by the righteousness of God in these Scriptures, is
meant (doubtless) either that way, method, or means which God himself has
found out to justify or make men righteous, (See cap. 3. Sect. 2. p. 40. of
this second part) or else (which comes to the same) that very righteousness by
which we stand justified or righteous in the sight of God. This is the general
interpretation of the best Protestant Expositots, as Calvin, Iustitiam Dei
accipi pre ea, qu^ Deo pr^batur, notum esse debuerat elementariis. Calvin
Instit. l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 9. Dubium est, qua ratione Dei justiciam appellet,
quam per sidem obtinemus: ideone, quia sola coram Deo consistit, an quod eam
nobis Dominus sua miscericordia largiatur? Calv. in Romans 3.21.
Musculus, Exponi patestde ea justicia, qua nos coram Deo justificamur, etc.
Musculu in Romans 3.21
Beza, Posita est omnis justificatio inremissione peccaterum: et idea justicia
haec in imputatione posita justitia Dei vocatur. Beza. De Coena Dom. Iusticia
Dei, id est, salus vel redemptio, quam Deus praestat. Came Myroth. p. 178.
Iusticia imputata recte dicitur justicia Christi, quia Christus eam sua
obedientia nobis acquisivit. Sicut etiam dicitur justicia Dei, Juia Deus
propter Christi meritum, eam nobis imputat. Pareus de Iusti. l. 2. c. 2. p.
388. Sect. 8. To. 3.31. cleared.
etc. Neither have I met with any that understands it of the righteousness of
Christ: nor is there the least appearance in the context of any necessity so
to take it.

Again, the last verse in the same Chapter is laid hold on by some as a
favorer of their Imputation. Do we then make the Law of none effect through
Faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the Law. They conceive, that the Law
cannot be said to be established by Faith, or by the Doctrine of Faith, but
only by imputation of Christ's fulfilling it, unto Believers.

I answer, I that there is no necessity, that by Law in this place, should be
meant precisely the Moral Law. Calvin understands it as well of the Ceremonial
Law, as of the Moral; and explaines, how as well the one, as the other, may be
said to be established by Faith Quare hanc Pauli excusationem, uequae de
ceremoniis seorsim neque de mandatis (ut vocant) moralibus, sed in universum de
tota lege accipio. Calvin. In Romans 3.31.
. Therefore he is far from conceiving, that the Imputation of Christ's
righteousness should be established by Paul's affirming the Law to be
established by faith. Ambrose likewise long before him, conceived the same
things of this Scripture.

2. It is much more probable that (of the two) Paul should here assert the
establishing rather of the Ceremonial Law, then of the Moral. 1. because the
Jews, to whom he addresseth himself in this excusation, seeking to ease and
qualify their spirits touching the Doctrine of Faith, were more tender and
jealous over the Ceremonial part of their Law, then over the Moral, placing
the far greatest part of their hope (if not the whole) of their justification
and salvation in the observation hereof, as appears from Act. 15.1. Except ye
be circumcised after the manner of Moses, yecannot be saved, etc. So from Gal.
5. v. 2. compared with the 4. as also from diverse other places, both of the
Old and New Testament. Now it is no ways like, that the Apostle should seek to
prevent the lesser and lighter offense in this people, and wholly neglect them
under the greater. 2. because the Doctrine of faith, and justification by
Christ taught by the Apostle, did not carry any such color or appearance of
opposition to the moral part of their Law, as it did to the Ceremonial. The
Gospel builds up moralities, and that with an high hand: but it abrogateth
and casts down Ceremonialls altogether; that is, it calls men off from the
further use and practice of them, though it confirms (indeed) their precedent
use, benefit and authority, and so establishes them. Now it is but a weak
conceit to think, that Paul should go about to vindicate or purge either
himself or his Doctrine, from a lighter and weaker suspicion, and leave both
obnoxious to a greater. But

3. Suppose that the Apostle here speaks precisely and determinately of the
Moral Law, yet is there no necessity gained from hence, that this should be
said to be established by the Imputation of Christ's righteousness. For 1. both
Austin and Chrysostom affirm, that the Law is therefore said to be established
by faith, because faith compasses and attaines that righteousness, which the
Law sought after and could not attain. Chrysostom's expression is, (...).
Chrysostom. in To. Homil. 7.
that faith establishes the will of the Law, by bringing that to perfection,
which the Law would have done. 2. The Moral Law may in this sense also be said
to be established by faith, because faith purges the hearts of those that
believe, and works out those corruptions and sinful inclinations, which
disable men from doing the things therein required, and so promotes the
observation and keeping of it. This (upon the matter) is the interpretation of
Musculus Fides vero, quoniam justificat credentes, and corda credentium purgat,
quod neque Lex apud Iudaos, neque Philosophia apud Gentes, neque doctrina
bonorum operum apud Christianes praestare potest, ram non adversatur bonorum
operum Doctrinae, ut illam magis stabiliat. Musculus ad Romans 3. ult.
upon the place. Pareus likewise admits of it, and cites Austin for it also. But

4. The Law may be said to be established by the Doctrine of faith, inasmuch as
the comminations and threatenings of the Law, as, In the day thou ^atest thereof,
thou shall die the death: and again, Cursed be he that continues not in all
things that are written in the Law to do them, etc. are by the Doctrine of
justification by faith, declared not to be in vain. The sufferings of Christ
whereby we are justified through faith, are a full confirmation of the force,
efficacy, and authority of the curse of the Law, being the price of the
Redemption of those that believe from it. Yet

5. (and lastly) I conceive the better Interpretation of the place to be, that
by Law the Apostle should mean, that part of the Old Testament, which
comprehends the writings of Moses, with those other Books, which together
with the writings of the Prophets, make up the entire body thereof. For in this
sense he had used the word, v. 21. where he affirmed, the righteousness of God
to have testimony of the Law and the Prophets. The word is elsewhere, (and that
somewhat frequently) taken in this signification. Now the Law in this sense may
(most properly) be said to be established by Paul, ^eaching the Doctrine of
faith, because this Doctrine is fully consonant and agreeable to those things
that are written therein, as he shows at large in the following Chapter,
arguing and insisting upon two pregnant testimonies to this purpose, the one
from Moses, the other from David. Origin of old made use of this
Interpretation: Fides confirmas legem, quia Christus inquit, Moses de me
scripsit. Qui ergo credit Christo, confirmat Legem, quiae credit in Christum.
Origin.
and Hierome was not far from it. Fide lex stabilitur, quia fide probamus verum
esse quod lex dicit, Testamentum testamento legem legi, circumcisionem
circumcisions successuram. Hierony.
Piscator of later times likewise adhereth to it, in his Disputes with
Ludovicus Lucius. See Mr. Gatakers Animadversions upon these Disputes. p. 42.


The next Scripture sometimes managed for the imputation we oppose, is Romans
4.6. Even as David declares the blessedness of the man to whom God imputes
righteousness without works. That righteousness which God is here said to
impute to a man, can be no other (as is pretended) but the righteousness of
Christ. To this I answer,

First, Gods imputing righteousness, Romans 4.6. opened.
is fully opened and cleared in my Answer to Mr. Walker p. 41. whither the
reader is desired to repair for satisfaction, if he desires it.

Secondly, that of the two (if we will needs here understand a positive legal
righteousness) it is much more probable the Apostle should mean a
righteousness consisting of such works, or of such an obedience to the Law, as
has an absolute and perfect agreeableness to every man's condition and calling
respectively, then the righteousness of Christ, which has no such property in
it, has bin already represented in this Discourse. Cap. 2. Sect. 5. p. 7.


Thirdly, that righteousness which God is said here to impute, is by the best
Expositors placed in Remission of sins. Righteousness imputed (says Paraeus)
Iustitia imputata consistis in gratuita remissione, tectione, non imputatione
peccatoru^. Pareus ad Rom, 4.7. p. 371. Hoc sensu justitia imputata dicitur
justicia Christi, meritorie seu effective, quia Christi merito nobisest parta,
non subjective, quia and Christo inhaereat. Idem, ibidem.
consists in a free remission, covering, or non-imputation of sin. And a
little after, showing in what sense the righteousness which is imputed by God
unto believers, may be called the righteousness of Christ, he expresses
himself thus. In this sense imputed righteousness is called the
righteousness of Christ, viz. by way of merit or effect, because it is
procured for us by the merit of Christ, not because it is subjectively or
inherently in Christ: many testimonies have bin formerly cited from diverse
other good Authors of concurrent judgment with him herein. We are taught
(says Calvin upon the place) Postremo [do^emur] hanc quoque remissionem
gratuitam esse, quia sine operibus imputatur; quod et remissionis nomen indicat
Calvin. in Romans 4.6. Quarto autem capite ad Romanos primum appellat justitia
imputationem: nec eam dubitat in remissione peccatorum c^llocare, idem. Instit.
l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 4.
that Remission of sins is free, because it is imputed without works. But

Fourthly, the phrase of imputing righteousness, may (I conceive) be best
interpreted and understood by the contrary expression, of imputing sin.
Opposita juxtase posita magis elucescunt. To impute sin signifies only, either
to look upon a person as justly liable to punishment, or to inflict punishment
upon a person peccati nomine, for, or in consideration of sin. This latter
signification I find more frequent of the two, in Authors of best esteem. God
imputes sin (says Paraeus Imputat Deus peccatium, cum punit: non imputat, cum
non punit, sed condonat et tegit, quasi non esset. Pareus ad Romans 4.7.
) when he punishes: and he does not impute it, when he does not punish, but
pardons, etc. So Calvin, Ergo et peccatorum non recordari, est ea non
postulare all poenam. Idipsum alibidicitur proijcere post tergum, delere instar
nubis, etc. non imputare, tectumque habere, etc. Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c. 4.
Sect. 29. vi. etiam in Romans 5.13.
makes the non-imputation of sin, and the not-punishing of sin, of one and
the same signification and importance. If therefore to impute sin, signifies
only, either to hold a man liable to punishment for sin, or to execute and
inflict punishment upon him for sin, doubtless to imputerighteousnesse,
imports nothing else, but either to look upon a man as a righteous person,
or to confer upon him and actually invest him with the precious privileges
that belong to persons truly righteous. But however,

Fifthly (and lastly) here is neither peer nor peep of the least ground or
reason to conceive, that by righteousness in this Scripture, should be meant
the righteousness of Christ.

The next Scripture mis-us'd for the imputation aforesaid, is that Romans 5.19.
For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, Romans 5.19. cleared.
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Hence it is argued,
that as by the imputation of Adams disobedience, men are made formally sinners;
in like manner by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, men are made
formally righteous. To this I answer,

First, that somewhat has bin already delivered in this Discourse, touching
the sense and meaning of this Scripture, as likewise touching the includencie
and insufficiency, of this argument. See Part 1. c. 21. Sect. 2.3. etc.

Secondly, it is not here said, that by the imputation of Adams disobedience,
men are made formally sinners, but simply sinners; that is, either obnoxious to
death and condemnation (as Bishop Davenant Certum est, illam ipsamactualem
inobedientiam nobis imputari, ita ut per eam stemus damnati, etc. Bish. Daven.
de Iusti. Act. etc. p. 363.
with some others interpret) and as the word sinner is often used in Scriptures
1 Kin. 1.21. Pro. 6.29. Psalm. 109.7. etc.
, or else, sinners by propagation (not imputation) as Augustine Proinde
Apostolus, cum illud peccatum ac mortem commemoraret, quae ab uno in omnes
propagatione transissent, eum Principemposuit, a quo propagatio generis humani
sumpsit exordium. August. de Peccat. Mer. and Rem. l. 1. c. 9. vi: etiam c. 13.
etc. c. 15. Apostolus opponit (...) Christi (...) Adami, non ut actionem
actioni, sed ut satisfactionem culpae, ut remedium morbo. Pareus de Justice.
Christi Act ^et Pass. p. 173.
of old, and Peter Martyr and Musculus of late, with diverse others, as may be
seen at large in their Commentaries upon this Scripture. So that according to
either of these interpretations of the word, sinners, here is neither little
nor much for the imputation of Christ's righteousness so much urged and
contended for.

Thirdly, neither does the Apostle here oppose unto, or compare the obedience
of Christ with the disobedience of Adam as one act, unto, or with another, but
as satisfaction to and with the provocation, or the remedy to and with the
disease. Otherwise he should make sins of omission, to be no disobedience,
because omissions, are no acts. And Adams transgression did not only stand in
the commission of evil, but in the omission of that which was good also.
Therefore

Fourthly, by that obedience of Christ, whereby it is here said that many are
(or, shall be) made righteous, that is, justified, we cannot understand, that
righteousness of Christ which consists only in his obedience to the moral
Law, but that satisfactorie righteousness or obedience which he performed to
that peculiar Law of Mediation, which was imposed upon him, and which chiefly
consisted in his sufferings. See for this what has bin already laid down cap.
3. of this latter part. Sect. 4. p. 45. And for this Exposition of the word
obedience, in this place, there is as great a vote and voice of Interpreters,
both ancient and modern, as for any one Scripture I know, which has the least
degree of difficulty in it. And (for the most part) they compare this place,
with that Philip. 2.8. where it is said of Christ, that he humbled himself,
and became obedient unto death, etc. making both Scriptures to speak but of
one and the same obedience. Theophylact, (...). Theop. in Romans 5.19.
Peter Martyr, Docat quodnam fuerat illud bonum, quod per unum Christum Iesum
salutem hominibus recuperavit. Illud autem ait fuisse Christo obedientiam, de
qua scribens ad Philippenses etc. P. Mart. ad Romans 5.19. And a little after:
Quae verba docet, id quod Apostolus ait, per obedientiam Christi, qua
nostracausa mortem subiit, etc.
Calvin, Quum pronunciat no: Christi obedientia constitui justos, hinc
colligimus Christum, eo quod Patri satisfecerit, justitiam nobis comparasse.
Calv. ad Romans 5.19.
Musculus, His verbis aperit de qua justitia Christi loquatur. videlicet de
illius obedientia, de qua legis Philip. 2, Musculus ad Romans 5, 19, Eadem fere
habent Pareus, Piscator, and Gualterus in locum.
Pareus, Piscator, Gualter, and of our own, Mr. Gataker, Vterque locus (Rom, 5,
19, Philip. 3.8,) intelligendus est de obedientia, quam mediationis legi
peculiari, Christus exhibuit, etc. Mr, Gatak, in Elench, Gomar, p. 49.
are men of this interpretation. Amongst whom, Pareus gives two reasons of this
his Exposition. The first is, the antithesis or opposition which the Apostle
makes between the disobedience of Adam, and the obedience of Christ: which
(says he) will not constare if by the obedience of Christ, we understand
vniversalem ejus conformitatem cum lege, that is, his universal conformity
with the Law, the disobedience of Adam being but singularis (...), a singular
and particular transgression. But his latter and greater reason is, the effect
which is here attributed to this obedience of Christ, viz. the justification,
or righteous-making of many, which (says he) the Apostle hitherto has
constantly vindicated or appropriated to the death and blood of Christ, yea and
the whole Scripture throughout teaches our Faith to seek its righteousness
in this obedience of his. So that all this while here is nothing at all
appears for the countenancing of that imputation of the active obedience of
Christ, which takes so deeply with the thoughts of many.

5. Suppose, that by the obedience of Christ, we should here, contrary to the
general current, as well of Interpreters as the Scriptures themselves,
understand that active righteousness or obedience which he performed to the
Moral Law, yet will it not follow from hence, that therefore men must be
justified, or made righteous by it in such a way of imputation as is contended
for. For certain it is, that that justification, or righteous-making, which
the Apostle speaks of in this 19. verse, is the same with that which he had
spoken of, v. 16, 17, 18. Now that righteousness (as he calls it, v. 17.) is
described v. 16. to be the gift (i. the forgiveness) of many offenses, i. of
all the offenses whereof a man either does, or shall stand guilty before God,
unto justification: and evident it is, that that righteousness or
justification, which stands in the gift (or forgiveness) of offenses or
sins, cannot stand in the imputation of an observation or fulfilling of the
Law.

6. (and lastly) it is but a loose and very unsavourie kind of arguing, to
reason from a thing simply done, to a determinate manner of doing it. If a man
should argue thus, Peter was slain with death: therefore he was slain by a
Beast, or therefore he was slain with a Dagger, were there the least shadow or
appearance of the certainty of the Couclusion, in the premises? So when the
Apostle simply and barely affirms, that by the obedience of Christ men are
made righteous, to infer and conclude a particular and determinate manner of
rigteous-making from hence, as viz. by imputation of this obedience, there
being other ways or manners of righteous-making, (as has bin proved) has no
power nor authority at all of an Argument in it.

Another text employed in the service aforesaid, Romans 8.4. That the
righteousness of the Law might be fullfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. From the former clause it is argued, that the
righteousness of the Law, can in no sense be said to be fullfilled in us, but
only by the righteousness or obedience of Christ unto the Law, imputed to us.
But to this also I Answer.

1. That some both learned and Orthodox, Romans 4.8. cleared.
understand this clause of sanctification, rather then of justification: and by
the fullfilling of the righteousness of the Law, that Evangelical obedience to
the Precepts thereof, which all those that truly believe in Christ do in part
perform, and desire and strive to perform more perfectly. This was the
exposition of Ambrose of old: and seems to be the judgment of Peter Martyr
Quomodo autem praecepta legis in nobis impleantur per communionem cum Christo,
qui pro nobis mortuus est, ita potest declarari: quod illis qui credunt in eum
spiritus conceditur, quo vires little instaurantur, us obedientiam legis
praestare possint, non quidem perfectam et absolutam, etc. P. Marty. ad Romans
8.4.
upon the place. Nor is this exposition rejected by Musculus, though he
inclines more to another, in which propension I shall willingly give him the
right hand of fellowship. So that however, this place is not so clear or
demonstrative for the pretended Imputation. But

2. That by the righteousness of the Law, which is here said to be fullfilled
in those that believe, cannot be meant the righteousness or active obedience
of Christ imputed, is evident from hence, because it must of necessity be such
a righteousness, and such a fulfilling in believers, which may be apprehended
as a proper and suitable effect, of Christ's condemning sin in the flesh,
immediately preceding in the end of v. 3. The very purport and frame of the
context, plainly shows this relation between them, and that the latter was
intended by God as a fruit or end of the former. For what the Law could not do
(says the Apostle) in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own
Son in the likeness of sinful of flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in
the flesh; That the righteousness of the Law might be fullfilled, etc. That
ratiocinative particle (...), that, imports the fulfilling of the
righteousness of the Law in those that believe, to be a natural and direct
effect of, or thing intended by God in Christ's condemning sin in the flesh.
Now unpossible it is, that the active obedience of Christ, or the imputation of
it, should be any proper effect, of his condemning sin in the flesh. For by
this expression, of condemning sin in the flesh, Interpreters generally agree
(and besides it is a thing evident in it self) that the Apostle means the
abolishing or taking away the guilt, or the accusing and condemning power of
sin, by the death of Christ: The phrase of condemning sin (to note this by
the way) is metonymicall, the antecedent put for the consequent, condemning
for, disabling to accuse, or being a means of the condemnation of another;
which (we know) are the consequents or effects of any man's being condemned, in
course of Law. The testimony of a condemned person, against any man, is of no
force in Law. But to our purpose; how the abolishing or taking away the guilt
and condemning power of sin by the death of Christ, should be a means of the
Imputation of the righteousness of his life, I am no ways able to conceive or
comprehend; no more then I am, how the present fulness of the stomach should
be a means to make a man stand in need of a second dinner immediately. For
certain it is, See the first and fourth Conclusions in the second chapter of
this latter part. p. 3.5. etc.
(as has bin reasoned home elsewhere in this discourse) that he that has the
guilt of his sin purged and taken away by the death of Christ, needs no other
righteousness, nor imputation whatsoever, for his justification or acceptance
in the sight of God, no more then he that is full, needs the honey-combe.

3. It is a very uncouth and hard expression, imputation of Christ's
righteousness to believers, a fulfilling of the righteousness of the Law in
them. For that clause, in them, still notes either a subjective inhesion of
some thing in persons, or else some kind of efficiencie. Now the Friends
themselves of that Imputation which we oppose, unanimously and constantly
affirm, the righteousness of Christ to be subjectively and inherently in
himself only, and to become ours only by imputation; which they still make a
modification contradistinguished against subjective inhesion. So that in this
sense the righteousness of Christ cannot be said to be fulfilled in them. Nor
can they say, that the righteousness of the Law, or of Christ, is fulfilled in
them, in a way of efficiencie: for they are not the workers of this
righteousness. Therefore an imputed righteousness can in no tolerable
construction of speech, be said to be fulfilled in men.

4. If by the righteousness of the Law, we understand that entire and
complete obedience, which every believer, according to the great variety of
their several conditions, callings, and relations, stands bound to perform,
it can with no agreeableness to truth, be said to be fulfilled in them, by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness unto them. Because (as has bin largely
proved in the former part of the Discourse) there is scarce any believer (if
any at all) but stands bound in a way of duty to God and his Law, to the
performance of many particular acts, yea of many kinds of acts of obedience,
which are not to be found (nor can it without sin be conceived, that they
should be found) in all that golden catalogue of works of righteousness
performed by Christ. Therefore the righteousness of the Law, in the sense
declared (which is the sense stood upon by our adversaries) cannot be said to
be fulfilled in those that believe only by the active obedience of Christ
imputed to them.

5. Neither does the original word, (...), which is here translated,
righteousness, signify, obedience unto, or conformity with the Law, but
rather that justification, which was the end, and intent of the Law, but that
it was disabled through the weakness, that is, the sinfulness, of the flesh,
to ataine it, ver. 3. And so Calvin, Piscator, Musculus, with diverse other
learned Interpreters, and Tremellius out of the Syriaque, render the Greek
(...), not by the Latin word justitia, justice or righteousness, but
justificatio, justification: Beza by himself, (and perhaps more agreeable to
the Apostles mind then the rest) translates it, jus, the right or Law (as it
were) of the Law; And so both Chrysostom, (...). Chrysostom. ad To. 8.^. Sermon. 13.
and Theophylact (...). Theophyl. in Romans 8.4.
of old, expound the word not of any obedience of to the Law, but of the end,
scope, or intent of the Law, viz. justification. Paraus following Bezas
translation of the word, conceives that the Apostle by (...), or jus legis,
means that (...), or damnatorie sentence of the Law against sinners, mentioned
cap. 5.16. in which signification of the word, that right or power which God
has to condemn sinners unto death, is called cap. 1.32. (...), where our
English render it, the judgment of God: the former translation had it, the Law
of God. This exposition of the word, though it seems contrary to that given by
Calvin and others mentioned, yet will it give out one and the same sense and
importance of the place with it, as will presently appear. So that if this
place were translated with exactness to the original, the argument that is
now drawn from it for the imputation of Christ's righteousness, would wholly
disappeare.

6. Neither is it by ten degrees as clear as the Sun, that by the word Law in
this Scripture, we must of necessity, and with all preciseness, understand,
the Moral Law. We know there are many other acceptions of the word in the
writings of this Apostle. And that it cannot be here meant precisely of the
Moral Law, is evident: 1o, because that impossibility of justifying men
thorugh the weakness of the flesh, spoken of ver. 3. is not confined to this
Law alone, but extends as well to the other two, Ceremonial and Judicial:
except we shall say, that though the Moral Law was weak through the flesh,
and could not justify, yet the Ceremonial and Judicial had a sufficiency of
strength hereunto; which is manifestly untrue. 2o, because the Jews, to whom
especially he addresseth himself in all his disputations concerning the Law,
and Justification thereby, built as much or more upon the observation of the
Ceremonial Law for their Justification, then of the Moral, (as was formerly
observed Sect. 8. of this Chapter.) Now its certain that the Apostle here
takes the word Law, in the same sense and latitude, wherein the Jews meant it,
when they contended and argued for Justification by it: otherwise he should not
argue with them ad idem, nor reach their apprehensions or meaning. 3o, because
the Moral Law, suppose it had not bin made weak, nor disadvantag'd by the
flesh, yet could it not by the most exact observation of it, have justified
men, at least not all men, and by name not the Jews, who were bound to the
observation of the other two, as well as of it, and had bin found sinners, had
they faild in any point of either of these, though they had bin absolute in the
other. Now it is evident, that by the righteousness (or Justification) of the
Law in this place, the Apostle means the righteousness (or Justification) of
such a Law, which in it self was able to justify, had it met with a
sufficiency of strength in men answerable to it. Therefore he cannot be
conceived to speak here determinatly of the Moral Law, which had no such
ability in respect of the Jews. 4o, and lastly, because the Jews had bin
never the nearer a Justification, by the righteousness of the Moral Law
imputed from Christ unto them (supposing such an imputation) being (as has bin
said) under the transgression of other Laws. So then this consideration also,
that by the word Law in this ^cripture, cannot be meant the Moral Law, gives
an utter defeat to the attempt that is made upon it, for the establishing of
the imputation of Christ's righteousness. But

7. God sending his own Son, etc. condemned sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness (or Justification) of the Law might be fulfilled (...) in or
upon us etc. that is, that that Justification, or way of making men righteous,
which the Law, that is, the writings of Moses, held forth and prophesied of
unto the world long since, viz. by Faith in the Messia that was then to come,
and to make attonemement for sin by his blood, might be fulfilled in us, or
upon us, that is, might be accomplished, made good, and fully manifested, in
us, or upon us, viz. in our Justification, who by our walking not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit, that is, by an eminency of holiness in our lives
above the strain and pitch of men under the Law, give testimony unto the
world, that the Messia, or Great Iustifier of men, foretold by Moses, is indeed
come into the world, and having suffered for sin and overcome death, has
powered out the Spirit of Grace abundantly upon those that believe in him. This
interpretation (especially as far as concern's the clause in question, that
the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us) is confirmed as well by
the sweet proportion and sutablenesse between such a fulfilling of the
righteousness of the Law in those that believe and live accordingly as the
effect, and that sending of Christ in the similitude of sinful flesh to
condemn sin in the flesh, laid down in the former verse, as the means or
cause thereof. Secondly, in this interpretation, the word (...), fulfilled,
has its proper and genuine force and signification, which is wholly lost in
that exposition, which labors to find the imputation of Christ's
righteousness in this place. For to be fulfilled, in the Scripture, properly
signifies the accomplishment, making good, or full manifestation of a thing,
which before was under promise or prediction only, and as it were in the dark.
Thirdly, that righteousness or Justification, which is here called, the
righteousness (or Justification) of the Law, is (questionless) the same
righteousness, which Romans 3.21. is said to be witnessed by the Law, that is,
by the writings of Moses, and by the preaching whereof the Law it self is said
to be established, ver, 31. of that Chapter. So that in this respect it may
very well be called the righteousness (or Justification) of the Law. Fourthly
(and lastly) according to the tenor of this interpretation, this passage of
Scripture is of perfect sympathy and accordance with those, Romans 3.21.22.25.
whereas as the other interpretation leads it, it can neither fi^de friend nor
fellow in all the Scripture. In the former of these last cited Scriptures, the
Apostle expresses himself thus: But now the righteousness of God without the
Law, is manifested, being witnessed, by the Law and the Prophets, even the
righteousness of God which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, etc. In the
latter, thus: Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness, for (or, concerning) remission of sins
that are past, etc. It plainly appears, from these Scriptures, compared
together, First, that the righteousness of God, that is, the way, means, or
course which God holds for the Justification of men, stands in remission, or
forgiveness, of sins. Secondly, that this righteousness or Justification of
his, is witnessed, that is, asserted and vindicated by the Law, that is, the
writings of Moses, and consequently may well be called, the righteousness, or
Justification, of the Law. Thirdly (and lastly) that this righteousness of God
testified and asserted by the Law (in the sense given) and exercised by him
under the Law, in the forgiveness of the sins of those that then believed,
was not manifested, or declared, or (as our other Scripture had it) fulfilled,
that is, fully revealed and discovered to the root, bottom, and foundations
of it, till the coming of Christ into the world, and his dying for sin, which
in that other place, is called, his condemning sin in the flesh. This for
answer in full to this Scripture.

The next place, imputation which we oppose, is Romans 9.31.32. But Israel which
followed after the Law of righteousness, has not attained to the Law of
righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were
by the works of the Law, etc. From hence it is thus argued, that had Israel,
that is, the Jews, who followed after the Law of righteousness, believed in
Christ, they had attained the Law of righteousness, that is, should have had
the righteousness of the Law performed by Christ, imputed unto them. But, to
this also I Answer,

1. that by the Law of righteousness, Romans 9.31.32. answered.
which the Jews are here said to have sought after, but could not attain, is
not meant the Moral Law, nor indeed any Law properly so called, either Moral,
Ceremonial, or Judicial, for God had preve^ted them with the gift of all
these Laws, so that they need not have sought after them. If it be objected,
that their study and endeavor of keeping the Law, which they had, may be
called, a seeking or following after the Law: I answer, be it so: yet this
study and endeavor of theirs, could be no cause of their coming short of
righteousness or Justification, which yet is ascribed to that seeking or
following after the Law of righteousness here mentioned. As Christians are
never the further off from being justified, by living holily and keeping the
commandments of God: So neither was the care and endeavor of the Jews to
observe the precepts of that Law, which God had given them, any cause of their
miscariage in point of Justification. Abraham and those that were justified by
Faith in Christ, as he was, were as conscientious and careful observers of al
Gods Laws, as any of those were, who stumbling at the stumbling stone, were
never justified. Therefore by the Law of righteousness in this Scripture, is not
meant any Law properly so called, much les definitively, the Moral Law.

Secondly, in this expression, the Law of righteousness in the former clause
of the verse, Calvin finds an hypallage, the Law of righteousness, put for
the righteousness of the Law Iam priere loco legem justiciae, per hypallagen
posuisse mihi videtur pro justicia legis: in repetitione secundi membri, alio
sensu sic vocasse justi^iae formam seu regulam. Calvin. in Romans 9, 1. Nam
illud, sectand^ legem justiciae, simpliciter esse dictum de legis justitia, i.
ea, quae ex operibus legu est, patebit infra, etc. Mus. in Romans 9.31.
: in the latter clause, he takes it in somewhat a different signification, for
a form or rule of righteousness. Musculus dissents little (if any thing at
all) from this interpretation, by the Law of righteousness, understanding that
righteousness which stands in the works of the Lawb. So that neither of these
Authors (nor any other that I have yet met with) restreyne the word Law, in
these phrases, determinatly to the Moral Law.

Thirdly, neither is there any reason, nor color of reason, to limit the
Apostles expressions (in this place) of the Law of righteousness, to the
Moral Law only, and the righteousness thereof: because it is notoriously
known (and has bin more then once observed formerly) that the Jews never
hoped for, nor sought after righteousness, Justification, by the Moral Law
only, or the works thereof alone, but by the Ceremonial Law also, and the
observances hereof; yea and principally by these, as has bin else where in this
Treatise prooved from the Scriptures. So that by the Law of righteousness,
whereof they miscarried by not seeking it by Faith, cannot be meant determinatly
the Moral Law, or the righteousness thereof, because they never travaild of this,
upon such terms, they never had thought or hope of being justified or made
righteous, by the Moral Law or righteousness thereof only. And so Paraeus, by
the Law of righteousness in this place, understands as well the Ceremonial, as
the Moral Law. Iudaeos ait sectatos legem justiciae, quae praescribit
justiciam operibus perfectam; hoc est, conatos esse, tum ceremoniarum
observatione, tum moralium operum meritu justificari coram Deo. Pateus in Romans
9.31.


4. Neither would the righteousness of the Moral Law alone, suppose they should
have attained it by believing, have stood the Jews in any stead for their
justification, being as well bound to the observation of the ceremonial law, as
of it. Therefore it was not this law or the righteousues of it, which should
have bin imputed to them, in case they had trruly believed: and consequently no
imputation of any law righteousness whatsoever from Christ, can be concluded
from this place.

But 5. (and lastly,) to give the clear sense and meaning of the Apostle in
this Scripture) by the Law of righteousness, which Israel is said to have
followed after, but not to have attained, because he sought it not by Faith,
etc. can be meant nothing else but justification it self, or righteousness
simply and indefinitely taken (in which acception it is often put for
justification, as was observed cap. 3. Sect, and elsewhere) which the Jews,
seeking to attain it by the works of the Law, that is, by themselves and the
merit of their own doings, and not by faith in Jesus Christ, were never able to
attain, but lost the favor of God, and perished in their sins. That this is
the direct and express meaning of the place, may be several ways confirmed.

1. To call righteousness simply (that is, justification) the Law of
righteousness, is agreeable to this Apostles dialect elsewhere. For Romans 7.23.
and 25. by the Law of sin, he means nothing else but sin it self. So Romans
3.27. By the Law of Faith, faith it self: and again Romans 8.2. by the Law of
sin and death, he means sin and death simply. For none of these have any
Law properly so called: only the word, Law, added to them, seems to represent
them under a more emphaticall, and weighty consideration.

2. When this Apostle speaks of the righteousness of the Law, elsewhere, he
never uses this hypallage, to call it the Law of righteousness, but still in
plain and direct language, The righteousness of the Law. See Romans 2.26. Romans
8.4.

3. This exposition makes the double antithesis or opposition, which the
Apostle apparently makes, between the Gentiles, v. 30. and the Jews, v. 31.
pregnant, clear, and full, whereas any other interpretation, dissolves the
strength, and darkens the light of them. The Gentiles (says he, v. 30)
followed not after righteousness, that is, had no thoughts of, took no care or
course for any justification before God. But Israel (v. 31.) sought after the
Law of righteousness, that is, propounded unto themselves, as a business of
maine importance, a righteousness or justification in the sight of God, and
ran a course of means, such as it was, to obtain it. Again, The Gentiles
(says he, v. 30.) attained unto righteousness, that is, unto justification in
the sight of God: many of them have bin justified and saved. But Israel could
not attain unto the Law of righteousness (v. 31.) that is, could not compass
a justification of themselves in the sight of God, as the Gentiles did. The
strict Law of opposition enforces this or the like interpretation.

4. (And lastly) that by the Law of righteousness, which Israel could not
attain unto, he means righteousness simply, or justification in the sight of
God, appears from the latter reason, or latter part of the reason, which he
renders v. 3^. of Isreal's miscarriage and falling short in this kind. Wherefore
(says he) could not Israel attain unto the Law of righteousness, which he
followed after? because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the
works of the Law. If by the Law of righteousness, which Israel is said to have
sought after, we understand, the righteousness or obedience of the Law, the
reason which is here assigned by the Holy Ghost (at least in part) why they
could not atain it, viz. because they sought it by the works of the Law, will
be very incongruous and absurd. For what savor either of reason or truth is
there in it, to say, that a man therefore cannot attain the righteousness or
obedience of the Law, because he seeks to attain it by the works of the Law?
But to say that a man cannot attain unto righteousness or justification
before God, if, or because he seeks it by the works of the Law, has perfect
consistence with both, I mean both with reason and truth.

Lastly, I might further strengthen this exposition, with the Authority of
Theophylact (if need were) who expounds that clause. v. 31. they could not
attain unto the Law of righteousness, of a simple and plain
non-justification. (...). Theophyl. in Romans 9.31.


The next Scripture proof (and last out of this Epistle to the Romans) which
is frequently alleged for the supposed Imputation, is Romans 10.4. The words,
these, For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one that
believes. Therefore (say the Masters of that way of Imputation, which we desire
to hedge up with thorns) the righteousness of Christ, or the obedience performed
by him to the Moral Law, is imputed to those that believe, for their
righteousness. But neither does this Scripture know any such imputation, more
then its fellows. For

1. Romans 10.4. answered.
There is not the least resemblance or color of reason, that by the Law in
this place, should be meant precisely and determinately, the Moral Law,
because (as was both lately and formerly observed) the Jews, with whom chiefly
the Apostle grapples in this place, (as is evident from the beginning of the
chapter) never so much as dreamt of justification by the Moral Law only, but
chiefly by the Ceremonial. Neither does Calvin, or any other Interpreter that
yet I have met with, understand the place of the Moral Law. Besides, it is
evident from that which immediately follows v. 5. that he does not speak here
of the Moral Law: for there, he cites that description, which Moses gives of
the righteousness of the Law; not out of any part or passage of the Moral
Law, but out of the heart and amidst (as it were) of the Ceremonial Law.
Those words, the man which does these things shall live by them, wherein he
places Moses's description of the righteousness which is of the Law, are
taken from Levit. 18.5. and are in special manner spoken of the Ceremonialls
and Judicialls. For thus the words lie: ye shall therefore keep my Statutes and
my Judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them. Therefore (doubtless)
the Apostle does not speak here of the Moral Law.

Secondly, righteousness of Christ imputed to believers (suppose such an
imputation were simply granted) should be called the end of the Moral Law For
(doubtless) no Law whatsoever considered simply as a Law, is any cause or
means of justifying a person, in any other way, or by any other means, then
by the observation of it self: and consequently, Justification by Christ
cannot be conceived to be the end of the Moral Law. For nothing can properly
be said to be the intent or end of a thing, but only that, which in reason and
likelihood may be procured and obtained by it. Now there is an utter and
evident impossibility, that Justification by Christ should be procured or
attained by the Moral Law. Neither obedience nor disobedience thereunto, has
any relation of causalitie to such an effect, a man being never the nearer
Justification by Christ, either for the one, or for the other. It may be said
with far a more favorable aspect both upon reason and truth, that Christ is
the end of the Ceremonial Law: and yet not of this neither, considered simply,
as a Law, but as comprehending in it such and such usages or rites, wherein
Christ and Justification by his blood were typified and resembled, and which
were to expire and to lose the binding power of a Law, which it had before,
upon Christ's coming. As for the observation or transgression of this Law,
neither the one nor the other contributed any thing more toward any man's
Justification by Christ, then the observation or transgression of the Moral
Law did, or does. Nay the observation both of the one and the other (though
very unperfect and lame) have bin a stumbling block in the way of many, and
cast them quite off from Justification by Christ, as the Apostle implies, ver.
3. Therefore

Thirdly, the Greek Expositors, as Chrysostom, (...), etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 17.
in Romans
Theophylact, (...). Theophyl. in Romans 10.4. [Sect. 20]
and Theodoret, make Christ in this sense to be called by the Apostle, the end
of the Law for righteousness unto those that believe, viz. because he
performed or exhibited unto them, that, which the Law propounded to it self as
its end, and would have performed, but could not, viz. their Justification. But

Fourthly, some Interpreters conceive, that Christ in this sense is said to be
the end of the Law for righteousness to him that believes, because the Law by
convincing men of sin, and exacting of them a righteousness which it does
not enable them to perform, and again by threatening and condemning them for
the want of it, it does as good as lead them by the hand unto Christ, by whom
they are freely justified. This Exposition calls Musculus Master, Nam finis
Legis est Christus. Intelligendum est, quod Lex ad Christum ducit. Dum enim
peccatum revelar, arguit ac damnat, justiciamque exigit quamnon praestat, nihil
aliud agit quam quod ad Christum ducit, per quem justificemur gratis. Musc. in
Romans 10.4.
and Calvin in one touch upon the place, is not far from it. Id autem fieri
nequit, quin omni justicia spoliats, peccati agnitione confusi, ab ipso
justiciam gratuitam petamus. Calvin. in Romans 10.4.
But neither does this seem to be the meaning of the place: however, because it
makes not at all against us in the present controversy, we shall not (at
present) insist upon any refutation of it.

Fifthly, some think, Christ is therefore called the end of the Law, because by
his coming in the flesh, and by his sacrifice of himself, he put an end to the
Law and Mosaicall dispensation. Both Musculus and Parous mention this
exposition, but name not the Author. This exposition is a truth, but
(doubtless) not a true exposition. Therefore

Sixthly (and lastly) the plain and direct meaning of the Apostle in this
Scripture seems to be this. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to
every one that believes. that is, the Law, meaning the whole Mosaicall
Oeconomie or dispensation (which is the frequent signification of the word,
Law, in the writings of this Apostle, as was formerly observed and exemplified)
was therefore, and for that end and purpose given by God unto the Jews his
people, that whilst it did continue, it might instruct and teach them
concerning the Messiah, who was yet to come, and by his death to make
atonement for their sins, that so they might believe in him accordingly, and
be justified; and further, that in time, that people and Nation might be
trained up, nurtured, and prepared for the Messia himself, and that oeconomie
and perfection of the worship and service of God, which he should bring with
him, and establishes in the world at his coming. This interpretation,
including the whole Mosaicall administration within the meaning of the word,
Law, was both Chrysostoms of old, (...). Chrysostom. in Romans 10.4.
and is Mr. Gatakers Verum ego potius, Christum finem legu ea ratione
simpliciter dictum existimo, quia Lex revera Dei populo lata est, quae ad
Messiam illu viam pramuniret; quod erat ministerij Mosaici munus pracipuum.
Gatak. Elench Gomar. p. 53.
yet living amongst us: and Parcus likewise is large in the vindication and
explication of it: and Calvin himself Indicat e^am legis praposterum
Interpretem esse, qui per cjus opera justificari quaerit quaniam in hoc lexdata
est, quo nos ad a^^ara justitiam manuduceret. Imo quicquid doceat Lex, ^uicquid
pracipiat, quiequid promittaet, semper Christum habet pro scepo; ergo ^n ipsum
dirigendae sunt omnes Parts, etc Call. in To. 10.4.
in his commentary upon the place seems very inclineable to it. This
interpretation might be further confirmed.

First, from the carriage and tenor of the context it self. For doubtless the
Apostles meaning is, that Christ should be the end of that Law for
righteousness, by the observation whereof, as being their own righteousness,
ver. 3 the Jews, against whom he here reasons, sought to be justified. Now it
has bin often said, and once (at least) sufficiently prooved, that the Jews
sought righteousness and self Justification afwell from the observation of
the Ceremonial, as of the Moral Law.

Secondly from the full consent and entire sympathy of other Scriptures of like
propension and phrase. 2 Cor. 3.13. It is said, that the Children of Israel
could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished, that is, of
the whole ministry or dispensation of Moses, as is evident from the carriage
of the whole Chapter. Now what was the end of this dispensation, but CHRIST and
Justification by him? So Gal. 3.24. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster
unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith. By the Law in this place,
cannot be meant the Moral Law; the whole series of the context from ver. 13,
to 25. rises up against such an interpretation; neither is there any Expositor
I know, that so understands it, but by the Law, which is here said to be our
Schoolmaster unto Christ, is unquestionably meant, the whole frame or body of
the administration of Moses, yet with a more peculiar reference to the
Ceremonial part of it. See Mr. Gatakers judgment touching this Scripture, in
his little Tract against Gomarus, p. 54.54. and again in his Scripta
adversaria (as he call's them) p. 43. of the first part, and p. 96. of the
second: together with Mr. Perkins upon the place.

Thus at last we have (I suppose) abundantly vindicated the Non-imputation of
the Active obedience of Christ in the sense controverted, out of the hand of
all those reasonings and pleadings, that are usually (or that readily I think
can be) build upon the Epistle to the Romans: wherein notwithstanding the
greatest part of the strength and confidence of our Adversaries lies: And
therefore I shall make bold to acco^modate the Reader with more brevity
ingiving answer to those other Scriptures, which yet remain.

The next of which, Cor. 1.30. But ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God
is made unto us wisdom, anarighteousnesse, and sanctification, and Redemption.
Because Christ is heresaid to be made righteousness unto us by God, it is
argued, that therefore the righteousness of Christ is imputed us. But to this
I answer, that here is a little or less color for the deemed imputation, then
in any of the former Scriptures. For

First, 1 Cor. 1.30. answered.
Christ is here no otherwise, nor after any other manner affirmed to be, or to
be made righteousness unto us, then he is to be made wisdom or sanctification
unto us. Therefore there is no more ground to conclude from hence the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, for our righteousness, then of his
wisdom for our wisdom, or his sanctification for our sanctification. And if
it be a weak and unsavourie inference from this place, to conclude that we are
wise with the same wisdom, wherewith Christ was wise, being imputed unto us;
it must needs be a bird of the same feather, to infer, that we are righteous
with the same righteousness, wherewith Christ was righteous, being imputed to
us. Here is no more mention or intimation of the imputation of the one, then of
the other. Suppose Christ were made righteousness unto us, by the imputation
of that righteousness of his, which men so much contend for; yet there is
nothing more evident, then that this special manner of his being made
righteousness, must be made good otherwise, and from other Scriptures, and
cannot at all be prooved from this place. As because a rich man has silver and
gold and jewels in his possession or keeping, it does not follow, that
therefore he has silver in one Chest, and gold in another, or jewels in a
third, because he may possibly have them al in one and the same. From general
expressions, particular modifications of things can never be prooved. Therefore

Secondly, when Christ is said to be made righteousness unto us, the meaning
only is, that he is made or ordained by God to be the Author or sole means, by
way of merit, of our Justification, purchased and procured for us by his death
and sufferings. This Exposition is strengthened,

First, the word, righteousness, Justification, as has bin often observed.
See particularly the third Chap. of this second part, Sect. 2.

Secondly, that righteousness or Justification which believers have in, or by
Christ, is still attributed in the Scriptures to the death and sufferings of
Christ, (as has bin formerly observed See cap. 2. of this latter part. Sect.
7. p. 9.10.
) and never to his righteousness or active obedience.

3. Neither is it true according to the principles of the men themselves, who
profess enmity to us in the point depending, that Christ by his active
obedience only should be made righteousness or justification unto us. Therefore
they forsake their own guides, when they seek for the imputation of this
righteousness unto us out of this place.

4. And lastly, the interpretation given has the concurrent judgment of many
sound and able Expositors for it, who by Christ's being made righteousness unto
us, understand nothing else but our justification or righteous-making by him;
some placeing this justification in the forgiveness of our sins, some
ascribeing it to the satisfaction, that is, the sufferings of Christ; none of
them either ascribeing the purchase of it to his active obedience, or placing
it in the imputation of this unto us. Let Chrysostom (...), etc. Chrysostom Hom.
5. in 1. ad Corin.
and Theophylact (...). Et mox. (...). Theophyl. in 1 Cor. 1.30.
be consulted with upon the place: and of later times, Pomeranus Quierg^ in
nobis peccatores sumus, in ipso et per ipsum, justi sumus, non imputate propter
ipsum nobis peccate. Pomeran.
and Piscator. Iusticia: id est, cujus satisfactions nobu donata, atque
imputata, justi sumus. Piscator in 1 Cor. 1.30.
Mr. Gataker likewise p. 47. of his little Tract against Gomarus, rejects that
interpretation, as wanting as well color as substance of truth, which seeks
to establish the imputation of the active obedience of Christ upon this
Scripture. Bernard (as he is cited by a Great Master of the way of Imputation,
though against Bishop Downham. Tract, of Iustific. p. 223. Sect. 4. [SECT 24.]
himself) is express and full over and over for that sense of the place which
we maintain. Christ (says he, as Bishop Downham translates him (was made unto
us wisdom in preaching; justice (or righteousness, in absolution of sins,
etc. Again: enlighten mine eyes, that I may be wise: remember not the sins
of my youth and my ignorances, and I am just. Yet again: He was made unto us
of God, wisdom, teaching prudence; justice, forgiving sins, etc. They only are
wise, who are instructed by his Doctrine; they only just, who of his mercy
have obtained parden of sin. In all this variety of expression, it is
observable, that he still places that righteousness or justification, which
Christ is made unto us, in the remission or pardon of our sins. Which with the
premises upon this Scripture duly considered, I presume no imputation of the
active obedience of Christ will be any more urged or contended for from hence.

The next Scripture that is much solicited by some, to speak a good word in
the cause of the aforesaid imputation, is 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to
be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. From hence they infer, that as our sins are imputed unto Christ,
so Christ's righteousness, meaning his active obedience (or else they do not
hold to the point) is imputed unto us. Of all the Scriptures which men take up
for the plea of the imputation opposed, Mr. Gataker has well observed, this is
most pregnant and clear against themselves. Quid ser^ clarius contiase
producere poterat, quam illud, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gataker in Elench contra Gomar. p.
48, 2 Cor. 5.21. cleared.
But for Answer.

1. There is no footing in this Scripture, for the inference drawn from it:
here is nothing said touching any imputation of our sins to Christ: and
consequently, here can be nothing to build a reciprocal imputation of his
righteousness unto us upon. As for that expression, of Christ's being made
sin for us, it imports no such imputation, as men suppose, as will appear
presently.

2. Some of the most judicious and learned assistants of the way of this
Imputation, absolutely reject this equality or reciprocation of Imputation,
between the sins of believers unto Christ, and the righteousness of Christ
unto them. There is not the same force or power (says Bishop Davenant) Non est
eadem vi^ nostra injustietae, ad efficiendum Christum injustum and iniquum, qua
est obedientiae ejus et justiciae, ad constituendos fideles, justos et
innocents. Bishop Dauenaut. De Just. Habit. etc. p. 332. Christus ita volute
peccata in se suscipcre, ut non inde peccater, sed hostia pro peccato
constitueretur. ibidem. p. 333.
of our unrighteousness, to make Christ unrighteous, which is of his
righteousness, to make those that believe righteous and innocent. See more to
this purpose in the second Chapter of this Discourse, Sect. 19. p. 26. So that
(according to their own principles) if the righteousness or active obedience
of Christ be no otherwise imputed unto us, then our sins are imputed unto
him, we are not made formally righteous by such an imputation.

3. Neither is there so much as the face or appearance in this place of any
comparison made, between Christ's being made sin for us (whatsoever be meant
by it) and our being made the righteousness of God in him, but only the latter
is affirmed as the end, consequent, or effect of the former.

4. that the weight and importance of that particle, in him, should be, by the
imputation of his active obedience unto us, there is neither instance or
parallel expression in Scripture, nor rule in Grammar, nor figure in
Rhetorique, to make probable in the lowest or lightest degree. Therefore

5. (and lastly) the direct and clear meaning of the place, is this: that God
for that end made Christ sin, that is, an offering or sacrifice for sin,
for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, that is, that
we might be justified, or made a society or remnant of righteous ones, after
that peculiar manner of Justification or righteous-making which GOD has
contrived and established through that sacrifice or offering of his Son. This
interpretation is justifiable upon these and the like considerations.

1. sin simply. See for this Exodus 29.14. Exodus 30.10. Levit. 5, 6, 16, 18,
19. Levit. 7.1, 2, 7. Levit. 9.7. Ezekiel. 44.27. Ezekiel. 45.19.23. Hos. 4.8.
besides other places, This is generally acknowledged by Interpreters, yea by
the choycest Adversaries themselves which we have in the present controversy.
See Bish. Downham Trea. of Iustifi. p. 226. etc. and Bish. Davenant. de Justice.
Hab. p. 333.


2. To express a number or company of justified or righteous persons by the
abstract term of righteousness, is very agreeable likewise with the Scripture
dialect in many other places. It is an expression of like stamp and figure with
those, poverty, for poor men, captivity for captives, etc. Of which kind you
please to see many instances in the third Chap. of this latter part, Sect. 3.
in the latter end, p. 45.

3. That addition, of God, (the righteousness of God) imports, that that
righteousness or justification which believers obtain by the sacrifice or
death of Christ, is not only a righteousness of Gods free donation and gift,
but of his special wonderful and profound contrivement for them.

4. By the Grammatical construction and dependence of the latter Clause, our
being made the righteousness of God in Christ, upon the former, viz. his being
made sin for us, it is evident, that in the latter, such an effect must of
necessity be signified and meant, which may answer and suite with that cause,
which is mentioned in the former, viz. the death of Christ for us. Now the
proper and direct effect of the sacrifice or death of Christ, is deliverance
from the guilt and punishment of sin, not the imputation of his active
obedience unto men. Christ did not die for men, that they might be justified or
made righteous by the righteousness of his life. Quis enim sic argumentaretur,
mentis ^ompos: Christus factus est pro nobu peccatum, i. sacrificium peccati
expiatoriu^, quo nos justi constitueremur: ^^r go obedientia Christi in vita
praestita, non autem morte sive sacrificio Christi, justi constituimur? Gatak.
Elench. Gom p. 48.


5. The Scriptures, when they speak of the death or sufferings of Christ under
the consideration of that efficiencie or causality which is in them in respect
of Justification, never ascribe any other effect unto them, but only, either
the remission of sins, deliverance from wrath, redemption, or the like.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us.
Gal. 3.13.

6. (and lastly) the Interpretation given, as touching the substance and maine
importance of it, is the exposition of Interpreters (almost) without number, as
of Chrysostom, Theophylact, Occumenius, Calvin, Musculus, Piscator, etc. I
forbear the citation of passages from them, partly because the exposition has
bin (I conceive) abundantly cleared and confirmed already, partly because it is
(upon the matter) acknowledged by the chief opponents we have in the business
in hand; partly because the Authors themselves (if any man doubt or be
unsatisfied) may readily be consulted withal, and partly likewise to save the
Reader an unnecessary labor, as I conceive.

I shall only insist upon one Scripture more, Gal. 3.10. For it is written,
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them. Out of this Scripture has of late bin hewn (as
I hear) this worthy pillar to support the tottering and ruinous building of
the premised Imputation. If every one be cursed, that continues not in all
things that are written in the Law to do them, then can no man be justified,
but remains accursed, who has not the perfect observation of the Law imputed
from Christ unto him: The reason is, because no man is able to obtain any such
personal observation thereof. The argument is not of any eminent desert, to
have an answer bestowed upon it: yet let us not envy it this honor. If the
man of this argument, whoever he be, be in good earnest with it, doubtless, he
is confederate with Stapleton the Papist (at least in part) who maintains
against Calvin, that the righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness of
Faith, are not two, but one and the same righteousness. Therefore

First, Gal. 3.10. Answered.
if there be no other means to dissolve the Curse denounced against all
non-continuers in all things that are written in the Law to do them, but a
perfect fulfilling of the Law by Christ imputed unto them, woe and woe a
thousand times to the world, yea to the whole world of men and women without
exception. For certain it is, 1. that there is no such perfect fulfilling of
Law imputed from Christ unto any man, (as has been proved at large throughout
the first part of this discourse) and 2. that were there any such imputation,
yet this would not reach the dissolution of that curse: this cleaves faster to
the whole generation of Adams posterity, then to be dissolved or loosed from
any of them by any other means, then by the blood of Jesus Christ. It is not
said, that without keeping the Law, but, that without shedding of blood, there
is no remission. Heb. 9.22. Christ might have kept the Law a 1000 years for
us; and yet never have found Justification or redemption from the Curse of the
Law for us, had he not bin made a curse for us, by his death and sufferings.
Gal. 3.13.

Secondly, Christ imputed, without the imputation of the active obedience with
it for that end. Yea I never yet heard of any of that way and judgment, who
pleaded the necessity of Christ's active obedience imputed, for the bringing men
off from the curse of the Law, but only to bring them under the blessing or
promise of the Law, Do this and live. Therefore the argument in hand, is no
more a friend to that opinion it self which it seeks to establish, then it is
to the truth it self. Falsum, nunc vero, nunc falso est con^^arium.

Thirdly, the imputation of a perfect fulfilling of the Law from another, were
it granted, cannot make him a continuer in all things that are written in the
Law to do them, who offends daily in many things: and consequently, will leave
him in as bad a case, in respect of the curse of the Law, as it finds him. All
the imputations under Heaven, of whatsoever, from whomsoever, cannot make him,
who has not continued in all things of the Law to do them, to have continued
in them. It is well that this argument is weak: for otherwise it is of a most
bloody and unmercifull Spirit, and would bear down all the world before it
into Hell. If there be no other way or means for poor sinful men to come off
from the curse of the Law, but by continuing in all things that are written
therein to do them. Doubtless they must all fall under this curse, and never
rise again: Therefore

Fourthly (and lastly) the direct intent and meaning of this passage of
Scripture, is this, Cursed be every one that continues not, etc. that is,
every one that expects Justification and salvation by the Law; woe be to
every such person, man or woman, if they continue not in all things that are
written in the Law to do them: the curse of the Law will fall heavy and
terrible upon them. That this is the plain and express meaning of the Apostle
in this place, and that, that clause of universalitie, Cursed be every one,
etc. is to be limited to the universality of those only, who depend upon the
Law for Justification, is evident.

First, whatsoever the Law speaks, it speaks to those (that is, to all
those) that are under the Law, Romans 3.19. so is it as true also, that
whatsoever the Law speaks, it speaks only unto those that are under it, and
to none other. Now those that expect and look for Justification by Faith in
Jesus Christ, and not by the Law, are not under the Law, but under grace, Romans
6.14. See also Romans 7.1, 2, 3, 4. Therefore the Cursings and threatning^ of the
Law do no ways concern or touch any of these. So Gal. 5.23. speaking of
those that were Christ's, that is, that were dead to the Law, as touching all
hope and dependence upon it for Justification, and had cast themselves upon him
for that blessing, affirms, that against such there was no Law, meaning no
Law to judge or condemn them. And 1 Timothy 1.9. He denies that the Law is given
to a righteous man, but unto the lawless and disobedient, etc. meaning, that
the Law, as touching the curse and penalty of it, was never intended by God for
men that are holy and righteous, that is, that are true believers in Jesus
Christ, from whom all holiness and righteousness proceed. But

Secondly, the context it self apparently leads us to this limitation and
interpretation. For 1o, the words immediately preceding in the beginning of the
verse are these. For as many as are of the works of the Law (that is, that
seek to be justified by the works of the Law, as Calvin, Musculus, and all
Protestant writers generally interpret) are under the Curse. To prove this, he
alleges that testimony of the Law mentioned: For it is written, Cursed is
every one that continues not, etc. So that this clause, and the curse
contained in it, have only reference to those that are of the works of the Law,
that is, that seek to be justified by the Law, and not by Christ. Again, 2o,
the interpretation given is confirmed from the words of ver. 9. immediately
foregoing: Here he had pronounced those that were of Faith, that is, that
sought Justification by Faith in Christ, Blessed with faithful Abraham. Now to
prove that these were the blessed ones of God, and not those that would be
justified by the Law (which was the Spirit that now began to work among these
Galathians) he affirm's that all these are under the curse, and consequently
far from being blessed. And to prove this, he cites the passage in hand from
the Law it self: Cursed be every one that continues not, etc. So that it is
evident from hence also, that that continuance in all things which are written
in the Law to do them, is only required of those, either for the removal of
the Curse threatened, or for the obteyning of the blessing promised, who seek
to be justified by the works of the Law, and not of those that believe with
Abraham, and depend upon Christ for justification. 3o, (and lastly) the tenor
of the verse immediately following, is as the light of the Sun, to clear and
vindicate this interpretation. For here the Apostle goes on with the further
proof of his last conclusion, viz. that those that are of the works of the
Law, are under the Curse, thus. And that no man is justified (and then, not
blessed, and consequently accursed) by the Law is evident: for the just shall
live (that is, be justified, and so live, and be blessed) by Faith, when he
says, that no man is justified by the Law; he supposes that no man can be
said to continue in all things that are written in the Law to do them: for he
of whom this may be truly affirmed, may very properly be said to be justified
by the Law. The truth is, there is no other way or means of Justification by
the Law imaginable but only this. Therefore that Justification which we have by
Faith in Christ, cannot be said to be by a continuance in all things that are
written in the Law to do them, because this is nothing else but Justification
it self by the Law.

And whereas it might be objected: justified by Faith and by the Law, or
righteousness of the Law together; may not a man be entit'led to, or invested
with a righteousness of the Law, in and by his Faith? To this the Apostle
answers (by a preoccupation) in the words immediately following. ver. 12. And
the Law is not of Faith: that is, a man does not observe the Law in one kind or
other by believing, he cannot be said to have a legal righteousness put upon
him by his Faith. This he proves from the express tenor and condition of the
Law it self, which requires a personal observation of the things contained
therein by every man that shall live, that is, that shall be justified thereby:
But the man that does them, shall live in them: the full importance of which
clause* you shall find opened in the 8. Chapter of the first part of this
Discourse. By all that we have reasoned upon the passage of Scripture in hand,
it is more then double evident, that here is no refuge or sanctuary for the
pretended imputation, but rather an high hand of Heaven against it to overthrow
it. Some further plead that of the same Apostle, Phil. 3 9. That I may be found
in him, not having mine own righteousness, etc. but we have elsewhere In the
first part of the Dis. course. cap. 6.
upon a diligent search and inquiry, found this Scripture looking a quite
contrary way.

Other Scriptures then these alleged with any face or color of reason in the
cause of that Imputation which I disclaim, I verily know none: If I did I
would not favor my self, or the cause I maintain in the least, by dissembling
or suppressing any of them. As for those that are conside^t, that they see that
imputation of Christ's righteousness which we oppose, in that and the like
Scriptures, Deliver me from blood guiltiness o God, Lob. 41, 27.
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness Psalm. 51.14. and again in
that, Do this and live, Luke 10.28. I leave them and their confidence to the
convictions of miracles and signs from heaven. For (doubtless) as for texts
and interpretations, they are turned into Stubble with them, and reasons and
demonstrations are esteemed by them but as Leviathan esteems iron and brass,
that is, as straw and rotten wood. Job. 41.27.


CAP. VI.
VVherin the Arguments against the imputation of Faith for righteousness: (in
the sense stated in the beginning of the Discourse) are propounded and answered.
THere have bin two opinions, the one affirmative, the other negative, hitherto
promiscuously argued, and maintained in this Discourse. The former pleads the
Imputation of Faith (in a proper sense) for righteousness, in an unproper; as
was declared in the beginning. The latter denies the imputation of Christ's
active obedience, in the letter and formalitie of it, in Justification: which
expressions likewise have long since bin interpreted, and cleared from all
ambiguitie. We shall now toward the close of our work, distinguish them, and
answer the arguments or objections against the one and the other apart by
themselves. I begin with the reasons or arguments urged against the
affirmative.

The first and great argument or objection against the Imputation of Faith for
righteousness (in the sense taken) usually presents it self in this or the
like shape.

That which impeacheth the truth or justice of God,

But the imputation of Faith for righteousness (in the sense declared)
impeacheth, or trencheth upon the truth and justice of God. Ergo

The reason of the assumption (which is only questionable) is rendered thus;
because if God should impute Faith for righteousness, he should account that
to be a righteousness which is none; and therein should be untrue or unjust.

The major proposition in this syllogism, is an anointed truth, and not to be
touched: but it is unequally yoked, the minor being of a contrary Spirit, and
therefore to be denied. And to the proof or confirmation of it I answer.

First, that this was (in effect) the plea and argument of that fanatique
Spirit of Suencfeldius, (as it stands upon record in Zanshie Dei tribunal est
multo justius, quam Iureconsultorum, ubi impii non absolvuntur. Ergo in
Theologia verbum justificandi non juridic^ pro absolutione est accipiendum, sed
pro justum, integrum, gratum Deo reddere. Zanch. in Epist. l. 1. p. 215.
) and likewise of the Counsel of Trent (as Calvin has observed Iterum enim
affirmant, nos vere justos esse, non tantum reputari. Ego contra etc, Calvi.
Antidos. ad sess. 6. p. 324.
) to prove, that the word Justification in the Scripture, was not to be taken
in a juridicall sense, viz. for absolution, but in a physical or moral sense,
for the making or constituting of a man properly and completely just or
righteous, and is the common argument of the Papists, for their Justification
by inherent grace and works Bellarminus dicit, verbo imputandi, non significari
nudam existimationem, sed existimationem cui veritas in reipsa respondear.
Chamier. t. 3. l. 21. c. 13. p. 886.
. This notwithstanding, I conceive it very unjust, to charge those that use it,
either with Swenchfeldianisme or Popery. But

Secondly, neither does it follow, that God should account that for
righteousness, which is no righteousness, though he should count Faith for
righteousness For any obedience, or action conformable to a righteous Law, or
rule, may truly (and often in Scripture, is) be called, righteousness. Then
stood up Phineas, and executed judgment, etc. and it was counted unto him for
righteousness, etc. Psalm. 106, 30. By righteousness in this place, cannot be
meant a conformity or obedience to the whole Law: one particular act, (as this
was) whatsoever it were, cannot bear the appellation of righteousness in such
a sense. Therefore it signifies only a conformity with some particular and
special precept or rule. See the word used much in a like sense, Genesis 30.33. 2
Cor. 9.9.10. Hebr. 11.33. etc.) Now then Faith, or believing, being a
subjection or obedience to a special commandment of God, (1 John 3.23. 2 Pet.
2.21. Romans 1.5, etc.) it may both with truth, and in sufficient propriety of
speech, be called, righteousness: yea the weakest or most imperfect believing,
look what degree of sincerity and truth there is in it, so far it may truly
be called and counted righteousness: yet by righteousness in that clause,
where God is said to impute the Faith of him that believes for righteousness,
Non hoc dicitur^ Deum apud se judicare illos, pro qu^um peocatis universis
Christus satisfocit, nihil mali unquam commisisse, aut boni debiti omisisse,
sed eodem haber^ loco, quoad mortu reatum, et jus ad vitam aeternum, acsi nihil
vel m^li ad misissent, vel boni deb^ti admisissent, Gat. Elench. p. 35.36. S^e
also my answer to Mr. Walker, p. 24. 25. etc.
I do not conceive is meant an act of obedience or conformity to any special
or particular precept of God. Therefore

Thirdly, when with the Scriptures we affirm, that God imputes or accounts
any man's Faith unto him for righteousness, we do not mean that God only
accounts such a believing for a righteous act unto him: much less do we
mean, that he esteems it a perfect, literal, and complete observation or
fulfilling of the whole Moral Law: but that which we mean, is this, that God
looks upon a man who truly believes, with as much grace and favor, and
intends to do as graciously and bountifully by him, as if he were a man of
perfect righteousness, and had entirely kept and fulfilled the whole Law. In
this sense to account Faith for righteousness, has not the least color or
appearance either of injustice or repugnancie with the truth. The Reader may
please to see the substance of this answer further opened and confirmed in the
former part of this Discourse, Cap. 19. Sect. 6 and 7.

Fourthly (and lastly) there is scarce any thing affirmed more frequently, or
familiarly by the best reformed writers, then that God esteems or accounts
those just, or perfectly just, who properly and in exactness and strictness
of speech are not such, but only have their sins forgiven. Therefore they
apprehended no matter of unjustice or contrariety unto truth in that, which
the objection impeacheth of both. From hence we gather (says Calvin In Romans
4.3.
) that Paul's dispute is, not what men are in themselves, sed quo loco Deus
ipsos censeat, that is, but in what place or condition God is pleased to
account them. And elsewhere De vera Lo^es. Refor, ratione. p. 368.
: It follows then that we are just or righteous, (and consequently may justly
and righteously be so accounted by God) quia nobis peccata non imputantur,
because our sins are not imputed to us. Therefore we stand just or righteous
before God (says Mr. Fox De Christo gratu Iustine. l 3. p. 280.
) because our sins are forgiven us. (We have Remission of sins (says
Melancthon In Exam. Theol. de Iustific. p. 529.
) for and through Christ: which having obtained, justi sumus coram Deo, we are
righteous before God. Paul (says Calvin) estimates the blessedness of a man
from hence, quia hoc modo justus est non reipsa, sed imputatione, that is
because he is after this manner righteous, not in very deed, but by imputation
And a little after going on, with his confutation of Osiander, he must grant
(says he) at least, that as far as that imputation of his extends, justos
conseri qui reipsa non sunt, that is, that they are accounted (meaning by God)
righteous, who yet are not righteous indeed. It were easy to wea^^e the Reader
over Instit. l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 11. Gratu^ta Dei acceptatio subrogatur in locum
justiciae. idem. Non magu ve, ritati, screutiae, justeque Dei judicio repugnat,
cos, pro quorum peccat^^ tam commissionus quam omnissionis satisfastio per
Christi mortem plenissime est prastita, tales judicare, qui nihil mali
commiserint, nihilque boni omiserent, quam eos perfect justos judicare, ut
pote qui perfectam legi obedientiam prassi teriut, cum id ipsi tame noutiquam
fecerint, pro quibus Christus tandem pr^stitisse perhibetur: Gatak. Elench.
Gomar. p. 35. vi: seqq.
and over with heaping up such expressions as these out of these and other
Authors of like Authentic Name with them. But the objection was (at least) as
much as answered before: therefore proceed we to do as much for another.

A second objection raised by some against the Imputation of Faith (in a proper
sense) for righteousness,

If Faith (in such a sense) should be imputed for righteousness, then should
justification be by works, or by somewhat in our selves. But the Scripture
every where rejects works, and all things in our selves from having any thing
to do in Justification. Ergo.

I answer to both propositions, and first to the major, by distinguishing the
consequent therein. That justification should be by works, or by somewhat in
our selves, may be understood two ways. Either 1o. by way of merit, so that by
works, should signify, by the merit of works, which is still the Scripture
sense; or else 2o. by way of simple performance. If the Proposition be taken in
the former sense, it is altogether false, and the consequence thereof denied.
Faith may be imputed for righteousness (in the sense often declared) and yet no
man justified by the merit of any work or works in himself. If it be taken in
the latter sense, so the minor Proposition is false (to touch upon this in the
second place) For the Scripture no where rejects every thing that may go
under the name of a work, or that may be said to be done by us, in respect of
a simple performance from having to do in the matter of justification. Nay it
expressly requires of us, and enjoyneth that as of absolute necessity to
justification, yea and attributes Justification to it from place to place,
which it self calls a work. This is the work of God (says our Savior to
the Jews) that ye believe in him whom he has sent. And when Paul exhorts the
Philippians to work out their salvation with fear and trembling, doubtless
he does not exclude their Faith or believing in Christ. Now that believing in
Christ is required as of absolute necessity as well to Justification as
salvation (at least of those that are adulti, and of years of discretion) is a
thing (I conceive) so well known and of that universal confession, that I may
forbear the citation of Scripturs without prejudice to the truth of it. Thus
our best and soundest writers, without scruple, call that believing by which we
are justified, a work, or the doing of something. Faith (says Calvin Fides
praec^puum opus est, quod a nobis Deus exigit. Calvin. in Iac. 1.22.
) is the chief work that God requires of us. And what did Abraham (says
Musculus Quid enim feeit Abraham, quod imputaretur, etc. Musc. in Gal. 3.6.
) that should be imputed for righteousness, but only believe God? The Reader
may please to see more to this purpose in my Answer to Mr. Walker, p. 67, etc.
So that the treasure of this objection is but coals also.

A third Objection is this. Justification not to be of grace, or of free grace,
Faith for righteousness, in the sense now contended for, makes Justification
not to be of Grace. Ergo.

Reverencing the innocence of the major Proposition, I come with a rod unto
the minor, Faith, in Justification. For by Grace ye are saved through Faith.
Ephesians. 2.8. And are freely justified by his Grace, etc. Romans 3.24. through
Faith in his blood, etc. ver. 25. Nay the truth is, that the work of believing
(as our Savior called it) is so far from carrying any opposition in it to
the freeness of Gods grace in Justification, that it is purposely required of
men (and it only) by him, that the freeness of his grace in their
Justification might take place and be established thereby. Romans 4.16. Therefore
it is by Faith, that it might be by Grace. And in reason, how can a gift be
conceived to be more freely given, then when nothing more is required of him to
who^ it is given then that he receives it? Now believing, is nothing else
(being interpreted) but a receiving, of that righteousness or Justification
which God gives in and with his Son Jesus Christ. As many as received him,
etc. Joh. 1.12. that is (as it is explained in the end of the verse) as many as
believed in his Name. So that in the imputation of Faith for righteousness (in
the sense so often explained) there is not the least appearance of any prejudice
at all to the freeness of grace in Justification. And thus we are fairly
delivered out of the hand of this objection also.

A fourth is this. Faith for righteousness in the sense claimed, ministers
this occasion of boasting unto the flesh. Ergo.

This syllogism also, as touching the matter of it, halts right down on the
minor proposition. For certain it is, that there is no occasion, nor (indeed)
color of occasion of boasting ministered to the flesh, by that opinion, which
maintains the imputation of Faith for righteousness in the sense avouched. For

First, suppose the work or act of believing, which is so imputed for
righteousness, be a man's own work or act (which is all the color that can be
pretended why the imputation of it for righteousness, should be an occasion of
boasting to the flesh) yet it is so by gift, and by the mere grace and
donation of another, viz. God. This the Apostle determines in express words.
Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through Faith: and that not of your selves:
it is the gift of God, that is, that Faith by which ye are saved is the gift
of God. See likewise Philip. 1.29. 1 Cor. 2.12. 1 Cor. 3.6. with many other
places of like importance. Now then, since a man has nothing, does nothing in
believing, but what he receives from another, all occasion or pretense of
boasting, is cut off by this, even according to the Apostles own rule and
reasoning. 1 Cor. 4.7. What have thou, that thou have not received? and if thou
have received it, why gloriest or boastest thou as though thou had not
received: evidently implying, that no man has any just cause or pretense of
boasting (I mean in, or of himself) for any thing, but only of that which he
has of his own, and from himself. Let the thing be never so glorious and
excellent, if he has received it, from another, he has cause only to boast
and glory in him from whom he has received it, but not at all in himself. If
God miracluosly should raise up Children unto Abraham of the stones of the
Earth, had these stones, being now made men, and men of the greatest worth and
excellency, any cause or pretense of glorying in themselves concerning that
dignity and honor which is now come upon them? No more has any flesh the
least cause or color of boasting in it self, how great or excellent soever
the act of Faith may be conceived to be, or how great and rich soever the
privileges may be which depend upon it, because it is given unto them by
another: it is the glory of the giver, and the comfort only or blessedness of
the receiver.

But Secondly, God should be pleased to impute it unto him for righteousness
in the sense we embrace. Because that weight of glory, those high and excellent
things which attend upon Faith, and are given to it, are not given to it for
any worth or dignity that is found in it (as we have heretofore clearly
demonstrated) but by the most free, gracious, and good pleasure of God. If a
King for taking a pin of a man's sleeve, should raise his House, and make him
honorable in the State, and give him thousands to maintain it, were it not a
ridiculous thing for such a man to go up and down and bragg of the pin of his
sleeve? Alas, for all this honor and greatness that he is come unto, he is
beholding to the grace and bounty of his Prince, and nothing at all to the pin
in his sleeve. He might have had twenty pins in his sleeve; and yet never have
bin worth twenty pence, had he not met with such a royal and magnificent
disposition in him that so rewarded him. This is the case of Faith, in respect
of those great things which depend upon it: though a Believer has the
forgiveness of sins, and the love and favor of God given him upon it, and
right and title to the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. yet all this is no ground or
pretense at all why any man should boast of himself or of his Faith, though it
were from himself (which yet we absolutely deny) because if this Faith had not
met with a God of infinite, grace, bounty and magnificence, we might have bin
miserable and accursed for all our Faith and believing whatsoever. Yea by the
Apostles own rule, when God is pleased to choose weak and foolish things to
confound the mighty, all occasion of boasting is cut off from the flesh. Indeed
if men had fulfilled the Law, and bin justified that way, there had bin some
pretense for boasting or glorying in themselves. First, because such a
righteousness had held some proportion (at least) with the reward that should
have bin given to it. Romans 4.4.
To him that works (says Paul) that is, that keeps the Law, the wages, or
reward is counted, not by favor, but of debt: God should have given them no
more, then what they had (at least in some sort) deserved. Secondly, because if
they had made out their happiness that way, they had done it out of
themselves, that is, out of the strength of those abilities which were
essential to their natures, and in the strictest and most proper sense that
can be spoken of, or applied to, a creature, their own. Both which being
apparently wanting in Faith, or in the Act of believing, there can be no color
or pretense of boasting for the flesh, though it be imputed by God for
righteousness, as has bin explained. So that this objection also vanishes
into nothing.

Fifthly, Faith be imputed unto us for righteousness, then are we justified by
that which is unperfect, and which it self needs a justification, for no man's
Faith is perfect in this life. But there is no justification to be looked for
before God by that which is unperfect, but only by that which is perfect, etc.
Ergo.

To the Major Proposition I answer, of it, then are we justified by that which
is unperfect, etc. These words may have a double sense or meaning; as either
that we are justified without the concurrence of any thing that is simply
perfect, to our justification: or that somewhat that is comparatively weak and
unperfect, may somewaies concur and contribute toward our Justification. If
the former sense be intended, the proposition is absolutely false, and the
consequence to be denied: it does not follow, If Faith be imputed for
righteousness in the sense given, then is there nothing that is perfect
required as necessary unto Justification, this inconsequence is notorious. Yea
the truth is, that the imputing of Faith for righteousness in the sense of the
discourse, presupposteth somewhat (if not more things then one) that is
absolutely perfect, as absolutely necessary unto Justification. Had not the Lord
Christ, who is perfect himself, even as perfect as perfection it self could
make him, made a perfect atonement for sin, there had bin no place for the
imputation of Faith for righteousness: yea there had bin no place so much as
for the being either of such a Faith, or of any righteousness or Justification
at all for men. For it is thorough the atonement made by Christ for us, that
either we believe in him, or in God through him: and it is through the same
atonement also, that God justifies us, upon our believing, that is, imputes
our Faith unto us for righteousness, in the sense argued.

If the said clause be meant in the latter sense, viz. that somewhat that is
weak and unperfect, may sometimes concur or conduce toward Justification, so
the Proposition is granted; but then the Minor goes to wreck. For Justification
before God may be expected and looked for, though that Faith whereby we
believe, yea and that Minister of the Gospel by whom we believe, be both weak
and unperfect, and yet both these (we know) are somewaies contributorie toward
Justification. Except ye believe that I am he, you shall die in your sins,
etc. (Joh. 8.24.) and consequently never be justified. We have believed in
Christ Jesus, that we might be justified, etc. Gal. 2.16. And that the Minister
of the Gospel, has (or at least may have) his part or hand in our
Justification, is evident, How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans 10.14. He that has
any influence into our Faith, or the working and raising that in the soul, is
somewaies isntrumental and helpful toward our Justification. But neither
does our Justification before God, depend upon the perfection of our Faith, but
upon the truth of it: neither does the truth of our Faith depend upon the
perfection of him, by whom we believe, but upon the truth of what he teaches
and delivers unto us for that end. So that the light of this truth shines on
every hand, that men may be justified, ministerially and instrumentally, by
things that are weak and unperfect. Therefore this objection also is no better
then his fellows.

Sixthly, righteousness in the sense expressed, then God should rather receive
a righteousness from us, then we from him, in our Justification. But God does
not receive a righteousness from us, but we from him, in Justification. Ergo.

I answer, that in this syllogism, imputation of Faith for righteousness,
which we defend, that God should either receive a righteousness from us, or
that we should receive none from him, in our Justification Because

First, Gods imputing Faith for righteousness unto us, in the sense which
hitherto we have aided, does no ways imply or import, that Faith is a
righteousness, properly so called, but only that God by the means thereof,
and upon the tender of it, looks upon us as righteous, yet not as made either
meritoriously, or formally righteous, by it, but as having fulfilled and
performed that condition or covenant, upon the fulfilling and performance
whereof, he has covenanted and promised, to make us righteous, meritoriously
by the death and sufferings of his own Son: formally, with the pardon and
remission of all our sins.

Secondly, Suppose such a position or inference as this, lay in the bowels of
what we hold, that Faith were a proper righteousness, yet neither would this
argue, that therefore God should receive a righteousness from us, in our
Justification. For we rather receive our Faith from God (as was laid down in
Answer to the fourth objection) for our Justification, then God from us, in
our Justification: though I grant, that in a sense a far off, and with much
ado, it may (happily) be made a truth, that God receives our Faith from us in
Justification. But

Thirdly (and lastly) that that imputation of Faith for righteousness which is
protected by us, supposes a righteousness given unto, and received by men
from God in Justification (and consequently, is far from denying it) is
evident from hence, because it could not be truly said, that God does impute
Faith for righteousness unto any man, exc^pt he should make him righteous upon
his believing. Now as it is impossible possible that a man should be made
righteous without a righteousness in one kind or other; so is it unpossible
also, that that righteousness, wherewith a man is made righteous in
Justification, should be given, or be derived upon him from any other, but from
God alone. For this righteousness (as has bin already proov'd at large) can
be none other, but forgiveness of sins: and who can forgive sins but God
alone? And by this time the fire of this objection also (I conceive) is turned
into smoke.

Some other exceptions (I confess) there are against this Imputation we hold
forth, Walker, now Printed by some (as it seems) at the unreasonable
importunity of my Antagonists Socinianisme Discovered, etc. which called for it
(and for 7 times more) with open mouth, and with multiplicitie of requests made
of forged cavillations and ragged raylings. But complaints (I consider) are
here but impertinencies. If the Reader please to set in about page 32 of that
Discourse, and read on, he shall find several objections more, such as they
are, against the Imputation in hand, attended with their Answers like madmen
with sober, for fear of doing harm. And as for those viperous and malignant
imputations rather then objections, of Socinianisme, Arminianisme, etc. against
the Doctrine mainteyned in this Discourse, they are fully and at large taken
off in that page 6.7, 8, 9, 10. etc.
: and the contrary opinion arrested upon strong and vehement suspicion of
confederacy indeed with the unclean Spirit of those errors. Yea it has bin
more then once in this Treatise affirmed, (and once at least, if not twice Part
1. ^c. 23. Part. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 8.
sufficiently proved, as well by evidence of reason, as by the Authority of
able, learned, and understanding men, that such an imputation of the Active
obedience of Christ, as Mr. Walker with some others maintain, and which has
bin impugned hitherto, does absolutely cancel and make void the necessity of
Christ's satisfaction by his death; which is the Spirit and soul or Socinian
Heresy. See the testimonies cited from Paraeus and Piscator, to this purpose,
cap. 2. Sect. 8. of this second Part, whereunto I shall here add a passage or
two from Mr. Gataker, in his little Tract against Gomarus. Be it granted (says
he page 7. Detur, h^ minem etiam paenu ex lege violata debit^^, non obnoxium
tantum, sed constrictum etiam, ad obedientiam nihilominus exhibendam teneri: ut
nullus dices, nec quod evincat qui^qua^ omnine comparet isthic, hominem qui
ebedientiam legi a^solutissiman pr^^st^^erit, etiam ad poenas de pendendas
nihilom^nus tenert. At qui hac ratione pugaant illi, quos tu impetu non fuisse
necesse, ut Christus, cum legem pro nobis ad extremum apicem obseruasset, ad
poenas insuper pro iisdem subeundas adigetur: ut ista, salte^ hac ratione,
supervacanes fuerint. Gatak. Elench. Gomor. p. 7.8. Si enim Christi obedientia,
qua^ Legi loco nostro Prastitit, nobis ad justitiam imputatur, imputationis
hujus^e beneficio justi plane constituimur: ac proinde sub legu maledectione
non su^us amplius co^stituti, nec propterea Christi. (...) redimi ab ea, quae
nos obnoxies non habet, opus habemus. Idem. p. 19. Si fideles, Christi
obedientia activa sibi a Deo imputata, perfect justi constituuntur, nihil
illis amplius opus est m^rte Christi, quam pro injustis, non pro justu ille
oppetebat. Idem. p. 37.
) that a man that is liable to punishment, yea and that actually lies under
punishment for the transgression of the Law, is notwithstanding still bound to
the keeping of the Law; yet surely you will not say, neither is there any thing
in what you write, which any ways proves, that that man, who perfectly
fulfills the Law, is yet bound to suffer punishment. And this is the plea of
those, whom you oppose, that there was no necessity, that Christ, having kept
the Law for us to the utmost jot and title thereof, should further be put upon
it to suffer punishment for us also: So that, in this respect at least, that
punishment or sufferings of his, must be superfluous and needless. Again,
afterward in the same Tract. p. 19. If the obedience of Christ, which he
performed to the Law in our stead, be imputed unto us for righteousness, we
must needs be made perfectly righteous, by the benefit of such an imputation,
and so we are no more under the curse of the Law: nor was there any need that
we should be redeemed from that, by the blood of Christ, which had no power
over us. Yet once more in the same Treatise, p. 37. he frames the argument of
those, with whom himself joins against Gomarus in the point in hand, after
this manner: If Believers are made perfectly righteous with the active
obedience of Christ imputed by God unto them, then have they no need at all of
the death of Christ for them; which death he suffered, not for the righteous,
but for the unrighteous.

So that if men were not partial in themselves, but would please so far to
dispense with their prejudice, as to judge righteous judgment between the
Doctrine laid down and defended in this Discourse, and that which opposes it,
it would clearly appear, that this were the right Horse to set the Saddle of
Socinianisme and Arminianisme upon, and not the other. And as the equity of
this decision touching the imputation, and non-imputation of Christ's active
obedience, fully appears by what has bin now and formerly said in this
discourse, imputation and non imputation of Faith in a proper sense, it
appears as fully also in those passages lately related unto, in that other
discourse mentioned. But howsoever we have abundantly vindicated the Doctrine
asserted in this Treatise, from all imputations either of Socinianisme,
Arminianisme, Popery, or the like: so that we need make no more bridles to put
into the lips of these unclean Spirits, yet give me leave to suggest this for
a close of this Chapter; that if every Doctrine, which either Socinians,
Arminians, or Papists, hold and maintain, should suffer the reproach and
infamy either of heresy, error or untruth, because they are found in their
writings, there are very few Doctrines in that Reformed Religion which we
profess, but will be found Matters of that calculation. Especially all those
fundamental Articles or Doctrines comprehended in that Breviate or Summarie of
Christian Religion, called the Apostles Creed which (as far as I understand)
is generally received and subscribed unto by all Reformed Churches without
exception, must lie under the ignominy, either of Socinianisme, Arminianisme,
Popery or the like; it being certain that there is none of them but is
professed and maintained by one or other, or by all of these stigmatique
Factions. So that it is the most ridiculous and trifling argument that can be
against an opinion, unworthy either men or learning, to make an out-crie
against it of Heresy, Blasphemy, Socinianisme, Arminianisme, Popery, and the
like, when in the mean time, men are able to produce nothing from the
Scriptures to purpose, nor yet to evince by any solid or substantial reason,
that it is so much as an untruth. Such passionate arguments as these may
(happily) ravish the simplicity and weakness of women and Children, and carry
away a great captivity of these, and indeed they are exactly calculated for the
meridian of their tempers: but men of understanding are little affected with
them, except it be, as they are arguments of the weakness and insufficiency
of those that so use them.

CAP. VII.
VVherin the chief grounds and Arguments for imputation of Christ's Active
obedience (in the sense hitherto opposed) are proposed and Answered.
IN the former part of this discourse, many things have bin debated and argued
(and somewhat also in this latter) against that imputation of Christ's active
obedience or righteousness, in Justification, which makes it either the
formal cause thereof, whether in whole or in part, or the right and title of
believers to eternal life. It now only remains, that we hear patiently, and
consider unpartially, and Answer distinctly those arguments and reasons, which
str^ngthen the hands of men of opposite judgment to us, to contend and plead
for it. Meet and equal it is, that men who plead reason, that is, any thing
that is like unto equity or truth, should either obtain the cause they plead
and be assented unto, or else receive a valuable consideration to the full in
their own coin, I mean in reason, by way of Answer. But inasmuch as some of
these arguments have bin already answered upon occasion in some former passages
of the Discourse, I presume I may so far entrust my Reader with the
concernments of the cause in hand (being in part his own) without danger, as
the accepting of Answers els-where given, in case they be sufficient, does
amount unto, only with reference without repetition.

The first argument for the imputation of Christ's righteousness in the sense
refused,

If there be no standing in judgment before God, unless we be endued with
perfect righteousness, then must the righteousness of Christ be imputed to
us, in our Justification.

But there is no standing for us in judgment before God, unless we be endu'd
and furnished with a perfect righteousness. Ergo.

I Answer by denying the consequence in the former proposition: God without a
perfect righteousness, and yet the righteousness of Christ (in the sense
controverted) not be imputed. The reason is, because remission of sins, which
is the purchase and procurement of the death and sufferings of Christ for us,
(as our Adversaries themselves acknowledge) is a perfect righteousness, and
every ways able to support and bear us out in judgment before God, as has
bin abundantly proved in the five first conclusions, laid down and proved in
the second Chapter of this latter part of the Discourse, p. 3, 4, etc. Yea and
our best Reformed Divines, find a sufficient strength of confidence for
believers in the presence of God, in the death and sufferings of Christ alone.
Calvin Instie. l. 2. c. 17. Sect. 9.
having mentioned that of the Apostle, Romans 3.24. etc Being justified freely by
his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, adds as follows:
Paul commends the grace of God in this, that he has given the price of our
redemption in the death of Christ: and then wills us to betake our selves
unto his blood, that so obteyning righteousness we may stand secure before the
judgment of God. And elsewhere Instit. l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 9.
interpreting that clause against Osiander, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him 2 Cor. 5.21. he first delivers himself thus,
Osiander here triumphs as if he descried the spectrum, or image of his
essential righteousness, when as the words sound quite another way, viz. that
we are righteous by the expiation or atonement made by Christ for us. And a
little after, somewhat more fully to our purpose, thus: sed hoc loco, etc. that
is, but in this place, readers that have but their wits about them, though I
should say nothing, cannot but acknowledge that nothing else is meant, quam nos
mortis Christi piaculo suffultos apud Dei tribunal stare, that is, then that we
stand at Gods judgment seat underpropt or borne up with the expiation or
atonement of Christ's death. If God will judge thee (said Anselme long before
him) say, Lord, Si Deus voluerit te judicare, dic, Domine, mortem Domini nostri
Jesus Christi obijcio ^nter (...) et te, et judicium tuum, al^ter tecum non
conte^do. Anselm.
I interpose the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and thee and thy
judgment, otherwise I strive not with thee. And Ambrose before him, to the
like effect, though not altogether so plainly: Gloriabor, non quia vacuus
peccati sum, etc. that is, I will glory, not that I am void of all sin, but
that my sins are forgiven. So that evident it is (as has bin formerly
signified) that a man needs not take care or thought for any other
righteousness in the presence of God, then only the forgiveness of his
sins, which he is confidently to expect in and through the death and
sufferings of Christ.

Again secondly, the Imputation we oppose,

He that is justified by the righteousness of another,

But every man that is justified, is justified by the righteousness of
another, and not by his own. Ergo. I Answer

First, righteousness of another and not his own, and yet no necessity of the
righteousness of Christ, that is, of his active obedience (for of this only
the question is) to be imputed unto him. The reason hereof is more then
manifest out of what has bin already delivered: viz. because the passive
obedience of Christ, is the righteousness of another, and men may be and are,
fully and thoroughly justified by the merit hereof communicated unto them in the
free pardon of their sins, without any further righteousness derived upon
them, either from him or from any other, in a way of imputation, or however. To
make this good, there needs nothing be added to what the Reader may please to
find in the 4th and fifth Conclusions premised in the second Chap. of this
latter part. Sect. 4. and 5. p. 567.

To the minor proposition, predicaeum, or latter clause of it. A man may be
said to be justified by the righteousness of another and not by his own, in a
double sense, either 1o, by way of merit, or 2o, by way of form. In the first
sense the proposition is admitted: whosoever is justified, is justified by the
righteousness of another and not by his own, that is, is justified by the
merit of the righteousness of another, and not by the merit of his own. But
this sense makes nothing to the point in hand. In the latter sense. it is
altogether untrue: for that righteousness, wherewith a man is formally
justified or made righteous, is always a man's own, I mean by donation and
possession, and not another, except only in respect either of procurement, and
so it is Christ's; or of collation, and so it is Gods. Remission of sins,
whereby a believer is formally justified (as has bin often said, and once at
least largely proved part 2. c. 4. Sect. 30, 31.32.33.
) is a man's own righteousness in such a sense, as his Repentance or Faith is
his own, being all given unto him by God or Christ. Him has God lift up with
his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance unto Israel,
and remission of sins. Act. 5.31. Now that which is given unto a man by God,
may truly and properly be called his own. There is no merit indeed in
remission of sins, but there is propriety in it to him that receives it.

A third Argument of Sovereign esteem (as I have perceived) with some,

Jf Believers have a true and real communion with Christ, then is his
righteousness theirs by imputation.

But certain it is, that Believers have a true and real communion with
Christ. Ergo. I Answer.

The Major proposition in this syllogism wants two things (at least) which a
good proposition should have, viz. reason, and truth. First, it wants truth,
because a true and real communion with Christ may stand, without his active
obedience being made theirs by imputation. They that please may see abundance
of truth in this, by those lights which we have already set up, partly chap.
10. Sect. 4. and 5 of the former part, partly again, chap. 2. Sect. 9 and 10.
of this second part. There is a real union and communion between the head and
the feet in the same natural body, yet is not the brain, or the proper
functions and operations of the head, made the brain, or functions of the feet
by imputation. So there is a real union and communion between the Husband and
the wife in marriage, yet is not the holiness, strength, or wisdom of the
Husband, made the holiness, strength, or wisdom of the wife, by imputation.

Again 2o, as it wants truth, so (that which is a want more worthy of blame)
it wants reason also. It has neither color nor appearance of truth in it,
that that union and communion which believers have with Christ, should of
necessity implie or draw after it, the appropriation of his active obedience
unto them by way of imputation; at least of such an imputation, as is the
golden apple for which our Adversaries in the present question, so eagerly
contend, that is, so that this obedience of his must become their formal
righteousness, either in whole, or in part, in justification. For what
possible ground of difference can there be found or assigned out of that union
and communion which interced's between Christ and the believer, why rather the
righteousness or active obedience, then the wisdom, or power, or glory of
Christ, should be made the Believers, by imputation?

A Fourth Foundation or ground upon which I find the imputation of Christ's
righteousness (as aforesaid) built by some,

If there be no other end, reason, or necessity, why Christ should fulfill the
Law, but only that his obedience thereunto might be imputed unto us for
righteousness in our justification, then is not the imputation thereof to be
denied.

But no other end, reason or necessity can be given, why Christ should fulfill
the Law, but only that his obedience unto it might be imputed for
righteousness unto those that believe, in their Justification. Ergo.

To this latter proposition I answer, Christ's obedience to the Law, and that
which is there assigned, is but supposititious, and inconsistent with the
truth. If the former of these be demonstrated, viz. that there are other ends
and reasons, and those very considerable, why Christ should fulfill the Law,
the proposition is disabled and broken in judgment; as for the latter, that
the imputation of Christ's fulfilling the Law for righteousness unto those that
believe, is but an imaginary and meerely-presumed end of his fulfilling it, it
has bin (in effect) the grand conclusion argued and established throughout the
Discourse.

First therefore, one reason or end of Christ's obedience to the Law, might be,
to procure the greater authority and deeper reverence to the Doctrine which he
taught, whilst he yet conversed with men on Earth. It is said, Mat. 7.28, that
the people were astonished at his Doctrine, because he taught, as one having
authority, and not as the Scribes. Some make this the ground of the
difference, because Christ did to the uttermost what he taught, which the
Scribes did not, and therefore were more obnoxious to neglect and contempt in
their teaching. But however it is a truth of general acknowledgment, and not
necessary now to be argued, that the holiness, uprightness, and
unblameablenesse of the life's of the teachers, have a powerful influence into
the consciences of men, to render them more observant, and and awful in their
attention to the things which are taught by them, yea and to make those the
more inexcuseable, that shall despise their teaching. Let these and the like
Scriptures be laid together, and considered of to this purpose, Mat. 21.32.
Ioh. 5.35. Ioh. 8.46. 1 Timothy 4.12. 2 Timothy 3.14. etc.

Secondly, righteousness or active obedience of christ unto the law, was
serviceable to that same great end, whereunto our righteousness and our
obedience (such as they are) are subservient also, viz. the glory of god, and
the advancement of his kingdom. being filled with the fruits of
righteousness (says paul) which are by jesus christ unto the glory and praise
of god. phil. 1.11. if other men's righteousnesnes come to be well conditioned
and so sanctified (as it were) by the means of jesus christ, that they are
hereby made fit matter for the praise and glory of god: much more must it needs
be conceived, that his own personal righteousness partakes abundantly of the
same condition, and makes for the exaltation of god, far above the line and
measure of other men. his own words, ioh. 8.49. fully understood, import no
less. jesus answered, I have not a devil, but I honor my father, and ye
dishonor me. and again, ioh. 7.18. he that seeks his glory that sent him
(speaking of himself in respect of god his father) the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him. wherein, or how, or by what means did christ
honor his father, or seek his glory, that is, labor and endeavor to procure
glory to him from the world? doubtless by a full and faithful discharge of
all things that he required of him, as well in that general and common Law of
his (which we call Moral) whereunto all other men are debtors of obedience,
as well as he; as like wise in that peculiar Law of Mediation, which was
imposed upon himself alone. In respect of his absolute, entire, and
uncontrollable obedience and condescension (or ascension rather, if you will)
to both these Laws, he is (I conceive) styled Heb. 1.3. (...), that is, the
resplendencie or brightness of his Fathers glory, that is, a perfect means of
discovering and making known unto the world, how excellent and glorious above
measure God is in holiness, righteousness, goodness, wisdom, truth, mercy,
etc. and that he is so light, or such a light, in whom there is no darkness at
all. 1 John 1.5. And in this sense, the light of the knowledge of God is said
to be given (by the ministers of the Gospel) in the face of Jesus Christ. 2
Cor. 4.6. meaning, that those who truly and effectually preach Jesus Christ
unto men, and hold him forth in all the glory and excellency of all that he
both did and suffered in the world, as they are left upon record by the Holy
Ghost in the Gospel, do with one and the same labor certify and inform the
world, what manner of essence and being, in respect of h^linesse, grace, love,
sweetness, mercy, goodness, bounty, etc. the true God is, with whom they have
to do. All these excellencies being apparently extant and visible, and that in
the full transcendencie and height of their several perfections, in that
obedience which Christ exhibited in the flesh unto God, it cannot with any
color or pretense of reason be imagined, but that that God from whom he came
forth, and whose servant he was in all this great administration, and from
whom he must of necessity receive and be furnished with all that strength and
power of grace, whereby he was enabled to do all these great things, must needs
be a God supereminently glorious in all the same and like perfections. So that
we see here is another end (and that of maine consequence) of the active
obedience of Christ, besides imputation.

Thirdly, righteousness of Christ we speak of, is the exemplarinesse of it:
it is the pattern in the Mount for all Adams posterity to work by. It is
true, the Law it self is as absolute and perfect a rule or pattern of
righteousness, as the conformity or obedience of Christ himself to it, is,
but it is not so plain and distinct a rule in some cases, as the obedience of
Christ to it. And therefore the Holy Ghost sometimes briefly mentioning the
letter or rule of the Law, makes use of the exemplarinesse of the obedience of
Christ as it were, to illustrate and interpret it. And walk in love, even as
Christ has lovedus, and has given himself for us, etc. Ephesians. 5.2. with many
the like.

Fourthly, the entire obedience and subjection of Christ to the Moral Law, is
of excellent importance, and has a Spirit of provocation in it, to draw all
the world after it in imitation of it: it is a tempting righteousneste, or an
holy, strong and blessed temptation to the world to work righteousness, the
force and power whereof, no man can withstand, but with an high hand of
desperate wickedness, and to the deep shame and reproach of his person. This
end likewise is often mentioned or insinuated in the Scriptures. Take my yoke
upon you, and learn of me (says our Savior himself Mat. 11.29.) for I am
meek and lowly in heart, etc. implying, that there was in his meekness, not
only a pattern or example to follow, but a provocation also to make them
willing and desirous to follow. See Ephesians. 5.24.25. 1 Pet. 4.1. with many
others.

Fifthly, the righteousness of Christ now under consideration, was a means of
continuing his person in the love and complacencie of his Father: which was a
thing of absolute necessit^e for the carrying through and accomplishing that
great worse of Redemption, which he had undertaken. For if the mediator
himself, upon whose favor and interest with God, the favor, peace, and
salvation of the whole world depended, should have but once miscarried and
displeased him, who should have mediated for him, or made an atonement or
reconciliation for him? If salt has lost the savor, there is nothing to season
it again withal, because all things are to be seasoned by it. This end of his
obedience and subjection to his Father, himself plainly expresses, Joh.
15.10. If ye keep my commandments, you shall abide in my love: even as I
have kept my Fathers commandments, and abide in his love. See also Joh. 8.29.

Sixthly, that righteousness of Christ we speak of, Christ had personal
union: yet was the absolute holiness and righteousness of the humanity it
self, of neces^ary concurrence also thereunto, and that in two respects.
First, there is no capacity in any part or parcel of the humane nature of
personal union with the Divine, except it be absolutely free from all touch
and tincture and spot of sin: otherwise this proposition might be verified,
that God is sinful; a sound which neither the ears nor consciences of men are
able to bear. That God should die, though it be a conclusion, which to reason
not yet taught or principled from above, may seem of the same hardness and
inconsistencie with the other, yet we know it is become not only familiar and
of easy admittance, but of very precious and sweet importance, in the School
of Christianity. But that God should finne, is a saying of a greater offense
and abhorring to reason proselyted and made Christian, then to reason yet only
it self, and no more. Secondly, suppose (for argument sake) a possibility of
that which is unpossible, that the Divine nature might be hypostatically or
personally united to an humanity tainted with sin, yet could it not give an
infiniteness of expiatory value or acceptance thereunto for others, in case it
were offered or made a sacrifice by it. The reason is, because such an offering
or sacrifice were of absolute necessity for the expiation of its own sin,
or at least it should be due, and the justice of God might lawfully require it
in such a way. For no relation whatsoever of any creature to the Divine nature
it self, or to any person subsisting therein, be it never so near and
intimate, is able to dissolve or make void any right or power which is
essential to God, as the right of requiring a full satisfaction for sin is,
wheresoever, or in what creature soever he finds it. Now then whatsoever God
either does or (in justice) may require of any man, to make satisfaction for
his own sin, unpossible it is, that with the payment or tender thereof, he
should make satisfaction for the sins of others, as it is unpossible in a
course of Law and Civil Justice, that a man by paying his own debt, should
thereby discharge another man's. The High Priest under the Law, did not make
at^onement for himself, and for the people, with one and the same sacrifice;
but (says the Scripture) he offered sacrifice first for his own sins, and
then (needing no further atonement himself) for the people. Heb. 7.27. So
then evident it is, that howsoever the infiniteness of the merit and
satisfactorinesse of the death and sufferings of Christ has its resultance and
rise from the Divine nature; yet could no such merit or satisfactorinesse have
taken place in respect of others, had not Christ as man, or his humane nature
wherein he suffered, bin perfectly righteous, and free from all sin, that so
he might stand in no need at all himself of that sacrifice which himself
offered of himself. Dying righteous and being God, his death holds out weight
and worth, merit and satisfaction for the whole world; whereas had he died a
sinner in the least degree, though his death by reason of the Godhead
personally united to that created nature, wherein in such a case he were
supposed to suffer, had bin of infinite value and satisfaction (for otherwise
it could not have bin expiatorie for himself, there being every whit as much
required for the attoning of one man's sin, as is for the sin of the whole
world) yet had the infiniteness of this satisfaction extended only to himself,
and to the purging of his own sin, and not so much as to one other. In so
much that in this case, had he meant to have propitiated for the world, after
he had once died and overcame death for himself, he must have returned again
into the infirmity of the flesh, and have suffered death the second time. Upon
this consideration doubtless it is, that the Holy Ghost, tendering the
satisfaction and peace of the consciences of believers, touching the fullness
and unquestionablenesse of their redemption and salvation by the death of
Christ, still inserteth the mention of his perfect righteousness, when he
speaks of his death or sufferings for them. By his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities, that is,
the punishment due to their iniquities. Esa 53.11. manifestly implying, that
there is a great weight and moment in the righteousness of Christ's person, to
assure or secure the consciences of men concerning their justification by his
death. You may please at leisure to peruse and compare these Scriptures
further, being all (with many more) of the same consideration. 2 Cor. 5.21.
Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 1.19. 1 Pet. 2.22. 23.24, etc. Thus then we have at least
discovered another great end of the righteousness or active obedience of
Christ, viz: the qualification of his person (at least in part) for that
meritoriousnesse of his death which may stand the world in stead for their
justification. So that there is no necessity at all of having recourse to the
pretended imputation, for salving the necessity or usefulness of it.

By what we have reasoned in this last passage, it appears how little
substance of truth there is in that which some much insist upon, viz. that the
bare union of the Godhead with the flesh or humane nature of Christ, did
sufficiently qualify it for a sacrifice (they mean for a sacrifice of that
same expiatorie value and virtue, which now it is) so that in this respect (at
least) there could be no necessity or use of his fu^fi^^ing the Law.
Doubtless the men of this affirmation either do not consider the necessity of
that personal integrity in Christ, which we lately demonstrated, and which
the Scriptures from place to place insinuate: or else they conceive that Christ
man, might have bin righteous without doing the works of righteousness, that
is, without keeping the Law, which is all one, as if they should say, he might
have bin righteous, though he had transgressed. For not to keep the Law in
those to whom the Law is given, is nothing else but to transgress. If they
think to relieve themselves with this interpretation of their notion, that if
Christ had suffered in the first hour or instant of his incarnation, or
immediately after the personal union of the two natures, his sacrifice had bin
of equal value, merit, and satisfaction, with what now it is, and yet in this
case, he had not fulfilled or kept the Law: I answer that this interpretation
is every whit as unfound and inconsistent with reason, as the text it self. For

First, let this supposition be admitted, that Christ might have suffered in
the Womb, and that this suffering of his had bin as fully satisfactorie for the
world, as those sufferings are, which he has now endured; yet had he bin as
perfectly righteous in this case, and consequently had observed and kept the
Law as perfectly, as now he has done. For the Law requires of Infants during
their Infancy, nothing but integrity and holiness of nature, which
doubtless the Lord Christ had from the first moment of his conception: and a
child or infant thus qualified I mean with holiness and integrity of nature,
keeps the Law as perfectly and exactly, as a man living to 30 or 40 years of
age should do, in case he never tra^sgrest. But

Secondly, righteousness of Christ's life, or his obedience to the Moral Law,
to be of absolute necessity for the qualification of his person for a meet
sacrifice, our meaning is not, that there was an absolute necessity that he
should have kept the Law upon the same terms every ways which now he has
done, as that he should perform the same individual acts of obedience, or the
same number of acts, in case he had bin called to the suffering of death any
whit sooner, then now he was: but that, until the very hour and instant
wherein he should suffer, whether it were sooner or later, he should in all
things submit himself unto the good will and pleasure of God concerning him
as well in that general Law which requires obedience of all men besides (which
we call Moral) as in that particular and special Law of Mediator, which was
given unto and imposed upon himself alone. Such an indefinite righteousness
as this we judge, and have (I suppose) unanswerably proved, to have bin simply
necessary in Christ, for the raising of that sacrifice of himself, to that
height of acceptance in the behalf of others, which now it has found at the
hand of God. But however, suppose this necessity or use of the righteousness
of Christ could not be sufficiently cleared, yet since there are many others of
undeniable evidence, the position so much contended for, viz. that the Godhead
of Christ sufficiently qualified him for such a sacrifice as he was, makes
nothing at all for the imputation of his righteousness, in the sense
pretended. Therefore we shall not trouble either our selves or our Reader any
further with untying an impertinent knot. But

Seventhly, Christ was a sacrifice, so was he, and yet is, and is to be for
ever ( Heb. 7.17. etc. ^a Priest, also, or an High Priest: and that
righteousness of his we speak of, qualifieth him, that is, contributeth
toward his qualification for Priesthood, as well as it did for sacrifice. If
he had not been perfectly righteous, and consequently fulfilled the Moral Law,
a^ well as any other Law, which concerned him, he had bin incapable of that
great place or dignity of Priesthood, which now he executes, to the great
benefit and blessing of the world. This is evident from that Scripture, Heb.
7.26, 27. For such an High ^riest it became us to have, who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, etc. meaning that no Priest
whatsoever without these qualifications, could have stood us in that great
stead, had bin sit to intercede with God for us, as Christ now does.

Eighthly (and lastly) that holy pleasure, and contentment which Christ himself
took in those works of righteousness, wherein he address himself to God
his Father by obedience to his Law, may well be looked upon, as one
considerable end or use, of this obedience of his. My meat is (says himself.
Ioh. 4.34) to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work Christ
was inwardly and secretly refreshed and satisfied, with every act or work of
righteousness which he wrought, as generally men are by acting and working out
of such principles as are connaturall and pleasing to them. It is joy to the
just to do judgment (says Solomon, Prove. 21.15.) Then the people rejoiced,
when they offered willingly, etc. 1 Chr. 29.9. Especially the Lord Christ being
full of grace and of the Spirit of holiness, and withal knowing perfectly,
and thoroughly apprehending the full excellency and beauty of all
righteousness and subjection unto God, could not but take and taste very high
and excellent contentments in all that he did in such a way. So that were there
no other end, use, or necessity of that righteousness of Christ, about which
we now reason, but only his own personal satisfaction and contentment in the
working it, this is abundantly sufficient to salve the the usefulness and
necessity of it. How many things are done even by wise men, with no relation
to any further end, but only their own pleasure, satisfaction and contentment
in doing them? Therefore the Argument last propounded to establish the
imputation of Christ's righteousness (in the sense supposed) viz. the
uselesnesse of it otherwise, is weaker then its fellows, though neither have
these cause to boast of much strength.

A fifth argument employed in the same service,

If we be debtors unto the Law, and that not only in matter of punishment,
deserved by our disobedience to it, but in perfection of obedience also, then
did Christ not only suffer death for us, that we might be delivered from the
punishment or curse due unto our sins, but also fulfilled the Law for us,
that so we may be reputed to have fulfilled the Law in him, or by the
imputation of his fulfilling the Law unto us; otherwise the Law should yet
remain to be fulfilled by us.

But we are debtors unto the Law, not only in matter of punishment for our
transgression, but in perfection of obedience also: otherwise our sinning
against the Law, should exempt and privilege us from subjection to the Law.
Ergo.

A short Answer (I conceive) may do sufficient execution upon a long argument.
homonymia, or ambiguitie of expression. For when it affirmoth, that we are
debtors to the Law in perfection of obedience, as well as in matter of
punishment; as this debt of obedience may be variously interpreted and
understood, the proposition may either be true, or false. If this be the
meaning, that we that are believers, are debtors unto the Law in perfection of
obedience, for our justification, it is utterly false. For we have no need to
depend upon it, or any obedience to it, for our justification in the sight of
God, but are fully and freely justified by Christ's blood. To. 5.9. Neither are
such debtors to it so much as in matter of punishment, Christ having cased
their shoulder of this burden, by taking it upon his own. It is true, those
that believe not in Christ, may in this sense be said to be debtors to the Law,
as well in matter of perfect obedience, as of punishment; that if they mean to
be justified, and to escape the punishment, and condemnation under which they
lie, otherwise then by Christ, they must keep the whole Law, because no third
way of justification from punishment due to the transgression of the Law, was
ever heard of, nor is imaginable, but either by Faith in Christ, or by a
personal obstervation of the whole Law. And in this sense the Apostle ( Gal.
5.3.) testifies to every man that is circumcised) viz. with reserence to his
justification (...) God:) this he is bound to keep the whole Law, as well as
to be circumcised: I because he that sticks not wholly and entirely unto
Christ for justification, must of necessity keep and observe the whole Law
even every jot and tittle of it, and not some part or parts of it only, to
obtain justification with God. But

Secondly, If the proposition means, that believers are debtors of perfect
obedience to the Law, in a way of sanctification and thankfulness unto God for
that unspeakable grace of Justification and forgiveness of sins by Christ,
so it is, and has bin formerly acknowledged for a truth cap. 3. Sect. 10. of
this second Part. But in this sense it concerns not the question in hand.

Thirdly, we are not therefore exempted or privileged from fulfilling or
keeping the Law, no not in respect of Justification it self, because we have
transgressed it: but 1o, having once transgressed, we are utterly incapable of
such an observation or keeping it, whether personally or by imputation, which
may amount to a Justification or exemption from punishment. 2o, that relaxation
or release which we have from an observation of, or dependence upon the Law for
Justification, accrueth unto us by means of our dependence upon Christ for
Justification thorough his death, and suffering the curse of the Law for us,
Romans 7.4. For

Fourthly, God never required of any man, but only of Christ, both exactness
of obedience to the Law, and subjection to punishment due to the transgression
of the Law, conjunction, but divisim only. He that shall perfectly keep the
Law, is no where threatened, or bound to suffer the penalty due to the
transgression of the La^^ nay, the very express renor of the Law, promises
exemption or freedom from punishment unto such: Dee this, and thou shall live.
The Law does not make any man a debtor in respect of punishment, simply and
absolutely, but conditionally only, and upon supposition of sin.

Fi^^ly and lastly, In case a man has transgressed the Law, and has undergone
and suffered (when there by himself or some other for him) the full punishment
or penalty threatened in the Law, he is no further a debtor unto the Law,
neither in point of obedience, nor of punishment, nor has any thing to doc
with the Law more or less, for his Justification (as has bin said) because
the punishment which has bin so suffered (either by him or for him) is of
indisser^^t and equal consideration to the Law, with the most absolute
conformity that could have bin held with the precepts and injunctions of it. So
that as no man is or ever was, or can be bound to fulfill the Law twice over,
for his Justification, or to make him righteous: So neither is it equal or
reasonable to conceive, that he, that has suffered in full the penalty of the
Law, which suffering is every ways as satisfactorie to the Law, as the
exactest obedience to all things contained in it, and of one and the same
consideration with it (as has bin said) should be still bound to the
observation of the Law (whether by himself, or any other for him) for his
Justification, this being all one, as the requiring of a double or second
obedience unto the Law, after a man has perfectly fulfilled it once. This for
answer to this Argument.

Sixthly, Christ's active obedience (in the sense disparaged) some have made
trial of this: If there be no Justification without a perfect righteousness,
and no such righteousness to be found, but the righteousness of Christ
performed to the Law, then of necessity this righteousness must be conceived
to be imputed to us, in Justification.

But neither can there be any Justification without a perfect righteousness,
nor any such righteousness found, but only the righteousness of Christ
performed to the Law. Ergo.



Intending to have nothing to do with the innocence of the major, I address
my self to the minor,

First, that however true it be, that Justification cannot take place without a
perfect righteousness, being nothing else but the making of a man perfectly
righteous, yet such a righteousness, as the Sons of this argument intend, a
righteousness consisting determ^nitely of such a number or tale of righteous
acts as Christ performed unto the Moral Law, is not of any absolute necessity
thereunto. For if the Jews under the Law were justified by the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, this right usnesse of his is not to be limited or
measured by the righteous acts performed by him only to the moral Law; but to
the Ceremonial also, See cap. 18. Sect. 3. of the first pa t, etc.
as has bin formerly observed and proved more then once:

Secondly, righteousness (take righteousness in their own notion and sense)
to be found, but only the righteousness of Christ. We have heretofore showed,
that there is a righteousness in the Law, as absolute and complete, as the
righteousness of Christ it self: and that it is much more probable of the
two, that if God imputes a legal righteousness unto men in Justification,
that he furnishes them this way out of the Law it self for Christ's sake then
that he should impute the righteousness of Christ unto them. See cap. 2. Sect.
5. and c. 5. sect. 9. of this second Part. But

Thirdly (and lastly) that perfect righteousness wherein Justification
consists, and wherewith men are made formally righteous when they are
justified, is nothing else but remission of sins, as has bin abundantly
proved both in the second and fourth Chapters of this latter part of the
Discourse. This forgiveness of sins is that righteousness, which the
Scripture calls a righteousness without works Romans 4. ver. 6 and 7. compared
together. And which Augustine, ips^ nostra justitia quamvi^ vera sit propter
very bonifine^ ad quam refertur, tamen tanta est in hac vita, ut potius
peccatorum remissione constet, qua^ perfecticne virtutum. Aug. de Civit. l. 19.
c. 27.
Haymo Quia credidit Deo, reputatum est ei ad justitiam, id est, ad remissianem
peccatorum. Haym. ad Romans 4.3.
, Bernard Dei justitia est, non peccare: hominis autem justitia, Dei
indulgentia. Bernaidus. Sermon. 23 in Cantic. Christus factus est nobu justitia,
in absblutione peccatorum. Ibid. Sermon. 22.
, with others of former times, as likewise Luther Iustitiane stra, proprie est
remissio peccatorum, se^ (ue loquitur Psalmus) peccata non imputare, etc.
Luther. in Summa. Ps. 32
, Calvin Sequitur ergo eo nos esse justos, quia nob is peceata non imputantuy.
Calv de vera Eccles. Reform. ratione. p. 368.
, Musculus Iucundum est quod justitia et beatitudo nostra est remissio
peccatorum, per fidem in Christum. Muscu. in Psalm. 32. p. 298. Quid enim est
justum esse, et reputari in peccatu conceptum et natu^, quam peccatu esse
liberum? ibid.
, Pareus Sic Deus Abrahae et omnibus nobu peccatoribus fidem. imputat pro
justitia, quando credentes in fillium justificat hoc. est, absolvir, etc. Pal
cus ad Romans 2.3. p. 363. Fide accepit justitiam, sen remisslonem peccatorum a
Deo gratis donatam, etc. ibid.
, Chamier Remissio peccatorum; est Iustitia imputata Cham. Panstrat. t. 3 l.
21. c. 19. Sect. 10. Iidem justitie proram et pupp im constituionut in remiss^
^^peccato; um. ibid. Sect. 9.
, withothers more of satter times without number, yea and the Homilies of our
own Church Because all men are sinners and offender, against God; etc. every
man of necessity is constrained to seek for another righteousness or
justification, to be received at Gods own hands, that is to say, the
forgiveness of his sins and trespasses in such things as he has offended.
Homil. of salvation, part 1. p. 13. Iustitia Christi, est absolntio a peccatu
per Christum ex side, Pet. Mart. ad ^om. 10.8. Credimus totam nostram justitiam
positam esse in peccatorum nostrorum Remissione etc. Harm. Confess. Gallic.
art. 13.
have still with confidence and without scruple, called by the Name of a
righteousness. See cap. 5. Sect. 5. of the first part. and cap. 4. Sect. 28.
of this latter part. And because some, who have a great mind to make Calvin of
theirs, in the imputation of Christ's active obedience, will needs have all
those passages in him (which are very many) wherein he places justification or
righteousness in Rem ssion of sins alone, to be meant only in way of
opposition to that Popish opinion, which together with remission of sins
coupleth infusion of grace to make up the formal cause of justification, as if
by the word only, or alone, he meant to shut out this infusion of grace only,
and not the active obedience of Christ imputed; I shall by a passage or two
from him in the point, clear his intention in such expressions, and fully
manifest how importune, and at open defiance with the truth, any such
interpretation of his mind and meaning must needs be. In which words (says
Calvin, meaning those of the Apostle Romans 4.6. in his commentaries upon the
place) we are taught, justitiam, Paulo nihil esse quam remissionem peccatorum,
that is, that righteousness with Paul, is nothing else but remission of
sins. And not long after upon the 9th. verse of the same Chapter; So iustitia
Abrahae est peccatorum remissio (quod secure ipsepro confesso assumit etc.)
that is, If Abraham's righteousness be the forgiveness of his sins (which
he, meaning Paul without any further care or thought about it, takes for
granted, etc. By these passages it is evident, that whatsoever his own mind or
judgment was in the point now under question, viz. whether remission of sins
simply and alone, without any other addition whatsoever, were the
righteousness of a Believer in justification, he attributes the affirmative
unto Paul, and makes his opinion and judgment to stand, for Remission of
sins simply, excluding not the infusion of grace only, but all other things
whatsoever. Except (happily) men (Gyant-like) will attempt to set Pelion upon
Ossa, heap presumption upon presumption, and say, that Paul likewise expressed
himself in the Point, only by way of opposition to the Popish opinion
concerning grace infused, and had no intent to be understood simply, that
Remission of sins was a Believers righteousness. Otherwise, for Calvin to
ascribe one opinion unto Paul in the point of justification, and to be himself
of another, is neither better nor worse, then to profess himself wiser then
he in the business, yea then the Holy Ghost himself speaking by him. Which
horrid blasphemy those men unadvisedly bring upon the head of this holy and
faithful servant of God, who labor to make him of a quite differing judgment
himself (especially in so weighty a point as justification is) from that which
he acknowledges to be the judgment of so great and glorious an Apostle, as
Paul was. I might add a third passage, (yea and three more to that) of his (ex
abundanti) of the same importance (and perhaps somewhat more pregnant)
Therefore Paul (says he Merit Paulus fidei justitiam in peccatorums
ormissiene simpliciter includit, docevs earn a Davide describi, cum beatum
heminem pronunciat, cui non imputantur peccata Calvin. De vera. Ecales. Res.
ratione. p. 368.
does well, simply to include the righteousness of Faith in Remission of
sins, teaching us that David so describes it, when he pronounces the man
happy, whose sins are not imputed unto him. Whether Calvin himself did
simply and absolutely, and not with limitation and restraint, place the
righteousness of Faith in remission of sins, or no, most unanswerably
undeniable it is, that he conceived Paul so to do.

Nor is there any reasonable ground or cause (to add a word of this in the
close of this Answer) why men should be so averse or shie as some are,
righteonsness, yea as a perfect and complete righteousness; since it is
equivalent unto, and vertually conteynes and comprehends in it, the most
absolute and entire obedience unto the Law and will of God, as has bin already
fully demonstrated, cap. 2. Sect. 4. of this second Part, where also the
authority and confent of Augustine in this behalf was produced, who plainly
affirms, Omnia mandata facta deputantur, quonde quiequid non fit, ignoscitur.
Ang. Retract. l. 2. c. 19.
that all the commandments (of God) are reputed to be kept or done, when
whatsoever is not done, is forgiven. Again ^o, it may well, and in sufficient
propriety of speech, bear the nature of a righteonsnesse, (vea and that
perfect and complete) because it has all those great and high privileges
annexed to it and depending upon it, (which a righteousness most literally and
strictly so called, could have) as the love, favor, acceptance and approbation
of God, yea life and salvation themselves. It has bin elsewhere (as I
remember) observed in this discourse, that the names of things are very usually
enterchanged in Scripture, upon occasion of a similituda or liken^sse of use or
offect between them. John Baptist is called by the name of ^liah. because he
was servicenble unto God and his cause after the same manner and with the same
spirit that Eliah was. So Peter and John were counted Pillars. Gal. 2.9.
because they were conceived to stand the Church of Christ in some such stead,
as Pillars do the house that is supported by them. So Christ himself (to omit
other instances in this kind without number) is called Bread, a Vine, a Door,
a Way, a Root, a Branch, the morning Star, etc. because in something or
other he resembles the nature or use, or both, of all these things. In like
manner Remission of sins though it had not the nature or essence of a perfect
righteousness in it, may yet be called a perfect righteousness, because it is
of the same consideration, benefit and use unto the creature, with a perfect
righteousness indeed. But enough for this argument. I hope it will be from
henceforth contented, and complain no more for want of satisfaction.

A seventh argument which is likewise laid hold on by some as a Shield and
Buckler to defend the imputation assailed,

If Do this, and live, be an everlasting rule of God, and which shall never be
dissolved, cancelled, or grown out of date, then must the active obedience of
Christ be imputed unto men in justification, that so they may be said to have
done this, that is, to have fulfilled the Law, and so live.

But Do this and live, it an everlasting rule of God, which shall never be
dissolved, etc. Ergo.

I answer, that all the strength of this argument, lies in the hollownesse of
those words, (take them out of which proposition you please) is an everlasting
rule, etc. In this sense I grant, that do this and live, is an everlasting
rule: it is, and has bin, and shall be everlastingly true, that whosoever
shall do this, that is, fulfill the Law perfectly, shall live and enjoy the
favor of God etc. But this sense makes nothing to the purpose, neither is there
so much as the face of a consequence in the major, if it be taken: whosoever
continues in all things that are written in the Law to do them, shall live and
be saved, whether Christ's righteousness be imputed unto them, or not, But if
the meaning of the clause be, is an everlasting rule, that is, is the only
perpetual and standing rule or Law, whereby, and according to which men must
be justified and so saved, so that no man can be justified, but he only that
may truly be said to have done this, that is, performed an universal obedience
to all the precepts, to every jot and tittle of the Law; in this sense (I say)
it neither is, nor ever was, nor ever shall be a rule of God, nor a rule of
truth. For God has always had, and for ever will have, Repugnantia legis et
fidei est i^ causa justificationis: facilius enim aquam igni copulabis, quam
haec duo concilis es, homines lego et side esse justos. Calvin. in Gal. 3.12.
another Law or rule for the Justification of men, besides, Do this and live,
even that Law or rule which is still in Scripture opposed to this, Believe this
and live. Compare Romans 3.27. with Romans 10.5.6. etc. See likewise cap. 4. of the
first part of this discourse, throughout, together with the Answer given to
the Scripture, Gal. 3.10. in cap. 5. of this second part. These passages
perused and considered, will perfectly allay all the heat and burning of this
Argument.

Another foundation to build the imputation counter-argued upon, is laid by
some after this manner.

That righteousness which God accepts on our behalf, as the righteousness
imputed to us in Justification.

But the righteousness of Christ, is that righteousness which God accepts
on our behalf. Ergo

I answer briefly, 1o, by denying the Major, 2o, denial to the Major, is,
because God may and does accept that for us, or on our behalf, which yet he
need not (in the sense contended for in this Treatise) impute to us. God
accepted Abraham's prayer on the behalf of Ismael, and yet did not impute this
prayer to Ismael himself, as if he had prayed it. In like manner he accepted
the prayer of Elisha for the Shunamites Son, and yet did not look upon the
child as if he had made it for himself. It is true in these and many other
cases of like consideration which might be added, the persons prayed for by
others, received benefit by the prayers that were made for them, but there is
no color of reason to conceive, that God must necessarily look upon such
prayers, as if they had bin made by the persons themselves, for whom they were
made, and who were profited by them: It is like they had the greater
acceptance with God, and prevailed more on the behalf of those for whom they
were made, because they were made by others for them, (especially by persons of
such grace and interest with God as they were, who did make them) then if they
had bin made by themselves. In like manner, those on whose behalf Christ's
sufferings were accepted, receive an unspeakable blessing and benefit by them:
but this operates nothing toward such an inference or conclusion as this, that
therefore God must look upon these sufferings of Christ, as if they had
personally endured them, on whose behalf they are accepted (which is the
imputation principally opposed in this Treatise) nay such a supposition or
imputation as this, rather tends to destroy or prejudice their acceptance,
then any ways to further it. The sufferings of Christ (doubtless) have the
height of their acceptance with God on the behalf of those that believe,
because they are looked upon by him as the sufferings of himself, I mean of
Christ, and of no other.

Again 2o, to the minor, I answer likewise by Distinction. If by the
righteousness of Christ, the proposition means, precisely that obedience
which he exhibited to that general and common Law, whereunto all other men are
obliged, considered apart from his obedience to that peculiar Law of Mediator,
given to himself alone, so it is altogether false. For God did not accept this
righteousness of Christ on our behalf, so, or upon such terms as to justify
us, either with it, or for it, as has bin ten times said, and often enough
proved already. If by this righteousness, be meant that obedience of Christ,
commonly known by the name of Passive, or both Active and Passive together, so
this proposition may be granted: but then the other will be found tar die, as
has bin showed, unless we make four terms in the syllogism instead of
three, by taking the same words in one sense in the Major, and in another sense
in the Minor; and then it is no longer a syllogism, but a Paralogisme. So that
neither can this argument do any thing. Therefore let us further try the
strength of those that are yet behind.

Some conceive that the imputation of Christ's righteousness (in the sense
taken and left) may be firmly established upon the publiquenesle of his person,

If Christ were a public person, standing in the place or stead of all those
that should believe in him, then all that he did, and all that he suffered, are
to be looked upon, and are reputed by God as done and suffered by these, and
consequently are imputed to them.

But Christ was a public Person, standing in the place and stead of all that
should believe in him. Ergo.

In this argument, Christ's person, or his standing in the place of those that
should believe, is no sufficient ground to build this inference upon; therefore
all that he did, and all that he suffered, are looked upon by God., as done or
suffered by them. This is evident: his conception, incarnation, birth,
circumcision, subjection to Joseph his supposed Father, his apposing the
Doctors in the Temple, his whipping the buyers and sellers out of the Temple,
his Redemption of the world, with other particulars more of like consideration
without number, were all, either things done, or suffered by him: yet are they
not looked upon by God as done, or suffered by all those that believe in him.
For to what purpose (for example) should I, being a believing Gentile, and so
not only free from the Yoke of Jewish Ceremonies, but further, under command
not to use them, be looked upon by God as one circumcised? so what can it in
reason advantage me, to be looked upon by God, as one who in Christ, was in
subjection unto Joseph? especially how shall I not fear and tremble, to take
the least hold of such a conceit, that God should look upon me, as having
redeemed the world, which yet was one of the greatest acts that Christ did?
Therefore this proposition is no Oracle. Princes and Magistrates are public
persons: yet God forbid that all that they do, should be looked upon by God,
as done by all those that are in subjection under them. Adam was as public a
person (yea and more public, in a sense) then Christ himself; yea and is
conceived by the most, to have stood as much in the place or stead of his
posterity, as Christ did in the stead of his, I mean of those that were-to
descend Spiritually from him by Faith: (though for my self, I had rather
demurre, then join issue in this) And yet how ridiculous is it on the one
hand, and of dangerous consequence on the other, to suppose that all that Adam
did, and all that very possibly he might have done, either may, or might have
bin so imputed to all his posterity, as if they had done it? Of what advantage
or concernment can it be unto me, that God should look upon me, as one that
gave Names to all Cattle, and to the fowls of Heaven, and to every Beast of
the Field, which yet Adam did? Genesis 2.20. Or as upon one, that first propagated
mankind, and begat Cain, which we know were done by Adam? with twenty things
more of like nature. In case he had stood, and continued in his righteousness,
the publiquenesse of his person had bin no ways touched, nor impaired hereby:
and yet is it of very doubtful importance, to conceive, that all that
righteousness which Adam in this case had wrought, should have bin looked upon
as the righteousness of all his posterity, and imputed to them for their
Justification; For from hence it would follow, 10, that all his posterity
should have bin saved, 20, that they should all have bin sinlesse: which are
two principal regions of terra incognita: 30, (and lastly) that they should
all have bin justified by a double righteousness, one personal and wrought by
themselves, another imputative, wrought by another: and so (in this respect at
least) should have bin better provided for their justification, then those that
are now justified by Christ.

Secondly, it has bin formerly demonstrated, See cap. 2. Sect. 14. of this
second Part.
or with the manner of Scripture expression, to say, that the sufferings of
Christ, are by God looked upon as our sufferings, or to conceive that we should
suffer in him. It is not all one to say (says Doctor Willet) we are punished
in Christ, and Christ was punished for us, and in our stead: this is warranted
by the Scripture, Esa 53.6. But the other cannot be affirmed, for seeing in
Christ's death we have remission of our sins, we cannot be said for the same
sins, to be punished in and with Christ, whereof we have remission in his
death. Comment. on Dan. 9. Qu. 25. p. 289.

Thirdly, the publiquenesse of a person, who negotiates the business and
affairs of others, as Christ did of those that shall believe in him, does no
further, or any otherwise interesse those whose affairs they manage, in what
they do, in, or about such a transaction, but only with reference to the issue
and success of what they do for them, in that behalf. If a man undertakes the
ordering and issuing of such a business for me, and deals dishonestly or
unconscionably with others therein, and at last makes a conclusion with much
damage and disadvantage to me, which might be a wise and saire carriage of
things on my behalf, have bin prevented; I am in this case liable to suffer
all the detriment and damage, which the unconscionablenesse, or weakness of my
Agent has brought upon me: but I am not to be looked upon, as one that have
used the same unconscionablenesse with him, or as if his weakness were mine.
Or in case he had dealt wisely or faithfully for me, and had brought my
business to a good end or issue; I here receive benefit and good by such a
man's wisdom and faithfulness: but these are not ascribed orimputed unto me,
as mine own, because he was my Agent that used them. The Client that prevails
against his adversary before the Judge, by the skill of his Advocate or Lawyer,
is not therefore reputed as skillful in the Law, as his Advocate, nor to have
pleaded his own cause as substantially and effectually, as his Lawyer did. In
like manner, as far as Adam had a Commission or power from God to deal for
me, or in my affairs, being one of his posterity, I am bound to undergo and
suffer my share in that evil or misery which he brought upon the world,
through his weakness or unfaithfulness in that transaction: but this
weakness or unfaithfulness of his as a Commissioner for me, is not looked
upon as my personal weakness or unfaithfulness; only so far as my person
was in his, they are ascribed and imputed unto me as mine own. See for this
cap. 2. Sect. 11. of this second part. So again on the other hand, as far as
Christ had a power from God to deal for me, and in mine affairs, being one
that believe in him, I have my part and portion in that blessed end and issue
whereunto by his holiness, wisdom, faithfulness and patience he brought the
affairs of the world entrusted in his had: but God does never the more look
upon me, as if that holiness, wisdom, faithfulness and patience, had bin
mine, nor is it any ways necessary that he should, to make me capable of that
which falls to my share as I am a believer, in that great and blessed
transaction of Christ.

Fourthly and lastly (to part with this argument also upon such terms, Christ
stood in the place or stead of those that should believe in him, especially in
all things performed by him, and which tended to the qualification of his
person, for the accomplishing of that great work of Redemption. To stand in the
place or stead of another, implies a necessity of his being in the same place,
and doing the same things himself wherein he stands, and which he does, who is
supposed to stand in his stead, unless they had bin done by this other for
him. Now Christ did a thousand things, yea and suffered many, for the doing and
suffering whereof, there lay no personal necessity upon many Believers,
whether Christ had done or suffered them, or no. As for example, there was no
necessity, either in way of duty, or of penalty, lying upon any Believer, one
or other, to be conceived or borne of a virgin, to turn water into wine, to
command the winds and the Seas, to ordain Apostles, or the like. Again there
was no necessity lying upon any believing Gentile to have bin circumcised, to
have bin in subjection unto Joseph, to have eaten the Passover at Jerusalem,
etc. Therefore in all these Passages of his life, with many others, it is full
evident that he stood not in the place or stead of all Believers, All that the
Scripture speaks in this case is, that he suffered for us, was made a curse
for us, etc. which expressions, though they imply indeed (in the general) a
necessity of our sufferings, unless Christ had suffered for us, yet do they
not imply a necessity of our sufferings in the same kind, or after the same
manner, in all particulars. It does not follow, that except Christ had bin
circumcised, we must have bin circumcised, except he had fasted 40 days we
must have fasted 40. except he had bin scourged with rods, or crucified on a
Cross, we must of necessity have bin scourged or crucified: only it follows,
that except Christ had suffered either in these or some other particulars, as
satisfactorie to divine wisdom and justice as these, we must have suffered,
and that most grievously. Therefore it is not every ways so square a truth,
that Christ, even in his sufferings themselves particularly considered, stood
in our stead. But the Scriptures which often say, that Christ suffered for us,
died for as, etc. never say, that either he kept the Moral or Ceremonial Law,
nor any part of either for us; though this expression may be admitted, without
granting that he did these in our stead. See cap. 3. Sect. 11. of this second
part. And thus we see that this argument also is defective on every side.

Another, If we cannot be justified by the righteousness of Christ otherwise
then by the imputation of it, then must it needs be imputed unto us, in our
justification.

But there is no way of being Justified by the righteousness of Christ, but
only by the imputation of it unto us. Ergo.



I answer in few words to the latter proposition, righteousness, that is, the
active obedience of Christ could have no other influence into Justification,
but in that way of imputation, which has hitherto bin gainsaid, either
Justification must stand without it, or else fall. For certame it is, that no
such imputation can stand, as has bin proved by three demonstrations and by
four, and by many more added to them, in the first part of this Discourse. But
the weakness of the Proposition is sufficiently evinced from hence, because
that righteousness of Christ mentioned in it, concurr's toward Justification,
by qualifying his person for that sacrifice of himself, by which Justification
or remission of sins, has bin purchased for all those that believe, as has
bin opened at large in an answer to a former argument.

The quiver of our Adversaries is well nigh exhaust, and almost empty, by this
I scarce know two arguments more really differing from those already produced,
that will well hold the Answering. The best of those which yet remain, I
conceive is this.

If we may truly be said to be dead, and crucified with Christ, Christ, to have
risen again with Christ, to sit in heavenly places in, or with Christ, etc.
then may we be truly said to have fulfilled the Law with Christ also, (for
there is no reason why any difference should be made in this case) and
consequently the fulfilling of the Law by Christ is imputed to us, and
accounted ours.

But we may truly be said to be dead, and crucified, and quickened, and raised
again and to sit with Christ in Heavenly places, the Scripture affirming all
this. Ergo.

My Answer to this argument is a Protestation against the consequence of the
major Proposition, Christ, etc. in a Scripture serise, ha^^^^o such conclusion
or inference as this in their bowels, therefore we have fulfilled the Moral
Law with Christ also^: or if we could be said to have fulfilled this Law with
Christ, our own fulfilling it in him, should rather be said to be imputed to
us, Cap. 2. Sect. 11. of this second Part.
then his fulfilling it for us, (as we formerly reasoned concerning the
imputation of Adams sin) But the reason of the difference, viz. why we may be
said (in the Scripture sense) to be dead, and risen again with Christ etc. and
yet cannot be said to have fulfilled the Law with Christ (in the sense
demanded) is this. When the Scripture says, we are dead, we are crucified, we
are quickened or risen again with Christ, etc. the meaning is not, that God
looks upon us, as if we had laid down our natural lives by death, when he
laid down his, and as if this la^ing down ourlives, were a fatisfaction to his
justice for our sin: for then we might as well be said to have satisfied for
our selves, or to have redeemed our selves with Christ, as to have died, or bin
crucified with him: such expressions as these only import, either a profession
of such a death in us, which holds proportion, and has a spiritual kind of
resemblance and likeness with the death of Christ, which is usually called a
death or dying unto sin, and to the world, Romans 6.5. or else, this death it
self really effected and wrought in us by that death of Christ, being
therefore called, the communion or fellowship of his sufferings, as well as a
conformity to his death. Phil. 3.10. You have the expression used in the
former sense, Romans 6.^. How shall we, that are dead to sin, (that is, who
profess a being dead unto sin with Christ) live yet therein; and so be a
reproach to our Profession? In the latter sense, it is found, Gal. 2.20. I am
crucified with Christ, that is, the natural death of Christ for for m^ an^
many more, has wrought upon me in a way of assimilation to it self, and has
made me a dead man to the world. So when Believers are said to be quickened or
risen again with Christ, the meaning is not, that God looks upon them as
quickened from a natural or corporal death, to a natural or glorified life
and condition, as Christ quickening and rising again was; which yet must be
the meaning, if any thing be made of it, to strengthen the proposition now
under assault: but the clear meaning of such expressions is, either to
signify the profession that is made by us of that newness of life, which in
way of a spiritual analogy and likeness answers that life whereunto Christ
was quickened and rose again from the death Romans 6.5. or else the new life it
self, raised and wrought in us, by that quickening and rising again of Christ
from the dead. In the former sense, you shall find one of them used Colos.
3.1. Jf ye be risen with Christ, that is, since you make profession of that new
and excellent life, which answers the life which Christ lived upon, and after
his resurrection, give this account and evidence of it unto the world, seek
the things that are above, etc. In the latter sense, you may find the other
Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with
Christ, meaning that GOD by the quickening and raising of Christ from the dead,
had begotten them (as Peter speaks) to such a life, which spiritually
answers that quickening and rising again of Christ. But on the other hand,
as there is no such expression in Scripture as this, we have fulfilled the Law
with Christ: so neither if there were, would it make any thing at all to salve
the truth of the proposition under question, if the sense and meaning of it
were carried according to the line of the interpretation of those other
expressions mentioned. For what if we should be said either to profess such a
fulfilling of the Law, which holds a spiritual analogy or proportion with
Christ's fulfilling the Law, or really and personally to fulfill the Law after
such a manner: were there any thing in this to infer an imputation of Christ's
personal fulfilling the Law, in the letter and formalitie thereof unto us?
Doubtless Christ's quickening and rising again, are not in the letter and
formalitie of them imputed unto the Saints for their quickening and rising
again, in the same manner: if they were, Hymeneus and Philetus had bin no
Heretics, for teaching that the resurrection was past already. 2 Timothy 2.18.
Therefore neither is there any thing in this reason, more then in its fellows,
to repair the breaches that have bin made upon that imputation, which with
them it seeks to fortify.

We have but one encounter more,

Whosoever is a sinner, and so continues, whilst he lives, cannet be justified
otherwise then by the imputation of Christ's righteousness.

But every man (Christ excepted) is a sinner, and so continues whilst he
lives. Therefore no man can be justified but by the imputation of Christ's
righteousness.

An answer to this, and an end:

I repeat therefore, rather then add (in reference to the former Proposition)
that if there be no other way or means for the justifying of a sinner, then by
the imputation of Christ's righteousness (in the sense so often sentenced)
doubtless the condition of the whole world is miserable and help-lesse: there
is no way or door of life yet opened unto sinners. For imputation of this
righteousness upon such terms there is none; as has bin largly proved, and
(if I be not mistaken) beyond all reasonable denial, throughout the body of
this discourse. But blessed be the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort,
who without the key of such an imputation, has opened an effectual door of
Justification unto poor sinners, yea even unto those, who are like to be no
better then sinners, whilst they live in the world; however this justification
coming upon them, makes them the best and happiest of sinners in that kind.
Those that truly believe in Jesus Christ, being not under the Law, but under
grace, are not liable to condemnation, for the things they commit daily against
the Law. If any man sin (as we ast do, whilst we live) we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our
sins 1 J^n. 2.1.2. So that for the dissolving and taking away all the gur^t,
danger and inconveniences of the ^inu^s of believers in every kind, there
needs no imputation of the active obedience of Christ, the propitiation which
he is unto them by his blood and interc^ision, has done this service for them
to the uttermost, before this imputation is supposed to come at them. And
doubtless it is no more to the justification of a sinner, then the Midwifes
were to the deliver^e of those Hebrew women, who were fully and safely
delivered before the Midwifes came at them. Que apud Dominum propitiatio est,
nisi sacrisicicium^ et quod est sacri ficium, nisi quod pro no^is oblatum est
in morte Christi? Aug.
Exodus 1. What propitiation (says Augustine) is there with the Lord, but
sacrifice? and what sacrifice is there, but that which was offered for us in
the death of Christ? Nor are we to think that the fullness of the merit of the
death of Christ, is so exhaust and spent upon the purchase of the parden and
forgiveness of our sins, that it will not hold out to procure our
acceptance also with God. Yes, by the redundancie of this merit (says Mr.
Reynolds The life of Christ. p. 402.
) after satisfaction made thereby unto his Fathers justice for our debt, there
is further a purchase made of grace, and glory, and all good things in our
behalf. Yea Adoption it self, and the acceptance of our persons, and
admittance into the high favor of God to be made heirs of selvation, spring
all from one and the same most precious and fruitful root of the blood of
Christ, the perfect holiness of his person, and righteousness of his life
presupposed (as has bin said.) So that he that has communion in the fullness
of his death, shall not know what to do with the imputation of the
righteousness of his life after it, were it made unto him, or conferred upon
him. But enough (if not more then enough) of this heretofore.

Thus have we at last overcome and fully answered all those arguments and
pie^^^ which (to my knowledge) have yet bin insisted upon, and cons^^ed in by
an^, for the up-bearing of th^^^utation (...) Christ's righteousness, in the
sense (...) contradicted in the discourse, viz. in the letter and formality of
it, or as the formal cause (whether in whole or in part) of Justification. If
any man of con^^ary judgment and yet unsatisfied, will vouchsase in a spirit of
meekness and love, either to di^^^^ the insufficiency and weakness of any
of there Answers (in case he conceives them insufficient and weak) or else
further to object, what he conceives to be of greater weight and importance,
then the arguments already answered, I shall willingly and unpartially consider
of either. And if in either I shall find any thing of pregnant and solid
conviction, and above answer, I shall soon turn Proselyte, and be glad to be
so delivered of an error. I had much rather be employed in cancelling and
desacing mine own errors, then other men's: and desire to make it my daily
trade and occupation, to exchange darkness for light, crooked things for
straight, errors for truths. The Lord by his Spirit lead us into the way of all
truth, and keep us that we turn not aside, either to the right hand or to the
lest, that so we may be soundly built up in our most holy Faith, and be
prepared hereby for his everlasting Kingdom.

FINIS.

