GOOD NEWS From the Assembly in Scotland, now sitting in consultation,
concerning their Ecclesiastical Government in the CHURCH.

Exhibited to this Parliament in England, concerning this present Reformation
in England, with their hearty desires this ensuing Treatise may be forthwith
enacted; for the satisfaction of all good Subjects, here or elsewhere.

From Edinburgh, August 4. 1642 Au^st 10th

IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's device, a framed fleur-de-lis with a plain
background

London printed for J. W. 1642.

DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM device consisting of an open book with a sword,
scepter, and surrounding motto
Good News from the Assembly in Scotland, now sitting in consultation,
concerning their Ecclesiastical Government.
THe Confession of Faith, and Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland, in doctrine,
discipline, and worship, so far as the Reformers did conceive and understand
were regulated by the word of God, and grounded upon Scripture, as is
acknowledged by the Harmony of Confessions of the Reformed Kirks, and by the
testimony of the best and most eminent Divines, which have been in the Kirk of
England, or in the Reformed Kirks at that time, and to this day, amidst the
greatest desolation, notwithstanding the ambition and usurpation of Prelates,
no other Ministers and Office-bearers have been acknowledged, or received by
the Reformed Kirk of Scotland, but Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, with
Deacons. These being warranted with Scripture, and being sufficient for all the
necessary uses of the Kirk of Scotland; yet so, that the Prince and Civil
Magistrate, hold his own eminent place and Civil Power, for the consolation
and purgation of Religion.

No man here were, were he never so wise and pious above others, or does he
never so much abrogate authority unto himself, has the reins of Kirk
government in his hands, to dispose or do what seems good in his own eyes;
but all matters are advised and determined by Common Consent in the Conventions
and Assemblies of the Kirk; which Assemblies were of four sorts and degrees,
commonly designed by the names of Kirk-Sessions, or Consistories, Presbyteries,
Provincial Synods, and General, or National Assemblies.

The Kirk-Sessions, or Consistory, do consist of one Minister at least,
approved for his learning, life, and skill in government; and of Elders, men of
best knowledge, and holiest of life in the parish, so many in number as the
proportion of the Congregation does require, who are chosen with the consent of
the people, and in the presence of the people solemnly admitted to their
charge: These convene weekly for orderin^ ^uch matters of the worship of God,
as are proper for that parish; as what days of the week are me^^est for
assembling to the public worship, or catec^^zing, and what hours in the Lords
day, before noone and after^oone, are sit for the exercise of that d^y
(...) what times the Communion shall be given, for consulting of Delinquents in
swearing, curling, profanation of the Lords day, drunkenness, fornication: And
for dilating greater offenses, such as heresy, superstition, adultery, if any
be suspected: if there be any scandal within their bounds, that all
Trangressours may be brought to repentance, or separated from the people of
God, according to the Ordinances of Christ, and order of the Kirk. Here also
the Deacons are present, to receive direction in their duty.

Presbytery or Classical meeting does consist of particular Kirks, in such a
circuit 12, 16, or 20. Or so many, as by conveniencie of the place, can weekly
assemble here, one elder of each parish appointed by the particular
Kirk-Session, and the whole Ministers of these, do meet where the Ministers
and others be admitted to the Ministry, whom we call expectance, exercise
their gifts by course in public, the exercised or prophecy being ended, the
Minister and Elders sit down, and after prayer and censure of the Doctrine,
they use the power of Jurisdiction, Ordination, Suspensation, Deprivation,
Visitation of Kirks, trials of the projects of Excommunication, deduced by the
particular elderships and of direction to the Ministers of the parish, to
excommunicate if need be. Here the Scandalous faults of Ministers in Doctrine
or life, are declared, and all persons of whatsoever quality disobedient to
their own Ministers and Elders, are with great authority censured, Provincial
Synods do consist of the whole Presbyteryes, shires, or provinces, so that the
whole Kingdom is divided into Shires or Provinces in relation to those Synods.
Here all the Ministers and one Elder from every parish do meet twice in the
year, and after preaching and calling upon the name of God by the Moderators
of the preceding Synod: a new Moderator being chosen, they try the
Presbyteries by their Records, presented by the Clerk of every Presbytery what
was obscure or difficult for the Presbyteries, or might concern them all in
common, is determined and ordained, and if any difficulty do arise which does
not fall under some Kirk constitution, it is referred to the National
Assembly: all matters are with such deligence, expedited that each Minister
may return to his charge on the Lords day.

In the general or national assembly, the Kings Majesty in person, or
Commissioner in his place uses to be present, who convene once in the year or
oftener, pro re nata.

It does consist of Ministers and Elders from each Presbytery and regal
Borough.

After solemn Humiliation the first day of the Assembly, one of the Ministers
is chosen by the voices of the whole Assembly to moderate and precide in that
Assembly.

The records of the Synod, are perused and tried, Acts and constitutions of
all the Churches, and agreed upon with common consent, and all men's doubts and
scruples concerning them, are satisfied to the full. If they be propounded
Animo edificandi non tentandi, Appellations, Grievances, Petitions and
Complaints, are examined and determined by this supreme and highest Kirks
Iudicatory, and some Commissioners chosen to present grievances or Petitions
agreed upon in the Assembly to the Parliament, the King, the Council of the
Kingdom, or convention of the Estates.

In this authority subordination of Sessions, Presbyteryes, provincial Synodes
and national Assemblies do consist, the Order, Beauty, the strength of the
Kirks of Scotland, comfortable to the Godly, both pastors and professors,
terrible as an Army with Banners to Papists, be their places never so high, to
all Heretics, Schismatics, hirelings and all ungodly men.

No scandalous fault of any person escapes Censure.

No heresy or errors can sooner be hatched, but it is presently crushed by
some of those inferior Assemblies, or if it be kept on foot, or take strength,
it is quite suppressed by the national Assembly convening once in a year,
which has been a main cause why so few sects and errors in Doctrine and
Worship have appeared in the Kirk of Scots for many years, and wheresoever
those Assemblies have place and liberty, the names of Heresies and Sects have
not almost been heard of.

In these particular Assemblies, the particular Heretics are not governed by
the extrinsecall power of any one or many set over them, as in the Monarchical
government of prelates, but they are ruled and judged by themselves, and their
own intrinsecall power, each member by the whole body in one orderly way. None
of the whole communion of the faithful being barred from the joint and common
government by those Assemblies, the gifts, the knowledge and zeal of all the
members, especially of the Ministers, and stirred up, quickened and
strengthened, and holy emulation is excited by acquaintance, conference, and by
perceiving the gifts one of another. And the best gifts are known for planting
of Kirks and Colleges: whence it is that Ministers return from those
Assemblies ashamed and humbled in themselves, and furnished with fresh
resolutions for every pastoral duty for the common benefit and edification of
all the Kirks.

FJNIS.

