Good News from SOVTH-HAMPTON, AND BASINGSTOKE, in Hampshire. As it was
related in a Letter from thence by one Master Goter, to a Merchant of good
quality, in Lumbardstreet. With the Copy of a Letter sent by Captain Swanly,
Captain of one of the Kings Ships, to the Major and Communalty of the said
Town. As also another Letter to the same Merchant from Basingstoke, relating
the passages there.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bates, and are to be sold at his shop in the Old
Bailey. 1642.

December. 9. 1642.
Sir,
MY service unto you remembered; we received yours, and the things by the Post:
It is true that you heard of our Town. Captain Swanly, Captain of one of the
Kings ships, on Saturday last sent a letter to our Town, the copy of which, I
have here enclosed; whereupon our Major summoned all the inhabitants to appear
at our Councel-house on Monday, where the Captains letter was read diverse
times, whereupon a letter was returned to him how that they would obey the
Parliament, yet every man underwrit it not: it was thought that Swanly would
have come up the River with his ships, and bear the Town about our ears: This
day one of our Parliament men an Alderman of our Town, with diverse of our
Townsmen, are gone to the Committee at Portsmouth, to make their peace with
them; this stir need not have been, but that our Major, and some of the
richer sort that are counted for malignants, for most of our Commoners held
fast for the Parliament.

Thus having no more at present, I take my leave, and rest yours to serve,

John Goter.

Captain Swanlies Letter to the Town of Southampton.
Mr. Major, and the rest of your Corporation,
YOu well know in what distractions this Kingdom is in now, and is at this
time. I am placed here by authority of Parliament, for the peace of that part
of the Kingdom, which I shall endeavor to maintain as far as my ability of
life and fortune may extend: your Town is a confiderable place of
Merchandising, and by reason thereof, there are men amongst you of very good
fortune and estates, to preserve their estates and so in general through the
Kingdom with their Religion and liberties, is the only aim of the
Parliament; and no question those that shall oppose either of these, are unfit
to enjoy either, but to be branded with baseness: there are diverse reports in
the Country of your forwardness in opposing the Parliament; but I hope you
wish your own peace herein better then so, if you should not, there can
nothing befall you but ruin and destruction; to know the truth of this, I have
sent my letter unto you, as likewise whether you will submit your selves
obedient to the commands of Parliament, and consequently to the directions and
commands of the governor of Portsmouth, and the Committee there authorized by
both Houses of Parliament: for the peace of this part of this Kingdom, I have
seized on Cashot Castle, and disabled Saint Andrews Castle, and Nutly Castle;
I have seized also upon all the boats of Hieth and thereabouts, I have given
order to stop all provisions from coming out of the Isle of Wight unto you,
all which I have done by the commands of the Committee of Portsmouth; I have
also authority to summon you, and that Town to your obedience, to the grand
Council of England; to which I desire answer, and if no answer, I shall take
it as a denial; then if unhappy things befall, thank your selves, for I shall
to my uttermost endeavor and power bring you thereunto.

I pray you let this letter be known to all the Commoners as to your selves:
thus expecting an answer by this messenger, I rest

Yours, as you use your selves, Richard Swanly.
December. 3. 1642.
Basingstoke this tenth of December, 1642.
Sir,
HEre lay my Lord Grandisons troop of Horse, and Colonel Greyes Dragooners
eleven days: we had imploiment enough to dress the meat, and provide drink
for them, but last Friday they went away, and as we heard, are gone to
Marlborough, and many say they heard the Guns go off very fiercely.

The KING was expected to be in this Town this day: here were many Gentlemen
came thirty miles to meet him, but returned presently, hearing the contrary.
It has been a great charge to our Town; they demanded two thousand yards of
woollen cloth, and five hundred yards of linen, at fourteen pence the yard;
so the linen Drapers brought theirs in, but the Clothiers, and woollen Drapers
made no great haste, so they served themselves some at one shop, and a greater
quantity at another.

If you see master Lamy, tell him he saved his purse in going away, but they
made bold with his house, he may come down safely now, and see what is done:
pray God send peace, or else I see what will come to this Land quickly. I hope
you at London desire peace, as well as we, though perhaps you are not so much
in danger as we are, yet enough, I believe you are not quite out of it: and
thus with my love I rest yours,

H. W.

FINIS.

