STABLISHING AGAINST SHAKING: OR, A Discovery of the Prince of Darkness
(scarcely) transformed into an Angel of Light, powerfully now working in the
deluded people called, QUAKERS:

WITH A sober Answer to their railings against Ministers for receiving
maintenance from their people.

Being the substance of one SERMON preached Feb. 17. 1655. at Shalford in Essex.

BY GILES FIRMIN (Pastor of the Church there) upon occasion of the Quakers
troubling those parts.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nathanael Webb, and William Grantham, at the
black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard near the little North-dore. 1656.

To the Worshipful DVDLEY TEMPLER Esquire. Justice of the Peace in ESSEX.
SIR,
I Should be very ungrateful, now this Sermon comes to be read, if I should
forget you, without whose assistance it had scarce been Twice I was
interrupted, as I was preaching.
heard. I wished much for your presence, though I did not request it: but what
I feared your self apprehended, and seasonably coming in, stopped those mouths
by your Civil power, which neither reason, nor the solemnity of the Ordinance
would have silenced: had you been an Anabaptist, an enemy to the Ministry and
Learning (as some have unjustly reported) you might have spared this care: if
this act will not clear you, let my pen answer for you; (for I think no
Minister has more inward acquaintance with you than my self) I never heard
him so much as question his own Baptism, but I have heard him disapprove of
persons for being Rebaptized, and two of his Children my self have baptized;
how then is he an Anabaptist: When a Minister was nominated to succeed his
deceased Pastor, because it was told him, that he was a Minister that would
admit Tradesmen into his Pulpit, he told me he should never come there; and for
Learning, such an enemy he is unto it, that I have heard him say, Take away
Learning, and England becomes a dunghill: This I am sure, be a Minister
Classical, or Congregationall, so he be learned, able, and godly, holding to
the old sound Divinity, he makes no difference, but can embrace both, beteaming
them not only amaintenance, but an honorable maintenance. How then men will
prove their reports, I know not, unless thus, He is a Soldier; Ergo: but it
is easily answered, Non sequitur, unless this Proposition be true, All
Soldiers are Anabaptists and enemies to the Ministry, etc. which I am sure is
false of some, though true of too many. Go on then, good Sir, let not these
reports trouble you (though I know they have done) God will in time clear up
your innocence more by your actions than by my pen, and give his Church as much
cause to bless him for your faithfulness to it, as the Commonwealth has
cause to bless him, for the unbyassed integrity, and painful diligence, which
you have manifested in the execution of your Office as related to it: What I
have here presented to you I pray accept, as a testimony of that honorable
respect I bear unto you, subscribing my self,

Feb. 28. 1655. Your servant GILES FIRMIN.

To the READER.
NO man, I think, was more resolved against meddling with this Sect than my
self, insomuch that though they came into diverse Towns about me, yet I let
them alone, judging silence to be best, and was apt to blame other Ministers
that kept Fasts against them, being a generation not worthy the taking notice
of: but I saw at last, when I would not trouble them, they would trouble me,
sent diverse of their Books into our Town, invited my people to come and hear,
and prevailed with some to hear; now I was forced to change my resolutions,
Dury calling upon me now to speak: twelve of their Books were brought to me,
(besides Toldervy's, who said, his foot was out of the snare, but I could not
so judge of him, and what I said of him is since come to pass) which when I
had perused, I made one Sermon to discover this generation, and I bless God for
the good success I found of it. Some people desired my Notes, but my Sermon
being very long, it was too tedious to write over my Notes; and some friends
counselling me to print them: I chose this as the easiest way: some passages I
have added, which I would not use in a pulpit: when will the blessed God remove
these spiritual judgments from this poor Nation?

Stablishing against Quaking, etc.
2 Cor. 11.14. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel
of Light.


THis Chapter may be divided into four parts:

1. Is a Preface the Apostle makes to his Apology, defiring the Corinthians to
give him audience, and weigh well what he had to say from the^ to the 6 verse.

2. He answers to what they had alleged against him; from the 6 to the 13
ver.

3. He makes a little digression, and points out these false Teachers in their
colors, from ver. 13 to v. 16.

4. He compares himself with these false Teachers.

For the first he gives diverse reasons why they should hear him, and that
carefully. 1. The ardent, holy love he bare to them, ver. 2. taking his
Metaphor from the jealousy in Conjugal relations; he speaks as a wooer,
though he did not woo for himself, but for Christ; and so explicates this in
the next words, For I have espoused you, etc.

2. From the holy fear he had, illustrated by a comparison, what the Serpent
was to Eve, the same he will be to you if he can. ver. 3.

3. Verba haec qua^dam qua^i ironta^ prae se far videntur qua Corinthios,
novitatis avidos false ridet, Wein^: in loc.
If your new Teachers can bring another Christ, a more excellent Gospel, or
confer more excellent gifts of the Holy Ghost, then let them be heard; but
since this is impossible, they cannot preach Christ, nor open the Gospel, nor
confer such gifts; therefore hear me, ver. 4.

The same we will say to these Quakers, or any despisers of the Ministers, if
they can open the Gospel, can teach Christ, have better gifts than the
Ministers, then run after them, but if not, then stay with those who first
taught you Christ, the Gospel, etc.

4. I am not only superior to these false teachers, but I am equal with the
best of the Apostles, therefore hear me, and thus, ver. 5.

From Paul's using thus many Arguments to get audience, observe: When once
people have lent their ears to false teachers, they will hardly lend them
again to true.

True Teachers must plead hard for their peoples ears, and it is well if they
can with entreaties prevail: it was so then, and to be sure we find it so now.

2. He answers what they objected against him:

1. They object, that he was rude in speech, ver. 6. He did not lard his
Sermons, nor Epistles with Athenian eloquence, nor flourish with gallant
strains of wit: yet surely not so rude as they made him, he could speak so well
that ( Act. 14. ver. 12.) the heathens took him to be Mercurius, one of their
gods. Well, he answers, am I so rude, but examine me in my knowledge, consider
me in all things that are requisite to an Apostle, and so if I have not
manifested my self in all things to be a true one.

The same we say to these Quakers, and all others, if by their knowledge, and
all things else requisite to Ministers or Apostles, [if there be any more to
come, for they tell us they are sent out with an Apostolical spirit] they can
manifest themselves to us to be Ministers, or Apostles, we will listen to them;
but by all we can find in their Books, they scarce appear to be rational men.

2. The second Objection was, the humility of his person, ver. 7. he abased
himself, wrought with hands, taught the Gospel freely. To this he answers, you
need not object this against me, for my humiliation was but your exaltation;
for I spared you: but how then maintained? by other Churches, ver. 8, 9. the
Churches of Macedonia supplied my wants. But as for you I have not been
burdensome to you, neither will I be, ver. 9. to the end. In the Regions of
Achaia none shall stop me of this boasting: which he confirms with a kind of
an oath, as Calvin, Piscator, Weinrichius, and others judge of the words, As
the truth of Christ is in me, ver. 10. as I am a true Minister of Christ: or
let me not be esteemed to have any truth. To be sure this is more than Yea,
yea, and Nay. Which the Quakers make so much use of.

But why will you take no maintenance of us, it is because you do not love us?
ver. 11. So my enemies may suggest to you, I love the Macedonians, but not you.
But this is not so, God knows, he appeals to God: this is more than Yea, yea
again. True here is a weighty case why Paul uses these expressions. But why
then will you not etc? I will give you the reason in v. 12. because first I
would cut off occasion that is, should I take maintenance of all Churches, my
enemies your false teachers, would tell you that all my preaching is but for
money, profit; but now they cannot say so, for I take nothing of you. Again,
your false teachers they glory that they teach freely, they require nothing of
you, no more do I, nor will I in the regions of Achaia: Now you have the
Reasons.

Before I go any further, I have here as fit a place as I could desire (I did
not think of it when I chose my Text, but I see Providence has fitted a place
for me) to take up that great clamor which with one mouth all the Quakers make
against the Ministry. I must name them all if any, for all their Books are
full of it, (and with the Quakers the Separatists) we are no true Ministers;
but why? we teach not the Gospel freely as did the Apostles: we preach for
hire, divine for money, we are covetous, and much of this strain, diverse of
their pages have little else but this kind of stuff. Thus the silly Women
told me in the Church, I was a Hireling, etc.

To all these I answer:

1. False teachers may and have preached freely: then be sure free teaching
could not prove us to be true Ministers. Yet the Quakers teach not freely, for
at one Town by me, I hear that one of these Quakers had about five pounds
gathered for him, besides his entertainment.
This is plain from the Apostle here in ver. 12. for the false teachers did
glory in this, and therefore Paul he would teach freely to Corinth, and be even
with them in glorying. Thus Parnell, who tells us he is sent from Christ, (if
any man could believe him, but the youth thinks others have as few brains as
himself) he teaches freely (and well he may:) but this does not prove him to
be a true Teacher, nor none of his Sect, or any other Sect whatever: but he is
a false teacher, though a free teacher, as were these: (but [Teacher] is a word
he deserves not.)

It is false, that All the Apostles taught freely, and wrought to maintain
themselves. This is plain, 1 Cor. 9.6. in which Chap. the Apostle proves by no
less than seven Arguments, that the Ministers may take maintenance, ver. 14.
speaks as fully as can be, being the winding up of his arguments: Even so has
the Lord ordained, etc. Here is an Ordinance from heaven for the maintenance of
right Gospel-Preachers, if the authority of the LORD who made it, be as good as
the authority of the Quakers and Separatists, and by virtue of this Ordinance
we claim our maintenance. How learnedly the Quakers talk of these arguments
you shall hear anon. But to come to the 6 ver. Or I only and Barnabas, have
not we power to forbear working? The word [Onely] plainly carries it, that the
other Apostles, who were married, and were trained up to fishing (diverse of
them) those did forbear: but what have all the Apostles thus power to leave of,
take maintenance, but I only and Barnabas, etc? No, no, we have the same power
as well as they. But ver. 15. I have used none of these things, etc. Again, in
the 12 ver. If others be partakers of this power over you, etc. Their own
Officers, it seems, or others did take maintenance. So could he.

Paul took no maintenance: for in the 8 and 9 ver. of my Chap: he says, He
took wages of others to serve them, i. e. the Church of Philippi. Paul could
take his liberty where he saw cause. If Paul, than we.

Paul, whom these Quakers object against us: For we have his own example, he
did take wages. Secondly, he as moved and guided by Gods Spirit, does not only
show it is the mind of God, but he proves it also, by diverse reasons, 1 Cor.
9. Add to this, 6 Gal. 6. (...).
Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches, (or
catechizeth, as the word properly signifies) in all good things.

Will the Quakers allow this Text to be Scripture? then let Him, be he or she
what they will, high or low, Its possible the Quakers will object against the
she, but I will let them alone to see if they will do it.
master or servant, is he or she taught; catechized? then communicate in All,
what All? this word will not be liked: yea all good things, fit to be
communicated, or communicable. So 1 Timothy 5.17. one part of the honor Ministers
must have is maintenance, the 18 ver. proves it: mark, it is honorarium, the
maintenance of the Elders is not as the pay I give for a servants work, but it
is honor, an honorable maintenance. The same Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2 4. So 1 Timothy 4.15. (...) Be in these things.
No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, etc.
But how then shall he live? I shall add no more, God has provided for us
expressly in the New Testament; though the maintenance we have fall short
abundantly of what the Priests had in the Old Test:

Mal. 3.8, 9, 10. and other Texts. The Lord did ever beteame his Ministers
honorable wages Whence you do but wickedly to upbraid us with those Texts,
unless you could prove us to be no workers. I doubt not but Christ in glory
does take himself to be faithfully preached by the Ministers of England, (I
will not say every one) why then not maintained?

Quakers how they provide for themselves by Scripture. Naylor: Saluta: etc. p.
37. 38. he speaks against the Magistrates because they imprison some of their
Sect, calling themselves Pilgrims, and tells them, that God foreseeing their
doings, has commanded all that own him to entertain strangers, and made a Law
for it, which you have made a Law against, and quotes Levit. 19.34. Heb. 13.2.
Observe how they have provided for themselves, when they wander up and down, to
mislead souls, and trouble the Churches; yet you must entertain them: they have
two Scriptures for it. But Naylor;

1. Do the Spirit that is infallible teach men to lie as you do against the
Magistrate? has he made a Law against Gods Law in this point? no true stranger
will say it but idle persons, Vagabonds, Rogues, persons who work not in their
callings, what should become of the Nation else?

2. Will two Texts serve to prove that Naylor, or others, when they wander up
and down, yet they must be entertained, men must provide you lodging, food,
etc. and will not five Scriptures that speak for Ministers maintenance, be as
strong for them to require it? are not the people bound as well to provide for
us, as men to entertain you? you are the persons who oppose Gods Law, not the
Magistrate. For shame leave off quoting of Scriptures thus.

3. But Naylor you might have read a little further, to the 7 and 17 ver: there
you shall find that these Hebrews to whom the Apostle writes, had Rulers over
them, and they were to obey them: their duty to entertain strangers, so to have
Rulers and obey them: but your Sect, and so others with you are not such as
those Hebrews, from whom you fetch your proof, for you rail at those who are
such, and at the people who have such.

Thus then by the Quakers principles, I hope we may yet call for our
maintenance.

7. Our Lord Christ, who Mat. 10.8. bid his Disciples, that as they had
received freely, so give freely: that is, as Christ had freely given them those
gifts of healing, etc. by which they might have soon been very rich (the 1 and
8 ver. show what they had received,) yet Luke 10.7. he bids them eat and
drink, for the labourer is worthy of his hire. If they must carry no purse
with them, ver. 4. he intended they should be maintained, and show plainly it
was their duty to maintain them; for he could have furnished them with money,
but would not.

For Paul, Magd. ^en^. 1. l. 2. p. 451.
it plainly appears by Acts 18.3. that though he were brought up to Learning
(which at that time was so famous in Tarsus that it excelled Athens,
Alexandria, and other Universities, and so Paul was learned, acquainted also
with heathen Poets, as appears) yet withal he was also taught a Trade: he was
of the same craft with Aquila, he did not learn it of Aquila then, but before
he came Paul had his trade: for Paul being of the Tribe of Benjamin, though he
were learned, yet he could not come into the Priesthood, and so had none of the
Tithes to maintain him, he must maintain himself. So those Elders of Ephesus,
Act. 20. and other Elders, they all had their trades by which they maintained
themselves before ever they heard of the Gospel; then no wonder though Paul,
and those Elders did sometimes work: Paul being a single person might easily
maintain himself.

2. Paul having the Spirit in that manner, need not trouble himself, to attain
any thing needful to his work; and I doubt not the ordinary Elders at that
time, yet had another manner of assistance than we have now, for to have them
men so able to teach, and convince gainsayers, Tit. 1. these gifts could not be
reached so quickly: but though they did labor and study for them, yet the
Spirit might assist more than now he does for the speedy fitting of persons.

3. It was a free act in Paul that he for this time upon some reason moving him
did suspend his power, 1 Cor. 9.12. if he were absolutely bound to it, why not
others also? v 6. So if any now who have means sufficient for themselves and
their posterity will preach freely they may: but nevertheless there remains a
duty on the peoples part to maintain them, as such that preach the Gospel, v.
14. though they be otherwise able to live. Neither has the Scripture given
any such caution, that if Ministers have good estates of their own, then the
people should not give them the double honor. Though the Priests were never so
rich, yet that did not hinder them from taking Tithes. Though Kings have great
Lands, yet the people pay Customs. So in any other Art, or place whatever men
are in; for the reason holds, The labourer is worthy, etc.

But what are these things to us? when first, our fitness to this work is not
so easily attained; those Languages wherein the Scriptures were writ, which
cost us much time to attain to, as without which no man can be a good Text-man,
they never bestowed any pains about. The customs to which the Apostles allude
often, they knew them because their own, but we cannot till we read and know
them by Learning. The Errors which Ministers are to oppose, are abundantly
multiplied over they were in the Apostles time; thus I might speak for the
necessity of Arts, without which men cannot be sufficient Ministers, all things
put together prove, that he who will be a Minister, had need give his whole
time; let him study, and pray, as bard as he will; let him live a hundred years
in his strength, yet he that will be a Minister indeed, will say he finds all
little enough: if it were no more to be a Minister but to step off a
shop-board, and get into a Pulpit, and speak some honest practical things,
which people have heard from others, and know something it may be from their
own experience, then it were easy work indeed, and well might the people
grumble at the maintenance of such. Hence we see Paul in his Epistle to Timothy
who was not bred up, as others, he must give himself wholly to these things,
Chap. 4. ver. 15. not entangle himself with the affairs of this life. Chap. 2.
ver. 4. Then must Timothy be maintained by the Church, or beg, if he have not
enough of his own estate to keep him.

2. Is your offense at Tithes?

may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.
why else should the people pray that they might do so; and to this end takes
care that according to Gods Institution, Ministers be provided who may teach
the people all godliness and honesty, he in the mean time a Nursing Father to
them, Isa. 49. see that they may have an honorable maintenance according to
the word: I say if the Magistrate) could find a better way for the maintenance
of the Ministry every way, you shall see how easily Ministers will part with
Tithes. But now we take them as that which the Supreme power of the Nation for
many years have allotted to us.

are no man's own, but the Ministers many hundred years since the Parliament of
England (not the Pope, as learned Parnel says in his books) did set apart the
Tithes, for the maintenance of the Ministry, and the supreme Magistrate is but
the Feoffee in trust, to see that what the people of England in their
representative, with the King and house of Lords, had given to the Ministry,
be duly paid them; let this convince you (if your hearts be sober) that Tithes
are no man's own, but the Ministers; for let a man be to hire a Farm, his
Landlord cannot let him a Farm that shall pay no Tithes; let a man buy a
Farm, or sell a Farm, he can neither buy nor sell a Farm that shall pay no
Tithes; if a man have a Farm to sell of an hundred pound per annum, this Farm
may possibly pay twelve pound a year for tithes, if this man could fell this
farm tythefree, would he not raise the price in the sale of it accordingly?
So, would not Landlords let their farms accordingly, if they could let them
tithe-free? the Tenant should soon find it: But neither the Landlord, nor
Tenant, do look upon the tithes as theirs, but the Ministers; whence men let,
hire, buy, sell lands as still looking upon them to pay tithes, and so none of
all these are wronged at all: whence tithes are as duly our own, as any man's
estate is his; and that is the reason why when people deny our due, we go to
the supreme Magistrate (who, as I said, is the Feoffee in trust) in his
Officers, and Courts, to help us to our due, as any other man wronged, goes
for right to any Court; whence it is evident, it is mere blindness, (if not
madness) which makes people talk thus against Ministers taking of Tithes, for
we take only what is our own, and no man's else.

As for lands, so for houses, we observe the long Parliament made two Acts (it
may be more that I know not of) one for Bristoll, another for Colchester, that
according to the rents of houses, so men should pay, not exceeding a certain
sum, (a very little one I am sure.) I know wicked spirits rail at the
Magistracy for doing this: but herein the Parliament did what was equal and
just before God and man: For (as I said in my first) if the Magistrate be bound
to take care that the people under him do lead a life in all godliness etc.
which comprehends the first Table of the Law, then the Magistrate must set up
able men (no slight fellows) that may answer the qualifications in the Word,
to teach the people; then reason, besides the Word, says these must be fed,
maintained, and that as become their places, surely the Magistrate who has
power to raise a tax, when the good of the Commonwealth requires it, has as
much power to cause people to pay toward the upholding of the Officers, and
Ordinances of God, unless Religion do nothing concern the interest and good
of the Commonwealth, which to affirm is to fall below Heathenisme.

As for such as affirm that the Magistrate has nothing to do in the Church;
the care of it does not at all belong to him. I think such devilish principles
deserve not an answer, (yet they are answered) though such own not the
Scriptures; yet let them but go to the Heathens, and they will shame them.





1. Not more equal: for therein we rise and fall with the people, we share
with their blessings, and crosses; we have little or more, as they have little
or more.

2. Not more easy: because, as I said, neither the buyer, nor seller, neither
he that hires, nor he that lets, do look on Tithes as theirs, and is it a
burden for men to pay for what is none of their own, and they esteem none of
their own? as in my second I have opened.

Object. But you should trust God, for your maintenance.

Answer. So we do, and desire to do, but we will not, nor dare trust you: if
your corruption be touched, or your rotten opinion be opposed, if your covetous
lust stir (and that reigns) what is next? we must seek for maintenance.

2. We see God has taken care for us already, many hundred years before we
were born, in settling an estate upon us by the Supreme power of the Nation.

3. You would have done well, had you lived in the Primitive Churches, when the
Magistrate was an Heathen, and so took no care for the Church but to destroy
it; but yet even then they were so free to maintain the Officers, and
Ordinances of Christ, etc: that they could have Church stocks, to maintain all
with, the poor, the sick, strangers; yet then were Bishops besides Presbyters;
and none of these were to meddle with Secular cares, for if they did, they were
to be cast out; Can. Apost. 7.80.
as the Canons then made declare. Had that spirit that is now amongst
professors, been in those days, it had been very ill with the Church, as it is
now, and should be worse might such Christians have their wills.

To gather up all then: since Christ in his word, has commanded that we should
be maintained; since the Magistrate being Christian, has long since appointed
us maintenance, and that such as none can call his own, but the Ministers, are
we the covetous persons who require that which is our due by the Law of God and
Man, or are you the covetous persons, yea and sacrilegious, who deny it?
Certainly if people were not acted by a very Satanicall spirit they could not
thus open their mouths, in such base language against us, as they do. Why do
you not charge us rather with idleness, if you can, and so in that respect
prove we ought not to be maintained? Why do you not speak against the
Impropriators? You pay tithes to them without such clamours, only the
Ministers are they who trouble you; but we know whose hand is in all this, Hell
and Rome would be glad if your designs might prevail.

So much for the Ministers maintenance, which because my Chapter gave me so fit
an occasion, I have first answered.

The third part of the Chapter, contains a description of these false teachers,
and adversaries to Paul: 1. He calls them false-Apostles. 2. Deceitful
Workers. 3. They transform themselves, etc. like stage players, they personate
the Apostles of Christ.

But how can this be? (say the admirers of these false teachers) we cannot
believe it. The Apostle answers, yes this may very easily be, and proves it a
majore. Do not wonder at this, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel
of light, which are the words of my Text, and but the antecedent part of the
Enthymeme, the consequent part is in the 15 verse: Satan is, ergo his
Ministers, etc. Parnel several times in his Book (he entitles, the Watcher:)
calls Logic, filthy Logic: and page: 30. tells us what Logic is: Logic is
only to make a false word true. That is thy masters Logic indeed Parnel,
Satan's, but the true Logic we own, (for to give you a definition of Logic is
in vain) is that whereby the Lights of your master Satan, are by the help of
the Scripture, discovered to be false. But why does thy mouth call that filthy,
which the pure Spirit of God uses? In these words he uses both parts of
Logic, Invention and Disposition. We use no Logic but such as God himself
has made.

SATAN, (...) Adversari, odio ^abere.
the Adversary, the hateful enemy of mankind, is transformed: what is he got
on the stage too, and put on the robe of an Angel of Light? Surely a Tragedy we
must expect.

Light is taken properly, or improperly. 1. Properly, he that has his sight
knows what we mean when we speak of light; to have any Philosophical discourse
about it, is neither profitable, nor proper to my Text.

2. Improperly, it is taken several ways, I shall name but a few and leave the
rest: 1. For the true and saving doctrine of the Word, Prove. 6.23. Psalm.
119.105. 2. For knowledge, Acts 26.18. Isa. 60.3. 3. For good works, Mat. 5.16.
4. For joy and comfort, Psalm. 97.13. 5. For Christ, Isa. 42.6. Ioh. 8.12. I
name no more, I shall make use of some of these; the Observation is plain: It
has been of old, and it is the practice still of the Prince of darkness, to
transform himself into an Angel of Light. Good Angels did use to appear
lightsome and glorious unto persons; well, Satan will do as they do. Cor: a
Lap: upon this Text tells us many stories of persons to whom Satan thus
appeared in a visible shape, they saw him, and conversed with him, as if he had
been an Angel of Light, and they discerned him by his discourse to be but the
black Prince transformed: but this is not the thing Paul chiefly means; he has
another way to act, when he went to Ahabs prophets, and persuaded them, it is
more than I know that he appeared visibly to them; some Politicians will do
much, and yet are little seen, I am sure it is so with him: Light uses to
discover things, but never is Satan less seen than when he acts as an Angel of
Light. This has been his practice of old, and I am sure he has not laid down
his trade now in our days, he has found so much success by this policy
toward the advancement of his kingdom, that so long as Christ's Church is upon
the earth, and has rest from persecution, till he come to be bound up, we must
look for him in this shape.

For the doctrinall part I will dispatch it briefly, because I will make have
to what I aim at: I have but two things to open: 1. How does Satan thus
transform himself, how does he work, what garments (as the word is taken
from Stage players, that put on garments suitable to the person they act) puts
he on, that make him appear thus? 2. Whence comes it, that he does thus?
For the first:

1. By taking the Scriptures, which are the true light, and making use of them,
for the doctrine he would have received: if Satan would have any error take,
he must not fetch his proof, his light from a Turkish. Alcoran, or Plato, or
Aristotle, etc. these have no Authority in the Church: no, no, he will bring
his Scripture, that which is called the Lamp and the Light, to you, is not here
Scripture? Search the Scriptures, yea so he does, and can bring Christ
Scripture also: if Christ answer him, and turns him off with a For it is
written, Mat. 4.4. the very next tentation he will prove with a For it is
written, ver. 6. He seems to be even with Christ, and what he quotes is to the
purpose, so much as he quotes. Clothes, Bays, etc. use to have seals hung
upon them, then they pass for current: when he can hang the seals of
Scripture upon his doctrines, who will now question them? Has not this been
the practice of him in all the Heretics since Christ his time? Credunt
scripturis ut credant adversus seripturas, Ter^ul. p. 77.
had not the Arians Scripture? Has not the Pope Scripture? Have not the
Socinians Scripture? though Reason is their Rule, yet has not Crellius at last
found our Scripture against Christ's Divinity? The least Scripture that I know
any error or practice have to prove it self, is the practice of the
Separatists (with these Quakers) who have cast off the soundest Ministers, and
all our Churches. It is observable how these Quakers, who have done the most
mischief to the Separatists and the Anabaptists societies do tell them, they
are in Babylon; that which they have cast upon us is now cast upon them, and
will be as easily proved against them, as they can prove it against us.

light, Mat. 5. should he preach, that men should whore, swear, (when not
justly called to it) lie, steal, be drunk, etc. though men love these deeds of
darkness, yet should they hear them taught as things that ought to be done,
though their hearts love the actions, yet their judgments would conclude, this
were no true light: whence observe the next verse to my Text, they are
transformed as the Ministers of righteousness, not Ministers of
unrighteousness, he will hold equipage in many things at least. Thus these
Quakers, because they taught people, they must deal justly, do no body wrong,
not lie, etc. Some of the people took it for granted these Teachers came from
Christ, (as they told me) and why do not we come from Christ as well, for I
hope they have heard the same from us and more? (but this was the business, we
were Priests, and divined for money because maintained.)

Coloss^ult: that which answers the rule is holiness and mortification. Thus
the Friars and others of that Popish generation, by their course habit, hard
lodging, fasting, abstaining from marriage, One of this Sect, n^e^ me, burnt up
ten pounds worth of lace, grounding her act upon Act. 19.19.
etc. these have a show, says the Apostle. Thus the Quakers must wear no lace,
drink water, (before others, at least one of their teachers did) fast. J.
Toldervy tells us, he knew some who fasted 30 days, the sincerity of their
discourse against sin, and sebriety in their appearance took with him. Who
would suspect a Devil in these, to teach things thus cross to the flesh, to
deny our natural appetites? Yes even here he is, for all his specious shows;
if it be a thing cross to God, to set up some way of our own, we can then
cross our selves: so true is that which blessed Herbert in another case has
said, Oh what were man, might he himself misplace! Temp: Sat Poemi, p. 1.

Sure to be cross, he would shift feet and face.
Christ could not be in the Pharisees esteem a Teacher of righteousness,
Matthew. 11.19. He is a man gluttonous, and a winebibber, etc. God allows us to
take comfort in the creature after a Christian manner, Eccles. 5.18, 19. with
many Scriptures which show the practices of the Saints that they did so.

Duck-coyes to draw in others. Lo! you who follow these teachers, who are
taken? not the rascality of the Country, as Christ had Publicans and sinners
to attend on him, sometimes, but there are such men, and such women, whom all
know to be godly persons: would they countenance, and follow such if they were
were unsound? This has been alleged to me, as a proof on the Quakers side,
because such men entertained them: this becomes a great stumbling block. I
shall speak a word to this afterward.

Quakers cry up conscience very much, calling men to attend more to that, than
to the Scriptures, (as anon I shall show) but it is manifest that Satan is got
into their consciences.

ex vero nil nisi verum, but it is such Logic as he uses, has done of old;
where sin has abounded, the grace of God abounded. What then? thus now; men
are not to take up their rest in the Ordinances, but to look beyond Ordinances,
Christ is the end of Ordinances, as in Baptism, the Supper, etc. What then?
hence the Quakers and others tell us they have got Christ, (the thing
signified) what should they do with signs? so cast away the Ordinances: they
are grown so Spiritual, that they live above these Carnal, (as Naylor calls
the Ordinances) things. There is some light in the Antecedent, and as much
darkness in the Consequent part, for the consequence is false.

off and on was the best they had: since they have cast them off, and gone into
their new ways, now they are stablished, comforted, and settled for ever. This
he can do two ways, (but I intend not to enlarge.)

First, by withdrawing those tentations, doubts, scruples, which he threw
before into their minds, making a cessation: as also by drawing them off from
the quick searching power of the word, which coming close, made conscience to
jog them, and trouble their false bottomes where they would be resting.

2. By false application of the Promises, in which this Teacher has an
admirable skill;as he can sink the honest heart with misapplying of some
terrible Texts, so he can as well cheer a false heart, with the misapplication
of comfortable promises: what his skill is in this, I have opened upon other
Texts.

So much for the first Question. The second I will dispatch also in a few
heads. Whence comes it, or why does he thus transform himself? etc.

The Reasons may be taken, First, from himself. Secondly, from God.

1. From himself: because this is the way for him to attain his ends. Could
he do the mischief he does in the Church where the Candle is burning, Light
shining, if he did not put on this garb? No verily; this is a notable way for
him to lead people into darkness, by light: should he come into the Church with
his Wolves skin, he might scare the Sheep, they would run from him, but not
follow him. When I was coming from Spain into England, we had two sheep aboard
our ship, which were bought that we might have fresh meat by the way: when one
of the sheep was killed, the Seamen put the skin of the sheep over the dog
which belonged to the ship; the sheep that was left alive, would continually
follow the dog, where the dog lay down, the sheep would lie down by him,
and would not leave the dog though the dog would guerne at the poor sheep;
but thus the sheep would not do before. Thus Satan must do, if he will have
any sheep follow him, he must get on his sheeps skin, and so he has done, we
see the effect. Thus his enmity against Christ in his kingdom, against the
comfort and peace of the true members of the Church, against the souls of
people is driven on, Revel. 20.3. Deceive the Nations: A Deceiver is not the
person he is taken to be; no more is this Angel of Light, who works by deceit.

2. God has his ends in this: it is not his pleasure that Satan should ever be
an Angel of Light again, but it is his pleasure (I know no false Divinity in
the word) that Satan should have liberty to transform himself into an Angel of
Light.

First, what terrible ends he had in giving Satan commission to go to Ahabs
prophets, in sending strong delusions, 2 These. 2.11. the Texts declare: and
certainly there are the same reasons still, when people have lived under light,
but they love it not, secret rottenness lie at bottom, they love darkness,
they shall have Lights at last, which shall suit their principles, and
certainly lead them to what they love, and that freely.

Deuteronomy. 13.3. A Prophet rises up, gives a sign, and the sign comes to pass,
who would not follow him? take heed, I do it to prove you. How much miserable
ignorance and vanity of heart have these times discovered: wherein Satan has
thus acted even in those who gave hopes, and we dare not absolutely deny but
they may belong to God: those who we hoped had been men, have discovered
themselves to be children, yea the weakest of children carried about with every
wind of doctrine.

dye, the Spirit of prayer is gone; and what can we look for, but a su^table
reward to our abused liberty? More heads I could have added, and enlarged, but
I have done with the doctrinall part.



Object. Deceived? Have we not a word that tells us, There is an impossibility
of the Elect being deceived, Mat. 24.24? Answ: 1. It is true, and are you
Elect? do you know it so certainly upon grounds infallible, (not imaginary)
that you are one of them? I think we must go backwards, to prove Election, by
the effects which the execution of that Decree produces: One which I am sure
is to make the Elect vessel careful what doctrines it receives.

2. An Elect vessel cannot be deceived so as to miss of salvation, yet he may
take such courses and go in those paths which in themselves would lead him to
perdition, (after effectual calling I mean) but that the mercy of the Lord
fetch him back by repentance out of them.

3. An elect Vessel may be so far deceived, as to dishonor God exceedingly,
grieve the Spirit of God, wound the hearts of the children of God, which should
not, nay cannot be small things in the eyes of one who is indeed Elect.

4. Though an elect Vessel cannot be deceived as to ruin his soul, yet he may
be so far deceived as to lead others also into deceitful paths, and may be
truly an occasion why they lose their souls. God may show the Elect mercy,
and recall them, but not those it may be whom the Elect has mislead.

And here look to it ye Separatists, that have cast off the Ministry with so
much scorn, at your door must lie the cause why so many persons are turned
Quakers; you now rise up against them, (some of you) but the people that hear
you and them argue, tell us, you are run down, you cannot answer them, and no
wonder. But who may it thank that so many are carried away into such vile
errors, as your selves can judge? only your selves; while the people kept to
Gods Institutions, waiting upon Official preaching, there was no such doings.
Whither come these Quakers? but to Towns where you dwell, and have drawn away
the people from the Ministry, there these Foxes find their preyes. Had the
people kept close to the Ministry, they had been preserved from these
miscarriages, and been in the way, God uses to save by, but now they are gone.

But how shall we know this transformed Angel of Light, how discern him?

Angel of Light: Angels do excel man in wisdom abundantly, whence we may
well think it is not easy to find him out. When David asked the woman of
Tekoah whether Joabs hand was not with, etc. She answers, My Lord (not Thou
man, as the Quakers) is wise according to the wisdom of an Angel of God: I may
say, that man had need have wisdom near to the wisdom of those true Angels of
Light, who would be able to discover all the falsehoods of this transformed
Angel of Light, both in doctrine, and in comforts, etc. As for the Light of
comfort it is not my purpose to touch that here, I intend only the Light of
doctrine: and truly the generation I am now to take in hand, are so gross,
that an ordinary assistance of Gods Spirit is enough to discover these, to whom
now I shall address my self: and because I am to speak to plain people, and to
those only I intend this Sermon, (because that sort is so mislead) I shall
desire them but to observe this:

First, I lay down that which I know is the Light of Christ: which I call the
Major Proposition.

Secondly, I lay down the doctrine of the Quakers, as being quite cross to
that Light, which I call the Minor Proposition: and because I would not wrong
the Quakers I write down their own words, out of their own Books, with the page
where you may find them, if you have the books: so that when you see Major or
Minor you may know what I am proving; if I do prove the Major to be the Light
of Christ, and the Quakers be cross to that Light, then the Conclusion is you
may be sure the Quakers light come from Satan transformed etc.

Major. That light which will not admit of, nor endure the trial, that light
is Satan's light, and not the light of Christ.

Minor. But the light of the Quakers will not admit of, nor endure the trial.

Ergo. the light of the Quakers is the light of Satan, and not the light of
Christ.

Major is thus proved, because the light of Christ will admit of, and endure
the trial: as, Take Christ himself, who is the Light of the world, if the
question be, whether he be the Christ? he will come to the trial, Ioh. 5.39.
He had others to bear witness of him, in the verses before, but he offers
himself to be tried by the Scriptures, Search the Scriptures, for they are they
which testify of me. If you do find that I answer not those Scriptures which
speak of the Messiah, throw me by: who of his enemies could by the
Scripture-triall find him to be false? So Ioh. 10.37, 38. If I do not the
works of my Father, believe me not. etc. Thus Mat. 115. when John sent to him,
his answer is the proof, Tell John what you hear and see. i. e. The prophecy
in Isa. 35.6. fulfilled; then let John (or you rather) judge what I am. Thus
Paul, 2 Cor. 12.12. Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in
all patience, in signs, and wonders and mighty deeds. I gave you sufficient
proof that I was an Apostle, by all the signs of a true Apostle. Thus Isaiah
8.20. teach the people how to try all false spirits, bring them To the Law and
to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there
is no light in them. Let them talk of their Lights what they will, if they
speak not according to this word (the touchstone for all spirits) they are but
delusions.

Our Major then is true light, according to the Scriptures.

Minor: But the light of the Quakers will not admit of, nor endure the trial.
This I prove from their own Books.

I. N. against F. Harris, p. 10. the Question is, Whether that can be the way
of God, which has nothing to warrant it but the bare words and affirmation of
men, which they call infallible?

To this I.N. answers: Answ: That Spirit of God which is infallible is the
sufficient ground; and to preach, that is the way of God, neither had this ever
any other testimony, but what is of it self: For the worlds wisdom, and
carnal natural man, can neither receive it, nor bear testimony of it, only
such who believe it, etc. The sum is this, the Quakers have the Infallible
Spirit, they believe the testimony of it: and this is all the proof.

But could not CHRIST, who is the Light of the world, answer thus more truly
than any Quaker? what need then of searching Scriptures, or observing his
works, his infallible Spirit is proof enough. Could not Paul say as much, he
had the infallible Spirit, and what need of the signs of an Apostle?

Could not those Apostles, Rev. 2.2. whom the Angel of Ephesus tried, have said
as much, they had the infallible Spirit, and if this were proof enough, how
could the Angel try them?

Zedekiah can say, Thus says the Lord, 1 King. 22.11. and smite Micaiah on the
cheek, etc. ver. 24. Hananiah can say, Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, the God
of Israel, Jer. 28.2. And if their saying, they have the infallible Spirit, be
proof sufficient, then they are as good Prophets as Micaiah or Jeremiah.

God will not judge men's doctrines or conversations according to their
infallible spirit (which they boast of) at the last day, but according to his
Law, written or not written, (as the Heathen had not the Law written, but yet
the Law they had) Romans chapter 2.12. then by the same Law now try and judge
Doctrines and Conversations. The Quakers shall be judged by the Law written.



Major. That Light which puts out the Light of Nature is the light of Satan,
not of Christ.

Minor. But the Light of the Quakers puts out the Light of Nature.

Therefore the Light of the Quakers is the Light of Satan, not of Christ.

By the Light of Nature, Major proved.
I mean, that Candle, or inward Law which God set up in the heart of all
mankind after the loss of his Image in the Pall, checking many sins against
God, but more against men, God having made a fuller and greater revelation to
Nature in the things of the second Table, than in the first. Thou shall not
kill, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal, etc. So, Honor
thy father and thy mother; without this light, no Societies could hold: but
Christ his Light does not put out any part of this Light: no, we find him
Matthew 5. opening these Commandments in a larger sense than the Pharisees did.



Honor is but the expressing of the inward respect we bear to persons, by
outward signs, speeches, and gestures; without the outward signification of it
thus, no man can tell who is honored: and as is the custom of the Nation, so
we express this, whether by uncovering the head, bowing the body, etc. But the
Quakers deny this. Let a Master be in a house, with ten other boys, the
servant comes in, he stirs not his hat to his Master, no more than to the
boys; his language to his Master is, Thou man; to the boy, Thou boy: what
honor has the Master above the Boys?

I. N. against F. Harris, page 6. Did ever any Saints use any other language
but Thee and Thou, to God or man?

Yes that they did, better Saints than the Quakers are, though they say they
are perfect.

Paul was a Saint, Acts 26.25. He says not, Thou Festus, or Thou man; but Most
noble Festus: so, King Agrippa.

Daniel was a Saint, yet when he speaks to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.37. he says,
O King, thou art a King of Kings!

Hannah was a Saint; when she speaks to Eli, 1 Samuel 1.15. no, My Lord. ver. 26.
Oh my Lord! not Thou man.

Sarah was a Saint; 1 Pet. 3.6. she called Abraham, Lord.

Rachel, if the Quakers can prove her to be no Saint let them, but she to
Laban, Genesis 31.35. My Lord, and rose up; there is language and gesture.

Solomon rose up from his Throne, went to meet his Mother, and bowed himself to
her, etc. 1 King. 2.19. Read also Prove. 31.28.

Eliazer is a good servant, yet in his prayer to God, Genesis 24.12. O Lord God of
my Master Abraham.

Abraham was a Saint, Gen 18.2. when he saw three men, (as he thought) he bows
himself: in ver: 3. his language is, My Lord. So Abigail to David.

Yea, they will acknowledge no Relations. I. Toldervy, when he was of that
number, relates of himself, page: 17. that he took his Master by the arm or
cloak, and bade him sit down William Web; not Master, nor pulling off the
hat. Afterward says he, I denied all relations, from the words of One, He
that lives in the light will see no difference. And in page 16. he tells, how
through his disobedience (from this principle) his Mother and many little ones
do suffer, having in his charge the redeeming part of an estate for his
Mother, possibly in a short time to have been effected, which he deserted: and
adds, the workings of this power was so predominant, that I refused the least
acknowledgment, much less performance of duty to any.

Parnel. Goliahs head etc. p. 68. speaking about Ornaments, Moderation in every
thing I own, but what is wast is for the lust. both in Kings, Princes, and
great Personages (as thou call them) but with us there is no respect of
persons.



Major. That Light which teaches men to forsake the Scriptures, setting up a
Spirit in man which shall not be examined by the Scriptures, is the Light^^
Satan, not of Christ.

Minor. But such is the Quakers Light, Ergo.

The Scriptures are left by God to be our Light and our Rule, Major proved.
Prove. 6.23. Psalm. 119.105. The Prophets bid us go to them, Isa. 8.20. Christ
bids us search them, Ioh. 5.39. The men of Berea. Act. 17.11. Tried Paul by
these; for Paul to tell them of his infallible Spirit, and so they might
believe him without searching the Scriptures, he had as good say nothing: those
men were commended for this action. Apollos a mighty man in the Scriptures,
Acts 18.24. convinced the Jews by the Scriptures, ver. 28.



If you ask me before I go to the proof, Do the Quakers cast off the
Scriptures? I answer, when they can find any thing which they think make
against us, then they will urge the Scriptures very much; Golich. p. 63.
yea, they will run to the Apocrypha rather than fail to help themselves, as
Parnel to evade the strength of Levit. 19 32. runs to Chap. 4 of the Book of
Wisdom, v. 8, 9. but mistakes. Yea further, when Satan has gotten strong hold
of persons in their way, yet he will then provoke them to read the Scriptures
much, but casts strange glosses upon the Scripture, p. 21. 21.
as I. Told: confesses when he was in that snare. Herein he works like an
Angel of Light. But to speak truly, the Quakers make nothing of the
Scriptures, miserably abusing that text, 2 Cor. 3.6. You shall hear them speak:

1. I. Toldervy, p. 6. reports of that Quaker who was the means of his
seducing; that he, expressed with firm confidence, that searching of the
Scripture was not the way to find out the knowledge of Christ, but the turning
the mind to within: quite cross to Christ, why did not Christ bid them turn
to that?

2. Mason, page 12. in his defense of Craven: Thou say (to his Opponent) the
Old and New Testament is thy rule, the same was writ for thy imitation. He
answers, But did Paul or any of the Aposlles walk by any literal rule, or was
not their rule a ^^asure of the Spirit of God committed to every one of them?
but it were well if these pecuniary Priests would walk answerable to the
precepts left upon record in the Letter. By this you may see what Mason makes
of the written Word.

3. Parnel. Watcher, page 8. where you may have a learned discourse how the
profession of the Christian Faith and Religion came into England, two pages
before. Let those who are ignorant read it. But p. 8. he adds, and those had
the writings of the Prophets and Apostles which is called Scripture, and so was
the Keepers of the Letters, and that they took to be their rule to walk by, as
they do now, but knew not that which gave it forth, to lead them unto the
life, but had the letter and the form. To the same purpose he speaks, p 40.
and in his Goliath, p 77.

4. Naylor against I. Reyner, p. 3. speaking against us, has these words,
Whose Law is without, Light without, their Word without, their Church without,
Baptism, Prayers without; All which we witness to be within. Farewell then
the written Word.

Naylor, Saluta: etc. p. 29. tells those that will follow their doctrine, then
you shall not have your Light and Life to seek in a Book without you, etc.

Naylor against F. Harris, p 9. speaks out, The Infallible Spirit, by which the
Scriptures were given forth is the sole tryer of spirits and doctrines, neither
has it need of any addition where it is: you bring the letter to oppose
Christ, and so deny the end of the Scriptures, which is to see up the Spirit of
God for Judge, and not themselves, etc. So then the Scriptures must not judge
of his Spirit, but your spirit is Judge of the Scriptures.

5. Priests Ignorance, p. 4, 5.

The sum is this, it is all one to them, Scriptures or no Scriptures; for
they have the Spirit that did give forth the Scriptures. As for the written
Word, you see how they contemn it, and condemn those who make it their rule to
walk by: when they do use it, it is at the pleasure of their infallible
spirit what shall be the meaning of it. Here I will give you a taste of their
spirit.

Parnel entitles one of his Books the Watcher, and tell us in his Title Page,
of the stone, that struck the feet of the Image, quoting Dan. 2.31, 32 etc. By
this title we shall ^^pect some great matter about the Image, p. 21, 22. It is
one thing to allude to a scripture, another thing to inte^pret it, as does
Parnel, here.
his spirit interprets the Image. Now the head of the Image which is of gold,
and (are) those that have had a light shining into them, and have seen the
emptiness of many Forms, and have gotten the thing in their comprehension:
(with more of this stuff, which I am loath to transcribe) and the breast of
the Image which is of silver, and the thighs of brass are the rest of the
sects and forms, and the legs of the Image which is of iron is the beast, and
the feet of the Image which is part of iron, part of clay, are the Priests and
Pharisees, joined to the powers of the earth, etc. But Parnel, the Spirit in
Daniel gave another Interpretation of this Image in the same Chapter, and we
have seen it fulfilled in the greatest part; How dare thou then set down thy
Interpretation thus cross to his? Oh that any Christians should admit such a
Fellow into their houses!

Let us hear Deusbury's spirit interpreting Revel. page 20.
17. Babylon is within you, the Beast is within you, which all the world
wonders after (what a wonder is this, I hear there is a Doctor of Divinity in
London has given the same interpretation of this Beast, etc.
that all the world should wonder after that which none of the world ever saw!)
is your wills: your wisdom is the great Whore that sits upon the Beast. But
why do you stay here Deusbury, go on to 9, 10, 11, 12, 16, verses, and tell
us what they are? when you have done, turn to the last clause of the 19 ver. of
the 1 Chap. and 1 ver. of the 4. Chap. there see how neatly your spirit have
interpreted this 17 Chap. John was shown things that were to be hereafter: but
it seems there were no such wills, hearts, nor wisdom before John, but all the
wickedness of men was to be after John. Is this the best Interpretation your
spirit can make?



The Quakers divide the Spirit from the Scriptures.

Major. That Light which makes the Scripture to cross it self, and that in
things known by the Light of Nature, that Light is the light of Satan, not of
Christ.

Minor. (...) such is the Quakers Light. Ergo.

Major is clear: For if the same infallible spirit gave out all the parts of
the Scripture, then to have one Scripture plainly and truly to contradict
another, and that in things known by the Light of Nature, would argue high
imperfection in the Spirit of God: which is blasphemy to impute unto him.



Thus all the Quakers, and Bishop in particular, p. 24. quotes the 2 of James
to overthrow all respect to persons. Then where is the honoring of Parents,
and Superiors, as in my second Argument I opened. The very first verse will
give the meaning of the Apostle, Have not the Faith of the Lord Jesus etc. with
respect of persons. If you like the faith of our Lord Jesus when it is in a
rich man, but despise it in a poor man, this is sinful: yet there are good
reasons to be given from the 6 and 7 ver. that the rich man S. James mentions
was not a believer, but rather an Heathen; and to have a rich Heathen preferred
before a poor Believer is sin: however take the 9th, if you have respect to
persons, etc. One way it is true, another way false. Take the words Divisim,
thus, may I, or must I show civil respect to a rich man that is much above me,
though wicked, (much more if a Magistrate, Father, etc. for these relations are
not founded upon Grace?) yes that you must, else you transgress the Royal
Law, Honor thy Father etc. But take the words, Conjunctim, thus, may I show
civil respect to rich persons, etc. and despise a poor man that has the Faith
of our Lord Jesus? No, if you do, you sin.

God will allow no such respect of persons: thus the Scriptures are preserved
in their harmony, and Natures Light not offended.

Take another instance, the glory of the Lord, etc. put out by such as the
world call Quakers, p. 10, 11, 12. He takes the words of our Savior, Mat.
5.34. Swear not at all, to overthrow all swearing; there he brings in several
holy men who swear, Abraham, Jacob, David, the Angel, Rev. 10. and Ierem: 4.2.
All that he answers is, but Christ says, Swear not at all.

I observe he does not mention Paul in 2 Cor. 1.23. I call God for a record
upon my soul; and other places where Paul swears, yet he was after Christ; did
Paul, and the Angel sin? It is not my purpose to enlarge upon this; but a few
words, ver. 33. Thou shall not forswear thy self. 1. Deuteronomy. 10.20. and 6.13.
where it is joined to the command of fearing God and serving him, Thou shall
swear by his name. Indeed by the Earth, Heaven, or Jerusalem, etc. thou shall
not swear, no nor by the name of God vainly, but when thou art called to it
upon just and weighty causes, then the old command holds, else I must destroy a
part of the Law, and not fulfill it, verse 17.



Exodus 11. (...), men do swear, not men did swear before Christ, but now
left it since he spoke those words; there is strife still.

Object: But where there is strife they are without, p. 12.

Ans. 1. It were well for you if you were within. 2. There may be difference
between those who are in Christ, and yet the difference so fairly carried as no
sinful strife, but an Oath will put an end to it. 3. But may a Magistrate give
an Oath to those who are without? surely no: if that be true, must not swear at
all. How then shall strife be ended? 4. We know the Quakers are not so perfect,
but strife will be among them.
within: but that Light within, does lead men to swear in great cases, to put
an end to strife: we find it so among the Heathen, Abimelech etc. both before
and after Christ. The Light of Nature teaches this, why then do you oppose it?

Paul should so forget himself, to sin so fearfully in swearing as he did:
yea, and an Angel also: Isa. 65.16. relates to the times after Christ.



Major. That Light which takes men off from that rule which is perfect and
cannot err, and sends them to be guided by a Light which is imperfect, and may
and does err, that is the Light of Satan, not the Light of Christ.

Minor. But such is the Light of the Quakers. Ergo.

Major cannot be denied, for will the Light of Christ teach men to leave his
own perfect rule, and go to an imperfect one? then if men walk by it, how can
they be blamed? he must then approve of sin.

The Minor need proof, which is this:

That Light which takes men off from the Law of God, his Word; and send them to
the Light of Conscience to be guided by it, that Light take men off from a
perfect rule, and send them to an imperfect one, etc.

But thus do the Quakers. Ergo.

The Word of God is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. But the Quakers do
not send men to the Word, but to their Consciences. I grant it were well if men
did attend to the dictates of a true illightned Conscience, and it will be
fearful damnation that they do not. But this is not all the Quakers mean.

But however the Light of Conscience is (1) but Imperfect. (2) It may err. It
is imperfect: here I will take occasion to examine the Text, the Quakers make
so much use of, 1. Joh. 9. This was the true light, which lights every one
that comes into the world. But I would feign know, why these Quakers confound
this Light, with Conscience, as if they were both one, is the Conscience and
Christ all one? what folly is this.

Secondly, But what do they mean, that Christ lights every one who comes
into the world, with saving light, Fruits of fast, page 23.
as Parnel his 29 Querie intimates? this is manifestly false.



The world knew him not: How then does he lighten every one with such a
knowledge, when the Text says plainly the world knew him not?

What miserable blind Consciences do we find where people have lived under the
revelation of Christ! I am confident many know not the essentials to salvation.

The meaning then is:

1 If we speak of the Light of Reason, Understanding, so Christ lights every
one who comes into the world.

2. Or if we speak of Saving light, As many, or every one who has that saving
Light, it is Christ who illightneth him.

3. So we may say of Common Light; Christ gives that also. As Psalm. 136.8. The
Lord raises them that are bowed down. What every one? we see the contrary; but
those who are raised, it is he who lifts them up, none else can.

Again, Conscience may and does err; this is a further proof of the
imperfection of it, Acts 26.9. Paul was there guided by his Conscience, but it
erred. Did not of old, Do not now all Errors, and Heresies plead Conscience,
Papists, Socinians, etc? I doubt not Queen Mary would say, her Conscience led
her to burn the eminent servants of Christ.

Now let us hear what the Quakers say:

Quakers glory, etc. p. 2. They exhort the Magistrates to let the Priests
alone, and to receive the Law of God which is perfect according to that in the
Conscience: herein have truth in all ages suffered by them who made Laws
contrary to that in the Conscience. No matter for the Word then.

Fell. page 5. The Priests of thy high places (Oh England!) bear witness
before my face against thee, which thou have set up contrary to my will which I
have made manifest in every man's Conscience. No, not every man's, you are not
perfect, Fell. So once before in the same page.

Wooddrove. p. 15, 16 Turn your mind within you to the pure Light of Christ
in your Consciences, see by this light within you, who rule within you. No
matter for the perfect rule without you, to try the light within you, nor to
help it.

J. N. against Harris, p. 15. Make our Light within, to be the Light of the
Covenant of Grace. How many millions of souls know nothing of it!

Bishop p. 21. Sink down to that of God in every one of your Consciences, the
light of Christ. In all their Books the Word of God written is made of no
account.

But while the Quakers thus call on all men, to turn to that within them,
(their Consciences) why do they so cry out upon the Magistrates for sending
them to Bridwell and Prisons, since they do as the Light within them bid them?
They practice their doctrine, but the Magistrates have the Light without them
in the perfect rule, to guide Conscience within them. What a woeful Nation
should we have where Consciences are so blind, erroneous, sleepy, benumbed,
and some cauterized, if men should lay by the perfect rule, and go to that?
the Prince of darkness would make strange work.

Conscientia est regula regulata, non regula regulans This Argument differs
from the third.

Major. That Light which destroys the Institutions of Christ, is the Light of
Satan, not of Christ.

Minor. But the Quakers light destroy the Institutions of Christ, [his
Ordinances:] Ergo, it is the light of Satan, not of Christ.

Major is clear, for then Christ must oppose himself, if he has left
Ordinances wherein people shall attend upon God, till the end of the world, and
now have a light to destroy them, Christ has changed his mind. 1 Cor 11.26.
In the Lords Supper we show the Lords death till he come. Christ is not come
yet: Christ bid them eat and drink in remembrance of him: his words at the
Institution of the Lords Supper. What were the Apostles only to remember him,
or the Corinthians, and those first Churches? Must not all Churches till he
comes so remember him? Mat. 28.19, 20. Teach and Baptize, I am with you to the
end of the world. What do you limit this teaching and baptizing, to the
Apostles? They are dead many hundred years since, yet the end of the world is
not come; how then can these words be fulfilled, but in the ordinary Officers,
who succeed the Apostles, is the rule of Christ, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, 18, etc.
come to an end? I am sure there are offenses still, and you perfect ones are as
vile offenders as any, but you have taken a course to prevent all discipline,
for your Church is within, so shut up that none can come at it, no nor believe
it.

light destroy all the Ordinances and Institutions of Christ.

Parnel: Wat: p. 8. They (who brought the profession of the Christian Faith
into England first) had two Sacraments, Infants Baptism is one, that which
they call the Supper of the Lord is another; and they had the carnal bread and
wine as the Priests and people has now. See what esteem this youth has of the
Ordinances, against the Baptists he talks much for their baptizing with
water, but I will not transcribe his babbling.

Naylor against I. Reyner, page 3. Church, Prayers, Baptism, Singing, we
witness to be all within. None of these outward.

Naylor, Saluta: p. 7. Is not Christ the Ordinance (no that he is not) and the
end of all Ordinances? I here is truth in this and it overthrows the former,
for if he be the end of the Ordinance, how can he be the Ordinance it self? are
the means, the end? a few lines after. Is not he the Sabbath, Baptism, Supper?
No that he is not.

In p 33. there we have the bottom: he will not deny but these Visibles (as he
calls them) had their place and time, but what are they now? He meets with an
Objection of ours, which is this, They are commands of God, and there is no
Scripture for taking them away. This is an Objection indeed: to which he
answers, I say those carnal things are but commands, as Circumcison, and the
Passover were, and many other, yet were they taken away without letter, by
that spirit that gave them, when they were abused: what letter had Hezekiah to
take away the brazen Serpent? what scripture had Paul to cry down Circumcision
etc. -- so runs on. But why does not Naylor make up his answer fully, applying
what he faith to the Objection, thus, So we the Quakers having the infallible
spirit which gave these commands, d^e by the same, seeing you abuse them,
without scripture take them away. Now your answer is complete. But

First, I say, those carnal things (as you call them) are so spiritual, that
all the perfection the Quakers brag of, will not be sufficient to perform one
of them in the holy manner the letter (as you call the Word) requires.

Secondly, You talk of the Infallible spirit, but you have not given us the
signs of it as Paul did, 2 Cor. 12.12. nay the Satanicall spirit by which you
are acted, has not given you so much wit, to ca^ry your selves cunningly, but
you do so manifestly cross Christ and the Apostles, that people must throw
away their Bibles, and natural Light before they can believe you.

Thirdly, You mistake in the brazen Serpent, for it was not ordained as a means
of worship in the Church, but only for the time while Serpents stung them in
the Wilderness, they were to look to it, typifying Christ; but when they were
past Serpents in Canaan there was no use of it: yet Hezekiah wanted no means
whereby he might certainly know the mind of God.

Fourthly, The worship then instituted was not taken away, because abused; but
because the Ceremonial part was fulfilled.

Fifthly, Jesus Christ the Lord of the Church may institute what means of
worship he pleases, his Apostles did converse with him forty days after his
resurrection, Acts 1.3 speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of
God: They had order what to do; but I hardly think the Quakers were there then
with him, and heard that doctrine, they teach us.

Sixthly, Then the Spirit of God teach us to deny God that which he has had
since the world began, viz: External worship: for prayer, sacrifices, and the
teaching of the family by the Father of the family, these parts of worship we
find at the beginning: after that, more. But now God must have none at all;
how shall we know there is a God in the world if we take away his worship?

Seventhly, Christ must then be a great destroyer of the Law, and not a
fulfiller, Mat. 5.17. for he must quite blot out the second Commandment; as the
fourth, and fifth, by these Quakers.

Eighthly, The right performing of the worship of God, will cost pains, and
exercise of graces; but the spirit in the Quakers have taken them off from that
burden.



Major. That Light denies a great work of Christ in the hearts of them who
believe in him, that is the light of Satan, not of Christ.

Minor. But so do the Quakers light: Ergo.

The Major, is so clear, that it needs no proof; for to deny a a saving work, a
great part of his redemption, this cannot come from Christ.

Minor. But the Quakers light denies a great work of Christ in the hearts of
them, who believe: I mean such a work as must necessarily be in all such: that
is, a work of inherent holiness, the new creature distinct from Christ's
person, and from his imputed righteousness to our Justification: The Quakers
in these Books I have, have spoken confusedly, and covertly, yet this must be
their doctrine, or some other notion, being Christed with Christ, Godded with
God; which I verily think they aim at.

Naylor, Saluta: p. 20. has these words, But say you, this is that
righteousness we believe in, and by which we are justified, by that blood
which was shed at Jerusalem, and by that obedience that was in him, and by that
holiness: but that the want of his righteousness in us, or that want of
Christ, or his blood in us can hinder our Justification, that we deny, and look
upon it as heresy, it is Christ without us that has satisfied for sin, his
righteousness, faith, patience, love, obedience, etc. its these without us
that whoever believes in shall be saved, and by this faith the ungodly is
justified.

Page 23. We can do nothing, neither do we desire to do any thing, yet can
we do all things that he wills, through him that is in us.

Page 2. While you live, sin lives; and if we say we have no sin we deceive
our selves (this is well) but where he alone lives, there is no sin, etc.

I deny not, but we are justified, by the righteousness, satisfaction of
Christ without us, as opposed to Inherency in us. But I utterly deny that God
ever imputes that righteousness to us, but withal he works inherent
righteousness in us, so as no man can be in a state of Justification, or shall
ever see God, who has not this inherent work of holiness in him, Heb. 12.14.

I deny also, that a person whom the Lord actually justifies is an ungodly
person; in that instant its true, he is ungodly, if you compare him with the
Covenant of works, he is a transgressor of it, which is the scope of the
Apostle, in the Romans 3.4. Romans 3.4.
To cut all men off from seeking life in that Covenant, and to bring them to
the righteousness of Christ: but look on him in reference to the Covenant of
grace, he is now a believer; or else he cannot be justified, and such a
believer as has received Christ to Union, and now trusts to Christ for
Communion of benefits, whereof justification is one. He that prates of his
justification before this Faith, he does but prate of that which he shall never
find. That absurd notion of faith justifying only Declarative, I would have
opposed, had this place been convenient.

I affirm also, that the work of inherent holiness which makes us new
Creatures, is a distinct thing from Christ his person; though among our
New England notions, this was received when the errors raged there, that
Christ was the new Creature; but for the 2 Cor. 5.17. they made miserable
Grammar of the verse, undertaking to be the Interpreters of the Original, read
it thus, if any man be in Christ the new Creature, and thus indeed Christ being
perfect, no wonder though the Quakers are perfect; for there is nothing in them
but Christ. And thus we see the meaning of that which we have so wondered at,
that men and women, who could not tell how to live honestly among men, keep
promises, keep from pilfering. deal justly (no nor can scarce do it at this
day) since these Quakers came are on a sudden mounted aloft, and tell others
they are perfect. No wonder, for if Christ be the new Creature, the new
Creature then cannot grow, for Christ cannot be more perfect then he is, I
affirm also that those who desine to do nothing, as says Naylor, they are
not in Christ, (if we speak of adulti) Romans 7.21. and their wills are renewed.

I know not what to make of that phrase, While you live, sin live, to take it
in our sense, they cry out upon us.

Mason p. 11. reproves Mr. Scortrith with scorn, because he affirmed that God
and a Saint are not one, Christ and a Saint are not one, then quotes against
him, Joh. 17.11. (which is nothing to his purpose) 21.22. and 2 Cor. 6.16. 1
Cor 6.17. yet (says he) is there not a real union between them, is not Christ
the head of the body, etc? I believe Mr. Scortrith did never deny this, for it
is the common received truth among Divines, that the union is real, that is,
it is not Ens rationis, it is not an imaginary thing, and that Christ is the
head Mystice, who denies it? Dr. Saints persev: p. 189.
Owen has gone as far as a man can go with safety (I think) in this point;
and yet not spoken more then some others have before him, both Bucanus, and
Polanus: so that it was another kind of union which Mr. Scortrith denied, and
with him also, all sober men.

Parnel. fruits fast. p. 25. propounds these two queries to Priest Stalham,
Sparrow, and among the rest 48. What is your own righteousness, and what is
the righteousness of Christ, and how do you distinguish between them? What a
hard question is this to answer, in a sound way also? but then 49. Whether he
that is justified by the righteousness of Christ, does not dwell in it, and it
in him, and whether he that dwells in the righteousness of Christ does sin,
yea or nay? Is this the way whereby you come to be so free from sin? You say
below, these things (i. e. the 61 Queries) I do not ask as if I knew them
not, but for the satisfaction of the simple, etc. The simple are beholden to
you, but had not you been both proud and simple you would not have moved such
queries as you have done. But I answer: for the righteousness of Christ
dwelling, etc. I deny that the righteousness of Christ whereby a believer is
justified does dwell in him: Saluta: etc. p. 20.
your fellow Quaker Naylor is against you: (unless you carry this secretly,
that we are Christed with Christ, then something you may gather) by dwelling, I
mean it is not inherent in us. Bellarmine makes difference between the
satisfaction of Christ, by which we are pardoned, (this he will not admit to be
in us) and that righteousness by which we are justified; this he says is
inherent in us. But I dare not accuse the Quakers of being guilty of so much
knowledge, and I presume you do not aim at his doctrine.

For the other phrase, The justified person dwelling in the righteousness of
Christ, and so not sinning; I confess my simplicity cannot understand this,
unless it had more sense in it. I have read 2 Pet. 3.13. wherein dwells
righteousness, but I have not read, where a Believer dwells in Christ's
righteousness, nor of so dwelling as not to sin.

Major. That light which teach men to omit their duty to God, that light is the
light of Satan, not of Christ.

Minor. But so do the light of the Quakers. Ergo.

The Major need no proof, Christ does not teach men to omit their duty, then he
is a teacher of unrighteousness.

Minor. But the Quakers light teach men to omit their duty to God, viz. Prayer.

Parnel Watch, p 46. speaking against one, Then thou went on with thy deluding
spirit, pressing the wicked to pray, whereas Prove. 15.8. the prayers of the
wicked are abominable; and thus thou did that which was ab^minable in the
sight of God, in praying thy self, and teaching the wicked to pray.

Parnel Gol: p. 15. The Apostles did not teach the wicked to pray.

Answ. 1. It is true, while men go on in a course of wickedness, and are
resolved to do so, yet in the mean time think to heal themselves, and make
God amends by their Prayers, the Lord says, he abominates their Prayers: Yet
this denies not Prayer to be their duty, to acknowledge their Lord and
Creator, upon whom they depend.

2. Why do the Quakers so much call all people to sink down to the light of
God in the Conscience [as before] yet now exclaim upon men for being guided by
it? the light of God in the Conscience does teach men to pray, bids them pray:
should they not obey their Conscience? 1 Jonah 6.14. the Conscience of the
Heathens did dictate Prayer.

3. Must not the wicked pray because they sin, and so it is abominable? then
they must not plow neither, for that also is sin. Prove. 21.4. but all sin is
abominable to God: what then, must not the wicked plow? I hope then the Quakers
will keep their families.

4. Was Peter no Apostle, was not Simon Magus wicked? read Acts 8.22. The
Apostle lames, 5 Chap. 13. Is any among you afflicted? Let him pray. But
suppose a wicked man (though I love Charity well, yet I believe there might be
one or two among those Tribes he writes to) what must he do? Surely, Any will
reach him. If he may pray when afflicted, why not at at other times: observe
the Epistle, and you will find there were some wicked among them.

5. What mean those words, Ier. 10.25. Fury on families that call not on his
name.

Naylor Saluta. p. 19. to the question, must we not pray? Answers, I say wait
for the spirit of prayer. But where learn you this? This is your spirits
Divinity, suppose the Spirit comes not this month or year? Then it seems the
duty must lie by: for God to give his Spirit is his free act, for me to pray is
my duty, as a Creature; let me do my duty, and wait there for the free Spirit
of God.

p. 20 Your times are in your own hands: (a little after) but the times of
Sons and Daughters are not in their hands, no, it is true, if you mean those
times David speaks of, Psalm. 31.15. But the times of prayer you speak of.
Daniel was a Son, yet he Chap. 6.10. three times a day prayed. so David, and
others had their times. But for times to sin we abhor them, we hope, more
then you.

etc.

Major. That light which teaches men to say, they have no sin, that light is
the light of Satan, not of Christ.

Minor. But so do the Quakers light, Ergo.

Major. Christ his Light teach us that for the Dominion of sin, all his people
are freed from it, Romans 7.12.14 but he that says he has not the being of sin,
and does not sin, the truth is not in him, 1 Ioh. 1.8.

Job had more holiness in him then all the Quakers, God says of him that he
was perfect, chapter 1. i. e. Evangelically, not Legally, for Chap. 9.20. he speak
other language, so 30. and 31. verses.

Job 14.4. 1 Kings 8.46. Eccles. 7.20. Prove. 20.9. Iam. 3.2. a relative
perfection in our justification, an inherent perfection of parts, in our
Sanctification, a striving after perfection in degrees; such perfection we own,
i. e. uprightness; but for the Quakers perfection let them keep it: Paul found
a body of death, Romans 7. and says he was not perfect, Phil. 3.12. Where sin
has no dominion, that man is perfect, i.e. Evangelically, Psalm. 19.13. the
word is (...) I shall be perfect, or complete, upright. yet such an one may
have sins, ver. 12. so not perfect legally. Who knows his errors? not
David, but the Quakers.

Minor. But the Quakers light teach people to say they have no sin, they are
perfect (not in our sense.) This their books are so full of that it were
tedious to transcribe. Mason spends the seven first pages of his book about
this, quoting some texts for it where perfection is mentioned, (which we own
in a sound sense) then railing upon the Priests, and damning them to hell
because they cross them.

Mason. p. 3. makes great use of Ephesians. 4.12. etc. perfecting of the Saints,
etc. thus he argues, if the Saints could not be perfect in this life, were not
these Apostles and Pastors, put upon a needless employment? Can the Priests of
the nation prove that Saints are tossed in heaven? Were Englands blind
watchmen commissionated from Christ, they would not prate thus against
perfection.

But if Mason had well understood the Original word (...) here rendered
perfecting, he might have known that the word is translated by others, For the
gathering together of Saints, by others, the Coagmentation, joining, gluing
together of Saints, to Christ by faith, to the body by love: not noting the
perfection of the growth, but such a perfection, as when a body has all its
members. He adds presently for the Edifying of the body of Christ. What need
of Edifying when there is complete perfection, so that till this Mystical body
have all its Members, the Ministry must last. When a body has all its
Members, none wanting, broken, or out of joint, yet then those Members must
grow.

If he will fetch his strength from the 13. v. a perfect man, etc. and that
perfect man, to be meant of every singular believer, to what I have said before
about perfection, I add, we acknowledge there are thousands (through mercy) of
perfect men, in England, as perfect is opposed to children tossed to and fro in
ver. 14. saints who stand so unmovable, and firm, that all the winds of
Quakers and other Heretics doctrines cannot shake them here upon earth.

But by the former words, Till we all come or meet etc. he seems to speak of
the whole mystical body, which shall be a perfect man, when they meet All in
the unity etc. and of the knowledge of the Son of God: But I do not believe
any man has that perfect knowledge of him, in this life, which they shall have.

There are abundance of these true members, who dye before they are perfect in
inherent holiness I am sure, or else you must cut off most of the members (nay
all) which your friend Castelio in this point dare not do, but has so much
charity to say, that such shall be saved: but there are no Pastors in heaven
to perfect them: then the Pastors work is not needless, though the members
come not to the perfect growth in this life. Nay the need of Pastors argue
imperfection; for when perfection is come, there will be no need of these: what
need of Nurses, Tutors, Schoolmasters, etc. when perfection is attained? More
may be said, but I forbear.

Another Text the Quakers use is Phil 3.15. But what say they to the 12 ver.
Paul says he was not perfect. Here appears a contradiction: But, Perfect men
may be considered two ways:

1. Either with reference to the perfect rule; so no man is inherently, and
legally perfect.

Or 2. Comparatively, with other men; thus some are but young scholars, they
understand not the fullness of the righteousness of Christ, etc. but are
troubled about Circumcision, v. 3. and other Jewish matters; others are more
grown in the knowledge of Christ, and his grace, more solid in judgment, who
are perfect in comparison of others, and this perfection he means, as the next
verse, and the observation of the Chapter proves; thus some little children,
young men, Fathers, 1 John 2.13.

Some think he calls the false Teachers, the perfect men, (...) and (...).
Zanch: in loc.
speaking ironically, and nipping them for their boasting.

Musculus upon this Text tells us of a debate he had with a Franciscan, who
with great impudency boasted he was perfect: but says of him, he did so rage,
that he seemed perfect in fury and madness: the same is evident in these
Quakers, when crossed; for fierce countenances, fury, raging, railing, I have
not read nor seen the like, of such as talk of perfection. By what I have
said, you may answer all they allege for perfection.

Thus also Priests ignorance, p. 4. Parnel. fr: fast: p. 24. But stay Parnel,
are you perfect too? have you no sin? do you so dwell in the righteousness
of Christ? I omit thy abominable pride which thou manifestest in thy Books;
with other sins easily to be proved. I only turn thee to 1 Pet. 2.23. When
Christ was reviled he reviled not again. Do you show this Spirit of Christ?
Let any read your Reply (as you call it) to Dr. Draton, where you have cut off
Goliahs head, then judge: as you have printed your adversary, yet any one shall
see what he speaks is with reason, scripture, and sobriety; but what is your
return to a man of his quality and years? Impudent liar, blind sot,
blasphemer, liar, hypocrite, deceiver, the book is stuffed with this language.

Come to the Civil power, and see how your infallible spirit carry you there.
Fru: fast. p. 10. in your reply to your Mittimus (as you call it) thus you
speak to the four Justices, naming them. In the Mittimus you find several
lies, slanders, etc. I shall reply to the same, and return the venom upon your
venomous spirits, etc. This is the perfect man, without sin; such also is
Naylor and Mason. I will give you leave to brag of your perfection: but read
Jude 8.9. 2 Pet. 2.10.

Major. That light which teaches people to revile, and throw filth upon the
true Ministers, and true Churches of Christ, that is the light of Satan, not of
Christ.

Minor. But thus do the Quakers light teach people, etc.

For the Major none will question that, 1 Timothy 5.17. There is double honor
allowed the laborers in word and doctrine: For the Churches, they bear such an
honorable relation to Christ, that sure Christ will not thus teach people to
revile them, 2 Cor. 11.2.

Minor. But the light of the Quakers teach people to revile and throw filth on
the true Ministers and Churches of Christ; even all in England, and the world
that differ from them. This they avoid, by denying with greatest abhorrency
that any of the Ministers are such, or the Churches.

Priests igno: p. 2. Wood^d p. 16. but especially Parnel twice in his Fr^fast,
tells us of the Church in God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. and Parnel says he ownes that
Church, and amongst his Queries to the Priests, he would have them tell him
what Church that is.

I wish Parnel had set down the interpretation from his infallible spirit, I
believe we should have found a blasphemous one. But let us examine the Text,
this Church of the Thessalon. which was in God, chapter 5. ver. 12, 13. had Rulers
over them, and they were to esteem them highly, etc. But Parnel, you deny all
Church Officers, so do all your sect; then you are not in God, as this Church
was.

In the 14 ver: they were to warn the unruly: in the 2 Epist: 3. ch: 11. there
were disorderly walkers, how can unruly, and disorderly persons be in God? tell
us this. This Church was taught to pray without ceasing, but you bid stay till
the spirit moves.

But note this by the way, a Church may be said to be a Church in God, and yet
there may be some unruly, and disorderly persons amongst them. If you say, but
they must be exhorted, warned etc. that is true, and so do we exhort, warn,
etc. this will help save our Churches, (some at least I am sure.)

But what is it to be in God still? should I say (as some, hyperbolically, but
very harshly and unsavourily) After a sort Deified? this I believe would please
the Quakers, but how are unruly and disorderly persons Deified? shall I say,
Church in God? so this Church (and others) is differenced from the Assemblies
of Pagans, as they were before, not in God, but Idols. And in Christ, so
differenced from the Jews, who refused Christ. They professed the Faith of God
and Christ, or they had an inward fellowship (some of them) and union with God
and Christ, as I Ioh. 1.3. Our fellowship is with the Father and his Son, etc.
Others had an outward fellowship, as owned the faith, partaked of his
Ordinances, and so visibly did profess themselves to be the body of Christ.

But let M. Mason observe, the Apostle makes a distinction here between God the
Father and Christ; but he p. 8. says, to make God, Christ, and Holy Ghost,
three distinct persons, Afterward p. 9. he calls it a bold and a blasphemous
assertion.
is such a piece of Divinity, as was never known till the Merchants of Babylon
broached it: then quotes 14 Ioh. v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. But what will M. Mason
gather from hence, that Christ as he is the eternal Son of God, is of the same
Essence with the Father, so that the Essence is but One? this we yield. But I
pray what do you make of the Humanity of Christ? was it real or imaginary? if
real, what, is the Humanity of Christ the same Essence with the Godhead? this
is new Divinity indeed; what, is there no difference between Christ, and the
Divine Essence subsisting in the relation of the Son (if the word Person be so
offensive?) you say, for the simples sake, p. 9. you will set down what the
Lord gives you in vindication of his honor.

Then quote the 14 of Ioh. the simple ones are much obliged to you and Parnel,
but you have shown your self but simple in this, and have notably vindicated
the honor of God, to make Christ, who is God-Man, and without the Manhood is
not Christ, that the Manhood also must be one Essence with the Godhead.

But to return to Parnel, I have already given one ground from the Church of
the Thessalon to prove there are some true Churches in England. I scarce think
Parnel know what a Church is, for if he define it right, he must overthrow
diverse of his own principles. I wish his infallible spirit would have let us
known his mind, that we might have tried the Quakers Church: but I will leave
this with all the Quakers, Seekers, Separatists in England, that if they will
own the Church of Corinth to be a true Church, then I will prove there are now
many Churches in England that are true also.

For the Ministers whom you and others call Priests, and say, we run before we
were sent, (you do well to begin first to cast that upon us, which you know
will fall upon your own heads:) no, we can prove our sending: Bishop. p. 23.
he brings against us the 1. Tit. 7. Well, and are there not many Ministers who
do in a good measure walk up to those rules though they dare not brag of your
perfection? Covetousness is the great thing you object; but to this I have
answered before. As for anger, we may be angry; and if an excess in anger
sometimes, will cut us off from being true Ministers, then Paul and Barnabas
were not true Apostles. Read Acts 15.39. if infirmities cut us off, then Peter
was no Apostle who the second time halted, Gal. 2. Then Jeremiah, Jonah, were
no true Prophets. But G. Dicitur (...) preprie qui adhaeret alicui, velut
unguibus affixus, nec sese finit avelli. Bulling. in loc.
Bishop: why do you leave out the 9 ver: where a Bishop must hold fast the
faithful Word: here is no mention of the infallible spirit which he must
forsake this faithful Word, to listen after: Then he must be able by sound
doctrine (not Quakers dreams) to exhort, and convince gainsayers. Where are
these quaking Pratlers, and others also, if these rules must try them, who do
not know how to speak sense, but their reason is railing, and their answers,
you lie, etc.

Also G. Bish: why did you not quote the 5 ver. where Titus a Church Officer
was left to Ordain other Church Officers: these persons so qualified. Lay these
together, and here is the true sending of a Minister (the peoples choice
supposed, which we we also have.)

Thou do quote also 1 Timothy 3.3. Take in the 2 v. also, there is one apt to
teach: take in the 6 ver. And though Parnel be far enough from the abilities
required in a Bishop, many miles short, yet as he is a Novice lifted up with
pride, so let him take heed of the next words. And why did not thou quote the 4
chap. of this Epist: 14 ver: and 5 chap: 22. Lay hands suddenly. etc. and there
you should have seen how these qualified men came into their places.

Try us then for abilities, if you can, all you Quakers and Separatifts in
England; then see what is required by the Aposties example to bring us into the
Ministry, and prove we have it not.

Object. You are Ordained by Bishops.

Answ. To this I have answered at large in another Book, though it be false of
abundance of us, we received no Ordination from the Bishops; yet I wish that
the Separatists would think of one thing, in Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. there is mention
made of many slain for the Word of God, etc. these had white robes given them,
etc these who were slain must needs fall under the X Persecutions under the
heathen Emperors, and may well in a special manner look to that horrible
butchery under Dioclesian, but if you know those times, you will find there
were abundance of Bishops slain in those times (I mean Bishops who were above
Presbyters in the Church) and you shall find abundance of ceremonies, humane
inventions in those times in the worship of God, yet we find God does not show
such disdain of them as you do now, he gives them white robes. Thus Bp:
Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, and abundance of Ministers ordained by those Bishops,
but suffered gloriously for the testimony which they held, the Lord will own
them with honor in the Day of Judgment; how then you come to cast off so many
Ministers of Christ, so able in the work of the Gospel, (as none have been
more able since the Apostles days, no nor so able) so godly in their
conversation, to whose Ministry God has sealed, in the spiritual children he
has given them, and only because they were ordained by Bishops, (who yet were
Ministers and did Ministerial work) do you provide to answer for this at that
day.

Some men will scarce own any man's Ordination but that which is by such
Bishops, and you will own no Ministers who are ordained by such; if you two
should meet, who would be the strongest?

Parnel Gol: p. 26. makes this a proof against our Ministry, that it is
earthly, because in thus many years we have wrought no better reformation.

1. But Parnel, the English Ministry (through grace) will show the greatest
reformation in the world, and yet none in the world opposed like it. We can
show the souls who confess by us the Lord enlightened them, turned them, and
has built them up.

2. Then Isaiahs, and Ieremiahs, with other of the Prophets Ministry was
earthly, for I am sure they wrought but little reformation.

3. What, was Christ's Ministry earthly also? he complains Isa. 49.4. that he
had labored in vain.

4. What? you will have many called, and many chosen? Christ says the contrary.

England this day, as ever was since the Apostles died: and if any Quakers or
Separatists will undertake to prove the contrary, so they will argue and not
babble, they shall soon find those who will answer them. While therefore you
cast filth upon these (I plead not for every particular Minister) and upon all
the Churches, you show your light to be of Satan, etc.

Major. That Light which brags of the infallible spirit, and yet cannot speak
good sense or reason, that Light and Spirit must come from Satan, not from
Christ.

Minor. But such is the Quakers light and infallible Spirit. Ergo.

Major. The Spirit of Christ is a Spirit of wisdom, but he that speaks
irrationally, nonsense, he does not speak wisely: the Spirit of God is a most
rational Spirit, and where it speaks, it speaks like it self, Acts 6.10. They
were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by which Stephen spoke. Thus
Paul, Apollos, etc. they spoke rationally, carried such strength, that none
could answer them.

Ministers must be men able to convince, 1 Tit. 9. (...). those that talk
irrationally will never (...).

I know Satan can speak rationally, and sense also, which makes us wonder what
he means to take such instruments, unless it be because he is at the last,
seeing witty Jesuits cannot do the business, now try if foolish Quakers can
do it: this also I know, that reason being a beam of God, there can be no true
reason for sin or error. Also, though abundance of Gods people are weak and
shallow, yet they never speak truth, but they speak sense, and reason.

But here we have a pack, mightily insulting over the Ministers because they
do not assume to themselves the infallible Spirit, in that notion which the
Quakers boast they have it, and yet cannot speak rationally. Let us hear a
little.

Qua: gl^: of God, p 3, 4. there they undertake to answer the arguments the
Apostle brings, 1 Cor. 9.9, 10, 11, etc. to prove the maintenance of Ministers:
They that preach on the Gospel must live upon the Gospel. This scripture shames
you, and shows your Gospel will not maintain you, but you seek to Magistrate s^^
and the Ministers of the Gospel are ashamed of such a pack of teachers. This is
his answer, so, He that thresheth, thresheth in hope: Oh how have they threshed
in hope all this while, and got forth no corn, but are feign to seek to the
Magistrates for me^nes and food. So, Thou shall not muzzle the month of the
Ox: Oh you shameless teachers, your mouths must be muzled, have been
treading all this while, and no corn trodden out to feed you, but are feign to
seek to the Magistrates. Do not these men speak gallantly? Is not here
evidence of the infallible Spirit? But if these Quakers would have spoken like
men, thus ye should have said: True, those who preach the Gospel, those who
thresh, those who tread out, etc. that is, those who do perform the work of
the Lords Ministers, in teaching, Iabouring faithfully, they may challenge
maintenance by these Scriptures. But you do not thresh, labor, etc. in the
Lords work. Therefore you cannot claim maintenance from these Seriptures; now
you had spoken rationally, and there had been matter of shame indeed that we
should have called for corn, and not wrought: but now you have cast all the
shame upon the people, that we preaching, laboring, threshing, etc. are denied
our corn, our maintenance, and are forced to go to the Magistrates our nursing
fathers, Isa. 49 v. 23. for it. Like a man who has been plowing and threshing
half a year for another, when he comes to demand his wages, he is denied: the
man goes to the Magistrate to be helped, the Quakers cry out, Oh thou
shameless man, have thou been plowing and threshing so long, and now art fain
to go to the Magistrate? etc. Does the man deserve shame, or he who deny him
his due? So here.

Thus, Priests Igno: p. 2. The teachers of the world sprinkle Infants, telling
people its an Ordinance of God, which is contrary to the Scriptures; and quotes
in his margent Gal. 3.1. Luc. 1.26.36. Let any one read those Scriptures, and
see how they oppose it: he quotes no other Scriptures.

In the next: The teachers of the world call people unto a Sacrament, for the
which there is no Scripture, here they act contrary to the Scriptures: quoting
Genesis 29.28. the words are these, and Jacob did so and fulfilled her week, and
he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife also, and Genesis 10. but no verse. These
are all the Scriptures. Here you see the Priests ignorance, and the Quakers
knowledge laid together.

So let any one that has reason read Naylor his Answer to Io: Reyners
Queries. Parnel against Dr. Draton, and then see if it be not a woeful judgment
of God to let a Nation be overrun, and people catched, with such witless,
brainlesse fellows, besides their gross, abominable principles, that destroy
Scriptures, Ordinances, Churches, civil States, etc.



Major. That Light which affirms sound believers, walking (evangelically) in
obedience to Gods commandments to be in a state of condemnation, that Light is
from Satan, not from Christ.

Minor. But so do the Light of the Quakers: Ergo.

The Major is plain, 3 Ioh. 36.18.16. and 16 Mar. 16. If faith and holiness
shall go to hell, what shall go to heaven?

Minor. They do not say this in so many words, but by consequence; for the
persons who are such, and they cannot disprove it, they affirm to be in that
condition.
But the Quakers Light affirms sound believers, and persons who walk in
obedience etc. to be in a state of condemnation.

For we are assured there are hundreds of sound believers in Christ in England,
that fear to sin, walk with the Lord, (and that more close than the Quakers)
who do detest and abominate the Quakers doctrines, principles, and practices;
but the Quakers say of those who come not amongst them, that they shall be
damned, perish, etc. This is their common language about us.

Thus J. Toldervy, Ep. 17.18. told his Master Col. Web. Thus Mason p. 8.
speaking to the Ministers, whom he calls Merchants of Babylon, bid us read our
doom, in Revel. 18.7.8. yet among these I am sure are very sound believers, and
very holy men, if they may be tried by the word: which shall try them, yea and
you Mason, and all your Quakers, notwithstanding your boastings of the
infallible Spirit.

Thus I. N. p. 17. F. Harris makes this Querie, Whether it be safe for
Christians to forsake and let go those Gospel-dispensations of the Spirit of
Truth, in which God has blessedly appeared, etc?

The sum of his answer is this, that all those who deny the light of Christ,
and the infallible spirit (in their sense this must be taken, else we do say,
some truth is in this) have nothing but the spirit of delusions: but then adds,
without the infallible spirit there is no promise nor word, but what is stolen
from others, or out of a book, and had thou had no book thou had no voice nor
promise. Here is brave stuff: the promises then in the Bible, are little
worth; if I. N. can find any promises out of this book, let him take them for
me.

Thus Parnel and Naylor call the Ministers, Magicians.

Let the Quakers tell us what is faith, according as the Lord Christ declares
it in his Word, (not their infallible Spirit without the Word) tell us what it
is to walk holily, as the holy men in Scripture have done, and see if there be
not many hundreds that answer that faith and holiness.

And let me desire the Quakers but to tell me of one man in the Word of God
that was holy, who embraced the Quakers doctrines, principles, and practices?



Jam. 3.1. Be not many Masters, knowing we shall receive the greater
condemnation. Who so masterly as the Quakers, Mat. 7. ver: 1.

shaking in that strange manner, which some report of them, and their books
defend, it is manifest enough to every one, whom the God of this world has not
blinded, whence it comes, and prove their doctrine to have the same Author: it
is a thing so known amongst them, that J. Toldervy says p. 28. He had long
waited for it, then had it to purpose: My whole man was so shaken, torn, and
rent, that had I not by a great strength been enabled, I could not have
continued: also it did work in me as though I had taken a strong purge, page
29. yet I. N. against F. Harris p. 18. abuses the holy examples of Daniel,
Moses, and David, to defend these Diabolical actings; nothing like those holy
men, neither in the causes, nor effects. Let the Reader observe the History at
the end of the book.

I shall conclude all with transcribing a few lines out of him where he
relates what one of these Quakers, who was of his former acquaintance, page 7.
spoke to him, (with Answer to one of Parnels Queries) He gave me to understand
that they were sent forth to preach the Gospel by the same Christ the Apostles
were, and that the person, that Son of God which died at Jerusalem, was not the
Redeemer of man from sin. Oh fearful! but the redeemer was in every
particular man, that light by which he was given to see sin, and enabled by
it, if obeyed, to be redeemed from sin: which Christ had redeemed them
perfect, and now lived in them Lord of all things, by which they were made the
sons of God, and so what was manifested to them by that substance, from that
substance were they moved to speak, which was the same holy Ghost, by which
the Apostles were endued, sent forth and enabled to preach: so he declared how
sometimes in the night they were immediately commanded by the eternal spirit
to go forth and preach, etc. Here is enough said to make us all quake: I
intend not to open the wretchedness that lies in these words, only this is
worth the observation; that whereas some have cast off all Officers, and
Churches, because we are out of order, say they, and therefore they wait for
Apostolical men to be sent from God (I know not how) to bring us into order:
here you have them, I hope your expectation is answered, by a fearful judgment
of God.

But let us hear what is Parnels opinion, though propounded by way of querie,
Whether any now ought to preach in the name of Jesus, but who are called to it,
and fitted for it the same way as the holy men of God were, spoken of in
Scripture?

What holy men he means, the next Querie to this will interpret: Whether do
you own immediate revelation now, yea or nay? q 8.9. The question would be,
what he means by immediate revelation? but by comparing their spirits we may
know his meaning. Bishop p. 24. proving that we are not the Ministers of
Christ, brings in this for one proof, Gal. 1.12. the Ministers of Christ,
received not the Gospel by man, nor the will of man, nor were they taught it
but by the revelation of Jesus Christ in them. We may see what Parnel aims at:
but in this sense? no, we own no such revelations.

1. For, what should such Revelations concern? Faith, or Manners? If Faith; All
that we are bound to believe Christ has perfectly revealed in his Word: If
Manners; Christ also has perfectly revealed the whole will of God for our
obedience, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. The Scripture, etc. There it is to be found in the
Scripture, whatever is requisite to make the man of God perfect. Since we have
a perfect rule, what need we more? What if there be a revelation that cross an
Article of faith, or rule of obedience in the Scripture, (as do the pretended
revelations of the Quakers) what shall we judge of it? Surely the Devil is the
Author of it.

2. The foundation upon which the true Church of Christ is built, has long
since been perfectly laid; Ephesians. 2.20. and are built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone.
No Church need any better foundation to be built upon than the Church of the
Ephesians was built upon: that was built upon, not any of our new, mad,
Diabolical Apostles; but the Apostles which the Lord Jesus himself called,
fitted in a glorious manner, that the servants did show who was their Master:
and Paul one of these Acts 20.27. tells the Elders, I have not shunned to
declare to you All the Counsel of God, which concerns our salvation. If the
Quakers bring any more, then Paul did not declare All: but whether Paul or the
Quakers speak truest, we will not dispute: show us now such men as those
Apostles were.

3. I pray tell us, what Scripture have you to prove that any men now in these
days should have such revelations, and that now we must look again for
Apostles? It may be you will make a tush at Scripture, and tell us your
infallible Spirit tells you so: but we can upon better grounds make a tush at
your Spirit, and curse you by the authority of the Spirit, for adding to his
Word, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Rev. 22.18.

4. Before you brag of your Apostleship and Revelations, show your selves to
be, I will not say Christians, but Men, rational men, which as yet you have not
done.

5. As after those Prophets under the Old Testament whom God raised up, no man
dared to assume to himself that Name and Office (I know there were those who
were called Prophets in the N. Test. but they differed from the Old) or dared
to be a Penman: so after the Apostles whom Christ himself chose, fitted, and
authorized to be his Penmen in the New Testament, let none dare to be so
devilish to assume that Office, or Name unto themselves.

6. The Testatour is dead, who then shall make any other Testament? or what
need is there of any other, than what himself has made?

For the infallible Spirit the Quakers so much prate of, abusing the Ministers
because they do not boast of it, (and Mason in particular, page: 15. abuses
Mr. Scortrith, and bid his people take heed of him) I shall speak a few words.
Mason adds this, Take this along with you too, The Spirit of Truth is the
infallible Spirit. But George Scortrith confesses he has not the Infallible:
Therefore George Scortrith preaches from the Spirit of Error.


What now? what do Quakers make Syllogismes? then we look to our selves; but
Mason the next time you make a Syllogism, desire your Master to learn you so
much skill to make a true one, for the Priests do laugh to read such a false
one. You might have indeed disposed the predicate of your question in the Major
proposition, with some words altered, but now it is no where disposed. But to
the business:

1. If the Quakers would have us affirm that all Ministers must have the
Spirit in that manner as the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1. v. 11. and Apostles, v. 12. So
2 Pet. 1. ult. then we professedly say, we have it not. If the Quakers say they
have it so, then I say, the Spirit in the Prophets and Apostles was not the
infallible Spirit, for the Quakers spirit is cross to that.

2. I affirm that Ministers (I mean not every particular man who calls himself
a Minister) have that Spirit which is Infallible, to some a Spirit of gifts and
grace, to some only gifts. We pray to the Lord for it, and that we may be
guided by it.

3. True Ministers do by that Spirit from his word, teach to their people the
infallible truths of Christ, they build them upon such foundations for doctrine
and practice, that not one who follow their preaching shall ever miscarry, but
shall honor God here, and be infallibly saved hereafter.

4. Those who have forsaken this Ministry, the Spirit of God has left them,
and let them fall into corrupt errors, and some damnable heresies, with
practices grievous, and offensive to the Spirit.

But yet to say that this Spirit which (with reverent humility) we dare say we
have, does, or is bound to teach us every one in every Iota of truth, so that
not in any particular whatever we may mistake, this we do not affirm, no more
than he does, or is bound to expel every relic of corruption out of our
hearts: we know but in part. Peter might boast of this Spirit more than Mason,
but whence then does he walk so, Gal. 2.11.14. as to deserve a reproof.

Nay go to others who were guided extraordinarily: Isaac by a prophetical
Spirit, and infallible, blessed Jacob, but he mistook in the person whom he
blessed, he thought it had been Esau: the infallible Spirit did not guide him
there to know Jacob, but he erred as to his own purpose. Samuel went to anoint
David by an infallible Spirit, but he mistook in Eliab. So Nathan a Prophet,
but he mistook in his counsel to David about the Temple building. Then why the
Spirit should so teach every Minister that in no point whatever he should
mistake (so long as in nothing that concern the salvation of his people) I know
not.

Much more might be gathered out of their Books, whereby it may appear by what
spirit these Quakers are led, truly by Satan, scarce transformed into an Angel
of Light.

And now to you who are my people, and have chosen me to be your Officer,
having thus opened the wickedness of this Sect, I exhort you to beware of
them: for you who have understanding so as you are able to oppose them, I do
not fear your going to hear them, or conferring with them, they are scarce men
in reason: for you who are of the weaker sort, I exhort you again, come not
near them so much as to hear them, (since warning is given what they are) but
if you will do it, know assuredly, the Church will proceed against you for so
doing, as for any other sin.

FINIS.
A Minister now in Essex gave this Narration to a friend of mine, written with
his own hand, and his name to it; the Copy is true that I here offer to the
Reader.
The 8th Month, 19th day. 1654.
AT the earnest desire of some friends, I went with John Ward and Anthony
Hunter to a meeting of the deluded souls called Quakers, at John Hunters of
Benfield-side in the County of Durham, where we found about twenty persons
sitting all silent: after we had sat awhile (all being mute) the Lord moved me
to arise, and call upon his name by prayer. I was no sooner up, but my legs
trembled greatly, so that it was some difficulty to stand: but after I had
prayed a short space the trembling ceased: while I prayed to GOD as a Creator,
there was but little disturbance, but when I cried in the name of JESUS CHRIST
my Mediator, God in my nature, now in the highest glory appearing and
interceding for his Saints, then the Devil roared in the deceived souls in
most strange and dreadful manner, some howling, some screeking, yelling,
roaring, and some had a strange confused kind of humming, singing noise.

Such a representation of Hell I never heard of, nothing but horror and
confusion.

After I had done praying (not opening my eyes before) I was amazed to see
about the one half of those miserable creatures so terribly shaken, with such
strange violent various motions, that I wondered how it was possible some of
them could live.

In the midst of this confusion, one of them asked if I were come to torment
them? To whom I applied this word, Mat. 8.29.

And while I spoke something of Faith, they declared that they were come to the
faith of Devils, Jam. 2.19. but said we were not attained to such a faith.

After two hours, as we were departing out of the house, one of them cursed me
with these words: All the plagues of God be upon thee. Whereupon, I returned
and prayed for such of them, as had not committed the unpardonable sin. Thus
far this Minister.

Lately in a Town near me, when the Quakers were met together, there appeared
one amongst them in such a shape, as caused them to break up their meeting,
with no small trouble to diverse of them. I cannot learn the perfect manner,
for the Quakers will not reveal it; only so much some of them have affirmed,
and I will not publish more than I am certain of. I wish it may turn to their
good.


