THE TYRANNY OF SATAN, Discovered by the tears of a Converted Sinner, in a
Sermon Preached in Paul's Church, on the 28 of August, 1642.

By THOMAS GAGE, formerly a Romish Priest, for the space of 38 years, and now
truly reconciled to the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Badgor, for Humphrey Mosley, at the Prince's Arms in
Paul's Churchyard. M.DC.XLII.

To the Right Honorable, ISAAC PENNINGTON Lord Major of the City of London,
together with the Right Worshipful the Sheriffs, and Aldermen of the same
City.
SIRS,
MAy it please you, Saul that great Persecutor of the new beginning Church of
Christ, that enemy who breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord, after he was cast down from his horse, and his pride was
quelled by the might and power of Christ, he was by the Lords order committed
to the care of Ananias, Acts 9. 11. True it is, Ananias answered the Lord, that
he was jealous and fearful of Saul, because he had heard by many, how much
evil he had done to the Saints at Jerusalem, 13. v. But the Lord replied no
more unto him, but that he should not fear nor mistrust him, because he had
turned his heart, and made him a chosen vessel to bear his name before the
Gentiles, and Kings, and children of Israel, and that he would teach him how
great things he should suffer for his names sake. Let it please your Honor and
Worships to behold here my own case deciphered; for if Saul persecuted the
Church of Christ; I my self have persecuted the same Church, by opposing the
doctrine of it, by preaching and teaching contrary to it, by procuring to seduce
souls from it, by writing against it. But now it has pleased that mighty and
powerful Lord; against whom there is no resistance, to cast me down upon the
ground, to quell my pride, to lighten me round about with the beams and light
of his mercies, to make me know how hard a thing it is to kick against the
will and calling of God, and with trembling and fear to make me say, Lord what
will thou have me to do? If Saul was sent to Damascus to Ananias, a chief and
zealous follower of Christ, that by him he might be protected from the Jews and
enemies of the Lord, who doubtless hearing of his change and conversion would
have cruelly torn and slaughtered him if they could have found him. So I my
self by a secret and inward order, which I have found by God delivered to my
Soul, have judged it meet and fit to search out in this City some zealous
Ananias, some religious follower of Christ's pure doctrine, that I may be safely
sheltered and protected from the violent atte^pts of the Lords enemies the
Papists, who I know will endeavor to do me all the mischief they can. Therefore
let it please your Honor and Wps. who are well known to be as Ananias in
Damascus, zealous and truly religious followers of Christ's own doctrine, and
favorers of the pure Word of the Lord, to cast your eyes upon me a new
converted Saul, to shelter and protect me from those that plot my mischief. O
when surest they are to hinder my perseverance in the truth, by plotting and
studying my destruction, let them find me hovering under the wings of your
protection. O fear not! nor say what Ananias said, I have heard by many of
this man, how much evil he has done to thy Saints, but praise the work of the
Lord in me, who has opened now my eyes, who has brought me now out of
Babylon, who has made me confess my sins and iniquities with a sorrowful and
contrite heart. And as it pleased the Lord to show Saul, as soon as he was
converted how great things he should suffer for his names sake; even so be you
confident, as I my self am that this my calling and conversion is purely and
merely from above and from the Lord; from whom I have received this testimony,
that he has showed me already how great things I must suffer for his names
sake; for I must for him suffer many injuries and calumniations from the
Papists, I must suffer the loss of all my kindred, I must suffer the loss of
that maintenance, which I was wont to receive from them, I must suffer want and
poverty. But for whom? For the Lords sake; for the teaching and preaching the
precise rule of the Word of the Lord, for abjuring all Popish errors, for
renouncing all supertitions, for abhorring all idolatries. Let these my
sufferings serve to your Honor and Worships for a true testimony of my
conversion; let these my sufferings remove from you all fears and jealousies
of my perseverance, that thus with your favorable protection I may rejoice in
my calling, I may freely teach the pure Word of the Lord, I may oppose all
Antichristian doctrine, and by my example may draw many wandering souls to the
true Faith and Church of Christ. And I shall always pray to the Lord to keep
your Honor and Worships in grace, and that you may so rule and govern this City
by your conscionable and upright actions before God and men, that you may truly
here be called zelotes of the Honor of the Lord, and afterward you may have
your seats above in the triumphant City of Jerusalem.

Your Hon. and Worcester. humble and faithful servant, in the things of God, and
Christ. THOMAS GAGE.

To the Right Worshipful Sir SAMUEL OWFIELD, A Worthy Member of the House of
COMMONS, now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
IF my boldness may reach so far upon your patience, I shall briefly touch
what John in the fifth chap. of his Gospel writes of a poole which was in
Jerusalem called Bethesda: About this poole were wont to lie a great multitude
of impotent folk, blind, lame, and withered, waiting for the moving of the
water, which was done by an Angel, who went down at a certain time into the
poole and troubled the water, and then whosoever stepped in, was cured of
whatsoever disease he had. But one lying there 38 years, who in all this time
could never be cured, because being of himself impotent (as he answered to our
Savior) he had no man, when the water was troubled, to help him or to put him
into the poole. I will not stand to moralize this holy story unto you at large,
least you might justly say that I abuse to much your patience, by confounding
the style of an Epistle, which ought to be brief, with the division, parts and
order of a Sermon. Only I beg your patience so far as to peruse this my ensuing
Sermon, and in it you shall find an impotent man, not only blind, but deaf and
dumb, and truelly beaten by Satan, and by him expulsed out of the Church of
Christ, and as I may truly say) lying in this misery near 3^ years. The
discourse of my ensuing Sermon will inform You that I my self have been this
impotent man. Many times my Conscience has been moved and troubled from above
with good and heavenly inspirations (which God has been pleased to send into
my soul) by my considered aberration from the true Church, for which the
waters of my tears and inward sobs from my heart have been also moved with the
troubles of my soul. So that I would many times full feign have stepped and
entered into the true Church of England, where all diseases of the soul are
most surely healed. But alas! mine own impotency and weakness joined with my
long blindness, hindered the execution of my good resolutions; temporal
respects and fears kept back my steps. Many times I feared I should want a man
and a friend (as the cripple at Bethesda did) to help me, to encourage me, and
to further my good desires. I feared the high Assembly of Parliament would
rather mistrust him, that so many years has been an enemy to the State of this
Kingdom, than now in these times approve his penitency and contrition, which
might rather have seemed unto them a fained hypocrisy. All these fears kept
back for a time the forwardness of my will and heart. Until at last I
resolved to disclose and discover unto Your Worship, these troubles of my
heart, these diseases of my soul, even the want of a man to help me. God whom
I sought too pleased, with my request; I found that assistance from you, that I
so earnestly desired, for, I found a man, I found a friend, I found a
comforter, I found an Advocate to plead for my pardon before that high Court
now assembled. For by Your means I have been quietly brought into the Church;
by Your means also, I hope, I shall be henceforth protected against all
slanderers, who will whet their tongues against me and seek to trouble me, and
grudge at my good, as the Jews excepted against the Cripple and impotent man,
who was cured by our Savior. I shall always be ready to render due thanks to
God, and next to You, for Your blessed help toward my Conversion, and first
fruits of my Vocation, which in this humble. Work of mine, I have endeavored
to make known to the World, remitting my further expressions to better
occasions. And in the mean time praying to God, that he will be pleased with
his powerful hand to supply to You, and Yours what my heart can wish, but
never will be able to perform according to the full measure of so glorious a
Work, which truly next to God the beginner and Author of all goodness, by
Your means has been accomplished.

Your Worships humble and ever obliged servant in Christ THOMAS GAGE.

The Tyranny of Satan, discovered by the tears of a converted Sinner, In a
Sermon Preached in Paul's Church, on the 28 of August, 1642.
LUKE 22. 31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, Behold Satan has desired to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat. But I have prayed for thee that thy
Faith fail not. And when thou art Converted, strengthen thy Brethren.
Dearly Beloved; These words I have chosen to declare unto you this day, as
most fit to lay open before your eyes my own most wretched estate (wherein I
have continued almost 40 years) the tyranny of Satan over my miserable and
afflicted soul, as also by the sight of so hideous a sinner, as I have been,
and by the knowledge of the slavery wherein a sinner groans under the power of
the Devil, to terrify you all that here are present from yielding to his
crafty and subtle assaults.

And secondly, to cherish and comfort all those that find themselves seduced by
this mortal enemy of all man kind, with the mercies of a most loving and
merciful Father above, who not desiring the eternal death and destruction of
a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live; when
poorest we are and most in want, then does he show and discover unto us the
riches of his mercy for his great love wherewith he loves us, as Paul
witnesses in the 2 to the Ephesians. 3, 4. ver. When most dejected and
comfortless we are, then does he comfort us, and show himself a God of
Comfort; as also Paul does teach us in the 2 Cor. 4. Who finally when he sees
us most in darkness and in the night of sin, than does he dissolve those
mists of blindness and ignorance from the eyes of our understanding, an^
shines into our inward hearts, with the rays and light of his Grace and mercy.

Blessed and praised be thy name, O Heavenly Father, that have vouchsafed this
day to lighten me in the horrid darkness of my sins, that have visited me in
my Egyptian slavery, and have brought me out of that thraldom of Popery, into
a land of Milk and Honey, abounding with the sweetness of thy Grace and Mercies.
Continue, O Lord, these thy favors toward me so, that I may by my Conversion
be an example to all sinners to forsake their wickedness, by laying open unto
them this day two principal and essential points, to wit, the danger and
horridness of sin, and thy unspeakable mercies, that thus I may perform what
thou commandedst Peter; and that my self being converted, I may strengthen my
Brethren, calling them from sin, and strongly settling them in the true,
ancient, and Apostolic Faith.

Dearly Beloved, The first point which is to be observed in the words of my
Text, is the tyranny, which the Devil practizeth over a Christian soul,
contained in those words of Christ our Savior spoken to Peter, Behold Satan
has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat.

The desire of Satan is not any way to do us good, but all the mischief he
can. As soon as he has got us into his claws, he produces (as far as lies in
his power), Sentence of damnation against us, he prepares us, and puts us
in readiness for the fire of hell.

The first preparation which he makes for our souls to burn everlastaingly,
is the same which shall happen unto every damned, and cursed soul at the day
of the last and dreadful Judgment, when the Angels shall separate the wicked
from the good, as Christ our Savior foretold us by S. Matthew, in the 13 chap.
in the Parable of the seed, in the 41 ver. saying, The Son of man shall send
forth, his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend and them which do iniquity. As a so in the same Chap. of Mat^h. we read
in the Parable of the net cast into the Sea, and gathering of every kind, which
when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down and gathered the good into
vessels, but cast the bad away. So (says our Savior verse 49) shall it be at
the end of the world; The Angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from
the just, and shall cast them into the furnace of fire. Behold how the nearest
preparation for the fire of hell is the separation of the wicked from the just.

And after this follows immediately that dreadful sentence of damnation,
which ye shall find in Matthew. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. If this be a horrid thing to
consider, and which ought to make our hair stand upright, and our flesh to
tremble; let not us laugh, but fear and tremble to fall into Satan's hands,
hearing out of the words of my Text, that his only desire is to sever us from
the elect and godly, to prepare us for the final sentence of Judgment, to make
us ready for the curse of God and everlasting fire of hell. For what can more
plainly be understood by these words of our Savior to Peter? Satan has
desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat.

What does the Husbandman, when he sifteth his wheat, but with the help of the
wind separate the chafe from the good grane? Even so the Devil striveth and
endeavors to sift us as wheat; which is as much as to say, to separate us
from the Elect and chosen people of the Lord, from the good Laws of God, from
the good and wholesome Doctrine of the Church. This was the only endeavor of
Satan the night of the Passion of our Lord, to sever and separate not only
Peter, but the rest of the disciples from the company of their master like
chafe from the true grane: who said of himself, that he was the grane that
was to be buried in the earth, that afterward he might spring up again with
great increase for all his Church. O if every Christian soul would take this
point to consideration, how the Devil desires and endeavors to sever us
like chafe, fit for nothing but for the fire, and for that dreadful sentence
of damnation, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire; Doubtless we would
fear to commit the sins which daily we commit, doubtless we would tremble to
yield to the power of such a tyrant; doubtless we would take no rest in sin as
we do, if we did but consider that by it we are become dry chafe separated
from the heavenly grane our Savior Christ, severed from all those fruitful
granes and members of the Church, who standing on the right hand shall through
their fruitful Faith at last be laid up in that storehouse of everlasting
bliss and felicity; when the sinner like chafe already severed from the grane
by the Devils endeavors, expects nothing but death to burn for ever.

In the 12 Chap. of Judges and 6 ver. I have observed a pretty History for this
purpose, where the Scripture speaking of a battle fought betwixt the
Gileadites and the Ephraimites says, that the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, and
put the Ephraimites to flight toward the river of Jordan, And the Gileadites
took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites; And it was so that when
those Ephraimites which were escaped, said, Let me go over, that the man of
Gilead said unto him, Art thou an Ephraimite? If he said Nay. Then said they
unto him, say now Shibbobeth; and he said Sibboleth; for he could not frame to
pronounce it right; Then they took him and slew him at the passage of Jordan,
and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand.

Dearly Beloved, two things I would wish you to note in this History of Holy
Scripture.

The first, that at the passages over Jordan these Ephraimites were examined
who they were.

Secondly, that because they could not say Shibboleth, but instead of it they
said Sibboleth, therefore they were slain.

Shibboleth, according to the true translation signisieth An ear of Corn. And
Sibboleth signifies the chafe or the straw that remains when the corn is
separated from it. So that we find that the sword killed all such as could not
say Shibboleth or Ear of Corn, but instead of it pronounced Sibboleth, Straw
or chafe separated from the corn.

O Christian and devout Soul, take out of this a lesson of morality, and judge
thy self a rebellious Ep^raimite, always warring against thy God and Maker.
When thou sinnest, what do thou but rebel against thy Creator? who at last
will be too hard for thee. But when? When he shall meet thee at the passage
over Jordan, that is, when as water thou shall slide away. Omnes morimur and
quasi aqua dilabimur, we do all dye, and like water slide and fall away. O what
a day will that be, when thy Soul is to pass away from thy body? When thy
Soul is to pass over from this world to the other yet never seen? O then
shall meet thee the true Gileadite, against whom thou have rebelliously fought
with the Sword of Justice in his hand; then shall begin thy trial for thy life
or death of thy Soul, then shall thou be commanded to say Shibboleth, to say
if truly thou be an ear full of weighty and fruitful grane of fruitful
Faith: But if thou can not say but Sibboleth, that thou art fruitless, that
thou art a light straw, a little chafe separated from the true grane Christ
Jesus; then expect the wrath of God, expect the the blood of his sword of
Justice, expect if he find thee among the wicked separated from the good, that
this thy being sifted, this division and separation of thee from the just and
righteous shall be a fore-running messenger of that final sentence of
damnation, Depart from me you cursed into everlasting fire. God forbid that in
this Congregation there be any such chafe, any such dry straw separated from
the fruitful granes of the Church, and fit only for the slames of Hell. I hope,
the Devil has not so far prevailed with any. But of my self with shame (I
may say) that I have been that rebellious Ephraimite, that have almost 40 years
warred obstinatly against my Lord and Maker. I am that wicked Ephraimite, not
able to pronounce since my first use of reason this word Shiboleth, not able to
say I had ever any fruitful Faith, or have ever been a f^uitful grane, but
have always pronounced Sibboleth, have always been like bran sifted from the
white flower, like chafe separated from the grane, fit only for the fire of
Hell. For what fruitful Faith could be in me, that instead of worshipping only
my God and Lord, have bowed my knee so often to worship for God a piece of
bread, according to that damnable doctrine of the Papists (which now I abjure
and renounce) who teach that in their Communion is no substance of bread or
wine, but the true Real and Physical body and blood of Christ? A thing so
against Scripture, which teaches that Christ since his glorious Ascension can
be no more upon the earth, much less in several places and several pieces of
bread, but that he must be in Heaven, until that last Judgment day, as ye
shall find in the 3 Chap. of the Acts in the 20, 21. verse. saying, And he shall
sena Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you, whom the heavens must
receive until the time of restitution of all things, which God has spoken by
the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the World began.

What fruitful Faith could be in me, who so often have kneeled to Images,
worshipped them, burnt Franckincense before them, and praid unto them, so
contrary to the Commandments of God?

Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image or any likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above. Thou shall not bow down unto them? So contrary, I
say, to holy Scripture, which teaches that no Saints are to be called upon, no
Saints are to be Mediators between us and God, but only Jesus Christ, as ye
shall find in the 1 Epistle of Paul to Tim. in the 2 Chap. and 5 verse, For
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus.

What fruitful Faith has been in me, who have believed and taught a
Purgatory, a place of satisfaction for sins, derogating by this most damnable
doctrine from the infinity of Christ's satisfaction, who had not abundantly nor
infinitely satisfied for us, if we our selves ought in fire and torments to add
satisfaction to the satisfaction made by his most precious blood. O good God,
how do I now perceive my self to have been sequestered from thy just and
righteous believers! to have been sequestered from thy true Apostolic and
Primitive Church, to have be^n sifted like branne from the flower, like chafe
from the corn. O most merciful Father, if in these 40 years, I had met with
thee at the passage of Jordan, at the passage of my Soul from my body, not
being able to say Shibboleth, what could I have expected but to feel the smart
of thy sword, to receive the wound of everlasting death, to hear that dreadful
curse of thine, Depart from me you cursed into everlasting fire?

But think not, Dearly Beloved, that Satan's cruelty is satisfied with thus
separating a sinner like chafe from the corn, by making him ready for Hell
fire; O yet his cruelty goes forward, yet he sifteth further a Soul. Though
properly to sift in our English tongue, be to sift the flower from the branne;
Yet this word sifting, in Greek is more Emphaticall, for the true word, (...),
in Greek, according to M. Cameron's explication, signifies Cribrare, which as
he says, contains two things, to wit, illa concussio and agitatio, that
thrashing and beating of the wheat; and also illa divisio and separatio, that
division and separation of the chafe from the corn. So by Satan's sifting a
Soul as wheat, we must know, that he is not contented to separate a Soul from
the Church, and the fruitful granes and members of it, yet his cruelty goes
forward, for he knows Gods mercies are great, and touch the soul of a sinner
daily to bring him to repentance; therefore he desires our perseverance in
sin, our obstinacy and hardness, that we may no way return unto our Lord. He
uses yet more tyranny over us by sifting us; he beats us yet with blows,
even as the corn is beaten with the flaile; with one blow he beats out our
eyes, that we may not see the hideous estate we are in. With another blow he
strikes at our tongues, and breaks the mouths of our hearts, that we may not
call upon God for help and succor; with another blow he shuts up our ears,
that we may not hear nor give ear to the truth when it is preached. Even as a
Captain when he besieges a Castle, takes up all the high ways, whereby any
maintenance or provision may come to these within the Castle; So does this
cruel enemy of mankind, when he has separated a soul from the good and
righteous, he shuts up all the high ways, which are the mouth of the heart,
the hearing of it, the eyes of the understanding, that so no maintenance, nor
spiritual food may enter into it. This was figured in Mark 9. 17. 18. where it
is said that one of the multitude brought unto our Savior, his son which had a
dumb spirit: And he said, Whersoever he takes him, he teareth him, and he
fometh, and gnasheth with his teeth and pineth away. By this dumb Devil
spiritually is to be understood the effect which the Devil works in a soul,
which he has once possessed, making it dumb and speechless, that it may not
cry out to the Lord, nor acknowledge its sins with one peccavi. And many of the
Fathers upon the explication of this dumb Spirit, say that it was also deaf
and blind, to signify the two other effects, which the Devil works in a
soul, which he has once got into his power. This same destruction of a Soul
according to the Fathers exposition was signified by that deaf and dumb man,
whom our Savior cured, as ye may read Mark 7. 33, 34, 35. And he took him
aside from the multitude; and put his fingers into his ears, and he spit, and
touched his tongue; And looking up to Heaven, he sighed, and says unto him,
ephphatha, that is, be opened. And strait way his ears were opened, and the
string of his tongue was loosed, and he speak plain. In the 7 of Dan 5 ver.
you shall find a like figure of this cruel tyrant, where Daniel declaring a
dream and vision which he had, faith, And behold another beast, a second like
to a Bear, and it raised up it self on one side, and it had three ribs in the
mouth between the teeth of it, And they said thus unto it, arise, devore much
flesh. Although S. Hierom by this ugly beast does understand the Kingdom of the
Persians, and by those 3 ribs and 3 set of teeth between rib and rib,
expounds the 3 Empires of the Babylonians, Persians and Medes; Yet Richardus
de Sancto Victore, and many Fathers in a spiritual sense, declare this ugly
Bear to be a true portraicture of the malicious spite of the Devil, who with
3 set and orders of teeth devoureth and destroys the three noble powers,
wherewith the Soul does spiritually speak, see, and hear.

And truly in my mind, no Beast is a more proper Emblem of the Devil, than
the Bear, if we consider well what Aristotle in his 7 Book De Histor. Animal.
and 17 Chap. writes of this beast, which is that he eats of all things* of
the fruits of trees, of herbs, of Bees and Honey, of little Amits, and their
eggs, yea of your shell fishes, and also of flesh. A strange quality, proper
only to this Beast! For if the Lion eat flesh, he eats not hay, grass nor
herbs; and the Ox that eats hay and grass eats not flesh, Only the Bear
eats of all sorts, and with this quality resembles the Devil more than any
other Beast. For the Devil devoureth and eats of all; If a man be given to
the flesh, there is the Devil sporting also himself with those fleshy
thoughts: If like an Eremite one feed of herbs only; there also will Satan be
endeavoring in the wilderness to overthrow those that hide themselves there,
flying from the vanities of the world, as he has tempted and overthrown many
such. If one say, he is so abstinent that he will not eat any flesh, but feed
only upon fish, as some Monks and Friars do amongst your Papists; O how freely
does the Devil feed also with them, and for all their boasting of their
Abstinence, blinds them and makes them commit most horrid and enormous sins
of the flesh and Idolatry, as mine own sight and knowledge can testify. If
one like a little Amit in the earth, humble himself so deeply as to confess
and acknowledge himself dust and clay, and to conceit most lowly of himself;
there also will Satan feed, until he make him proud of his own low and humble
conceit. If like a Be feeding upon the sweetness of Honey any one be in the
Church feeding upon sweetness of Prayer and Contemplation, delighting with the
sweetness of singing Praise and Psalms unto the Lord; there also will this
Bear the Devil strive to feed, until he tempts with some foolish and idle
thoughts. In all like a Bear feeding of all sorts, and therefore may well be
compared to that Bear which Daniell saw, rising up to devour much flesh. And
as that Bear had three set or sorts of teeth to devour the three Empires of
the Babylonians, Persians and Medes; even so has the Devil three several
sorts of warlike engines to destroy and overthrow those three Forts and Castles
of our Soul, to wit, the Sight, Speech and Hearing, that so no relief may
come from God to that wretched sinner, whom he has once possessed.

First he makes us dumb, that we may not open our mouths to confess and
acknowledge before God the grievousnesse of our sins, nor cry out for help
with our hearts to our only Mediator Jesus Christ. Have not ye observed a
Wolf, when he has seized upon a little Lamb and sequestered it from the flock
and Shepherd; how the first thing he does, is to strangle it in the throat,
that it may not bale nor cry out and be rescued by the Shepherd? Even so does
the Devil, when he has got a Soul from the flock of Christ: the first thing
he does is to strangle it, that it may not speak, nor cry out to him that said
by S. John, Ego sum Pastor bonus, I am the good Pastor and Shepherd: For he
knows there is no better way, no surer remedy for us, than to acknowledge and
confess to God our grievous sins; as David says in the 32 Psalm and 6 verse,
I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord; And so thou forgavest the
wickedness of my sin. He knows that God will have a sinner accuse himself,
confess his sins before him, and that this was one of the first lessons that
ever God taught in this world, as ye may observe in the third chapter of
Genesis and 9 verse, where we read that when Adam had sinned, God came down
into Paradise, and called upon him, saying, Where art thou? Not that God was
ignorant where Adam was, nor that Adam could hide himself from the sight of
God: But God called him and asked him, where he was, because he would have Adam
accuse himself, confess and acknowledge his nakedness, and the sin he had
fallen into; for to teach all wretched and miserable sinners to confess and
acknowledge their sins and miseries before their Lord.

O this Satan knows to be the chief remedy, the beast ease for an afflicted
soul! therefore he strikes his first blow at the mouth of the heart, that
there may sound no act of repentance, nor the sinner may have a tongue to
confess and acknowledge himself to have wickedly offended his Lord and Maker.

O the Devil knows that nothing endangereth more a Soul in sin than
dumbness and silence! as David also testifies in the same 32 Psalm and 3
verse, saying, For while I held my tongue, my bones consumed away.

O how does a sinner pine and consume away for want of crying out to the Lord,
for want of acknowledging his own wretched estate!

O Dearly Beloved, make use of this Doctrine, and whenever ye find your
selves to have been carried away by Satan, forget not your tongues, be not
dumb, acknowledge presently your iniquities before the Lord, touch with your
tongues the leper and sores of your souls, let not them fester for want of a
tongue to heal them. Remember when ye are in sin, ye are as the Psalmist
says, like Beasts without reason.

O show at least to have that small sense and reason, which many Beasts and a
Dog has, who when he is bitten and full of soars, with his tongue only
preserves his soars from festering. Even so do thou poor and wretched
sinner, when thy soul is bitten with the first set of teeth of this cruel
Bear, lift up thy heart unto thy Lord, acknowledge and confess thy sins
before him, with thy tongue preserve thy soul from inward festering. Remember
that God will have thee confess thy iniquity and ask pardon of him. Be not
therefore dumb, O sinner I (if any there be besides my self in this
Congregation) say with David, I will confess my sins unto the Lord; Cry out
with the prodigal son in the 15 Chapter of Luke and 18. Verse, Father I have
sinned against Heaven, and before thee. Remember thou have a Heavenly Shepherd
above, Jesus Christ: Bale and cry out unto him like the little Lamb, that is
set upon by the ravenous Wolf. Be sure thou be not mute nor dumb: be sure
the Devil take not from thee the use of thy tongue.

O a man that is fallen into a deep water, has hopes of life if the water
reach but to his knees, or to his breast, or to his shoulders; but if once it
reach to enter into his mouth to choke him, eminent is the danger he is in.
Even so if a sinner be plunged and drowned so deeply into the depth of sin,
that it has reached to his mouth, that it once hinder his tongue from
confessing his wickedness, and from crying out to God; great danger is he in.
Fear this danger, O Beloved; fear that the mouth of your hearts be not
stopped by Satan, that by this high way which leads to the inward Castle of
your Soul, all Ammunition, all help and succor from above be not stopped
and robbed for want of acknowledging your sins, and crying out unto your Lord
for present aid and relief. And so much for this.

The second blow which the Devil strikes at a sinner, is to beat out his eyes
and to blind him, that he may not see the danger he is in, nor his own wretched
and miserable estate, as David affirms in the 38 Psalm. and 10. verse, saying,
My heart pants, my strength has failed me, and the sight of mine eyes is
gone from me. And again in the 40 Psalm and 15 verse he says, Innumerable
troubles are come about me; my sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am
not able to look up. O the Devid knows very well, that if a sinner did but
see the miserable and wretched estate his soul is in, he would make have to
return unto his Lord; therefore he blinds him that he may run headlong down
to Hell. He deals with a sinner as cruelly as Nabuchadnezzar King of Babell
dealt with Zedekiah, as ye may read in the 2 of Kings, 25 Chapter and 7 verse,
And they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the eyes of
Zedekiah, and bound him in chains and carried him to Babell. Even so does the
Devil with a sinner, he beats out his eyes, binds him in chains, and so
carries him to Babell, to a Chaos of confusion.

This a sinner will not believe, but runs forward with more and more delight in
his iniquities; he thinks, because he enjoys his corporal sight, that his
soul is not blinded. Tell me then, if a man should be in so desperate a case,
as running a long a street, and all crying out unto him and saying, O man art
thou mad, do thou not see such an one thine enemy standing before thee with
his sword drawn to kill thee? If nevertheless and for all these cries, this
man should run toward the sword; would not we say that he is mad, or rather
blind and not able to see the sword before him?

O Dearly Beloved* this is no sporting matter; when we offend the Lord, we are
surely blind; If we were not, how would we dare to run upon the sword which
the Justice of God has drawn against us? If we will not believe this, let us
but turn to the 7 Psalm of David, and read there the 12, 13, and 14 verses,
where we shall find these words, God is a righteous Judge, strong and patient,
and God is provoked every day; If a man will not turn, he will whet his sword,
he has bent his bow, and made it ready; he has prepared for him the
instruments of death. Behold a sword a whetting for us to run us through, a bow
bent to shoot at us, other instruments prepared only for our death and
destruction. And yet we will not see them, we run upon them: Why? Because we
are blind, the Devil has deprived us of our spiritual sight: We are like
that wicked and disobedient Prophet Balaam, of whom we read in the 22 Chapter
of Numbers and 23 Verse, that he was so blind that he could not see the Angel
of the Lord standing in his way with a Sword drawn in his hand; the words are
these, And when the Ass saw the Angel of the Lord stand in the way, and his
sword drawn in his hand, the Ass turned out of the way, and went into the
field, but Balaam smote the Ass to turn her into the way. Lo here, how a
simple and silly Ass by Gods permission, espyeth the sword of the Lord drawn
against a sinner and wicked Priest, to teach us, how those that are simple and
humble in their own conceits, see the dangers that a sinner runs into by sin:
But the proud and stubborn Delinquent against Gods Laws, will not see these
dangers. Because alas he is blind, the Devil has pulled out the eyes of his
Soul, the windows whereby the light and beams of Gods mercy were wont to
shine into his heart, are ^ow rammed up with lime and stone* that no light may
come in for a sinner to see those horrid Aspids, Basilisks and Adders, which
lie lurking and taking their repose in the close and secret chamber of his
Conscience.

O Pity! O Compassion! If any be to be had, when a sinner is come to this
misery. O Dearly Beloved, make good use of this Doctrine, and fly from sin all
your lives; s^are to be thus blinded: Pray to the Lord, that though through
man's frailty ye do commit a sin: O yet your sight may be left ye: One eye at
least may remain to lift up to God, to look up to him.

Remember how that poor and lame cripple, of whom we read in the 3 Chapter of
the Acts, and 4 Verse, received bodily health and strength, having no limb to
help himself, but was daily carried and laid at the gate of the Temple; And
Peter fastening his eyes upon him with John, said, look on us. Nothing was
demanded of him but only the use of his eyes; for looking only up upon Peter
he was cured.

O Dear Soul, Moralize this healing of this Cripple and the manner of it, and
take out of it a lesson how to obtain more easily the health of thy diseased
soul. If with no limb thou be able to help thy self: Look up at least
to God, lift up the eyes of thy heart to thy Lord, pray daily to him that thy
sight may not fail in thy inward man; Pray that the Devil may not blind thee
howsoever, but that thou may see the enormity and hideousness of thy sin,
the instruments of death which God has prepared against thee, the Sword of his
Justice drawn, the Bow of his wrath and anger bent; that thus having eyes left
thee to see those dangers, thou may like this Cripple, as he looked up to
Peter and John, and received bodily health: so thou also by casting an eye up
to the Lord, by opening the the window of thy heart may let in the light of
Gods mercy to shine within thee, and may receive the spiritual health of
thy leprous and diseased soul. And so much for this.

The last and deadliest blow, which the Devil with his heavy stayle strikes
at a Soul, is in the Ears, wherewith he fells him quite down and lays him
slat to the ground, taking his hearing quite from him, and making him deaf,
that he may not hear the word of the Lord, nor hearken to any comfortable
tidings of his Salvation.

Of the wretched sinners deafenes against the Word of God, Paul spoke in the
second Epistle to Timothy in the 4 Chapter and 4 verse, saying, And they shall
turn away their ears from the truth and shall be turned unto fables. Of this
sort of sinners, an Ancient Father, Clenent Alexandranus in his exhortation to
the Greckes and Gentiles speaks thus, Coelum fecistis Scenam, and Deus factus
est vobis Actus: Ye have made a sport and play of Heaven, and God himself is
become at Act or Comedy unto ye.

But you will say, Dearly Beloved, what means this ancient Author by these
words? An example will declare his mind better. Have not you marked in these
Plays here about the City? How sometimes one comes out upon the Stage, with
a Crown and Kingly Diadem upon his head, and with a Scepter in his hand,
granting Princely favors, and highly rewarding those that have been dutiful
and loyal Subjects unto him? Another you shall see come out upon the same
Stage with a sword drawn, all bloody, with streams of blood trickling down from
his head to his feet, as if he had been wounded in some sierce and desperate
combat. Then you shall see sometimes over the Stage the Heavens open, great
glory of Angels appearing, and one descending in a cloud. Sometimes you shall
see from under the Stage ascend a smoke of Fire and Brimstone, and a Devil
leap up in such a shape as may suffice to terrify you. At all this you laugh,
you hold it but a fable. The King you see come out, you respect not, because
you know he is none. The other that is wounded and all bloody, you pity not,
because you know that blood is not true but painted blood. The glory you see
and the Angels in it, do no way entice you to it, because you know it is but
fained: The Fire and Brimstone, and ugly sight of Devils that come upon the
Stage do nothing terrify you. Why? Because you know all is salfe, that there
is no Hell, nor any true Devil, but only a representation of it: So that you
sport and laugh at all.

Now then let us apply these words and this similitude of Clement Alexandrinus
to those deaf sinners, who, as Paul says, Turn away their ears from the
truth, and are turned unto Fables. These when they come to hear the word of
the Lord, will not hear it with their hearts, but make a play sport of it.
When they hear the Preacher set forth the might and power of that King of
Kings, and Creator of all things, who will glorify his elect servants with
everlasting bliss and happiness; Like Atheists they laugh at it, and judge of
this eternal King as of a King in a play.

When they hear the Preacher teach, how Jesus Christ was whipped, reviled,
stricken, smitten and crowned with thorns, nailed with nails, pierced with a
spear for their sins; their hearts will not hear it, they make sport of it,
they are not moved to love so loving a Savior and Mediator who with the price
of his own blood, made an abundant and copious satisfaction for our sins.

When they hear the Preacher teach the glory of Heaven, the Quires of Angels
there, that everlasting rest without any sob or tears, without any cold,
hunger, or thirst, they will not hear it to believe, they judge of it, as of
the glory in a play upon a Stage, and like Epicureans eat, drink and riot
saying, -- Post mortem nulla voluptas.

They think that their souls after death like Beasts shall be dissolved into
the air to nothing. When they hear a Preacher bring out upon the Stage in the
Pulpit, and set before a great assembly the deep pits of Hell, the Legions of
fierce and cruel Devils there, the always burning fire and Brimstone, the
everlasting broiling there, the horrid gnashing of teeth, the pains and
torments due to their sins, if they turn not to God; Alas they will not hear
it with their heart, they think it is but a Hell of a Play, they are turned
unto Fables, they make a sport of all, they make an Act or Play of God, they
think all fained, they hear it with their corporal ears, but with the cares
of their soul, they will not hearken unto it; they make themselves the Actors
of the fools part in this sport and play, which they make of God and Heaven.
Why? Because the Devil has made them deaf. This is his chief way, he
knows, though it be damb or blind, yet by hearing the Word of the Lord with a
well dis^^sed heart it may receive some seed of a fruitful Faith, as S. Paul
taught the Romans in the 10 Chap. and 17 Verse. saying, So then Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. This is the Devils fear, and
therefore he shuts up their ears, that no maintenance that way, no succor,
no relief may come unto the soul. With this he makes them groan under his
yoke, with this he makes them slaves unto him. In Deuteronomy. 15. 12. you shall find
that God gave a Command of release, saying, And if thy Brother, an Hebrew man,
or an Hebrew woman be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years, then in the
seventh year thou shall let him go free from thee. And lower 16, 17. v. God
commanded thus; And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from
thee, because he loves thee and thine house, because he is well with thee.
Then shall thou take an Aule, and thrust it thorough his ear unto the door,
and he shall be thy servant for ever.

In a moral and spiritual sense, Learn here, Dear Brethren, how as God
commanded a release for debts and for servants, so doubtless he expects that
thy Soul shall not be always under any other master but himself. If therefore
the Devil have been thy Master for some time, think for a release, think of
releasing thy self from him; do not say, dear soul, unto the Devil, I will
not go away from thee, because I love thee, because I am well with thee; which
if thou do, then will Satan make use of this Law of God for himself and for
his own en^s; then will he mark thee in the ears for a perpetual slave, with
an Aule he will boar thine ears through, and fasten them to a wall, to that
wall which thy iniquities have put between thee and God; he will keep thee for
his slave, if ever he mark thee in thy ears, he will take thy hearing from
thee, that thou may not hear any goodness, nor make good use of any. O
what misery is a sinner in, when he comes to lose his hearing! Abhor from
sin, dearly beloved, least ye fall thus into slavery under the tyranny of
Satan; if ye have not found your selves so far gone, nor so far ensnared by the
Devil, as he does ensnare others, renounce him at his first assaults, least he
encroach upon the mouth of your heart and soul, upon the eyes and ears of it,
making ye dumb, deaf and blind. O take example by me, who have had experience
of these 3 blows, who have been flailed, beaten and thrashed by this cruel
enemy; with one blow I have been left speechless and dumb almost 40 years; I
have not had a tongue till this day, to confess before God my iniquities, my
idolatries, my superstitions, my disloyalties to my King, the Lords Anointed.
O I have been blind, and wilfully blind, and would not see my errors, the
errors of the Whore of Babylon. True it is, many years ago by reading Authors
and the grounds of our true Protestant Religion; I did see the light of it, the
truth of it, the sincere, pure and candid doctrine of it: but yet with the eyes
of my Soul I would not see it. I was like a foul and ugly Monky, who when he
chances to see his foul shape, his deformed feet in a pure and Cristall
Looking-glass, rages, and flingeth at the glass and teareth it in pieces,
because it representes unto him his own deformity. Even so have I done, dearly
Beloved, these many years. When I read the pure and Crystal doctrine of our
Church, which teaches even what Christ taught Peter and his Disciples to
acknowledge a Supremacy next to God to Caesar, by taking money out of a fishes
belly, and sending it for trib te to Caesar, a lesson for all Subjects (yea for
the Popes themselves who can be no better than Christ and Peter) to acknowledge
their duty and Allegiance next to God unto their Kings, and Princes. But when I
saw by this clear doctrine my ugly shape of a disloyal, disobedient and
treacherous monster, nourished with the venomous and poisoned milk of the Whore
of Babylon, which teaches her Popes to be above all Temporal Princes, and no
ways bound to pay them tribute; O how would I fly and fling like a Monky at
the Crystal glass of the Protestant doctrine, that thus represented unto me
mine own monstrous shape. O when I used to read and study the grounds of the
Popish Transubstantiation, and found them groundless, saying, that one body
may be in 2 places, nay in a 1000. And upon that salfe ground proving that
Christ's body may be really present in the Sacrament in a thousand places at one
time, and at the same time also in Heaven: How clearly did I see the contrary
in the Crystal glass of our Churches doctrine? For if Christ's body being a
natural and physical body can be at one time in several places; then at one
time also it may be subject to several and contrary accidents, it may be hot
and cold at once, for it may be in a hot and cold place at one time, it may
be also stabbed in one place (as the Papists confess it has been by Jews)
and in another place at the same time it may not be stabbed; so then 2
contradictories simul and semel are true, and truly verified of the same body,
It is stabbed and it is not stabbed. Also in one place it may be be gnawn and
devoured by vermin, mice or worms: and in another place at the same time it may
not be gnawn: As my self can witness, who saying Mass one day in the West
Indias, in a town called Portabel, 6 years ago, after I had consecrated the
Bread or Wafer host upon the Altar, making a short mental prayer with mine
eyes shut, which they call the Memento for the Dead, suddenly came upon the
Altar a Mouse, and stole away the Sacrament. I opening mine eyes, and missing
it before me, began to be troubled, and looking about on one side, I saw the
vermin running away with the Bread. I stirred up the people of the Church, who
running to me caused candles to be lighted, and with another Priest searched
all the holes that were in the wall behind the Altar, and at last found the
Sacrament gnawn, and half eaten up. The half part of it the Priest took out
and carrying it to the Altar in Procession, lifted it up to be adored, with
knocking of breasts by the common people. Behold here according to the damnable
doctrine of the Papists, Christ's body is gnawn by a creature, and it is not
gnawn; for they say that the body of Christ is truly and really tetus in toto
and totus in qualibet part, all in all, and all and whole in every little
part. Then if this be true, Christ was whole and entire in that part which was
devoured, and he was also whole and entire in the part which was left; so he
was eaten and gnawne, and he was not eaten and gnawne. Here are two
contradictories truly verified at one time against the light of reason and
philosophy: Besides the absurdity which follows, that Christ should leave his
body to be so devoured by vermin and dumb beasts All these absurdities and
monstrous shapes of Popish doctrine, I well perceived and viewe^ in the pure
crystal glass of our Protestant doctrine: And yet like a beast I would fling
at this clear glass, that thus represented my Popish errorus unto me; I would
spitefully oppose the true sense and figurative meaning of our Savior, when he
said, This is my body.

Yea coming into England with a purpose to conform my self to the truth, and
having met here with a learned Treatise of one Master Stephen Vassal against
this damnable doctrine of Transubstantiation, which he directed to one Mistress
Bury a Gentlewoman, seduced and blinded by a Popish Priest; I took upon me for
some worldly and temporal respects to some friends, to answer his learned
grounds and reasons against mine own conscience: And though in his clear
doctrine I well perceived the ugly and monstrous shape of mine own idolatrous
and defiled soul; Yet did I fling and fly at the glass like a Monky. Why?
Because I was blinded by Satan, the window of my soul was rammed up by the
Devil, that no light might enter into it. I have been that false and
disobedient Priest Balaam, so blind that I would not see the dangers of my
soul near 40 years: But though the sword of Gods Justice hath-beene drawn
against me, though his bow has been bent to kill me, and many instruments of
death prepared against me, yet would I wilfully run on my ways to curse the
good and elect People of the Lord, to oppose the true, ancient and Apostolic
Church of England. True it is I have heard much good doctrine preached,
repre^enting unto me these dangers which my soul was in; I have heard that if
wilfully, I should have died in that wretched estate, my soul would have been
plunged into the deepest and bottomless pits of Hell; I have heard much
pre^ching of the me cies of God, of the glory of Heaven, of the pains of Hell:
Yet all this I have heard as a Play and sport of pastime, not hearing it with
my soul inwardly, but only with my outward ears. I have heard that for God we
must leave all in the world, both kindred, father, mother, preferments and
wealth: yet I would not hear this to any purpose: I was loath to forsake all
my kin^ed, who are Papists: I was loath to forsake that means which I have had
from them, and now must lose it: I was loath to see my self in want and
poverty. O I knew, my kindred and best friends would cry out, shame upon me, and
would threaten to kill me: All these worldly and temporal respects shut up my
ears and made me dease against the truth, which teaches that it is better to
live here in want and poverty, than to broyle for ever in Hell; that it is
better to forsake here and abandon all flesh and blood, Brothers, Sisters, and
Kindred, than to go with them to everlasting pains and torment.

Christ himself teaches us that we must not fear them that can hurt out
bodies, but can do no harm at all unto our souls, and that we must fear only
him that can cast our souls into the fire of Hell. This it is, O Lord! which
now makes me fear; thy might, thy power and wrath I fear: My soul it is
that hencef^rth I will tender; for this Jewel I for sake this day all the
world, for my Soul's sake I take my leave this day of all my kindred and
dearest friends. Awake, awake my soul, and like Abraham leave now thy flesh
and blood, that thou may become rich and great in the sight of thy Lord. Away
all fears, away all humane and temporal respects, away to much love of
worldly pelse.

O Lord I for thy sake I hate and leave this day that means, which hither to
from Papists I have received.

O Lord! I know they threaten my destruction, but into thy hands do I this day
commend my spirit. O let that be safe I though here my body be mangled and
torn into thousand pieces, do thou protect me, and I will fear no enemies; do
thou continue thy mercies to me, and I with David will sing and teach them for
ever.

Now, dearly Beloved, I have disclosed unto you the miseries of a wretched
sinner; the cruelty and unsatiable tyranny of Satan over those that he sifts
away from the fruitful granes of Christ's Church; I have discovered unto you
the heavy blows he gives them, and have made my self a President of so
miserable and wretched an estate. Now give ear, I beseech you, to the second
poi^t of my Text, where Christ having told Peter, how Satan desired to have
him, that he might sift him as wheat, Christ comforted him presently, saying,
But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not:

For to teach us, that though we be never so tyrannized by Satan, never so
abused and beaten, never so dumb, so blind and so dease; Yet the mercies of God
are able to relieve us: And God himself would not be merciful and omnipotent,
if any miseries of ours, (how great soever) should prevail or exceed the power
of his mercies: Nay when by sin we are most wretched and most forlorn, then
does God show most the power of his sweet and comfortable mercies, and
forgets not 40 only, but a 1000 years ill spent in sin and iniquity, as
David teaches us, Psalm. 90. 3, 4. saying, Thou turnest man to destruction,
Again thou say, Come again ye child en of men, for a thousand years in thy
sight are but as yesterday. Behold, though a man be turned to destruction,
though a soul be quite lost, utterly defaced and spoiled: Yet Come again ye
children of men, Let but these destroyed and forlorn soul^s turn again unto
the Lord, and a thousand years ill spent in sins and iniquities shall be
pardoned so easily, that they shall seem but as one day ill spent; for God is
merciful and will make the least that may be made of our sins, if from our
hearts we turn unto him. Nay when most we offend him, then chiefly does he
strive with his mercies to allure us unto him. By the greatness of his mercies
he striveth to show himself our God and Savior, as I have observed in that
answer which he sent unto John in the 11 of Mat. where John sent two of his
Disciples to know of him, if he were the Messiah and Savior of the world whom
they expected; To which message our Savior made no other answer, but that of
the 5 verse, saying, The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the
lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor
have the Gospel preached unto them. The only way to know that Christ is a
Savior, is by seeing his works of mercy, either Spiritual or Corporal; for
by the blind which he corporally and spiritually cures, by the leprous souls
and bodies which he cleanses, by the deaf to whom he restores corporal and
spiritual hearing, by the dead in soul and body whom he raises up; he is
sufficiently known to be a true Messiah, a true Savior, a most loving and
merciful Father. And much more by using these mercies, when least we deserve
them, when furthest we are from him, when most grievously we offend him; for
then it is that he striveth with the power of his mercy, to prevail against
the power of Satan. In the 12 Chap. of Matthew. 14. and 15 verses, this may
casily be observed, where it is said, Then the Pharisees went out, and held a
Council against him, how they might destroy him. Behold here wretched sinners,
the instruments of the Devil, united and confederate against our Savior. What
does he unto them? Does he destroy them? Does he pour down fiery darts upon
them? No. What then does he? Read forward the 15. verse, and ye shall see what
he does, And when Jesus knew it he withdrew himself from thence, and great
multitudes, followed him, and he healed them all. When most they strive against
him to offend him, then hoth he cure and heal their infirmities; for to reach
us that he is so merciful a Father, that he holds it a disparagement to his
great goodness, that our wickedness should be greater than his mercies, that
when most we offend him, than does he most mercifully cure and heal the lepers
and diseases of our afflicted souls. So in the 32 of Exodus, you shall find
the mercies of God striving with the wickedness of men; for whilst the
Israelites withdraw themselves from God at the foot of the mountain, worshipping
a golden Calf^ God on the top of the mountain is ordering a Law for them to
bring them to righteousness and to the port of true Salvation. In the 9 Chap.
of the Acts there also ye shall find a strong encounter between the malice of a
wicked finner and the kindne^e and mercy of God; for whilst Saul breathing out
threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord goes to the high
Priest and desires of him letters to Damascus to the Synagogues, that if he
sound any followers of Christ, men or women, he might bring them bound unto
Jerusalem. Then at that very time strives God with his mercies for the upper
hand, as you may read in the 3 verse, And suddenly there shined round about
him a light from heaven. And Gods mercies prevailing against Saul's stubbornes
from a wicked sinner, from a wicked Persecutor he was made an Apostle, and a
chosen vessel to bear the name of the Lord before the Gentiles, the Kings,
and the Children of Israel. O how does the Prophet Hosea in the 2 Chap. of his
Prophecies in the 13 and 14 ver. teach the truth of this doctrine! saying, And I
will visit upon her the days of Baal^m, wherein she burnt incense to them,
and she decked her self with her carrings and her jewels, and she went after
her lovers, and forgate me, says the Lord. Behold here a Harlot, a soul most
abommable, given to idolatry, burning incense before her Idols, following her
pleasures, the vanities of the world, decking and trimming up her self to
entice and allure her gallants, following her gallants and lovers, and quite
forgetting her Lord and God. But what will God do now with this lewd harlot,
with this abominable soul? Will he d^stroy her? Will he show the strength and
power of his justice against her? O no! Hear what follows in the 14 verse,
Therefore, Behold, I will allure ^^r, and bring her into the wilderness and
speak comfortably unto her. She shall not think that her wickedness can be
greater than my mercies: When she most flies from me, then will I most allure
her. Behold here, dearly Beloved, the good nature of our good God, who like
unto a su^er and wooer, when his mistress most disdaineth him, wooeth her more,
allureth her with fair and courteous promises. Even so does God with a Soul,
when we follow most the vices of our heart, the vanities of the world, seeking
to please our senses and bellies, more than the Lord, disdaining and contemning
our God and Maker; then does he woo our Souls, then does he allure them, then
does he bring them into the wilderness from all occasions of pride, of
self-love, of vanities and pstimes: There when he has got them from the
worldly pleasures, does he speak comfortably unto them. O Soul! says he, why
do thou follow any lovers but me? there is none loves thee better than my
self: I have bestowed more upon thee than any adulterous lover of thine. The
beauty of thy face which thou so much esteemest, is my gift. The dainties of
foul and fish, which so voluptuously thou bestowest upon thy belly, I first
bestowed them upon thee. The riches of pearls, rubies, rings and diamonds,
wherewith thou show thy self so fair an object to thy lovers eye, are all
my gifts. The flowers of all sorts and best persumes, wherewith thou delightest
so much thy senses, I gave them to thee. Why then dear Soul, do thou turn
from me? Why do thou shun me for other lovers? They carry thee to perdition,
but I to bliss and happiness; They seek thy pains and torment, I thy rest
and glory: They fall away like a flower which to day is, and to morrow will not
be, but I shall remain for ever.

Thus, O dearly Beloved, does God speak comfortably to a Soulel thus does he
allure her, thus does he woo and entice her, thus does he, when furthest she
flys from him, discover the riches of his mercies to her. An ancient Doctor
called John Raulinus Cluniacexsis says, what by experience we daily know,
Quanto magis srigus viget, tanto magis videtur Coelum stellatum, The greater
the frost and cold is, the m^re bright do the star's appear and show
themselves in the darkness of the night. Lauretus, who borrowed his doctrine
out of Thomas Aquinas and Austin, says also of the stars in a moral
explication, Stellae productae in Coelo designare possunt dona Spiritus
Sanctir, That they may be a symbol or figure of the favors and gifts of the
Holy Ghost. What then means it that these stars which are symbols of Gods
favors, shine brightest, when the frost and cold is greatest? O it signifies,
that when a heart is most cold and frozen, most void of the heat of the love of
God then does the Lord strive to shine brightest into that heart, than does he
most discover the glittering spangles of his mercy, than does he manifest the
glorious stars of his Heavenly comforts; for to teach us that none shall
despair, though never so deeply plunged into sin, though never so cruelly
tyrannized by the Devil: for God with his mercies can and often has changed a
wicked sinner to a holy life, and of a persecut^r and e^emy has made a holy
Apostle. I cannot here pass over with silence a witty observation of
Chrysostom upon those words, which the Angel of the Lord spoke to Joseph,
Mat. 2. 13. saying, Arise and take the young child and his mother, and fly
into Egypt, and be thou there, until I bring thee word; for Herod will secke
the young Child's to destroy him. Upon these words, Chrysostom groundeth great
admirations, wondering that God would send his only begotten Son into Egypt, a
Country that above all Countries misused and kept under hard slavery Gods own
chosen people, not suffering them to go out, till God hardened Pharaoh's heart,
and Moses after many wonders showed with the hand of the Lord, took them out
of bondage. Now then if this Country was first so rebellious against God
himself and his Commands, how comes it to pass, says Chrysostom, that God
will trust his Dear and only Son Jesus Christ with so perfidious and
disobedient a Nation? Could not there be Order given, that Christ might be
kept from the sury of Herod in any other Country and not in Egypt, so
stubborn an enemy to God and his Elect People? Chrysostom answers, O
commutatio dextrae excelsi, ut popului qui a tefuerat persecutor populi
primogeniti, postea sieret custos unigeniti ^ O wonderful change and
alteration of the right hand of the Lord, says Chrysostom, that that people
which before had been a persecutor and enemy of the first chosen People of God,
now should be trusted with Gods only Son, and should be made keeper of him to
desend him and protect him from the wicked plots of Herod! What is this? But to
magnify and set out the great mercies of God, who so strangely works
alterations in Nations and in particular souls, making those his dearest
friends, which were his greatest enemies and persecutors. This is the power of
the mercy of God, which can prevail against all the strength of Satan, who can
deliver a soul possessed by the Devil and bring it to a state more happy than
ever miserable it was in Satan's power. This the Prophet Micah prophesied in the
4 Chap. of his Prophecies, and 10 ver. saying, Be in pain and labor to bring
forth, O daughter of Sion! like a woman in travel; for vow shall thou go forth
out of the City, and thou shall dwell in the field, and thou shall go even to
Babylon; there shall thou be delivered, there the Lord shall redeem thee from
the hand of thine enemies. What greater confusion was there ever than in
Babylon? What greater blindness than there? What greater or crueller slavery
than there? Yet says Micah, there shall thou be delivered, there the Lord
shall redeem (...) from thine enemies; for to teach us, that there is no
sinner so deeply drowned into the depth of sin, so bitterly beaten by Satan, so
hardly captivated and bound with the bonds and fetters of his iniquities, but
yet the mercy of the Lord is able to take him out. Therefore, O dearly
beloved! make use of this doctrine and never despair of Gods savours, though
(as Christ said in my text to Peter) Satan sift you as wheat, separating you
from the white flower of the elect and chosen people; though he separate you
like chafe from the corn, from the sin^full granes and members of the Church,
by beating you as Corn is beaten with the flaile, by striking out your eyes,
that you may not see, by making you dumb, that you may not speak nor cry unto
the Lord; by making you deaf, that you may not hear any goodness: yet
despair not of his mercies, for out of Babylon, the place of greatest
confusion, there shall thou be delivered, says the Lord. Let my Conversion be
a President to you of this truth, and strengthen you, that you may not despair
of Gods mercies. For if I who have sucked my first milk of the Whore of
Babylon, of the most erroneous Popish doctrine, who have worshipped creatures and
Saints instead of my Creator, who have been disloyal and treacherous to my
King and Country, who have believed a damnable doctrine of Purgatory,
derogating thereby from the infinite merits of the satisfaction of Christ's
Passion, who have superstitiously offered up a sacrifice of the Mass for the
quick and dead, as if the Sacrifice which Christ himself offered of his own
body upon the Cross were not a sufficient Sacrifice for a whole world, yea and
many more worlds: if I who erroneously have believed that by my own works I
might merit de condigno, the glory of heaven, as if any human or natural works
may work a thing supernatural and merit a glory, which required the means and
satisfaction of Christ, not as man only, but as God and man. If I who have been
almost 40 years thus blinded, who have so many years persecuted the chosen,
elect and Protestant people of the Lord, who have so many years been frozen and
void of all heat of the love of God, who have so many years been in Babylon, in
confusion, and slavery; there have been delivered, there have found the mercies
of God, like stars in a winter night shining most confortably into my cold and
frozen soul! O let none despair of the mercies of God, nor willingly fall
into sin by my example, least their coming out of Babylon be as hard to them
as my conversion has been to me; But how great soever your miseries be, trust
in the Lord, that as he prayed for Peter, that his Faith might not fail, as he
has pleaded for me before his ^ernall Father: So he may also be an Advocate
and only Mediator between God and you, when deepest you are in sin, and
according to man's judgment, hardest to be brought out of it.

The last Point which is plainly to be observed in my text, is a precept and
command of our Savior to Peter, contained in those words; And when thou art
converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

This Peter did, and this all they are bound to do, who are truly converted
from sin and from a wicked estate to the true knowledge of Gods Laws. True it
is Peter did fall, and did most cowardly thrice deny his Master: But after our
Savior looked upon him, and with one look turned his heart, then Peter went
out and wept bitterly. And he did not only weep and repent within himself, but
most zealously endeavored to strengthen his Brethren, as you may observe Acts
2. when having received the Holy Spirit himself, he preached courageously unto
the Jews to convert them and strengthen them in the true Faith, as you may read
from the 14^. to the 38 verse, and forward, where publicly he said unto them,
Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. O he was a
true converted man, and thought he must not be contented to be himself
converted only, but that he was bound to convert and strengthen others. So did
Saul, who had been so great a Persecutor, when he was truly converted,
presently he strived to do good to others, as you may read Acts 9. 19, 20.
verses, And when he had received meat, he was strengthened. Then was Saul
certain days with the Disciples, that were at Damascus; And strait way he
preached Christ in the Synagogue, that he is the Son of God. And further in the
22 ver. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews that
dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ. Behold how this converted
Apostle is not satisfied with his own conversion, but presently burns with an
inward zeal of communicating unto others that good which he had received from
God by his Conversion. Your Divines say, that Bonum est diffusivum sui, that
which is truly good in it self, is with a natu^all inclination to impart it
self, yea prodigally to pou^e it self out to others. This doctrine also David
teaches us in his 51 Psalm. where he repents himself for the Adultery which
he had committed, and having begged of God, that he would create in him a clean
heart and renew a right spirit within him, Then says he in the 13 verse, will
I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. Lo
how David does not only repent himself, and manifest his conversion by words
of sorrow and bitter compunction, but promises God, that he will strengthen
others, by teaching them the ways of God, that also they may come to be
converted.

In the first Chapter of the Canticles ver. 4. You shall find a few words easy
in this sense, but hard to be understood in any other, where the Spouse
speaking to her Beloved, says, Draw me, we will run after thee; The King has
brought me into his Chamber, we will be glad and rejoice in thee; we will
remember thy love. Me thinks, the Spouse should have said, draw me, I will run
after thee, The King has brought me into his chamber. I will be glad, I will
remember thy love. If one be drawn, why do many in the plural number run? If
one be brought into the Kings chamber, Why be many glad and rejoice?

O dearly Beloved, it is to teach us how we ought to be have our selves, when
we are truly converted. The Spouso signifies a soul wedded by Faith to God
the true and heavenly Bridgroome; The Chamber whereinto this foul is brought,
is the true Church. Therefore if one Soul be drawn by God, many must run after
this one, if one Soul be brought into the true, Ancient and Apostolic Church,
many must be glad and rejoice. Why? Because we must not be contented to be
drawn alone from our iniquities, we must not be contented to be brought alone
into the Church; we must also draw others, we must make others also rejoice by
strengthening them, by teaching them, by converting them by our words, works and
good example. This is the command and precept of our Savior to Peter, in the
words of my text, And when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

This command of Christ, I that am this day converted and brought into the
Heavenly Bridgrooms chamber, into his true Church, must also obey. O I must not
be contented to be drawn alone, I must be the cause that many may run after me.
This, dearly Beloved, I have begun to perform already, having brought one
from the snares of Popery, and strengthened one soul in the true Protestant and
Apostolik Religion of this Kingdom. This by the Grace of God, both by
preaching, writing and printing, I will endeavor all my life to perform by
discovering and laying open to the world those Rocks and quick sands of Popish
doctrine, whereupon so many souls do run and are daily cast away by the
ignorance of foolish and unskilful Pilots O dearly beloved! never were you in
greater danger than at these times; for in Ireland you see how the Papists
threaten us with their erroneous doctrines; here at home they secretly plot to
bring in their superstitions; therefore let me warn you this day to hoyse up
your sails and top masts, and with the gale of that heavenly Spirit, of that
Divine blast save your souls from being splinted upon these Rocks of Popish
superstition from being swallowed up with the quick sands of Antichristian
doctrine. O beloved abhor all your lives the chief and principal point of all
Popery, which is that false authority that Supremacy which the Papists give to
the Pope above all the Church, O never admit this erroneous doctrine, nor ever
think that Christ left Peter or any other to be Supreme head, and only head
over the Church, but this authority was given equally to all the Apostles as ye
may gather out of Matthew. 28. and 3 last ver. where our Savior equally and with
equal authority sent all his Apostles to preach and teach, saying, Go ye
therefore and teach all Nations. And further he says, And lo I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world. Behold how Christ sends not only
Peter, but all his Apostles to preach and teach: And says he will be not only
with Peter, but with all his Apostles inspiring spiritually and instructing
them all, and not Peter alone, to rule and govern and feed with spiritual
food his flock. If this be so, dearly Beloved, never believe that the authority
which the Pope challenges to himself over all the Church is due unto him, who
usurpeth his authority and seeks by it to encroach upon Kings and Princes
Crowns, as I shall in some other occasion more largely declare. Fly therefore
dear souls from this chief and most dangerous Rock of all Popery; and having
once discovered the dangers of this false doctrine, abhor then all other
erroneous doctrins of Rome, which come from him that usurpeth Christ's own
power, and challenges it to himself alone. O let my conversion be your
strength and comfort! O believe an experienced and skillful Pilot, who has
travailed almost over all the world, and has by experience of almost 40 years
discovered all those rocks and quick sands of Popish errors of Antichristian
doctrines and superstitions, which threaten the loss and utter overthrow of
your souls. O that this day I may perform what Jesus said to Peter, And when
thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

O let my example, dearly Beloved, strengthen you all in the true Protestant
Religion, that so I may say with the spouse, draw me and we will run, that I
being drawn this day unto the true Faith, ye may all run more hastily and
speedily to the same; that I being brought this day into the Kings chamber,
that is, into the true Church, ye may all be glad and rejoice, finding in your
souls a new and greater strength to continue and dye in this ancient and
Apostolic Church, that so we may all meet and rejoice together after this life
in another chamber of our Heavenly Bridegroom, in the triumphant Church of
Heaven. Amen.

FINIS.

