Good News from OXFORD (Of the TREATY) For the Surrender thereof: And how they
are packing up to march away on Thursday next, June 18. 1646.

WITH The Surrender of Sherburne-house already agreed.

ALSO The particulars of the seven Visions seen at Gravenhage the 31. of May
last; Translated out of the Dutch Copies.

Printed by the Original Papers, and published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Jane Coe, 1646.

AN Abstract of the Letters From the leager before OXFORD.
THE wonderful works of GOD have and do still appear for that godly and
valiant Army with Sir Thomas Fairfax, in the so far reducing of this Kingdom
to peace, in which God has made his Excellency a glorious Instrument.

And now since his Excellency came before Oxford, that work has been carried
on with very great discretion; and although we have still gone on with the work
in preparing to storm, and approaches made very near to the enemy in several
places about the City, yet the Treaty has still gone on, and the Enemy been
every day more and more daunted and discouraged from resisting us, though the
most pernicious nest in the Kingdom, and a place the most impregnable of any,
and the persons desperate.

We have now gone through diverse of the Articles, and (though with much
difficulty) come near to the end; but to God is all the praise to be given for
this great work, for it could not be any ways expected from the arm of flesh,
especially from such a poor despised Army as that was at the first: but to the
Lord be the glory of his own works.

For the business of the Treaty for the surrender of Oxford,i t is certified
thus: viz.

That the Commissioners sat late on Saturday, June 13, and have overcome all
difficulties in the Treaty, there being only circumstantiall things to be
concluded on, which at the next meeting without peradventure will be finished:
so that by Thursday next it is conceived they will march out of Oxford; they
are already packing up in Oxford in preparation toward their march. His
Excellency upon a second humble Petition from Mistress Chamberlain of
Sherburne has accepted of the surrender of Sherburne house in Oxfordshire; The
General upon her first Petition advised her to address her self to the
Parliament, which it seems she did; but by reason of other great affairs,
obtained no positive Answer.

Although the House has been a Garrison, yet neither at our first coming to
Oxford this time twelvemonth, nor all this while we have been here has any
ways annoyed our Forces, but on the contrary has contributed in provisions to
the maintenance of those Forces employed about Wallingford, as other parts have
done. This house being kept with some men and Arms in it by Master
Chamberlain, prevented the making of the same an active Gartison for the King,
which would much have annoyed Henly and those parts: And have only stood upon
their Guards to defend themselves from Plunder, and never took any of the
Parliaments Soldiers Prisoners, nor offered violence unto them, nor raised
Contribution of the Country. If this be the Gase, (as they allege it to be)
it is different from any other in the Kingdom.

The Enemy made a sally out of Farringdon with Clubs, but were beaten in, two
of their Horses killed, and three men.

A sight seen in Gravenhage the 31. of May 1646. Jn the light of midday
between 12. and 1. of the Clock:
I.

II.

III. straight, then the Lion and the Dragon apepeared in sight.

IIII.

V.

VI.

VII.

FINIS.

