CRETENSIS: OR A BRIEF ANSWER TO an ulcerous Treatise, lately published by Mr
THOMAS EDWARD'S, entitled, GANGRAENA: Calculated for the Meridian of such
passages in the said Treatise, which relate to Mr John Goodwin; but may without
any sensible error indifferently serve for the whole Tract.

Wherein some of the best means for the cure of the said dangerous ulcer,
called Gangraena, and to prevent the spreading of it to the danger of the
precious souls of men, are clearly opened, and effectually applied; By the
said JOHN GOODWIN, a well-willer to the Saints, in the work and patience of
Jesus Christ.

The Cretians are always liers, evil beasts, etc. This witness is true:
Wherefore rebuke them sharply ((...), cuttingly) that they may be sound in the
Faith, Tit. 1. 12, 13. And I heard a loud voice saying in Heaven, Now is come
salvation and strength and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his
Christ; for THE ACCVSER OF OUR BRETHREN is cast down, etc. Revel. 12. 10. Let
not an evill-speaker be established on earth: evil shall hunt the violent man
to overthrow him, Psalm. 140. 11. But they shall proceed no further; for their
folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was, 2 Timothy 3. 9. Qui ergo
been mentitur, and absque ulla verecundia, quicquid in buccam venerit,
confingit in fratres, magistrum se optimum probat* Hieronymus. l. 1. Apol.
adversus Ruffin. (...). Musaeus. Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1646.

CRETENSIS; OR A BRIEF ANSWER to an ulcerous Treatise, lately published by Mr
Thomas Edwards, entitled, GANGRAENA.
BEhold (says the Lord Christ to Peter) Satan has desired you, that he may
sift you as wheat Luke 22. 31.
. Men use to sift wheat more carefully and thoroughly, then other grain. The
reason is, because it being the purest and richest of all grain, a little
beggary or soil left in it, is so much the greater eyesore, whilst it is yet
in the heap, or hand; and besides any mixture of dross being ground with
wheat, is (for the same reason) the more offensive in taste, when bread comes
to be made of it. So that our Saviors meaning in the recited passage is; that
the Devil has a very great desire to obtain leave from God of sifting the
Saints thoroughly, i. by liberty of temptation to try them to the uttermost,
what may be gotten out of them by way of weakness and corruption; not indeed to
make them the more pure, (though this be Gods design in the permission) but to
render them the more sinful and polluted, and to abate and pull down their
high interests both with God and man.

The Author of the late Treatise, known by the mark of a Gangrene Sect. 2.
or Cancer in the forehead of it, being (as it seems) of Satan's counsel, and
partaker of his intentions against the Saints, has diligently swept his
floor, and gathered together his siftings, all that dross and beggary of
weaknesses and infirmities, which Satan within the compass of four years (by
his own confession) was able to sift out of them, and he to come to the
knowledge of; and has ground, kneaded, and baked it, and made shewbread of
it, for such of the Presbyterian Sons of Levi, and their retinue, to eat, as
are of his own diet and constitution. But (doubtless) the man suffers loss in
his design, upon the same terms, and by the same occasion, upon which his
Grand Tutor many times suffers the like also in his; who, though his subtlety
and industry to promote his kingdom, be very great and formidable, yet is ever
and anon befooled by his malice, which is predominant, and magnifies it self
above them both. This still importunes him for present action against the
Saints, and suffers him not to preconsider, whether the winning of the Rests,
be not like to lose him the race. So (doubtless) Mr Edw. being overcome, even
to an intoxication, with the sweetness of his end, the defamation of his poor
innocent helpless Brethren, surnamed (by himself and many others, who of late
have acted themselves into a far deeper merit of the name, and that in the
worst sense and construction of the word) Independents; had not his Prudentials
free, to consider, whether the course which he has steered to drown them in
the black Sea of infamy and reproof, be not more like to carry them into the
fair Havens of honor. For he that charge his enemy, whose reputation in
every kind he sets himself to tread and trample under foot, like clay and mire
in the streets, only with such and such crimes; he does not so much charge him
with these, as acquit and discharge him from all others.

There is no reasonable man, but will abate and deduct, and that Sect. 3.
to a good proportion, from such reckonings and accounts, which are drawn up
and given in to him by the hand of envy: much less will he judge such
accounts short, or defective in particulars. So that whereas Mr Edw. conceits,
that he has now in his Gangraena informed the world, how bad and vile these
Sectaries and Independents are; the Truth is, that he has done this but
faintly, and with the extreme hazard of his own reputation; but he has
justified and acquitted them with an high hand from all other crimes and
imputations of any worse resentment or import, then those wherewith he
asperseth them; and consequently, has represented them unto the world as
better and far more deserving, then far the greatest part of his own
Presbyterian generation. For first, as to matter of practice, look of what
crimes or miscarriages soever, he has with any truth, impeached those men, of
his indignation; I here (in his own phrase elsewhere Antap. p.
) cast the glove to him, that if he will accept of the challenge, I will
produce both as many for number, as foul (yea far more foul) for nature,
perpetrated and done by a far less number of his Classique Proselytes, then
they are, amongst whom he pretends to find so many things of such portentuous
demerit. Yea and that I will give another manner of account of the realitie and
truth of what I bring upon the Stage in this kind, then he has done, or ever
will be able to do, of a very considerable part of those things, which his
gangred pen has uttered against his Sectaries.

And secondly, for matter of opinion; I cast my glove unto him the Sect. 4.
second time, that I will do the like. 1. That I will discover and find out as
many errors and heresies, and those of every whit as dangerous an import, as
those which he pretends (or at least is able to prove) to be at this day extant
among those who by the authority (or passion rather and precipitancy) of his
pen are voted Sectaries, in a far lesser number of his Classique party; only
upon condition, that he shall undertake to persuade those, amongst whom I shall
undertake to make this discovery, to answer, and give an account unto me what
their judgments are, in all such points and questions, which I shall propose
to them. Yea whereas he makes such a Tragical outcry, that there should be 180
errors and heresies amongst us, as if he were afraid that he should lose his
Presbyterian Religion in the crowd; I verily believe (and not without ground)
that if he would vouchsafe but freely and heartily to declare his mind and
judgment, in all such points, as I would tender unto him, and not profess
that Scepticisme himself, which he so much abhorres in others, I could make a
discovery of as many (errors and heresies together I mean) in himself alone.
Nor do I judge, that the most Orthodox Presbyterian under Heaven (no nor
Independent neither) erres much beneath the like rate or number of errors and
mistakes in matters of Religion.

And suppose the man were relieved with this supposition ( Cujus Sect. 5.
tamen contrarium verum est, as will be attested by many Authentic witnesses)
that all the tales he tells to make that crown of honor to languish and fade,
which God has set upon the heads of those which to him (it seems) are Heathens
and Publicans, I mean Sectaries and Independents, were true; yet certainly
they that scattered them were more innocent then he that gathered them up,
especially with so polluted an intention, as to call the world together to see
the nakedness of the Saints, and to rejoice with Satan in his victories and
triumphs over them. If the man had thought good to have served his God in verse
as he has done in prose, he might have begun his work with this Hexameter,

Fortunam Satanae, and magnos cantabo triumphos. Failings through infirmity,
are but the footsteps of Flesh and Blood: but bloody insultations over men
because of failings, bewray Principalities and powers, and more, spiritual
wickednesses. Doubtless, the sin of Cham in discovering the nakedness of
his Father unto his Brethren, was greater then the sin of his Father in being
drunk: Cursed be Canaan, (says Noah as a Prophet) a servant of servants shall
he be unto his brethren Genesis 9. 25.
. And so the fact of Doeg the Edomite in informing Saul against Ahimelech the
Priest, about what he had done for David 1 Samuel 22. 9, 10.
, was by many degrees more stigmaticall then any thing that Ahimelech did. The
form of those accusations Sect. 6.
which Mr. Edwards has levied against his brethren, is much more inexcusable
then the matter of them. Nor do we read that either Cham or Doeg, though
sons of much unworthiness, ever traded with Satan for these black
commodities, or compassed the earth to and fro by their Eves-droppers, Agents,
or Factors, to gather up and furnish themselves with the sins or infirmities
of the Saints; no nor that they ever took up a report into their lips against
any man, upon either the loose or malicious suggestion of others; but only
related and informed what themselves saw with their own eyes, and that casually
and without awaiting the opportunity. Whether therefore the man we know, has
not comforted these sons of shame by doubling the spirit of their
unworthiness upon himself, I leave to the consideration of such men, who have
not sacrificed the principles of their ingenuity upon the service of the
Classique cause. In publishing the failings and miscarriages of persons engaged
in the profession of Religion, what has he else done but sown the world with
the seed both of blasphemy against God, contempt of his ways, and obduration
of the hearts of wicked and profane men? yea, he has spread a table for Satan
with the shame and sorrows of the Saints, and made more joy in hell with the
noise of his Gangrene going forth into the world, then that climate has known
for these many generations; yea, he has made Beelzebub himself drunk with the
blood of the Saints, and reputation of his enemies, and has lifted him up
half way toward that heaven from which our Savior long since saw him falling
like lightning e. Besides, do not all men know Luke 10.
that the composition of the world it self, and of all the parts of it,
consists ex flore and faece, of what is excellent and what is excrement? For
Mr. Edwards or any man to judge of Independency by the miscarriages, whether in
practice or opinion, of some few that (it is likely) are the retrimentitious
part of that way, is as if a man should make an estimate of Cheapside by the
channel that runs in the midst of it, or give sentence of the holy and elect
Angels by what is found in sin and wickedness in the Devils. If Independency
has its tens, Presbytery has its thousands of the sons of Belial in her
retinue. And if the man will deal fairly in comparing them together, he must
not set the head of the one against the tail of the other, but measure head
with head, and tail with tail. All may be true which the man charge upon
Independency, and yet independency lift up her head in worth and dignity as
high above Presbytery,

Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi, as the Cedar in Lebanon is by the
hand of nature advanced above the Thistle in Lebanon. The most accursed
hypocrites that ever the earth bare, have been of the profession of
Christianity, and yet Christianity the best of all professions. That Wolves are
often found in Sheeps clothing, is so far from being matter of disparagement
unto it, that it rather commends it for the best and most innocent clothing of
all other: Nor ought the sheep (as Augustine said long since) either to lay
aside his clothing, or think the worse of it, because the Wolf sometimes puts
it on to deceive by it. The Angels of light are not out of love with their
shining, because the ministers of Satan transform themselves into their
likeness. Nay, it is a glorious testimony to the outward deportment of the
blessed Angels, that the Angels of darkness desire to assume it, when they
desire to conceal and hide themselves. The ordinary wisdom of the flesh
teaches men to take of the best to cover the worst withal.

But what atonement can be made for the man and his demerit, Sect. 7.
in case he shall be found to sycophantize, to fill the world with forged
cavillations and slanders against the Saints? and a great (if not the far
greater) part of what he has written, be evidenced to be not of the race or
issue of the folly and weakness of those that are accused, but of the wisdom
of the flesh, and strength of envy in the accuser, and some others, who by the
mediation of the same dear interest, are both one flesh and one spirit too
with him? Should not the world have cause to fear lest the Sun would be
ashamed, and the Moon abashed at the very sight of such a monster of impiety as
this; and mourn in sackcloth over the deplorable and sad condition of men, that
such things should be found with them? yea, and to interpret the birth of it,
as a sign that her dissolution approaches, and is even at the doors? I have
neither leisure nor opportunity to search to the bottom, or sift to the bran,
all that the man storieth, per se and per alios, in his Gangrene; nor do I
hold Intelligence with any man to inform my self of his haltings, but I am able
of mine own knowledge to avouch the untruth of some things asserted by him:
the untruth of more has been avouched unto me by others; and I make little
question but that when all his accused ones shall have had time and opportunity
to stand forth and plead their innocence, there will be very little truth found
remaining in any thing reported by him, except (happily) in such things which are
transgressions against no Law.

In the mean while he has taken a pretty politic course to save Sect. 8.
the stake of his own repute, and to prevent as much as may be, the through
examination of the greatest part of what his Gangrene represents by way of
disparagement to the Independent party, by printing so many letters so full
fraught with these commodities, without the names of their Authors. For by this
means he may put down in ink and paper, and make up letter-wise what he
pleases, and yet no man be able to say unto him that black is his eye for so
doing. If he will affirm that such or such letters were sent unto him, or came
to his hands, and withal refuse to produce the authors, or pretend reasons why
he should not name them; well may we suspect juggling: but yet the Jugler has
a City of refuge to fly unto to save himself out of the hand of a detector.
And to me it seems not a little strange, that Mr. Edwards should keep the names
of his informers, who have contributed so liberally toward the same design
with himself, under hatches, or within the veil; when as he prostitutes his
own name with so much confidence (that I say not impudence) in the frontispice
of his book. If he judges it honorable in himself, to be taken notice of
for Commander in chief in the Classique wars against Sectaries and
Independents; he had no reason to hide the names of his Captains, and those
that served in inferior place of command under him in the same service: except
he either thinks that they have been too timorous and low-spirited in the
action, and in this respect is tender of their reputation, hoping they may quit
themselves more like men hereafter, and then he means to bring forth their
names with honor; or else judges that his own interest in the glory of the
achievement, will rise the better, and be the greater and more entire, if no
man shall be looked upon, or known by name, that gave assistance to him in the
work. Or else thirdly, fears lest the contents of the letters being evicted
of forgery and untruth, should reflect dishonor upon the indighters, and so
discourage and weaken their hand as to any further service in so laudable a
cause. But the truth is, that I cannot attribute so much either to the first of
these reasons, or to the second, nor yet to the third (though this has most in
it) as to be able to believe, that he suppressed his names for any other end,
then to suppress the examination of the truth of the letters. I know, that if
I would borrow but a little Presbyterian faith, I could with this, without any
demurre or consideration at all, believe that all that is contained in the
letters from the first to the last of them, is pure and simple truth; and that
M. Edwards did very virtuously and commendably in sending away the names of the
writers into a land of darkness. But these being no fundamentals, I hope we
shall be tolerated without believing them with our own faith.

One of his Apocryphal letters (p. 66.) comforts his friend, Good Sect. 9.
Mr. Edwards (as he styles him) against me, thus: But whatsoever Mr. John of
Colemanstreet says, they (the Independents he means) will be found the
fighters against God. I grant, they may be so found in the Presbyterian
Almanac, through a mistake, but in the original, the Ephemerides of heaven,
they are called Fighters WITH and FOR God. Except the letter-man means, they
will be found fighters against the God of this world, in that Militia which he
has armed against the nation and servants of the God of Heaven in it. Against
this God in his Militia, I confess, they have fought, and (I doubt not) will
fight still more cordially and more courageably then many Anti-Independent
souls have done. Indeed if the Independents should turn Turks, and betray
their principles, and pass over into the Tents of High Presbytery, they will
be found fighters against God, as well as others. But in the mean season let
Mr. Anonymus and his compeers know, that there is no Sect of men in the Land,
the sons of high Presbytery and Episcopacy only excepted, that being true to
their Principles, are capable of fighting against God, at least in that sense,
which both Gamaliel in the Text, and Mr. John of Colemanstreet in his
Commentaries intends and prosecutes. Nor let any man think that I breath the
least air of disparagement in the face of Presbytery, by ranging Episcopacy
with it: in as much as Mr. Edwards himself, springs an engagement upon
Presbytery to persecute the Saints under the veil of suppressing errors, from
the laudable practice of her elder sister Episcopacy in the same kind.

In another letter of the same Packet (or packing rather,) viz. Sect. 10.
p. 55. he presents the honorable and grave Assembly of Parliament (for to them
he dedicates his Gangraena, quanta quanta est, from the one end of it to the
other) with such a painted piece of lasciviousness and profaneness, kissing
together, which might probably have found acceptance and thanks, had he
presented it to the company of free Traders in Turnbolstreet, for the
beautifying of their Hall: but by exhibiting it to those persons of Gravity and
Honor, he has traduced the modesty of their eyes and ears, and attempts no
less then to draw them into part and fellowship with himself in his own
reproach, by seeking to make them patrons of all the filthy, slanderous, and
abominable practices of his pen.

In the very front and entrance of his Dedicatory unto them, he Sect. 11.
tells them that he presents them with a Catalogue, or black Bill: he might
have added (in stead of what he does add) of the same nature, tendency and
import with those, which the black Accuser of the Brethren was wont long since
by his agents to present unto the Heathen Emperors and powers of this world,
against the Saints of the most high God. And whereas (a few lines after) he
professes that he much fears lest the subject matter of his Catalogue may
prove unto England like the Bill of Divorce given unto Israel; I profess also
that I fear the same fear with him, in part, because a great, if not the
far greatest part, of the subject matter of his Catalogue consists of
defamatory untruths, forged cavillations, and bloody insinuations against the
servants of God in the Land. And such practices as these in a Nation, ( unless
some speedy and effectual course be taken to prevent them) portend indeed
little less then a bill of divorce from Heaven to that Nation. But for the
Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, and Practices of the Sectaries of this time,
which he makes the subject matter of his Catalogue; by that time, 1o all those
Tenets which he very erroneously makes Errors and Heresies, to advance his
Catalogue; and 2o all those, which are forged in his own brain, falsely fastened
upon others, no man holding or owning them: and 3o, all those, which it may be
have fallen from the lips or pen of some one inconsiderable and
halfe-distracted person, no man seconding him therein: and 4o all those that
he has perverted in the setting down: 5o, all those that (for substance) are
repeated the second, third, and forth time over. 6o, and lastly, all those
Blasphemies and Practices, which without cause or ground of truth he charge
upon his Sectaries; by that time (I say) that all these shall be struck out of
his black Bill, the Bill will appear much blacker and fouler then yet
(perhaps) it does in the eyes of many, and so resemble the Author more to the
life: But the formidablenesse of the subject mattrr of his Catalogue will be
much eased, and the form of it be found much more formidable then the matter.

But I marvel how Mr Edw. having (it seems) an authorized Sect. 12.
power to make errors and heresies at what rate, and of what materials he
pleases, and hopes to live upon the trade, could stay his pen at so small a
number as 180; and did not advance to that Angelical quotient in the
Apocalypse, which is ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousand thousands. If
he had consulted with a book, not many years since printed, which maintains
that dangerous heresy of the Cosmoselenitae, i. of those that hold there is
another world in the Moon, and with another, printed within the compass of
his four years, entitled, Divinity and Philosophy dissected and set out by a
mad man, with some few others, that I shall shortly be able to name unto him; I
will undertake, that out of these he shall be able to increase his roll of
errors and heresies, from 180, to 280, if not to 500; and that upon more honest
and honorable terms, then now he has advanced it to his own number. And if he
pleases to repair unto me before the course of his menstruous or monthly
labor comes upon him, I will undertake to enrich his Treasury of errors and
heresies, by twenty and ten, out of his own Antapologie. For certain I am,
that every contradiction affords an error, either on the one hand, or on the
other: and if I do not find twenty and ten, and a better number then so, of
birds of that feather in that Element, let Mr Edwards pen plough as many long
furrows more upon my back, as it has done. In the mean time, I must crave
leave to say (or at least to think) that it is a most importune and
unsufferable presumption, for a poor, weak thimble-full of dust, that knows
not how to range his parts of speech in a sentence, nor to put the nominative
case and verb together regularly in English, nor how to frame the structure of
a period according to the common rules of reason, Grammar, and common sense; to
advance himself into a Paper Throne, and from thence, satis pro Imperio and
tribunali, pronounce the formidable sentence of Error and Heresy, against all
opinions and judgments of men whatsoever, which will not comport with his
understanding (or fancy rather) as the standard of all Truth. Yea and
Nebuchadnezzar-like, to slay and smite Dan. 5. 19.
what opinion he pleases: what he will to set up, and what he will to pull
down. For I profess ingenuously, that I know not by what other rule or
measure, besides his own humor and will, he judges of error or heresy.
Certain I am, that if he will stand either to the arbitrament of the
Scriptures, or to the principles of clear and sound Reason, he must discharge
and justify many of those Tenets for innocent, yea and well-deserving Truths,
which now he has arraigned at the bar of his Tribunal for Errors and
Heresies. If his Touchstone be, the major vote of his own party, I desire to
recommend unto him the conscientious perusal of a passage from the pen of a
conscientious and learned man of the same side, (I hope he will not say, that
he is known ex professo, to be of another judgment, then what he plainly
expresses in writing; a base calumny, wherewith to honor himself, he
dishonors Calvin, p. 45.) If dissentions and schisms (says Musculus Si
oriantur dissensiones and schismata in Ecclesia, in culpa sunt qui falsam sidem
defendu^t, non qui impugna^t: Nec refert utri sint multitudine superiores.
Ecclesia namque nec judicat ipsa secundu^ multitudinem, nec judicanda est
secundu^ majoris numeri consensu^, sed secundu^ manifestam veritatem in sacris
Scripturis expressam, Musc. Loc. Tit. de Eccle. Sect. 9.
) arise in the Church, they are in fault who stand up to maintain a false
faith, not they who oppose it. Nor is it material which party is the more
numerous. For the Church, neither her self judges according to the multitude,
nor is she to be judged according to the consent of the greater number, but
according to the manifest truth expressed in the Scriptures. If the man will
but own the verdict of as learned and ingenuous a pen as ever wrote on his
side, he must release the better half (I believe) of his prisoners, and
instead of an 180 Errors and Heresies, take his tables and write down,
four-score. Secondly, I would know of him, whether this be a regular process
in Law, To ask my fellow whether I be a Thief. If Mr Edw. thinks that he ought
to be reputed, and honored as a man Orthodox, till men of his own judgment
vote him erroneous; I know no reason he has, but to measure out the same
measure unto others; and consequently to judge no man or men erroneous or
heretical, until they be adjudged such by those that concur in opinion with
them. As for twenty and ten of those opinions, which he has impeached of error
and heresy, (and I will not say for how many more) I do here cast the glove
to whosoever will take it up, to bring them off with the honor of truth, from
all that the man has to lay to their charge. For I evidently see, that he has
dealt with many precious Truths of God, as the Jews did by Christ himself,
when they numbered him with Transgressors. And particularly, for that which he
has arraigned in the 70th place in his Catalogue of Errors, viz. that Faith in
a proper sense is imputed to justification, and not Christ's righteousness; (in
the sense by me rejected) I think I may with far less boasting say, what he
says of his abilities in the Church-Controversies; I am (says he) so far
versed in these Controversies, that I challenge, etc Antapol. p. 117.
. So may I say without offense, that I am so far versed in the Controversy
about the Imputation of faith and Christ's active obedience in Justification,
that I here challenge all the Presbyterians one after another, assembled, or
not assembled, in England, Scotland, France and Ireland, to prove either by the
Scriptures, or by dint of argument, either that faith is not imputed in a
proper sense, or that the active obedience of Christ, is in the formalitie of
it, imputed in Justification.

P. 45. He labors to justify the Devil, only to make me appear like Sect. 13.
unto him; for in saying, that I deal just by him, as the Devil did by Christ;
does he not plainly imply, that the Devil did no worse by Christ, then I do
by him? So then if it appear, that I dealt fairly by him, and did him no
wrong, in my citation of his words, then will the Devil be found to be Mr
Edwards client, and he the Devils Advocate, and that by the verdict of his own
pen. Now then whether I have wronged the man the least hair of his head, let
the world, and the great Judge himself of the world, judge. The case is this.
In my Innocencies Triumph, p. 8. I cite these words from his Antapologia, p.
169. The power of the Magistrate by which he punishes sin, does not subserve
to the Kingdom of Christ the Mediator. Now to take an occasion of resembling
himself unto Christ (which he does more then once in his Gangrene See his
Preface, p. 4.
) and me unto the Devil, he charge me, that citing the former part of the
sentence, I leave out the latter: adding further, that had I but named this
latter part, it would have been an evident confutation of me. Let any sober and
intelligent man, but consider, what that latter part of the sentence is, how
incongruous and illcoherent with the former, and he will clearly see, that in
omitting it, I rather cast a covering upon his nakedness, then any way
prejudiced him; unless (happily) he counts this a prejudice to him, not to have
his nakedness and weakness appear to the world all over. But the latter part
of the sentence he speaks of, the naming whereof would have been so evident a
confutation of me, is this; that he may apply efficaciously (...) of the
Prophetical and Priestly office of Christ: he does not affect the inward man
and conscience with spiritual punishment. Where, first, it is observable, that
himself, citing here so much of the latter part of the sentence, as (it seems)
he would have had me have cited in my Innocencies Triumph, leaves out the
latter part of this latter part it self, viz. these words (distinguished only
by a comma, from the former) neither is this instituted of God, and sanctified
as the means for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in
the day of Christ. So that if I have dealt by him as the Devil did by Christ,
merely by citing the former part of his sentence without the latter, he deals
himself by himself as the Devil did by Christ, (which is more unnatural of
the two) yea he deals by himself, with a far more exact conformity to the
pattern he speaks of, the Devils dealing by Christ, then I, though his charge
against me could be justified. For the Devil did not leave out the latter part
of the sentence which he cited, but only the last words, or latter part of the
latter part of this sentence. For Mr Edw. in affirming that the Devil left out
these words, To keep thee in all thy ways, deals far worse then the Devil
did by Christ; for the Devil did not lie unto Christ, though he tempted him;
but whether Mr Edw. does not dash his foot against this stone, in saying the
Devil left out the words mentioned, let the Evangelist speak; And he brought
him to Jerusalem, (says Luke) and set him on a pinnacle of the Temple, and said
unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down from hence. For it is
written, he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee Luke 4. 9, 10^.
. So that the Devil left out but part of those words which Mr Edw. charge
upon him, viz. these, In all thy ways; which being the very last words of the
sentence, it is Mr Edw. that has copied out the Devils delinquency to an
hair; dealt just by himself, as the Devil did by Christ, not I. But whereas
other Authors frequently make use of the figure Synecdoche, in putting down a
part for the whole; Mr Edw. makes much use in his writings of a new figure,
which we may call an Anti-Synecdoche, by putting the whole, yea and sometimes
more then the whole for a part. But however, I must give him the testimony of a
man impartial between the Devil and the Saints; for though he speaks falsely
of these, yet he will not flatter the other with the truth.

2o. I would feign know, in case the former part of his sentence cited by me,
be false, whether the addition of the latter would have made it true. If the
power of the Magistrate by which he punishes sin, does not subserve to the
Kingdom of Christ the Mediator (which are the words I cite) would the naming
of the following words, that he may apply efficaciously (...), etc. render or
make it subservient thereunto? Therefore I know not how, or wherein I have
trespassed either upon the man or his words in the least. If his meaning be,
the whole period, former and latter part being taken together, that the power
of the Magistrate by which he punishes sin, does not subserve to the Kingdom
of Christ the Mediator, by an efficacious applying of (...) of the Prophetical
and Priestly Office of Christ, etc. First, the Grammar of the sentence will not
bear it. And secondly, if it would, yet such a sense is little better then no
sense; the sentence thus taken, being of the same form and character of
speaking with this: The bread by which Mr. Edwards lives, does not subserve to
the maintenance of his life, by making his drink effectual to quench his
thirst. Or this: The learning by which Mr. Edwards confuteth the Sectaries, is
not subservient to their preferment by giving them houses or lands, or great
rewards, etc. If there be sap, savor, or sense in either of these, then may
he have some cause to complain of wrong done unto him, in that the body of
that sentence he speaks of, was not produced by me whole and entire, lower
parts and upper parts together. But if the period taken together, was of the
very selfsame shape and form with those, then was it Centaure-like; and then
I did him more right then came to his share, in showing only the upper parts
of it, wherein it was rational, and like to a man, and concealing the nether
parts of it, the discovery whereof makes it appear like a monster, strange and
uncouth to behold. The truth is, that the passage he speaks of, and over which
he mourns, finding it without the tail in my citation, though he calls it a
Sentence, yet a sentence it is none, having neither form, feature, nor any
property of a sentence in it. And in this my sentence and censure of it, I
refer my self to all those that have but their senses exercised in discerning
between sensible and senseless sayings.

Notwithstanding the man (in his Preface) is tumultuously importune Sect. 14.
for an answer to his Antapologie, and calls all the speeches that have been
given out by the Independents concerning an answer to it, but mere flourishes
and swelling words of vanity; as if to talk of answering him, were a swelling
word of vanity, a word of too much confidence to proceed from the mouth of a
mortal man. Yea, in the very first page of his preface he vapors at an
insufferable rate, pouring out contempt upon the poor Independents (whom he
calls Dogs, making himself or his Antapologie the Moon) as if they were not
only not able to answer it, but as if they knew not so much as which way to
go about to answer it: as if they who mean to answer him, had need to be
furnished with other manner of parts, learning, knowledge, wisdom, then were
any ways requisite to answer all the Seraphicall disputants in the world
besides. Paul himself (it seems) with some others, had given out some speeches
of his coming to Corinth, some while before he came. And because through
occasional diversions his journey was for some considerable time deferred,
some in this Church that were obnoxious, were puffed up (it seems) as if the
bitterness of death had been past, and Paul never meant to come amongst them.
Some (says he) are puffed up, as though I would not come unto you 1 Cor. 4.
18.
. But he cuts the comb of this their confidence in the next words, by
acquainting them with his resolution in that behalf. But (says he) I will
come unto you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know not the words of them
which are puffed up, but their power Verse 19.
. Because an answer to his Antapologie has been so much spoken of, and through
many interruptions following like the waves of the Sea one in the neck of
another, has not yet been brought forth, therefore the man is so far swollen and
puffed up with conceit, as if the world were not wide enough to contain him.
But the answer which he calls for with so much fierceness of importunity, will
ere long ( if the Lord will) be with him: and the world shall know, not what
the words are, (for these are big enough, and known unto the world already) but
what the power is (or weakness rather) of the Antapologie. There were some
sons of Belial, and yet sons of Confidence too, among the Jews, in the
days of the great provocation of that nation, when the day of that soar
judgment of the 70. years captivity drew near, and was even at the doors,
who (it seems) derided the predictions of the Prophets concerning the
judgment, and were so confident as to desire and call for that day of the
Lord, (under which expression the Prophets of the Lord were wont to forewarn
them of it) as for a treasure. But what says the Prophet Amos to these? Woe be
to you that desire the day of the Lord: to what end is it for you? The day of
the Lord is darkness, and not light Amos 5. 18.
. I verily believe that the Answer to Mr. Edwards Antapologie, will not be for
his honor: in which respect he has no great ground to be so restless or
importunate in calling for it; or to insult over those, who have told him once
and again, that (if the Lord will) an answer shall be given him. Whereas he
talks of his worthy piece being published 18. months since, he supposes (it
seems) that men have little or nothing to do, but to attend the motions of his
pen, and to expedite and dispatch him out of hand. Indeed if Independent
Ministers had either the privilege of ease, to preach to the bare walls and
pews in their meeting-places, or that shamelessness of forehead to make the
subject matter of their Sermons little else but loose, and lying, and frivolous
reports and stories, or virulent invectives against the Saints and servants of
God, (with which kind of material, this world, and the God of this world
together, will be glad to furnish Preachers at a very low rate, either of time
or study, for their building) they might (I confess) be men of more expedition
in writing, then they are, and be as like the Tree spoken of in the
Revelationa, as Mr Edw. himself. It is sufficiently Gangrena. Pref. p. 2.
known, that since the 18 months Mr Edwards speaks of, I have given some
account unto the world, and that by public writing, and this more then once,
twice, or thrice, (besides my constant and standing labors with those who have
committed themselves unto me in the Lord) that I am not so loose, or idly
disposed, as Mr. Edwards would insinuatingly persuade and possess the world
concerning me ( p. 73.) And known also it is, though somewhat more privately,
that I had given some further account in the same kind, of my time spent,
(within the said compass of 18. months) had not the way, by which light and
truth should go forth into the world, been hedged up by Clergie-Classique
Counsels, as with thorns, against me. But however, I can hardly believe, that
Mr Edwards himself, notwithstanding all the advantage of liberty and freedom
from other engagements which he had above other men, took much less then 18.
months time, for the building and beautifying his Antapologie. And who knows
not how much more easy it is, to be first in writing, or to object, then to
answer; according to the common saying in the Schools, Plura porest
interrogare Asinus, quam respondere Aristoteles: i. An ass may soon ask more
questions, then Aristotle be able to answer?

In the latter part of his Preface, he arms himself with constancy Sect. 15.
and heroique resolution, to triumph and rejoice in what he shall suffer in way
of hatred or reproach from the Sectaries, for his faithful and noble service
done both to Heaven and Earth in opposing them; animating and flattering
himself in his course, with this, that in case he shall suffer in this kind,
he shall ride parallel in the triumphant Chariot of honor with those great
worthies of the world, Calvin, Luther, and Austine; yea with the Apostle Paul
himself; nay, with the great Lord of all the Apostles and Patriarchs, the Lord
Christ himself, blessed for ever. See the 4, 5, and 6 pages of his Preface.
But poor man! little does he consider, how diametrally opposite he is in his
cause and course, both to Christ and Paul; and how unlike those other men. Was
either Paul or Christ, of his occupation? did they spend their time, or engage
their friends, in gathering up vagrant, loose, scandalous and lying reports
against the Saints, and servants of God, under the names of Sectaries, to
bless the vanity and wickedness of the world with the venting of them? Did
Paul or Christ, set their faces like an Adamant, to inflame and set on fire the
Powers of this world, with hatred, bitterness and bloudinesse of spirit,
against the sons and daughters of God, though full of weakness, and unworthy
in the highest? Or did they importune and clamor upon the secular arm, even
to the wearying of it, to avenge them on their adversaries; and little less
then threaten those in place and Authority, if they would not comport with
them in their carnal ends and desires, and lift up their iron rod to break
their enemies in pieces like a potters vessel? This, (says Christ to the
Jews, speaking of their murtherous attempts against him) this did not Abraham
Joh. 8. 40.
. Nor did the Lord Christ, or his blessed Apostle any of the things mentioned:
but whether Mr. Edw. has done any thing else (almost) either in his Lion, or
in his Bear, I mean either in his Antapologie, or in his Gangrene, especially
in this latter, I appeal to the judgments and consciences of all, that either
have, or shall please diligently to peruse them, and withal have but their
wits and senses free from Classique bands. When the Lord Christ was solicited
by some of his disciples, and that by those whom he loved best, to call for
fire from Heaven to consume those that would not receive him, he turned
himself, and rebuked them, telling them that they knew not what spirit they
were of. Whereas Mr. Edwards calls and cries, might and maine, for fire from
Hell to destroy, not those who refuse to receive the Lord Christ, but such as
do receive him with all their hearts, and with all their souls, only because
their faces are not instantly set to receive the Traditions of his Discipline
and Doctrine; and yet conceits that he knows well enough of what spirit he is,
making no question for conscience sake, but that it is Heavenly. And for Paul,
we know he burnt (viz. grief and sorrow) when any Christian, though never so
weak, was but offended: his Doctrine and desire was, that supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men: for Kings
and all that are in Authority, that we [Christians and believers, of what
judgment soever, for he excludes none] may lead a quiet and peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty 2 Timothy 2. 12.
. But Mr. Edwards is so far from burning when weak Christians are offended,
that he is offended, when they burn not. His Doctrine, Practice, and desire
is, that supplications and prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks, be made
for, and to, Kings and all in Authority, that Christians and believers may
either not live at all, or at least be so far from leading quiet and peaceable
lives in godliness and honesty, as to have their faces ground, and their
bones broken, and their hearts filled with heaviness, unless they will
receive the Clergie-Classique Faith, as well as the Faith of the Lord Jesus
Christ himself. O miserable man! who shall deliver him from this dangerous
snare of death; I mean of conceiting himself like unto Paul and Jesus Christ,
in the course he steer's against Sects and Errors! And as for Calvin, Luther,
and Austin, though these had much more flesh and blood in them, then the two
former had; yet for him to strengthen his hand in the way he goes, by their
example, is as if a murderer should encourage himself in his way, from the
practice of a Surgeon when he lets blood, or the proceedings of a Judge, when
he slayes a malefactor with a sentence of death. For when, or in what age of
the world did any of these spread the world round about them with snares of
intelligence, in every place, to catch the failings, and haltings and
infirmities of the Saints; and when they had taken a proportion of them, to
spread a table with them to entertain and feast the profane world? Especially
when did any of these, ever publish such a rhapsodie, of loose, light, lying
reports and tales, all or the greatest part of them calculated for the shame of
the Saints, and glory of the Sons of Belial? Or when did any of them deal so
importunely or imperiously with those, whom God had set in Authority over
them, to crush the generation of the righteous, the lambs of Jesus Christ,
under the names of Sectaries, only because in some things they held not
conformity in judgment with them? I do not all this while say, that either
Mr. Edwards writing, or printing, or preaching, against errors, heresies, or
Sectaries, is that, which simply makes him unlike either unto Christ, or Paul,
or those others named; for doubtless they did, interpretatively at least, all
this; and who has not engagements upon him, to go thus far both with him and
them, if he be able, and has opportunity? But first, the blaspheming many
Truths of God, under the names of errors and heresies (a stone at which his pen
frequently dasheth) makes him extremely unlike unto Christ and Paul; yea and
unto those others also, except only in their failings. Secondly, his turning
himself, especially with that fierceness of countenance, and furiousness of
importunity, upon the Civil Magistrate, to provoke men of this Interest, to
power out themselves in wrath and indignation upon all those, whom he thinks
good to make Delinquents by his pen. Thirdly, His sending forth of Emissaries
(wherein, thorough a mistake of the word Independents, in stead of
Presbyterians, he charge the Independents to resemble the Jesuits) to
discover, and report unto him, the slips and weaknesses of the servants of God.
Fourthly, His inveteratenesse, and Dragon-likenesse of spirit, by which he
manageth all his endeavors against Errors and Sectaries. Fifthly, His
importune confidence, and overgrowne presumption of his own parts, learning,
knowledge. Sixthly, His drinking in with so much greediness, all, and all
manner of reports, that are brought in to him, whether with ground or without,
that will but make dirt to throw in the faces of those, whose understandings
are either longer or shorter then his, be they otherwise as dear to him whose
Name is jealous, as the apple of his eye. Seventhly and lastly, His virulent
and viperous design, to preach the nakedness of the Saints, yea the
nakedness of vile and unworthy men (I mean their false, base, and putid
suggestions against them) as their nakedness, upon the housetop, and to call
upon all the world to hear; these things make him so extremely unlike Jesus
Christ, and those others whom he pretends to imitate, that that drop of
resemblance wherein he partakes with them, is quite drowned and swallowed up in
this Great Ocean of dissimilitude. And let Mr. Edwards know, and let his
Conscience and Compeers know, that whatsoever he shall suffer, whether from his
Sectaries or others, in this bloody negotiation, he shall suffer not as a
Christian, nor with Christ, but as a malefactor and an evil doer.

But I marvel with what profound Oracle of policy the man Sect. 16.
consulted with, about the title of his book, calling it, A Catalogue and
discovery of many Errors of the Sectaries. Was it not that tyrannical and
bloody principle: Pereant amici, dummodo and inimici una pereant. i. Let
friends go to wreck too, so that enemies may but wreck with them. For
certainly, by this title he makes Presbyterians Sectaries, as well as any
others. Wherein I should not have faulted him, but only to show how that the
zeal of High Presbytery, has eaten him up, and not left him so much of
himself, as wherewith to know his friends from his enemies. For if men be
therefore Sectaries, because they hold such opinions, as he rallieth in his
Catalogue under the Name of Errors, I know many Presbyterian Sectaries. First,
for that which he makes the 104 error in his Catalogue, viz. that Paedobaptisme
is unlawful, it is sufficienrly known, that the strongest shield and buckler
wherewith that cause was ever protected, was the workmanship of a Presbyterian
hand. So for that opinion, that there is no Scripture against a man's being
often baptized (mentioned in the 110th place) it calls a Presbyterian, Master.
That the calling and making of Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, are not
jure divino, etc. which is the 116th. That there is no distinction concerning
Government of Ecclesiastical and Civil, etc. (the 141.) are the opinions of
one, who professes himself to be no Separatist a, and then I know not by Mr.
Edwards principles, Compassion. Samaritan. p. 4
to make him any thing but a Presbyterian.

I know diverse of the Presbyterian judgment, as well Regular as Secular, that
own the 70th error* (so called, or miscalled rather;) viz. That faith in a
proper sense is imputed in justification, and that Christ's righteousness (i^
his active obedience) is not imputed (in the formality of it) in justification;
though for his (...) credere, it is a patch of his own peecing to the opinion,
and is no expression of theirs, who otherwise are not ashamed of the opinion.
To pass by many others of like patronage and relation; that which he
cataloguizeth for the 64. viz. this, That natural men may do such things, as
whereunto God has by way of promise annexed grace and acceptance: and that if
men improve their natural abilities to the utmost in seeking grace, they shall
find it. I desire to be informed by any understanding man, whether there be not
every inch, yea every jot and tittle of the substance of it, asserted by a
great Doctor (while he lived) of the Presbyterian School, and who being dead,
yet speaks much for that way. I mean Mr. John Ball, in his Treatise of the
Covenant of Grace, not long since published by M. Simeon Ash. The said Treatise
being further subscribed and recommended unto the world by five great Masters
of the Assembly it self, all of them of intemerated fidelity to the
Presbyterian Cause; viz. Mr. Edward Reynolds, Mr. Daniel Cawdrey, Mr. Edmond
Calamy, Mr. Thomas Hill, Mr. Anthony Burges. In this passage (p. 44.) of the
said Treatise, No man is hindered from believing through the difficulty or
unreasonablenesse of the command, or through his own simple infirmity, as
being willing and desirous to believe, but not able, (which inability deserves
pity) but his inabilitie is of corruption and wilfulness: he does not
believe because he will not: he is unable because he does not covet or desire,
which is inexcuseable.

Doubtless, if no man be hindered from believing, either through the
difficulty of the command, or through his own infirmity; and all the reason why
a man does not believe, is, because he will not, natural men by improving
their abilities to the uttermost, may believe, and consequently do that,
whereunto God has by way of promise annexed grace and acceptance. For has he
not promised, that he that believes shall be saved? or does not salvation
amount to as much, or more, then grace and acceptance? And if men should
improve their natural abilities to the uttermost, and yet not to be able to
believe, the reason why they do not believe, cannot be said to be this,
Because they will not: for their will in this case puts forth it self to the
uttermost, in engaging men to such an improvement of their abilities. So
doubtless the same errror (if an error it be) is asserted by Paulus Testardus,
Pastor to the reformed Church of Bloys in France, in a Tract called (...), seu
Synopsis Doctrine de Natura and Gratia, published not simply by the permission
or license, but ex mandato, by the command of a whole Synod of the Reformed
Churches in the Province of Orleance, p. 91. Thesi 121. where he says, that
God in all the three ways or methods of calling sinners unto salvation (which
he had opened before) does not only show unto the sinner what he should, or
ought to do, but gives power to all that are invited or called, to perform
and do it, and so to be saved if they will. So that if even he that is called
only in the most general manner of all, be not saved, he is inexcuseable
before God. This Paul expressly teaches, That (says he) which may be known
of God, is made manifest in them (namely the Gentiles,) for God has made it
manifest unto them, that they might be without excuse before him. But
certainly (he inferres) excusable they had been, if they had been fully willing
to do it, and only wanted power Quod in omnibus vocandi rationibus Deus
peccatori, quid debeat non modo oftendit, sed and omni invitato, vocato det
posse illud praestare, and salvari, si velit: adeo ut si non salvatur is, qui
generalissima tantum ratione invitatus est, sit prorfus inexcusabilis coram
Deo. Id express docet Paulus. (...) (inquit) (...) manifestum factum est in
ipsis, (Gentilibus scilicet) Deus enim manifestum fecit, etc. ita
utinexcusabiles ipsi sint. At certe, si, etsi maxim voluissent, non
potuissent, fuissent excusabiles, etc. Paulus Testardus, Eiren. p. 91. Thesi
121.
: with more of like importance in the seqeul of the same Thesis. So that if M.
Edw. will make this an error, and a brand of a Sectary, to hold, That a man by
the uttermost improvement of his natural abilities, may do that, whereunto God
by promise has annexed Grace and Acceptance (though all this while I do not
say that I own the opinion) he will involve one whole Synod, not only with the
guilt of the error (which is less,) but of an authoritative command, to have
the error both printed and published, which is enough to separate between all
Synods, and their authority and esteem for ever; yea, and make the crown of
Orthodoxisme to fade and languish upon the head of our present Assembly, by
arraigning five of the principal members of it at once, as men tainted with
the errors of the Sectaries of the time. Therefore let him either strike these
opinions mentioned (with many others) out of his Catalogue of errors, or else
let him number his own party amongst the Sectaries.

To draw toward a conclusion; I shall put a measuring Reed Sect. 17.
into the hand of the Reader, wherewith to measure the truth and honesty of the
Gangrene and her Author, from the one end of both unto the other, made of a
straight observation of some crooked passages and relations in the Gangrene,
ready to stink for want of the salt of truth. I shall begin with such
particulars as concern my self, and close with others of another aspect and
relation.

First, though he does not set my name in the margin against Sect. 18.
his 70th error, (p. 25.) as he had done a little before in the same page
against another, yet his intent clearly enough was (and I think himself will
not deny it) to arraigne the opinion held by me concerning the imputation of
faith, and non-imputation of Christ's righteousness in justification, in my
Treatise upon that subject, entitled, Imputatio fidei, for an error Page 128.
he talks of far smaller errors in justification then mine.
. Now how falsely and forgingly he represents the opinion, appears first, in
that he fathers that mungrell expression, (...) credere upon it, only because
it is an expression ad invidiam comparata, but no where used by me throughout
the controversy: yea, p. 91. of the former part of that Treatise Sect. 3. I
expressly deny that Faith justifies as it is an act. Secondly, in that he makes
this opinion to say, That the righteousness of Christ is not imputed in
justification. Whereas I expressly affirm, (p. 54. of the second part of the
Treatise) that in a sense (which I there explain) as well the habitual
holiness of Christ's person, as the moral righteousness, or active obedience
of his life, may be said to be imputed to those that believe in him. And very
often in the said Treatise, upon occasion, I declare in what sense I admit, as
well as in what sense I refuse the righteousness or active obedience of Christ
in justification. I suppose he is not himself a son of that profound ignorance,
as to hold, that the righteousness of Christ (as he calls it, whether meaning*
his active or passive obedience, or both) is in every sense imaginable imputed
in justification; and yet it is ill presuming of overmuch understanding
(especially in the point of justification) in him, who going about to rectify
the mistakes of others, shall himself affirm, That the redemption and
reconciliation purchased by Christ, is the moving and meritorious cause of our
justification and salvation: and that the instrumental cause whereby the same
is imputed, is the blood of Christ. Of which* Atheologicall and putid assertions,
who would have thought that the great Aristarchus of the errors and heresies of
the times, could have been the Author and Assertor, had not Mistress Gangraena
in the margin of her 22. page betrayed him? But if he, only denying the
imputation of Christ's righteousness in justification in one sense, but
asserting it in another, should be simply and indefinitly charged to deny it,
would think the charge base and unjust (as indeed he should have cause to
do,) he himself must bow down his back to the same burden, and be content
to be looked* upon as a man of this baseness, until he has made his
atonement with God and men for it. Ex ungue leonem. You may by this one
instance judge with what truth or honesty he has laid down the rest of the
opinions in his Catalogue. Well may he call them errors, when once he has lift
up his pen upon them. Forgery has a mischievous omnipotency, and is able to
create what errors or heresies she pleases.

Again, p. 45. he charge Mr. John Goodwin, that in his point Sect. 19.
of justification, he quotes Calvin, Bucer, and others, who are known ex
professo to be of another judgment. Surely the man is not either so simple, or
free from the guilt of false speaking in this assertion, as his words bear.
Doubtless he does not intend to make it a matter of charge against a man, in
the handling of a controversy, to quote Authors who are known ex professo to
be of a judgment differing from his. How many does himself quote in his
Gangrene upon as deplorable terms as these? But the man's meaning is, if he knew
how to get it out, that Mr. J. G* in his point of justification, quotes Calvin,
Bucer, and others, as being of the same judgment with him, who are known ex
professo to be of another judgment, If this be his sense and charge, either
he shows himself to be a very illiterate man, and not able to construe a
piece of plain Latin; or else charges Calvin, Bucer, and the reft, with being of
a judgment as contrary to themselves as to me. If he can construe Latin, let
him confess in English whether Calvin be ex profess of a differing judgment
from me in the point of justification, in these passages following (to omit
very many others of the same import.) Quum autem justiciam in se repositam non
habeant homines, imputatione hane adipiscuntur, quia Deus fidem illis fert
acceptam pro justicia, Calvin in Gal. 3. 6. And again, Quare Abraham credendo
nihil aliud quam oblatam sibi gratiam amplectitur, ne irrita sit. Si HOC illi
imputatur in justiciam, sequitur non aliter esse justum, nisi quia Dei bonitate
consisus, omnia ab ipso sperare audet, Calv. in Romans 4. 3. FIDES REPVTATVR IN
JVSTICIAM, non quod ullum a nobis meritum afferat, sed quia Dei bonitatem
apprehendat. Ibidem. Yet again: Quibus etiam verbis do^emur, iusticiam Paulo
nihil aliud esse quam remissionem peccatorum. Calvin Romans 4. 6. Manet ergo
salva nobis pulcherrima sententia, iustificari hominem fide, quia gratuita
peccatorum remissione coram Deo purgatus sit. Ibid. Abraham fidem habuit
Iehova: and reputavit id ei iusticiam: hoc est, habuit ei pro iusticia HANC
FIDEM. Credendo igitur id accepit, ut Deus eum pro iusto haberet. Bucer Romans 4.
3. I forbear to English these passages, because I desire to make an experiment
upon Mr. Edwards, whether he be able to do it, or no. If he shall publicly
acknowledge that he has abused both me and himself, and many more, in
charging me with quoting Authors for me, who are known ex professo to be of
another judgment, I shall conceive the better hopes of some competency of a
Latin faculty in him; but if he shall stand to avouch a charge of so palpable
and manifest untruth, to them that understand the Authors language The Reader
for his further satisfaction about Calvin's judgment in this controversy, is
earnestly desired to peruse the 11th chapter, as also the 5, 6, and 7. Sections
of the fifth chapter of the first part of my Treatise of Justification.
, I profess ingenuously that I know no reason but to judge him incapable of
the English sense of a Latin sentence. But whether Calvin, Bucer, and those
other he speaks of, quoted by me in my point of Justification, be of the same
judgment or no, with me in the point, let neither me, nor he, nor Mr Roborough
be Judges, (for we very possibly may all be partial) but let us refer the
decision to two sufficient men, and without exception, both for learning, and
integrity, and knowledge of the case, the one a foreine Divine, some years
since at rest with God, never known to me; the other a neighbor Minister
indeed, and of the Assembly it self, but between whom and my self, there was
never any acquaintance, beyond a casual enterview, and the exchange of a few
words of course. The former of the two is David Pareus, sometimes chief
Professor of Divinity in the Universitie in Heidelburgh: who in his Tract
concerning the Active and Passive Righteousness of Christ, having laid down
his judgment (in the Controversy depending) thus, ( page 176.) that remission
of sins for the satisfaction of Christ imputed to us, is our whole and entire
Justification, and argued accordingly ( page 177.) in the following page,
adds as follows; I might here produce the Authorities of the Fathers, who
likewise place our righteousness (meaning, in Justification) in the alone
forgiveness of sins for the death of Christ: and accordingly cites several
testimonies out of Austin, Oecumenius, and Ambrose. And immediately after these
testimonies, thus; I might also allege the consent of Luther, Melancthon,
Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Bullinger, Martyr, Musculus, Hyperius,
Vrsine, Olenian, etc. from whose doctrine in the point of Justification, I do
not vary a nails breadth. So that the light of this man's reading and judgment
together, could discover no other opinion touching the formal cause of
Justification, either in the Fathers, or any of the chief Protestant Writers
in his time, but that it should stand ONLY in remission of sins. The latter
of the two mentioned is, Mr Thomas Gataker, a man of approved learning and
integrity amongst us: who in Mr An. Wottons Defense against Mr Walkers charge,
lately published in Print by him, acknowledges ( p. 58.) that however he for
his part deemeth it erroneous (and so do I too, taking the word Justification
in that large sense which it seems he does where he argues against the
opinion, as viz. in his Animadversions upon the disputes between Piscator and
Lucius, p. 9. Besides sundry other places) to hold that Justification
consists in remission of sins, yet that Calvin, Beza, Olenian, Vrsine,
Zanchie, Piscator, Pareus, Musculus, Bullinger, Fox, and diverse others of great
note and name, yea whole Synods of ours are found so to say: adding further,
And yet were these men never yet, that I ever heard or read, for so saying,
condemned as Heretics, much less as blasphemous Heretics, but had in high
esteem, as their worth, parts, and works well deserved, by those that therein
dissented from them. I trust the servant is not greater then his Master; nor
the Authority of the Clerk, equal to that of the Justice of Peace. If Mr.
Gataker has spoken, I hope Mr. Roborough will hold his peace. And since two
such men, as David Pareus and Mr. Thomas Gataker, have so clearly and
confidently affirmed, every mouth (I trust) of clamor and contradiction will
from henceforth be stopped. For in the mouth of two or three witnesses (says
the Divine Law it self) shall every word be established Deuteronomy 19. 15. 2 Cor.
13. 1. etc. One affirmative testimony is more valid in Law, then many negative.
: Yea I am not without some hope, but that Mr. Thomas Edwards himself, may in
time be reduced, though I know that in clamorous and aspersive bickerings, he
emulates the glory of that martial zeal which was in him, who still affected
to appear,

Primus inire manu, postremus ponere bellum, i* The first to fight, and last to
quit the field. Page 45. he affirms, that quoting his Antapologie, and citing
the Sect. 20.
former part of the sentence, I leave out the latter; adding this palpable
untruth; that had I but named it, it would have been an evident confutation of
me. I clearly proved (Sect. 13. of this Answer) that the latter part of the
sentence he speaks of, especially construed with the former part which I cite,
is absolute and complete nonsense. And was any man ever evidently confuted in
evident nonsense? except it be in such a sense, as he that drinks puddle
water, confutes him that chooses rather to drink at the clear fountain or
stream.

Page 67. he charge his Sectaries or Independents, that they use to Sect. 21.
give great and glorious Names, and swelling titles to their books, as (for
instance) Innocence and Truth Triumphing together, etc. I perceive by his
aggrievement at this title, first, that if High Presbytery be advanced,
neither Innocence, nor Truth, are like to triumph: this keen piece of
Presbytery is not able to bear the mention of such things. Secondly, that
matters of Truth any ways tending to the disparagement of Independency, are
very rare, and scarce, and not to be had for love or money. For otherwise,
(doubtless) the man would not have played at so small game, would not have
strained himself to catch at this fly. As much love as a single halfpenny,
would have served to have covered this Transgression. What? not so much
liberty meet to be allowed to Independents, as to give what Names they think
best to their books, without a Synodicall debate, and permission? I confess,
Gangraena, is no Great or glorious Name, but it is a title swelling with
poison, and the gall of aspes. But for me, I shall take no offense at it: the
proverb is but fulfilled, Similes habent labra lactucas; like lips, like
lettuces. Both title and book (I presume) are savoury meat to those for whom
they were prepared, and such as their souls love, as marrow and fatness. But
what reason he has to call Innocence and Truth Triumphing together, either a
great and glorious Name, or swelling Title, we desire to gather from the Tree
of paradise the next month of her fructification. In the mean season, Mr
Edwards must suffer as an unjust asperser in this charge also.

Page 54. He charge Mr. John Goodwin, in a Sermon to have uttered Sect. 22.
that against the Parliament, and the power of it, as opens a gap to all
slighting of their Authority and power: and further adds, that he believes
there was never any such speech from any before himself. But first, if any
such gap (as he speaks of) be opened, I know no wild beasts that have broken in
at it, but some such Presbyterians, who (as I hear) demanded, What has the
Parliament to do with Inferior Courts? And who charge some of the worthy
members thereof, to be heretical and factious; yea ninnies and grolls, and men
that have no more wit, then will reach from their nose to their mouth, and are
only sensible. I confess in respect of such Presbyterian spirits as these,
there had need be no gap opened to the slighting of Parliamentarie Authority
and power: and that the Parliament it self had need keep power out of such
hands, which without it know how to be Imperious enough. But secondly, it is so
far from being true, that I in the Sermon he speaks of, have uttered any thing
against the Parliament or power of it; much more, any thing which opens any gap
to all slighting of their Authority and power; that he himself in this charge
against me, dasheth his foot against the stone he speaks of. For first, that
which he insinuates as uttered by me of such a consequence, is nothing else but
manifest and clear truth; yea and has passed the trial of Presbyterian fire
it self, and is come forth in full weight, without suffering the least damage
or detriment by it. Secondly, most certain it is, that no Truth whatsoever has
any prejudicial or endamaging influence upon any just and lawful Authority;
for God is not divided in, or against himself. Therefore he that shall
affirm, that any Authority or power whatsoever, is any ways endangered,
prejudiced, or disparaged by any Truth, does by an unavoidable consequence,
deny that Authority or power to be lawful, or from God. Nor could Mr.
Edwards lightly have uttered any thing, that would have struck more
dangerously at the very root of all Parliamentarie Authority and power, then
to say, that he that speaks the truth, speaks against them, and opens a gap to
all slighting of them. But thirdly (and lastly) let Mr. Edwards and his
abettors in this charge know, that it is not they who speak the Truth, whether
to Parliament or Princes, that open a gap to the slighting of their Authority
or power; no: but they are the men of this demerit and impiety, who for their
own ends flatter them, and have their persons in admiration for advantage; who
strain their wits and consciences together, to lift them up nearer to the
Heavens then God will bear, that so they may be masters of an opportunity and
power, to gratify them in their carnalls. And the Truth is, that had not God
by more then an ordinary hand of grace, both toward themselves, and toward
the Nation, made those honorable and worthy Counselors, wiser then their
Teachers; Satan had a most dangerous advantage against them, to have made them
more unwise then their enemies.

Page 73. He charge the Independents, That many of them play at Sect. 23.
Cards and Tables, are very loose on the Sabbath days, go to Bowls and other
sports on days of public Thankesgiving, as Mr. John Goodwin, and several of
his Church, etc. Whether his intent be to justify and make good the first and
second branches of this charge, viz. the Independents playing at Cards and
Tables, and their looseness on the Sabbath days, by the instance of Mr. John
Goodwin and several of his Church, I will not determine. Certain I am, that
according to the common rules of construction, his words import it, and I
believe that not one Reader of ten but so understands him. If this be his
sense, abhorred of all men be his lying: for Mr. John Goodwin neither plays at
Cards nor at Tables; neither has he done either since his first coming to the
City, nor of many years before; nor does he know any of his Church addicted
to either of these recreations. But however, I marvel the man should think to
burden the Independents with these exercises of Cards and Tables, when as it
is so generally known, of what light account, and general use they are in the
best reformed Presbyterian Churches. And if there be any of the Independent
way so much addicted to them, as Mr. Edwards charge seems to import, I believe
they are chiefly, if not only, those whom Mr. Edwards calls Malignants,
complaining of them for falling to this way; and who lately drank of the same
waters of Episcopacie with the far greatest part of the Presbyterian party, and
now accompany them in their schisming or rending off from that way. And (alas!)
who knows not how hard a thing it is for men that have a long time drunk old
Wine with their old Friends, presently to drink new?

For his charge of loosnesse on the Sabbath days, the net of Independency,
like that of the Gospel (as it seems by the many bitter complaints made by
Mistress Gangraena in that behalf) gathering fishes of every kind, good and
bad Mat. 13. 47* 48.
, and that in such abundance, as the tenor of the said complaints imports, I am
not able to speak for the whole circumference. But for M. I. Goodwin and
several of his Church, who are the only persons in whom instance is given to
make good the truth of the charge, we desire that when his great labors of
pouring out the Vial upon the Sun be over, he will please to refresh himself
with telling out the story at large, with the particularities of it, viz. on
what Sabbath, or Sabbaths it was, whether before Saint Ieffrey or after, that
either himself or his Informers saw that loosnesse in Mr. John Goodwin and
several of his Church, and what loosnesse it was, and who of his Church they
were, that transgrest this transgression with him. For my part, I shall not go
about to justify my self, or all of my Church from more loosnesse then well
becomes us, on such days; but I know no loosnesse comparable to that, when
Ministers of the Gospel, (whether such, or so called by themselves) shall take
liberty under the name of preaching to vent vagrant, loose, light, lying tales
and reports, on purpose to defame the good ways and servants of God; or else
to make loud challenges to all the world, to make good what they deliver, and
yet shrink and decline the encounter with a few plain conscientious men.
Doublesse neither Mr. John Goodwin, nor any of his Church, ever trespassed the
trespass of any such loosnesse as this on any Sabbath day; nor of any other
equal in demerit to it.

But though he should cavil himself off from the charge of charging, either
Mr. John Goodwin or any of his Church, either with playing at Cards and Tables,
or with loosnesse on Sabbath days, yet he must own the charging of them with
going to Bowls, and other sports, on days of public Thankesgiving.
Therefore, first, because he speaks of days in the plural number, as of many;
we desire him, that in the next return of his monthly course upon him, he will
thoroughly purge himself from all malignancy in this particular of his charge,
by naming those days of public Thankesgiving wherein this heinous offense
(but against no commandment or law, either of God or Man) was committed. We
cannot allow it, no not by his own law for a sufficient come-off, to say that
on such a day of public Thankesgiving, the men impeached trespassed the said
impeachment, except he can give instance of the pretended miscarriage in more
days then one, of that denomination. For himself in his Antapologie, p. 54.
quarrels with his You five (as ever and anon he calls the Apologists) only
for saying, that some of their brethren in their printed books do heartily
testify of them; telling them (by way of reproof, and charge of untruth in
their Assertion) that it is but one of them, not some that do so testify.
Therefore by his own rule, an assertion of the plural number cannot be
justified by a single instance or example of what is plurally asserted. And yet
who knows not the very law of Nature allows a man a greater indulgence of
phrase and expression in his own purgation, then it does in charging or
impeaching others?

Secondly, we desire of our grand-accuser, the next time he comes amongst us
with his monthly visitation, to let the world know, what other sports they are
that Mr. John Goodwin, and some of his Church use to go unto on days of
public thankesgiving, besides Bowls: they are not conscious to themselves of
transgressing either in Bowls or in any other sports on such days.

Thirdly (and lastly) we desire of him for the further vindication of himself
in this charge, when it shall next be with him after the manner aforesaid,
that he will please to speak it out, that the world may hear, on what day of
public Thanksgiving, about what time or hour of the day, whether fore-noon,
or afternoon; whether in the morning, or in the evening it was that Mr. John
Goodwin, with several of his Church went, or on such days are wont to go to
Bowls and other sports. For if it were on the evening of such a day, that the
deed was done, it is no clean strain to say it was done in the day it self,
especially except some notice were given in the margin, that he charge by the
day natural, not artificial. And besides, if it proves but an evening
transgression* the constant practice of the gravest Presbyterians themselves,
going to see the Fire works usually made in several places of the City, on
every fifth of November, being the most ancient, and honorable day of public
thankesgiving unto the Nation, will be an abundant atonement for it.

But (Reader) that thou may understand ab ovo ad mala, from the top to the
toe, the nature and tenor of that grand delinquencie in point of loosnesse,
which is here charged upon Mr. John Goodwin and several of his Church, the
story truly and briefly is this: Upon the day ordered by Authority for public
Thanksgiving unto God for his gracious and good hand upon the new Model in the
victory at Nazeby the last Summer, having preached somewhat long, and to
wearines in Michaels Cornhill in the fore-noon, and being hereby somewhat
indisposed to further labor that day, I kept my house privately in the
afternoon, till about five or six of the clock. At which time two of the
brethren coming in, and finding me in no better posture, desired me to walk
out a little into the fields with them, suggesting that a walk in the fresh
air might do me some good. So a walk we took, the season being pleasant and
fair; and having walked about a quarter of a mile, or very little more, and
being now upon returning, one of those that were with me told the other and my
self, that if we thought good to ease our selves a little before we returned,
there was a garden-house of a friend of his (a man familiarly known also to my
self and the other, though of a differing judgment from us in point of
discipline) near at hand, and that if we pleased we might step in thither, and
repose our selves for a while. Coming into the garden, we betook our selves to
an Arbor, and there fate about half an hour. During which time (and I know
not how long before) there was a company playing at Bowls in a little Alley in
the Garden; whom (I presume) we shall not wrong in case we judge them
Presbyterians, though (I confess) we did not examine them upon the point. But
before this company had given over their exercise, there came into the Garden
to us some more of our acquaintance, some of them of our, others of them of M.
Edwards judgment in point of Church Government. When the company that all this
while had been bowling, quit their ground, one in our company, (I remember not
who, or of what judgment) asked me if I would not stir my self a little by
casting a Bowl before I went home. The motion being made, and the rest
inclining to it, we went, whether 6 or 8, of us, I do not remember; but that
the one part was Presbyterian, and the other Independent, I perfectly remember,
and betook our selves for about half an hour to the exercise; the Sun by this
time being either down, or very near it; and so returned home. This is the
story of that drop of water which M. Edwards has got upon the tip of his
finger to cool his tongue, being (as it seems) grievously tormented in the
flames of passion and indignation, that the world should no more wonder after
the Presbyterians for holiness and religion, then to think that the
Independents had equal part and fellowship with them therein.

But let us animadvert a few things upon the story before we leave it. First,
it is very observeable that the man, who (it seems) holds correspondency with
the world, and with all parts in the Kingdom, to receive intelligence of all
the miscarriages and undue deportments of all such as are independently given,
is notwithstanding necessitated for the carrying up his great design of their
defamation, to article against them supposed miscarriages and misdemeanors, in
stead of those that are truly and really such. Mr. Edwards I presume knows,
that where there is no Law, there is, there can be, no sin, no transgression
Romans 4. 15.
: For that sin (all sin) is a transgression of some Law 1 John 3. 4.
. Now then till Mr. Edwards shall produce some law either of God or Man,
against which Mr. John Goodwin and those of his Church he speaks of,
trespassed in bowling as aforesaid, (which I know he will not be able to do
till the day after doomsday) it must be acknowledged that all their offense and
miscarriage therein, amounts to no more, then only to an unhappy occasion of
causing Mr. Edwards to give testimony unto them, whilst his heart was up to
dishonor them.

Secondly, it is considerable, that as there were some of Mr. John Goodwins
Church: so there were some (and, as I remember, more) of Mr. Edwards his Church
also, (I mean of the Church of England) who were involved in that innocent
transgression of playing at Bowls; yea, the owner of the Garden and Alley, a
godly and honest man, and competently warm in the Presbyterian The Proverb
says, Is is an evil bird that defiles his own nest.
way, was partaker with them in the supposed oversight. But (as was said
before) his Maxim is, Pereant amici dummodo and inimiciuna pereant. Let us
bespatter our enemies, what ever becomes of our friends.

Thirdly, for my self, I neither so much as handled a Bowl for many months,
(I think I might truly say, for some years) before; nor have I done it since:
nor would I then have drunk this cup of cold water, could I have thought the
weakness of any brother so great, as to be offended at it. But now perceiving
the Presbyterian weakness to be so excessively and importunely great as it is,
I do hereby, in the word of a Minister of the Gospel, secure Mr. Edwards, and
all his tender retinue, that I will drink no more any such waters, I mean cast a
Bowl on a day or night of public thanksgiving, whilst the world stands, lest
I should offend them. But

Fourthly, if I had a mind to demand a tooth for a tooth, I could call some
Presbyterian stars by their names, and those of the first magnitude, who upon
a day of public thanksgiving, fell every whit as far from heaven, as Mr. I.
Goodwin and those of his Church did. Yea, if you sift the Doctorate it self of
the Assembly, I believe you will find a man dropping through your sieve, who
with three more (of his com-or sub-Presbyters rather, four Ministers in all)
consecrated the greater part (if not the whole) of an afternoon upon a public
thankesgiving day, to a service that had no more Religion in it, then the
Fishermans daily occupation and employment: nor did their exercise (it seems)
receive any great testimony from heaven, they ate but very little of the labor
of their hands; two Roaches (as says the History) being all that Providence
and they could agree upon for the reward of their afternoon service. But
Presbyterians (I perceive) have a privilege asserted to steal horses, without
sin: but poor Independents must not have so much as a Toleration to look on.
And if Mr. Edwards will not take fair warning when it is given him, and give
over telling tales of Independents, I know who is resolved to sift the
forementioned heap yet nearer to the bran: and to make the world judge,
whether Presbyterian mistakes in the night, be not far worse then Independent
bowlings on days (or evenings rather) of public Thanks givings. Yea I know
who has a story of a Presbyterian Angel, which does but wait for the opening
of Mr. Edwards mouth in reproaches and slanders against his Independent
Brethren the second time, to clap into it, and stop it for ever. Yea I my self
have a Manuscript by me, which came to my hands above a year since, concerning
Mr. Edwards himself; which discourses his juggling and indirect walking between
the two Towns of Godalmin in Surrey, and Dunmow in Essex. The writing will be
attested by good hands: and if there be no remedy, will be content to submit it
self to the Press. In the mean time, how woeful and sad is the method,
wherein the case depending between Presbytery and Independency, must now (it
seems) thorough Mr. Edwards his horrid and portentuous proceedings, be argued
and debated thorough! the arguments on both sides being only or chiefly,
firebrands of Reproaches and Defamations, thrown in faces of the one side by
the other. So that that way of the two, which is able to render the sons of her
competitresse most odious and hateful unto the world, must sit as Queen, and
wear the Crown. Mr. Edwards by the method, wherein he has begun to plead the
cause of Presbytery, and threatens to proceed, has devoted the Names and
reputations of all of his own party, at least of such of them as are any
ways obnoxious, to the universal abhorring both of the present, and future
ages. Therefore it concerns all Presbyterians in general, and the Doctorage
of this way more particularly, that are any ways conscious, to heal the
Gangrene of his pen, and to restrain the further spreading of it: otherwise
their Names and Reputations are but so many dead corpses.

5. Whilst Mr. Edwards so conscientiously refraineth from casting a bowl upon
the evening of a Thankesgiving day, and takes liberty to recreate himself with
revilings and bitter speakings against the ways and servants of God in the
heart and strength of such days, (as his manner is too too frequently to do)
does he not strain out gnats, and swallow camels? and run parallel in practice
with those Priests and people, who refused to go into the common hall, left
they should be defiled Joh. 18. 28.
; but feared no defilement from prosecuting that Just One, even unto death? Yea
does he not by such distinctions as these, imitate the temper and spirit of the
Goddess Diana among the Heathen, who (as Iphigenia in Euripides says of her)
was wont to drive from her altar, as unclean, whoever did but touch a woman in
childbed, or a person slain; and yet delighted to have men slain in sacrifice
unto her?

6. (And lastly) May it not be some Question, whether the particularitie of
that day of public Thanksgiving, wherein Mr. Edwards finds Mr. John Goodwin
and some of his Church so tardie, might not occasion him to sift the
Independents more narrowly on that day, then on many others? It was said of
King Philip, that though he loved the treason, yet he hated the Traitor. So we
have many spirits amongst us who love victories, and yet do little less then
hate the victors, I mean those by whom it pleases God to give many of these
unto them. Mr. Edwards administers a strong ground of suspicion, that he
himself is a man of this dark complexion, in the last page (save one) of his
Dedicatory Epistle, where, having first stripped himself naked of all principles
of reason and ingenuitie, he thus shamelesly bespeaks the two Honorable
Houses of Parliament. And who knows but that all these victories are sent to
take away all excuse, to answer this objection, and to encourage you to this
work? The work he speaks of, and whereunto he supposes that no man can be
ignorant, but that the Parliament are encouraged from God by those many
victories which he has given them, is (as appears by the tenor and strain of
the whole Epistle) the crushing and utter undoing of all those, whose
consciences cannot submit to the Laws of Presbytery in all things appertaining
to God. So then, it being generally known, that many considerable persons,
whom God has honored, by making them eminently isntrumental in the victories
he speaks of, cannot presbyterialize in things of God; that which he says to
the Parliament in the words mentioned, being interpreted, is this; Who knows
but that the many victories, which God has given you, were intended by him as
a means of encouragement unto you, to quash and crush the greatest part of
those men, who were signally instrumental and serviceable both to God and them
in the obtaining of them, together with all those that adhere in judgment to
them in the land. Now the spirit of the man being so extremely incomportable
with the honor, comfort, or peace of many of those who were prime Actors in
the service at Naseby, lest the valor and faithfulness of these men being
commended by God unto the Nation with such remarkable success, should plead
with too nigh an hand the goodness of the way wherein they serve and worship
God, in the minds and thoughts of the generality of men, he (probably)
conceived that the best way to prevent this misery from coming upon him, was to
inquire out how men professing the same way with them, behaved themselves on
that day, whereon public Thanks were to be given unto God for that victory:
that so in case any unseemly or unworthy thing could be found out and charged
upon any of them, as on this day, the divulging of it, might help to break the
strength and interest of that other plea in the minds of men.

Page 70. He observes, that two of my children were taken away by the Sect. 24.
plague of pestilence, upon the making my house a meeting for the Sectaries.
That two of my children were taken away, by that hand of God he speaks of,
others so reporting it besides Mr. Edwards, (for touching the manner or means
of their taking away, I know nothing but by report, my self having been far
absent several weeks, when God took them away) I shall not deny. And if he
had staid his pen and closed the period here, he had wrought little less then
a miracle; for he had uttered one whole sentence of Truth. But now he may take
up the Poets lamentation; Sed mea me in culpam nimirum fata trahebant: the
spirit that attends him, (it seems) envied him the crown of that glory. For in
saying, that this was done upon making my house a meeting for the Sectaries, he
makes the sentence like unto its fellows, I mean void of Truth. For first, my
house is a solid substance; whereas Mr. Edwards meeting is a fluid accident. I
never heard of an house, that was made a meeting till now. And if mine be
transformed into such a thing, doubtless Mr. Edwards has done it by some
magique incantation; I have done no such thing to it my self. But it is the
man's unhappiness to be ever and anon tardie, in nonsense, as well as in
non-truth.

2. If his meaning be, that I have made a meeting place of it, whether for
Sectaries, or whosoever, he does not herein neither nick the Truth. For if by
my house, he means, my dwelling house, consisting of that building and rooms,
wherein I keep and converse daily with my family, (which is the ordinary
acception of the word) this is no ways altered by me since my coming to it. Or

3. If his meaning be, that I have ordered and disposed some part of the
buildings which I have hired, with an intent to have Sectaries meet there;
neither yet does the man or his meaning agree with the Truth. I confess one
room in these buildings, is ordered with an intent that such persons who
think it worth their time to attend my ministry, whether Presbyterians or
others, may be some ways accommodated to partake thereof. But that I ever made
it, or intended to make it, a meeting place for Sectaries, well may it be one
of Mr Edwards assertions, but Truth it is none. Nor do I know any sort of
persons that ever met in it yet, that any whit more deserve the denomination of
Sectaries, then the Presbyterians themselves. But

4. (And lastly) If the man's meaning be, (which is simply the best construction
can be made of his words) that I have permitted and given way, that some part
of the buildings which I have taken, should be used by such persons, as in his
mis-carrying dialect are called Sectaries, to meet in; neither will this
relieve him against the habituated foulness of his pen, or make the sentence
clean. For it was not upon that permission or grant of mine, that my two
children were taken away, nor yet upon the furnishing of the room for
convenience of meeting, (for the Sectaries he speaks of, both Presbyterians and
others, had met therein several times before the least hair of the heads of
either of the children fell to the ground) but it was upon my deserting and
disuse of it for a longer time, then God (it seems) was well pleased with; at
least if I should look upon the taking them away, as a stroke of anger or
displeasure from God. But as touching the Providence it self about my
children, whether I should look upon it as having more of mercy, or more of
judgment in it, I am not satisfied to this day. Though the children (I
confess) were dear unto me, and their lives very desirable, upon hopes that
God (howsoever) would have provided for them, if he had thought it meet they
should live; yet considering that the best part of that livelihood and means of
subsistence which I had, was by a strong hand taken from me, I could not so
much look upon the taking of them away by God, as a taking them away from me,
as from that misery, whereunto the undeserved hatred and injustice of my
Presbyterian neighbors, in wresting and detaining my means from me, had
exposed them. Men took away my means; and God made up the breach (in part) by
diminishing my charge. Neither were they taken away alone: there was a greater
number of children taken away out of a Prebyterian family near to them, by
the same hand of God; where yet there was no meeting place made for Sectaries.
And besides, I could soon be out of Mr. Edwards debt for this story concerning
two of my children being taken away; by telling him of three Grave men (and two
of them Great) who were principal Actors in my troubles and ejection, taken
away by death since the good service they did to the Presbyterian party in
that transaction. God has cut off both head and tail of those my adversaries:
But I leave Mr Edw. to make observatio^s upon it: for my part, I make none.

I have now perfected reckonings and accounts between Mr. Edwards Sect. 25.
and my self, and have set straight the foul errors and falsifications of his
books in these. I have yet another small parcel of accounts to clear with
him in the behalf of others: and by that time I shall have issued these,
though I shall be very brief in this transaction, yet I fear I shall make him
incapable of any Quietus est for ever. For doubtless the man has sold
himself to write all, and all manner of untruths that he can but scrapple
together, from what mouths or tongues or pens he cares not, so they be but
Presbyterian in their constitution, and carry any antipathie in them either to
the honor or peace of Independencie. I presume that Mris Gangraena has not as
yet paid me the tith or tenth part of her forgeries: it is like in time she
will be more honest in this, and I shall receive knowledge of the whole
substance of her iniquity.

I shall begin this latter account, where Mr. Edwards wel-nigh Sect. 26.
makes an end; with a story related by him in the very last leaf, (save one)
of his book, viz. p. 181. concerning one Cosens of Rocbester in Kent. By the
way, if the common Proverb, which says, That the best is at the bottom, takes
place in his Book; forgery of forgeries, and all is forgery, all over it. For
in this Relation, (by which you may judge both of those many that go before
it, and those few that follow after it) there are wel-nigh, quot verba, tot
mendacia: and yet even this also has this banner of confidence displayed
before the face of it; I was informed for certain: upon which preface we shall
animadvert presently.

First, His Relation here reports, that one Cosens of Rochester in Kent, that
Jesus Christ was a Bastard. Hoc primum: let this be the first lie in this
Catalogue: the man never said it.

2. This report avoucheth, that the said Cosens said, that if Jesus Christ were
upon the Earth again, he would be ashamed of many things he then did. This is
another of the same, and the second in order. For neither did the man speak
any such words as these; the witness, upon whose single testimony,
(originally) both these and the former words were charged upon him, upon
reexamination, and that upon oath, before the Committee of the County, waved
both the one and the other; as appears by the said Examination under the hand
of the Clerk of the said Committee, which I saw and read; and is forthcoming
for any man to peruse for his satisfaction.

3. This Information of Mr. Edwards affirms, that the said Cosens, for the
said Blasphemies, was put into prison in Rochester. Keep tale: this is a third
stumble. The occasion of the man's imprisonment, was a matter of a quite
differing nature; as by inquiry may be found out by any man; though for some
reasons the party thinks not so fit to have it printed.

4. The said certain Information informs; that the said Cosens being
committed, at the Sessions there came an Order from some in place to the
Recorder to release him. Skore up: this is the fourth word of folly in this
Narration. For there came no Order from any in place, nor unto any in place,
Recorder or other, for the release of the man; but upon the sight of the
forementioned Examination taken upon oath before the Committee, by the
Justices, the man was discharged. This untruth may well stand for two (or at
least be printed in a Capital letter) because men of honor and place are
aspersed by it, as if they interposed with their interest or power to obstruct
the course of Law and Justice.

5. The Information now under impeachment, further averreth, that upon the
receipt of the said Order, the Recorder a Sergeant at Law, and a grave man,
used these words; Cosens, know you must shortly come before another Court to
answer for these words, where you shall have no Order to release you. Tallie
on: this is a fifth (if not a fifth and sixth) phib in the Relation. For here is a
big lie with a lesser in the belly of it. For, first, the Recorder he speaks
of, never, upon no occasion, spoke any such words as these to the man: nor
secondly, did he ever receive any such Order, as is here spoken of; and so
could not speak, either these words, or any other, upon the receipt of it.

6. This loud-lying Information, further attests, that this man (Cosens) being
at liberty, entertaines in his house the Sectaries that come from London, or
other places into those parts, as Den, Lamb, Woodman, etc. Keep tale; this is a
sixth flaw (at least) in the certain Information. For the man professes that he
knows no such man, as Woodman; nor that (to his knowledge) he ever saw the face
of the man.

7. (And lastly) The said Presbyterian Information, for uniformitie sake, that
it may end as it began, affirms (in the cloze of it) that this Cosens is so
bold, that he dares threaten to question and trouble godly Orthodox
Presbyteriall Ministers, and goes to some of their Churches to see if he can
get any matter against them: for example, he has gone to one Mr. Clares, a
godly Minister, and threatened upon hearing him to complain of him, and put in
Articles against him. Remember the account: for this is the seventh and eighth
time (at least) that the Information prevaricateth with the Truth. For first,
the man is so far from daring to threaten to question or trouble any godly
Minister whatsoever, that he professes it to be his judgment, that neither
godly, nor ungodly, whether Ministers or others, ought to be questioned or
troubled for their judgments in matters appertaining unto God. Therefore
secondly, though he confesses that he went to Mr Clare upon the preaching of a
Sermon, and told him that he had not delivered the Truth; yet that he any ways
threatened Mr. Clare, he absolutely denies. I find nothing more to be excepted
against in this Information of the 9th of February, as matter of untruth: the
reason (I conceive) is, because there is no more of it. This
Counter-Information, I had from the mouth of the said Cosens himself, and have
the particulars under his hand.

Now though there be never a sentence (scarce a clause or piece of a sentence)
true in all this Relation, yet it has Mr Edwards seal upon it, and this
foundation; I WAS INFORMED FOR CERTAIN: But first, by this specialtie of
honor, I was informed for certain, bestowed upon this Relation, does he not
plainly grant and imply, that he was informed of many other things in his
Gangrene, for uncertain? If he had been informed of the greatest part of them
for certain untruths, his Information had been orthodox, and no guile found in
the lips of it.

But secondly, If Mr. Edwards signal and choice reports, of which he was
informed for certain, be of so dark and dismal a complexion, that there is
scarce so much as one beam, or the least glimmering of the light of Truth in
the whole body of some of them, what shall we think of those that have no such
image or superscription of confidence upon them? If his Chariots and Horsemen
fail, surely his Infantery will yield the field.

3. (And lastly) I would gladly understand, by what character of difference the
man discernes between his Informations for certain, and those that are but of
vulgar repute with him, and for which he allows three grains of non-beliefe:
I suppose such as come from his godly Orthodox Presbyterian Ministers, he holds
for certain: those which come from hands whose heads have not been anointed
with the hands of Consecration, more ambiguous and doubtful; and yet certain
enough to be reported and spread, if their faces be but set against
Independency. But who is Mr Edwards godly Orthodox Presbyterian Minister? Is he
not such an one, who works stoutly at the forge, and feeds both himself and the
world with all manner of scandals and falsehoods against the Independents,
without fear? We have reason to judge so by the rule of proportion. For p. 57.
he pronounces a man, a Person Religious, and well-affected to the Parliament,
only upon occasion of a Letter written by him, full fraught with false and
foul stories and insinuations against his Sectaries; who is looked upon by men
as godly, and as judicious as Mr. Edwards, yea and who have better opportunity
to know the spirit and ways of the man, in reference to both those
particulars, then he; by such (I say) this man is looked upon, as a man no
ways deserving either of those commendations, except it be by the figure
(...); as will appear (in part) by a Letter, whereof we shall give a copy
before we end.

You have seen the man like himself in a Kentish story: let us cross the
water, and see whether we can find him in any better shape on this side. Page
78. and 79. He tells you a long formal story of one Nichols, living about
Moore-fields, that comes into Stepney-Parish to draw away people: That to Mr.
Greenhils face did justify and maintain many wicked opinions, etc. Upon
occasion whereof there was a meeting concluded, and Mr. Greenhill and Mr.
Buroughs, with many others, were at it. He tells you further when this
meeting was, viz. a little before Mr. Buroughs fell upon the preaching of the
power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion. And further adorns the relation
with many good words that Mr. Greenhill should speak at this meeting; with
others that Mr. Buroughs should speak, as particularly, that in regard of
these things, matters being so, there was a necessity both of the government of
the Church, and of the power of the Magistrate, etc. As likewise with others
that should be spoken by diverse others there present. This story is long, and
the particular forgeries in it numerous beyond measure. In which respect I
shall desire the Reader at his leisure to make the computation, which he may do
with exactnes enough, if he shall please to compare Mr. Edwards Relation with
these ensuing lines which I received from Mr. Buroughs himself in writing,
anent the business:

That story Mr. Edwards has, page 79. of one Nichols, and of a meeting
concluded of, occasioned by some vise opinions vented by that Nichols, where
Mr. Greenhill and my self (he says) was, together with diverse passages that
he relates came from me at that meeting, is all false. I know no such man as
this Nichols, I never heard there was such a man in the world, till I read it
in Mr. Edwards his book. I to this day know of no meeting about him, or any of
his opinions, either intended, desired, or resolved upon, much less that there
was any such meeting. The next Lords day after Mr. Edwards his book came forth,
M. Greenhill asked me whether I knew of any such meeting with that Nichols: for
his part he wondered to see such a thing in Mr. Edwardshis book, for he knew of
no such meeting. Thus far M. Buroughs.

And because we have had occasion here to mention Mr. Buroughs; Sect. 27.
and Mr. Edwards takes occasion p. 33. not only to deal by him as he does by
his other Sectaries, whose opinions he arraignes ( ad placitum) for errors; but
seldom either names their persons, or encounters their opinions by argument;
whereas he has expressed himself in both against him; I desire to insert a
few lines for the vindication of him that is unjustly charged, by detecting the
weakness and groundlesnesse of the charge. The opinion wherewith Mr.
Burroughes stands there charged amongst the Sectaries, as with an error, is
this: Whatsoever errors or miscarriages in Religion, the Church should bear
withal in men, continuing them still in communion with them, as brethren,
these the Magistrates should bear with in men, continuing them in the Kingdom
or Commonwealth, in the enjoyment of the liberty of Subjects. But first it is
to be considered, that Mr. Burroughes, p. 34. of his book, had laid down this
position, That notwithstanding any plea of conscience, yet if the error be
destructive to the State, a man may be dealt withal by the State for it. And
secondly, this, ( p. 35.) That no pretense of conscience can excuse a man in
any matter of apparent injustice. These two conclusions pre-asserted, he comes,
( p. 67.) to give this Rule for forbearance in matters of Religion: That
whatsoever miscarriages in matters of Religion the Church should bear with,
these the Magistrate should bear with: because though it should be never so
much granted, that the Magistrate is Custos utriusque tabulae, yet his charge
in matters of Religion reaches not further then the charge of the Church does.
Now Mr. Edwards to confute this, instanceth in a man whose conscience is not
satisfied in the point of subjects taking up Arms against Armies raised by a
Prince, and therefore refuses bearing Arms, and all maintenance to such a
war, etc. Such a man as this (says he) the State may sequester, and the
Parliament I think has sequestered many upon such occasions, taking their
estates, etc. Surely this confutation is so far from being fit to satisfy
any Scholar, that it has hardly strength or color enough to take women or
weak people with H says, that this and others of Mr. Buroughs principles and
rules about Toleration, will be found both unsound and weak, fit to take women
and weak persons with, but not to satisfy any Scholar. The truth is, that many
principles, the more sound and strong they are, are like to prove the less
satisfactory to such Scholars as he. Engaged men are ususually more offended at
a truth, then at an error with opposes them in their way.
. For does the State deal with such a person as he gives instance in, as for
an error, or matter in Religion? or for injustice to the State; yea, apparent
injustice, and that which is destructive to the State? For forbearing that,
which if others should for bear also, the State must needs be destroyed? Now
evident it is, that Mr. Buroughs Doctrine or Rule touching for bearance,
concerns matters of Religion, when the subject matter is Religion, not matters
of State, wherein men may pretend conscience; yea, it may be, are
conscientious indeed so far, and in such a sense, as men of an erroneous
conscience may be such.

But this confutation of Mr. Buroughs is (it seems) but a forlorn hope; the
forerunner of a great Army of confutations advancing. Troilus (I see) will
needs be trying his valor with Achilles, whatsoever it costs him:

Infelix puer, atque impar congressus Achilli. How his Pen has abused Mr.
Ellis of Colchester, and other faithful servants of God in those parts, with
base calumnies and slanders, the world (I conceive) will shortly understand by
an Express from thence: For Mr. Ellis himself writes thus to a friend in
London. The aspersions cast on me, and some others here, by Mr. Edwards, are as
false as foul: which because they are a great part of his book and strength,
those who are here concerned in it, will, if God please, shortly make reply.

Page 57. He affirms that the preceding letter beginning thus: Sect. 29.
(p. 54.) Worthy Sir, the consideration of those many, etc. was written to him
by a person religious, and cordially affected to the Parliament. I know not the
man my self, and therefore shall not attempt to infringe this testimony of him
out of any personal experience which I have of him, or of his ways: but shall
only refer the Reader for his satisfaction, both concerning the man, and the
testimony given to him, to this ensuing letter, written by one well enough
known to himself, to a special friend of his about the City.

DEarly beloved and much honored in Christ, grace, mercy and peace be
multiplied to you, and to as many as are enabled by the power of God to look
toward Sion. As I was hastily perusing a book writ in Mr. Edwards name, among
sever all letters therein contained, I found one written by a person with whom
I have more then ordinary acquaintance. In which letter the glory of God, the
pure institutions of the Lord Jesus, with the Saints practices, are maliciously
abused, as also your self not a little concerned. In consideration of the
which, I was not a little pressed in my own spirit, neither indeed could I
refrain, but needs must declare unto you the person that wrote it (as he
himself acknowledges,) not knowing but it might seem strange unto you, and
remain as a burden upon your spirit, that the author of so many falsehoods, and,
as they appear to me, palpable untruths, should be (by such a one as Mr.
Edwards) termed a man religious, and cordially affected to the Parliament. But
not to withhold you any longer, his name is Josiah Ricraft, the same man in
whose name the Reply to your Answer was printed, the which whether he did
indite, or no, I will not affirm, only I may think, but it matters not much
whether he or another did indite it, only this I am confident of, he is a man
so far from* being religious, and cordially affected to the Parliament, (as Mr.
Edwards would make the world believe, that I shall, and am able by evident
testimonies, yea and by that knowledge I in particular have of him,
perspicuously make it appear (and had done before this, had I not been
extraordinarily prevented) that he is an enemy to the Parliament, State, and
Kingdom, by concealing, countenancing, and bearing correspondency with such as
endeavor nothing more then the overthrow of religion and the subjects liberty.
At present I shall speak no more concerning him, then what I my self distinctly
know of him: After he had taken the solemn league and covenant, he did
inviolation thereof, conceal a Colonel the which came out of the Kings Army,
and from him did receive the Kings Picture. This Colonel not daring to go
abroad in the day time. All this he did declare in my hearing; nay, during the
time this Colonel was in town, he did carry, as now he does, a great
correspondency with one Mr. Roberts, Minister, being one in fellowship with
him, whose life this Colonel would have taken from him, if I be not
misinformed, the which as I am credibly informed, had Mr. Roberts known of the
Colonels being in town, he would have endeavored the hanging of him, and that
not without cause, for former discourtesies received from him, too tedious to
relate. I shall defer the naming of him until I am called to testify what I
here declare, the which I hope will be suddenly. And though he was wished and
desired to discover him, pressing the Covenant upon him, yet would he not: I
shall at the present, as not desiring to be tedious, present you with one
passage more; it is concerning one who being to go to Oxford with an intent to
take up Arms for the King, he well knowing he was a malignant, and would not
take the covenant, yet him did he furnish with money to carry him to Oxford, and
has since taken up Arms. This I shall through the help of God make appear to
be really true, and will declare his name and where he lived, the which I now
forbear in regard of some friends whom I am not willing in the least to
grieve; were not the glory of God and the Kingdoms good interessed in it, I
should not at present have mentioned any thing of this nature, but not knowing
any way more tending to the vindicatiou of both, I take this method.

Truly, should I declare unto you how contrary his carriage and conversation is
to the Gospels rule, I am confident it would sadden the spirits of
conscientious men, and cause admiration in those who profess themselves to be
followers of our Lord Jesus. I do assure you, the Lord has so carried on my
soul with divine contemplation, and sweet communion and fellowship with the
Father and the Son, that all the unreasonable dealings I have received from
him, have not made any impression upon my spirit: only this the righteous God
knows has been no small saddening to my spirit, to see his averseness of
spirit to those who are of his own judgment. But these miscarriages I shall
let pass until a more convenient season, desiring with all my soul the Lord
may through the glorious and rich discoveries of himself powerfully upon his
spirit, cause him to be ashamed of his folly, and to own his weaknesses, that
the Lord may yet be honored by him, and his soul comforted in the day of our
Lord Jesus. And now that God who has made such rich discoveries, and glorious
manifestations of his tender love to you in the Son of his love, strengthen you
throughout, that you may be able to stand, and withstand all the opposition you
shall meet withal from any generation of men, and that you may increase with
the increasings of God. And this is the request of him who is Your brother in
the Rock Christ,

G. C.

As to the contents of the letter written to Mr. Edw. by that religious Sect.
30.
person, and so cordially affected to the Parliament (as you have heard) how
notoriously false are a great part of them! As first, that Mr. Kiffen, and some
others, upon their disputes with Dr. Featley, M. Seaman, M. Calamy, M. Porter,
and others, gave out to their members that they had the better, and that M.
Calamy durst not dispute with them. Both which are disavowed by the persons
charged, and with certainty of knowledge that the reporter can never prove
either the one or the other of them.

2. The said letter affirms, that M. Kiffen was left out from that
disputation which was held and to be held with M. Calamy* etc. whereas it is so
far from the truth, that he was left out from this disputation, that earnestly
soliciting an exemption from that engagement, his motion herein was absolutely
refused by the rest that were to dispute.

3. He affirms, that the said M. Kiffen was put to do the drudgery, to fetch
up members scattered to and fro in the country etc. This also is as false as
falsehood it self can make a report to be: The said M. Kiffen never stirred a
foot out of the City, further then his own house all the while.

4. This religious person in the same letter says, that not only M Kiffen,
but others also of them did the like good service (as Hobson the Tailor) in
their places. This again is so far from truth, or likelihood of truth, that
this Hobson he speaks of, with Mr. Kiffen, were (amongst others) made choice of
by their friends to attend the disputation, and to manage their interest in the
controversy against their opposers, and therefore could not do that, besides
which there was nothing possible to be done by them, or any others, that can
now save the pen of Religious I. R. from the pollution and reproach of a false
pen.

5. The said letter advances yet further in her way of folly, and affirms,
that one of their members, whose name is Palmer, being recovered, came into
their Conventicle house, and there before many people said, That Physicians
left her as they found her. This is a very emphaticall untruth; the woman never
making use of any Physician all the time of her sickness.

6. This letter (which seems to be Gangrena's chief favorite among all her
fellows) being loath that any other should carry away the whetstone from her,
pleads for this prize with such an argument, which makes all the quaint
inventions, and bold fictions, and daring relations in the book besides, to
give place and yield the crown. This is a story of a woman that was to be
rebaptized; a story which makes the tale of Gargantua and Don Quixote with his
windmils, to look like Gospels in comparison of it. It is pity the relator
should either eat or drink, till either he has proved the truth, or else
confessed the untruth of it.

This letter boasts what mischief it could do yet further, as when it says,
Many such Heathenish and Atheistical passages WITH BASENESS, I could relate of
this man and some of his members, etc. It is very likely that what ever you can
do in this kind, you must do it WITH BASENESS, or else let it alone. But indeed
you have give^ the world a very full account of your great ability to relate
what heathenish and Atheistical passages you please of any man. He that can
report and avouch the last mentioned story for a truth, may be confident that
his forehead will not fail him in any adventure of impudence whatsoever.

For a conclusion, I shall only point you to some few more spots Sect. 31.
which appear here and there in the body of the Gangrene, which plainly show
the very vitals and inward parts of it to be pestilentially infected; and I
make no question but ere long you will see the whole body of it full of such
spots all over, which will plainly bewray the constitution of it to be the
poison of Dragons, and gall of Asps. Page 93. he affirms, That several
Sectaries went early to Bristoll (he means since the retaking of it by the
Parliament,) and into Wales also; instancing in two, with an etc. viz. one M.
Bacon, and M. Symonds: This M. Symonds professes, that since the recovery of
Bristoll, he came not near either Bristoll or Wales by forty miles. But if M.
Edw. comes within forty miles of the Truth, he makes a commendable voyage. I
believe he came not near it by twice forty, when p. 100. speaking of great
livings, he calls them, a thing which their Presbyterian souls abhor. The
tenor of the passage is this: He charge M. Peter's, frequently to have
preached in City and country, that were it not for livings of two or three
hundred pounds a year, there would be no difference between the Presbyterians
and the Independents. And glossing this text, adds, wickedly and maliciously
insinuating unto the people, as if Presbyterian Ministers opposed the way of
Independency because of great livings, A THING OUR SOULS ABHOR. If his meaning
be, that the practice here gently insinuated against them* viz. that the
opposing the way of Independency because of great livings, is a thing which
their soul abhors, not the great livings themselves, I say no more but this; I
wish the rule were as true as the exception: i. that the opposing the way of
Independency for great livings, were as truly the abhorring of Presbyterian
souls, as the great livings themselves are NOT.

Page 70. he affirms, That one of Lilborns eyes was PVT OVT by Sect. 32.
a Pike in the street, immediately upon his letter coming forth against Mr.
Prynne and the Assembly. By the way it seems he has forfeited his honor of
being Lieutenant Colonel, by the high crime of writing a letter against M.
Prynne and the Assembly; yea and all his interest in the honor and gentry of
his House and Family. But had not M. Edw. a great beam in his own eye, he might
easily have seen, that neither of Lilborns eyes are put out. He is able to see
and read twenty untruths and ten in M. Edw. book, with the worst of them. That
which he reports of him, p. 96. that he is reported to be one, who is a
player at cards, either is a false report it self, or at least a Report of a
Report which is false, and so little better. The man protested that he never
played a game at cards since his coming to London. The rest of the aspersives in
the same retinue, as that he is reported to be a man of a loose life,
profaning the Lords day in sports, one who will sit long with company at wine
and tippling, etc. are grapes growing upon the same thorn. In the page last
named, he talks of one Thomas Moore of Lincolnshire, a great Sectary and
manifestarian: I believe M. Edw. himself is the greatest manifestarian under
heaven. There is no man has manifested that weakness of judgment, that
strength of malice against the Saints, which he has done. And for Thomas Moore
of Lincolnshire, a Sectary of that magnitude which he imports, I no more
believe there is any such man, then I do that there is any such woman at
Brasteed in Kent, as he speaks of, p. 88. 89. that is a Preacher, and that with
others breaks bread in her order. Mr. Saltmarsh in his late book affirms, that
the contrary is known to himself and all the Town.

Page 128. He talks of Bishop Hall, or one of his Chaplains, as holding Sect.
33.
far smaller errors then I (he means chiefly, in the point of Justification, as
appears by the context.) But that I hold any errors in Justification, greater
then himself, yea or any so great by many degrees, who yet (I make no question)
presumes himself as Orthodox in the point as either the Bishop he speaks of, or
any of his Chaplains, will be a thousand times said, before once proved, either
by himself, or all his party of godly Orthodox Presbyteriall Ministers. Page 8.
of his Dedicatory Epistle, his forehead serves him to abuse the honorable
Houses of Parliament with this loud untruth, that there are eleven meetings, at
least, of Sectaries, in one Parish in this City. What shall be given unto
thee* or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? Sharp arrows of the
mighty, and coals of Juniper Psalm 120. 3, 4
. Setting aside the Presbyterian meetings, confident I am, that he cannot find
the one half of that number he speaks of, of meetings of all other Sectaries,
in any Parish whatsoever in the City.

But this saying of his needs not be melancholy for want of company; it has
Brethren enough in the iniquity of it. And because the pages of his book are
not large enough to contain the shameless untruths he has a mind to utter, he
quarters them here and there in the margent of it. You shall find two together
in the margent of the second and third pages of his Preface. Here first he
says, that Overton an Independent Bookseller boasted that an Answer (to his
Antapologie) was in the Press. Whereas he only said (and that without
boasting) that there was an Answer to it entered in their Hall-Booke, and ready
for the Press. 2. He adds iniquity to iniquity; and says, that Eaton an
Independent, Milliner, said the same words, who yet spoke not so much; for he
neither said that it was in the Press, nor yet that it was entered into the
Hall book. And who should report, that some of John Goodwins Church reported,
that some of his Churchmembers preached for him, because he was answering the
Antapologie; I believe he no more knows, then declares. And why he calls
Eaton an Independent Milliner, I believe, if he were called to an account, he
could give none; but like unto himself, i. either some vagrant and loose
report that he was so; or some poor reason, 89 degrees of Logique latitude
from a sufficient proof or demonstration. But the saying is, Tractant fabrilia
fabri.

Page 33. speaking of Mr Buroughs opinion formerly mentioned, Sect. 34.
which he makes the 150 error in his Catalogue, he brands it with this false
mark in his margin: This is an error destructive to the power of Civil
Magistrates, and safety of Commonwealths, in diverse cases. The truth is, that
the opinion, 1. is no error, but a Truth: and 2. so far from being an error
destructive, either to the power of Civil Magistrates, or safety of
Commonwealths, in any case or cases whatsoever; that it is a Truth of a
sovereign importance, both for the support and strengthening of the Magistrates
power; as also for the safety of Commonwealths. The smoke of the exception
made against it, was before scattered. And if he were examined how he came by
that story, p. 104. concerning Mr Kiffen (formerly spoken of) viz. that he
should tell the Church, that he would relate the whole matter (concerning the
woman's recovery that had been anointed) I fear he could hardly prove, that he
came honestly by it. The man assures me, that there was no such undertaking,
nor relation made by him at all.

Reader, I have (for the present) given thee only a taste of Mr Sect. 35.
Edwards grapes: yet sufficient (I presume) to convince thee, that his vine, is
of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah; his grapes, grapes of
gall; his clusters bitter; his wine, the poison of dragons, and the cruel
venom of Aspes Deuteronomy. 32. 32, 33.
. I profess truly, that I have not read one quarter of the book, as yet; nor
know whether I shall ever care to read it thorough or no. The far greatest part
of the particulars detected, were observed by others, and presented unto me. A
few days (I make no question) will give thee more light, wherewith to
comprehend his darkness. By that time the boughs of his tree are a little more
withered, they will be broken off: the women will come, and set them on fire
Isa. 27. 11.
. The day will come, and is even at the door, when there will be scarce one
stone left upon another of all this false building, which will not be pulled
down by the hand of Truth. And when the servants of God shall have had the
opportunity to wash off that dirt and filth which Mr. Edwards has now cast
upon them, Gangraena will be found a strumpet, yea and of the race and lineage
of that Great scarlet whore, which corrupts the Earth with her fornication
Revel. 19. 2.
.

The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts* slow bullies. This testimony is
true: wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith Tit.
1. 12, 13.
. I trust that this brief Answer, will contribute a proportionable influence
toward this blessed effect upon Mr Edwards, and help to make him more sound
both in Faith, and manners also.

FINIS.

