THE FIRST RVLE OF THE GLORIOUS VIRGIN S. CLARE.



AUDOMARI.

Typis Thomae Geubels, 1665.

Permissu Superiorum.

THE PREFACE
THE Rule or form of life which the Religious women of the order of S. Clare
promise and profess to observe, is that, which Blessed S. Francis at the
earnest entreaty, and request of S. Clare and her companions, did write and
deliver unto them, about the year of our Lord 1224. and the 12. after her
conversion unto God; which she at Assisium, with some other few Monasteries did
carefully observe for about 30. years, although it was not as yet confirmed by
Bull, until the year of our Lord 1253. the 11. of Pope Jnnocent the forth, and
the last of her life. She at least, had that comfort, some few days before her
departure, to see that Rule confirmed by Bull, which her self for diverse
years, had freely and piously observed; which her successors in their sacred
Profession, now promise by Vow to keep and follow, and which the seraphical
Father S. Francis, had with much prayer and many tears framed and written.

The occasion, or reason of her demanding, or his writing of this Rule, is
mentioned by the R: F: Lucas Wadding, in the 1. Tome of his Annals on the year
of our Lord 1224 and 9. of Honorius the Third.

S. Clare a devout disciple and true follower of the seraphical spirit of so
great a Master, disdayning all things of this world, and emulating such, as
were more eminent; having understood in the year of our Lord 1223. and the 8.
of Honorius the third, that that hard Rule of the Friar-Minors was given, and
by him confirmed; she, the year following, with her companions of Assisium,
made earnest suit to S. Francis, that he would please to give in writing unto
her also, and her sisters of S. Damian, some Rule, or form of life, besides
what he had before delivered unto them, by word of mouth, conformable unto
that, which was confirmed to the Friar-Minors the year before, whereby [after
the death of so great a Master] as well they, as those, who were to succeed
them, might be governed. He, after serious deliberatio^ communicating the
matter with Cardinal Hugoline, then Protector of the Order of Friar-Minors, and
perceiving the sisters fervor aspired yet higher [as not content with the
Jnstitution given them by the said Cardinal Hugoline, some few years before,
which the other Monasteries not withstanding [except this of Assisiu^] were
content and satisfied withal, wrote for them, a proper Rule; and did
accommodate the same to that of the Friar-Minors, so far forth, as their weak
sex would permit the^; they both ouerseeing the work, whilst S. Francis
stayed at some word or periode, Hugoline gave him assistance and counsel,
concerning the circumspection or mitigation he esteemed needful to be used in
a matter of so high co^cernment; and in writing, they could not forbear
weeping; considering the Virgins zeal and fervor did exceed the ordinary
strain, and weakness of their sex.

This is commonly called the first Rule of S. Clare, not because it was given
first, for it was delivered rather in the third place, and so received by S.
Clare; but it is called the first, by reason of five different Rules or forms
of life, given and received at different times. For, three being almost
antiquated, it may be called the first of the two remaining. for better
understanding whereof, J shall in breef only, mention these five aforementioned
Rules, together with their beginnings.

Jn the year of our The 1. Rule.
Lord 1212. and 15. of Jnnocent the third, the most Holy Virgin S. Clare, began
the order of poor Clares, the 18. year of her age, in a Monastery of S.
Damian, without the gates of the City of Assisium, in the way toward Rome,
whence they were known anciently, by the name of Damiates or Assisiates: where
S. Francis tought them a certain manner of living in common, and gave them an
vnpolish't Rule, such an one, as was the^ fitting for those, that were newly
converted from the vanities of the world; they living unanimously, and devoutly
practicing the said form of life for the space of about six years.

Until the virtuous The 2. Rule
Cardinal Hogoline [who succeeded in the sea of Rome by the name of Gregory
the 9.] wrote some directions with Jnstructio^s annexed, which he first sent by
his own authority unto S. Clare and her devout Company, living in the
Monastery of S. Damian, and being with zeal by them received, he reduced them
into a better form, and by authority of the sea Apostolic, did adioyne
these his Constitutions to the Rule of S. Benedict, and sent them, the second
time, to the said S. Clare and her sisters, which they unanimously received, in
the 4. year of the Popedom of Honorius the third, and of our Lord 1219.

Jn the year of our The 3. Rule.
Lord 1223. the Glorious Virgin S. Clare, with her Companions of the Monastery
of Assisium, zealously emulating the height of perfection, in most sublime
Poverty, did humbly request that great Master of spirit S. Francis, that he
would please to frame for them, a yet more settled Rule of life, for present and
future ages: which he wrote accordingly, and delivered unto them, in the year
of our Lord 1224. they of Assisium punctualy observing it, for above 30.
years, until it was confirmed by a Bull of Pope Jnnocent the 4. the 11. year
of his Popedom, and some few days before the happy death of the Glorious
Mother S. Clare. And this is the Rule which here we declare and treat of and
the sisters of her Order, do promise successively in their Holy Profession to
observe and follow it; which though third in number, yet deservedly bears the
name of the first Rule of S. Clare, the two former being already in a manner
forgotten; having only been in use and practiced about 12. years, besides, that
as in all beginnings, so were those more rude and vnpolish't.

The 4. Rule, or form The 4. Rule.
of life, delivered unto the Order of S. Clare, is that, which by solicitation
of some Friar-Minors, without the consent, or knowledge of S. Clare, was
underhand dealt for, to be confirmed by Jnnocent the 4. the 5. year of his
Popedom; wherein diverse substantial points were changed, and new ons inserted,
concerning the austeritie, Poverty, subjection and such like. J will only touch
in breife what Ludouicus Miranda a grave Author of the said Order of
Friar-Minors, does mention concerning it, in his first part of the exposition
of the Rule of S. Clare 9. chapt. This Rule, 4.th in order, was procured, says
he, by the suggestion and solicitation of some Prelates of the Order of
Friar-Minors; certain Abbesses joining with them, without the priuitie or
consent of S. Clare; who, having understood the matter, and that the Prelates of
the Order intended to bind her and her sisters of Assisium, as they had
enforced other Monasteries, to the acceptance and obligation of this new Rule,
she with her sisters of Assisium, highly resenting it, that the said Prelates
had solicited and procured such a substantial change of Rule, without her
knowledge, and being greatly scandalifed at them, says Miranda, and at all
those sisters that held with them, refused utterly to admit of it, and with
all humility and modesty, presenting these her grieuances unto his Holiness
Pope Jnnocent the 4. with much affliction and sorrow, for that he gave ear to
the sinister relations of the said Prelates and Nuns, that held with them, she
humbly requested, that he would graciously please to recale the said Rule, and
approve and confirm that, which the H. Father S. Francis had written and left
them. She at length prevailed so far, and with so happy success, that after
5. or 6. years, that is, the 10. and the 11. year of his Popedom, he set
forth two distinct Bulls, by the former expressly commanding the said Prelates,
that in noe case they enforce the Nuns of S. Damian, to accept this new Rule,
which he declared to be void and of noe effect. By which Bull here annexed,
[beginning Recto assumpto tramite, faithfully translated out of an Authentical
copy, taken out of the great Convent in Paris, of the order of Friar-Minors,
by the Apostolical Nuntius, then residing in France 1628. and by him sent to
the English Monastery of poor Clares in Graueling] it appears manifest,
that the superiors and Prelates of the order of Friar-Minors, neither have, nor
ought to have, or exercise any Jurisdiction, or Power, over the afore-sayd
Nuns, seeing, as he says, that absolutely they have none: And by the latter
Bull, he approved and confirmed the Rule itself, which S. Francis had made;
declaring, that all the Nuns of Assisiu^ ought, by all means, to observe and
keep it; this latter Bull is also set down at large, being the Rule it self,
and Confirmation thereof.

The 5. Rule is that The 5. Rule.
of Urban the 4. who created Pope, 6. years only after Jnnocent the 4. being
informed, the first year of his Popedom, by the Cardinal Protector of the
Friar-Minors, that the Religious women of the Order of S. Clare, made
differently their Profession and Vow, in diverse Monasteries, according to
different Rules and forms of life, judged it expedient to make a new Rule;
collecting out of others, such things, as seemed most convenient for the
condition and state of those Nuns; endeavoring, as near as might be, to
reduce them to Uniformity; and himself confirmed this said Rule, by
Apostolical authority, as may be seen in Marcus de Lisbona, in the 2. part of
his Chronicles and 2. book.

Hence it appears that of all these 5. Rules here mentioned, and at different
times delivered to the Religious women of the Order of S. Clare, two only
remain in observance and use, to wit, this latter, drawn in order and
delivered by Urban the 4. caled vsualy the 2. Rule of S. Clare, or of the
Urbanists; and that other, which was written by S. Francis, as we have said and
confirmed some few days before the death of the Glorious Virgin S. Clare, the
11. year of Pope Jnnocent the 4. and is known vsualy by the name of her first
of her first Rule, as well in respect of that of Urban the 4. which was ordered
and brought into a form of Rule, 6. years after her death, as of the 3.
others, which, even at that time, were either antiquated, or annulled.

Here needs noe further addition by way of Preface, unto this first Rule of
the Glorious Mother S. Clare; seeing that the following Constitutions or
Declarations lately approved and confirmed by his Holiness Pope Alexander the
7. do sufficiently, according to their title, declare and explicate what might
seem obscure and hidden in the text of the Rule.

This J only add, by way of note, that, as in all other, so in this Holy
Religious Order of S. Clare, such respect and reverence is due unto the Holy
Rule, and Author thereof, as each word and letter is ever to remain without
change, and inviolable in its primitive and first integrity; although the
Constitutions or Declaratio^s of the same, must needs admit sometimes variety
and change, according to the change and circumstances of time, place and
persons, espeacialy, when uniformity and reference to the sacred Canons, and
Holy Council of Trent shall so require.

Hence it follows that a law may be made void, that is, by it self, or by
authority of higher power, may cease to oblige; and yet, that same law or Rule
shall remain as it was first written, and without the change of one only
letter; although in practice, it is become void, out of use and with out
force; as appears manifest in this very Rule of S. Clare, whereof we treat.

And to give you some few instances and examples: we find in the beginning of
the 2. chapt: that there is mention of not admitting Nouices, without the
consent and license of the Lord Cardinal Protector; which, seeing in practice,
it can not be complied withal, by reason of distance of place, and other
inconveniences, the leave of the superior, or Bishop of the Diocese does
suffice; and yet the words, or text of the Rule remain entire, as they were
first written, because once they had their effect and force, though they be
void at present. Again, in the end of the 3. chapt: it is lawful for the
Chaplain to celebrate within the Monastery, for communicating of the sick, and
yet, for many important reasons, it has been judged needful to alter it;
ordering that Mass be celebrated without the Monastery, and that afterward,
the sick within, if needful, may be communicated. Thirdly in the 8. chapt: it
is mentioned, that some secular Persons may enter the Monastery to visit the
sick, which now, is expressly forbidden by the H: Council of Trent in the 25.
session and 5. chapt: that none enter, but with such restrained conditions as
are there specified. Lastly, to omit diverse other such like instances and
examples, which in this Holy Rule occur frequently, J will only mention one
more, which by mis-vndersta^ding, might prove a stu^bling-block, in some ons
way, if not foreseen in time, and maturely prevented.

It is specified, in the 1. chapt of the Rule, that, as S. Clare, in the
beginning of her conversion, with her sisters promised obedience to the most
Holy Father S. Francis, so in like sort, does she prcmise to observe the same
obedience inuiolably unto his successors, and the other sisters are alwais
obliged to obey the successors of H: S. Francis. These words are wrightly to
be understood, not as written by the pen of the seraphical Father, [as appears
evident; for, he would never have caled, or given him self the title of the H:
and most H: Father S. Francis] but literally, of those Monasteries, or
Co^uents only, which, by authority and leave of the sea Apostolic, are
immediately subject to the Jurisdiction of the Friar-Minors; and not of those,
which by their own request, or appointment of his Holiness the Pope of Rome,
or immediately by them selves, are subjected to the government and Jurisdiction
of the Bishops of the Diocesses: for, these rendering their duty, and obedience
to their Ordinary, neither can, nor may, any ways, submitt themselves, to the
Jurisdiction of the successors of S. Francis.

And if we make reflection on the eminent high dignity of a Bishop in his
Diocese, and the esteem we ought to have of his so singular and choice title
of Ordinary, we shall find, it does import noe less, then a Jurisdiction and
power delivered unto him, both by the natural and written law of God: for God,
has so disposed in nature, that the members of a body be subject unto the
head, and particular persons to the cheef of the Community. seeing therefore
all Christians are members of that particular Church of Christ, in whose
Diocese they are, of which Church the Bishop is head and cheef; it follows,
that as members and parts of the same Church, they reverence and obey him, as
placed by God, for their head and guide; according to that saying of S. Cyprian
It is established by Gods S. Cyprian l. 4. epist: ^.
law, says he, that Churches should be constituted upon Bishops, and the parts
of every Church should be governed by the same Prelates; and this authority, or
power is founded in those words of the 20. of the Acts of the Apostles, where
it is said; The H: Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his blood; so that, it is more evident then the
light at midday, says Dominicus Soto a learned author of that age libro 10.
de Jure et Justitia quaestione prima, art. primo, that Christ did institute the
dignity of Bishops which now is flourishing in the miliant Church of Christ our
Lord God, at whose Consecration she uses this prayier: let him be a faithful
and prudent servant, whom thou Lord do appoint over thy family, to give it
meatein due season, and to make every man perfect. Wherefore, to desce^d to
particulars, by way of Conclusion, seeing the poor Clares are of them, which
Christ purchased with his own blood, seeing they are parts of that house,
which Christ built upon the rock, seeing they are children of Christ's family
wanting meat, and of them, who must be made perfect to Christ, they must
therefore be also subject onto him, who by God, is placed over them as
Ordinary, and Bishop to rule the Church of God, unless by an extraordinary
and speacial privilege of the supreme Uicaire of Christ, they should chance to
be exempted from this his Ordinary Jurisdiction and power, which the Popes of
Rome have been so far from gra^ting, that even the contrary has been at
several times by them declared, in different and express Bulls, as occasion
required.

Which truth will appear more evident, if we reflect how the order of
Friar-Minors espeacially in time of the Generalate of S. Bonauenture, procured
of the Popes Holiness, an act, whereby he declared them to be exempt and wholly
free, from all charge and care of the said religious women. Hence it followed,
that the Friar-Minors would by noe means admit, or acknowledge, that they had
any power, or Jurisdiction over the said Religious of S. Clare, but absolutely
refused to come near their Monasteries, or to administer the H: Sacraments unto
them, unless the sisters had first assured them, by a public Jnstrume^t in
writing, that their assisting them, was out of Charity, and not out of
obligation of duty.

Hence F: Emmanuel Rodericus, a grave and learned Author of the said Order, in
his 3. tome of Regular questions 72. quest: 1. Artic. 3. Conclus: plainly
delivered his opinion and judgment, in point of the Friars having charge of
Monasteries of Women, in these words, as follows. I wish, says he, that all
Nuns, of what Regular Jnstitute soever, were subject to the Ordinary,
especially in our Religion of Friar-Minors, in which, we can not take care, of
their possessions and rents, as others may. And the seraphical Father S.
Francis him self, does in this point abundantly declare his intention and
meaning, in those his words cited by F: Wadding, in his Chronicles, on the
year of our Lord 1219. S. Francis, says he, intending his journey unto the
Sultan in the East, the Cardinal Protector Hugoline conferred with him,
concerning the care and government of the poor Dames of S. Damian and other
Monasteries, which began to be multiplied. The H: Father replied, that for his
part, besid's that Monastery only, in which he had enclosed sister Clare, he
neither had built, nor procured any to be built, and so, had taken care of
none, but of that only of S. Damian, in order unto Regular discipline;
providing them some poor temporal means, by begging for the^. He added
further, that nothing did so much displease him, as that his Brethren in other
parts, earnestly endeavored to have houses built for Religious Woeme^, and to
have them under their government and charge. S. Francis, it is true, never
omitted to perform this charitable duty, toward the Monastery of S. Damian,
wherein S. Clare was enclosed, as F: Wadding well notes, and adds further,
that this his example gave exteriourly occasion unto his Brethren, to assist
other Monasteries, who either by persuasion, or entreatie, did so intrude the^
selves into those businesses, that when the secret mischeef broke forth and
showed it self [as it happened to their own great damage, under Urban the 4.]
they could not withdraw in time, and shun the inconveniences that insued. F:
Wadding in the same place, has much more concerning this subject, which for
diverse reasons, J purposely omit.

It follows clearly, by what has been said, that neither S. Francis, the
Author of this H. Rule, ever intended to subject these Religious Women, under
the Obedience of his Order, [but rather the contrarie] nor that the Order ever
accepted, but rather opposed and shaked off this great charge and burden;
whereas, notwithstanding, acceptance on both sid's is necessary to make a
contract valid in Law, as all Doctors unanimously do profess and teach: so
that, as Malderus well notes, lib. de Jure et Justitia: tract: 1. cap: 9. dub:
10. Although it were certain, says he, and the case suspposed as true, that
S. Francis, and S. Clare had made a contract, one with the other, she, in the
name of her sisters, promising Obedience, and he in the name of his Brothers,
to have a perpetual care of the sisters, that by this means, they might the
better observe their sublime Poverty; yet, because his successors did not
fulfill and keep this his promise, as we have seen in the time of S.
Bonauenture, for this reason, the promise of S. Clare, has long since ceased
to oblige the sisters of these ages.

Neither must this seem strange unto any: for the obligation of keeping a Law,
does cease, says Malderus, in the place aforementioned, when the occasion, or
cause for which the law was made, does cease: but the occasion, or reason why
S. Clare promised Obedience unto S. Francis and his successors, was her
earnest desire of most sublime Poverty joined with a strict enclosure, which
she knew fullwell, could not be effected nor hoped for, without assistance and
releef, by the begging of S. Francis and his Brethren for them; but the
Friar-Minors after the departure of the saint, absolutely refusing this charge
and burden, and procuring moreover a declaration from his Holiness Pope Urban
the 4. that they were to be exempt and wholly free from all care of the said
Religious Women, and by noe obligation bound to undergo it; it follows by
way of consequence, that the said sisters are in noe ways obliged to what
soever contract, or promise S. Clare might chance to have made in their behalf;
seeing, that both the occasion, or cause, why she might have made that promise,
does cease, and the successors of S. Francis have refused to accept the
condition, and undergo the burden.

Lastly, J conclude, that although all that can be objected, were supposed and
granted, yet, as all Doctors unanimously affirm, a promise cease to oblige,
when an higher superior by lawful authority does release it; and his
Holiness the Pope of Rome, can release promises made even to God him self, as
is manifest: but different Popes, and in particular, Jnnocent the 4. by his
Bull here annexed, beginning, Recto assumpto tramite, has not only released
the said Friar-Minors from all superiority, charge and care, which
here-to-fore they migth pretend to have had, over the Religious Women of the
order of S. Clare, but does also in Virtue of H: Obedience, strictly command
and enjoin under pain of Excommunication, all and every one of the Order of
Friar-Minors, that hence forth, they exercise noe Jurisdictio^ whatsoever, over
the aforesaid Abbesses, Nuns, or Monasteries of S. Clare, seeing that
absolutely they have none. Hence it follows, that seeing the Friar-Minors have
noe Jurisdiction or power, over the Religious Women of the Order of S. Clare,
that the said sisters also have noe obligation of Obedience, or subjection
toward the aforesaid superiors, or Prelates of the Order of Friar-Minors.

And to descend more to particulars, in the year of our Lord 1631. his
Holiness Pope Urban the 8. was graciously pleased, to send a particular Breue,
to the Abbess and Religious of the order of S. Clare resyding in the Town of
Graueling, dated the last of May, in the 8. year of his Popedom; which being
faithfully translated, we have also thought fit here, to set down; where he
declares in express terms, the said Religious Women, to be in noe wyes,
subject to the superiors of the Order of Friar-Minors, but that they, and
their Monasteries are, by his express command, restoared to the Obedience and
subjection of their Ordinary the Lord Bishop of S. Omers; they having been
subject unto him from the very beginning of their settlement and admission into
that Town; their admissio^ being limited with this condition, to live under
the Obedience and Jurisdiction of the Lord Bishop of the Diocese: as appears in
the letters of grant, given by his Highness Archduke Albertus, dated at
Brussels the 7. of October 1608. as also in the letters of reception of the
Baron Guernouual, then Governor of the Town of Graueling, and Founder in
part, of the said Monastery; bearing date 26. of August. 1627. and lastly in
the letters of admission of the said Town, dated the same year and day; all
three inserting, in express terms, this condition, as necessary for their
admittance, that they be ever subject to the Ordinary, the Lord Bishop of S.
Omers.

Let it therefore remain, as concluded and certain, that those Monasteries of
the order of S. Clare, which can not make appear, by particular grant and
privilege of the sea Apostolic, their positive exemption from the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop, that they are and ought to remain subject to the
said Bishop of their Diocese, who therefore is known under the notion and title
of Ordinary: and seeing the Poor Clares in the Town of Graueling, have not
only their admittance limited by the Prince, Town and Goueruour, and by the^
restrained to this obligation or condition of being subject to the Ordinary;
but are more over, by a particular Breue sent them by Pope Urban the 8.
expressly commanded to live and remain [as we have sayd] under the Obedience of
the Lord Bishop of S. Omers; excluding in express words, all whatsoever
pretended power, the Friar-Minors have, ore might seem to have over them;
seeing, [as Pope Jnnocent the 4. above mentioned does also declare] that
absolutely they have none, it follows, that they are, and ought to remain
subject, and obedient to the said Lord Bishop, and that, the Obedience
mentioned in the first Chapter of their Rule, remains [as now it is] by
supreme Authority, transferred, or restoared to the Person of the afore-sayd
Lord Bishop, or Ordinary.

THE BVLL OF POPE INNOCENT THE FOVRTH, declaring the Nuns of the order of S.
CLARE, not to be subject to the Friar-Minors by their Rule given by S. FRANCIS,
and forbidding the said Friars to exercise any Jurisdiction over the^ under
what pretense soever.

INNOCENT BISHOP Servant of the servants of God,
To our Beloved Sons, the General and Prouincial Ministers of the Order of
the Friar-Minors health and Apostolical Benediction.
THE trauailer that has taken the right path, whereby he may conveniently
attain to his intended ourneys end, should labor in vain, and unprofitably
endeavor to find out other trackes: for the more different ways he tries,
the more does he delay his journey, and whiles he does hasten, he does the more
hinder himself, and the way which perchance is but short, he makes long by
inconsiderate digressions; because one, that tries diverse paths, may easily
stray from the right, and so wander out of his way; and he that so
trauaileth, arriueth still late to his iourny's end; yea, his going on, in this
sort, is rather a going back from the end it self. Hence the variety and
novelty of ways is to be avoided, and the ancient and first way carefully to
beretained; seeing the old ways are better known then the newer, and one may
travail more confidently by the tracke of the one, then of the other.
Wherefore, they that can walk well in the beaten path, let them with care
avoid the unused.

We have been ever desirous that our beloved daughters in Christ, the Abbesses,
and Religious of the order of S. Damian, who flying from the slipperie
downfalls of the world, have chose the secure retirement of Claustral solitude,
might constantly serve our Lord in the observance of that Rule, whereby they may
more readily obtain eternal reward.

Hence some time since, did We, by our letters enjoin our Venerable Brother
the Bishop of Ostia, and Veletre, that he should not permit them to be
compelled to the undertaking of a new form of life, or the ancient [by Us,
being then at Lions changed,] unless it should seem unto him more expedient
for their salvation; but that he should procure the ancient Rule, which the
afore-sayd Abbesses and Nuns had admitted in the first institution of their
Order, to be by them inuiolably observed, if thereby the good and perfection of
their souls might be advanced; granting him power to compel by Ecclesiastical
Censures, without admitting appeal, whosoever should contradict him.

He [as by his own Relation We have vnderstood] desirous with all diligence to
fulfill our Commands; perceiving [after serious deliberation] it would be more
profitable for them, firmly to observe the ancient Rule, which in the very
beginning of their Religion, they had received by the careful endeavor of our
Predecessor Pope Gregory of happy memory; judged it noe ways expedient to
receive the new one, or to have the old Rule changed; nor to forsake the former
good and wholesome way, for an other newly found out, or decline the accustomed,
for an unaccustomed course of life.

Wherefore, by power of our foresaid letters, he gave in writing, a most strict
command, in Virtue of Obedience, to the Abbesses and Nuns before named, not
to admit in any ways, the aforesaid new Rule at the command given, or to be
given by any Minister, or Friar of your Order what soever; but to keep the
aforesaid old Rule for ever, in all ages to come.

And seeing it is contained in that new Rule, that you, the General and
Prouincial Ministers of your Order, have Jurisdictio^ over the forenamed
Abbesses and Nuns [as it appears indeed, that, by that Rule, Jurisdictio^
is given unto you, and to other Ministers, who for the time shall be] the said
Bishop gave by Our authority, in his letters, an express Command, to you
gathered to geather in a General Chapter of your Order at Genoua, that you
should not intermeddle here-after with any Jurisdiction over the forenamed
Abbesses and Nuns, nor their Monasteries, nor presume to exercise any
authority over the same, for the time to come.

And by other letters to the same Abbesses and Nuns afore-me^tioned, he
enjoined, that they should noe more obey, or be subject unto you, nor to other
Ministers, that for the time should be, but that they should humbly respect and
obey him, and such Visitours, as he should appoint for their Monasteries.

But you, not listening to the precept of the said Bishop, as it was your duty,
neglected to observe the same; entering the foresaid Monasteries by your own
authority and good pleasure, contrary to the tenor of their Rule; sometimes
also designing and sending thither, some of your Friars; using endeauours, that
the foresaid Abbesses and Nuns should not regard the Commands of the Bishop
before mentioned; oftentimes encountering and stopping his messengers and
letters; disputing moreover, yea and difinitiuely, affirming, that you were not
bound to regard, or obey the said Bishop, but in some cases only.

Wherefore, to you all and to all the Friars of your Order, in Virtue of
Obedience, under pain of Excommunication, by these Apostolical letters, We, by
strict precept enjoin, that you obey the aforementioned Bishop, and his
commands and letters in all things; and that, over the aforementioned Abbesses and
Nuns, or their Monasteries, here-after, you exercise no Jurisdiction
whatsoever; seeing that over them, you have none at all; and that you neither
endeavor, by word or deed, secretly or openly, by your selves or others, that
the aforesaid Abbesses and Nuns should not regard and observe the commands of
the said Bishop, and that you never oppose your selves to his messengers or
letters.

But rather, seeing as well your Order, as theirs, is committed by the Sea
Apostolic, to the care of the said Bishop, who with a vigilant eye does not
cease carefully to procure the advancement of both; you are devoutly to admit,
and inuiolably to observe his precepts, as well in the things afore-sayd, as in
all others; espeacially, seeing that as well you, as all the Friars of your
Order, next to the Pope of Rome, are bound to respect and obey your Cardinal,
appointed by the sea Apostolic, to have the charge and custody of your Order.

Otherwise, the sentence and censure, which the aforenamed Bishop shall give
against such as disobey, or rebel, We will ratify the same, and make it [God
willing] to be inuiolably observed, until condign satisfaction be given; not
admitting of any appeal to the contrary; notwithstanding any statutes,
privileges, or Apostolical letters, of what tenor soever they may be, either
granted, or here-after to be granted to you, or to any of yours, or to your
Order, in any ways to the contrary. Given at Perugia the 17. day of March, the
tenth year of our Pope-dome.

A SPECIAL BREVE OF POPE URBAN THE VIII.
To the English Poor CLARES in the Town of Graueling, whereby he restoares
them to the Jurisdiction or Obedience of the Lord Bishop of S. Omers. Pope
URBAN the 8.

TO Future Memory. It was lately proposed unto Us, in the name of our dearly
beloved Daughters in Christ, the Abbess, and Religious of S. Francis, of the
English Monastery in Graueling, caled Clarisses, of the Diocese of S. Omers,
that the said Monastery, from the first beginning of its Foundation, has been
subject to the Government and Jurisdiction of the Bishop of S. Omers, since, by
his conniuance, to the Order of S. Francis of Friar-Minors called Obseruants.
Whence, the said suppliants, faling into great difficulties with the afore-sayd
Friar-Minors, by Command of our Venerable Brothers, the Lord Cardinals, deputed
over the causes of Regulars, and by an express Decree of our Beloved son,
the then Nuntius of the sea Apostolic residing in those parts, bearing date
the 23. of February 1628. Whereby the aforementioned Monastery, was restored
to the Obedience of the aforesaid Bishop, or Ordinary, enjoying under his
Jurisdiction much tranquillity and peace. And it being mentioned in the same
exposition, that the afore-sayd suppliants, desired earnestly, the restoring of
the said Monastery to the Jurisdiction of the aforementioned Ordinary might
be strengthened by the Confirmation of our Apostolical Decree: We, inclined to
the requests humbly presented unto Us, in their behalf, do absolve the said
suppliants, for the obtaining only of the effect of these, and esteem each one
of them by force of these, truly absolved from whatsoever Excommunication,
suspension, or Jnterdict, or from whatsoever other Ecclesiastical sentenses,
censures, or punishment inflicted by whatsoever occasion, either by man or law,
if in any ways they should chance to be entangled in the same. More over We,
approve and ratify by these present, and by Apostolical Authority, the
afore-confirmed restitution of the said Religious and Monastery, under the
Jurisdiction of the aforementioned Bishop, or Ordinary; adding unto it, the
strength of our Apostolical firmness; supplying all and every defect [if any
should have hapned] in law, or fact whatsoever: declaring the afore-sayd
Decrees of the Lord Cardinals and Nuntius, as also these our present Letters,
to be, and be esteemed valid, firm, and efficacious, and inuiolably to be
observed by all, whom at present, or for the future, it may concern; and
ought thus to be defined and judged, by whatsoever Judges, Ordinaries, or
Delegates, even those of our Apostolical Palace. More over, it is declared
null, and void, if any Person of what authority soever, either wittingly, or
willingly should presume to attempt the contrary; any constitutions,
Apostolical ordinations, statuts, customs privileges, gra^ts, even ratified
by oath, or strengthened by whatsoever Apostolical confirmation, or letters,
granted, confirmed, or innouated, to the contrary in any ways:
notwithstanding; leaving all and every one of them, as at other times, in their
accustomed force, We will [at this time only, to the obtaining of the effect of
these] that they be speacialy, and expressly annulled, and derogated.

Given at Rome at S. Marie Major. sub annulo piscatoris. 31. of May. 1631. and
the 8. of our Pontificate. M. A. MARALDVS.

THE APOSTOLICAL CONFIRMATION OF THE RVLE. which Blessed S. Francis gave unto
the Holy Mother S. Clare.
INNOCENT Bishop servant of the servants of God: To our beloved Daughters in
Christ, Clare Abbess, and the other Sisters of the Monastery of S. Damian at
Assisium. Health, and Apostolical Benedictio^
THe Apostolical sea, being accustomed to condesce^d to the pious requests, and
holy desires of her suppliants; and you having addressed your humble suite unto
Us, in order to the approving and strengthening with our Apostolical
Confirmation the Form of life, whereby, you ought to live in common, unity of
spirit, and profession of most sublime poverty: the said Rule, having been
given, by the Holy S. Francis, by you freely accepted, and by our venerable
Brother the Bishop of Ostia and Ueletre approved and confirmed, as is more
amply contained in the letters of the said Bishop, conformable to Our
Apostolical authority, committed unto him, in this behalf.

We therefore, condescending to your devout requests, do again ratify, by
Apostolical authority, and confirm, by these present, what the said Bishop
did in this behalf; inserting herein, the tenor of his letters, word by word,
as follows.

Ugoline, by the grace of God, Bishop of Ostia and Veletre, to his most dear
Mother, and Daughters in Christ, Clare Abbess of S. Damian at Assisium, and her
Sisters, as well present, as to come, health and fatherly benediction.

For as much as you, my dearly beloved Daughters in Christ, contemning the
pompes, and vanities of the world, and desyring to tread the footsteps of JESUS
Christ and his most Holy Mother, have chosen to live in poverty, and enclosed,
that you may with more liberty and purity of spirit, attend to the service of
his divine Majesty: we, commending in our Lord, your holy resolutions; do,
out of our fatherly affection, condescend graciously unto your petitio^s and
pious desires, and by authority of his Holiness and of Ours, confirm for
you, and all those, that shall succeed you, in your Monastery, the form and
rule of life, of holy union and most sublime poverty, which the Blessed Father
S. Francis, by word and writing, has delivered unto you, to be observed; and
is, as follows.

IN NOMINE DOMINI. Amen. THE RVLE OR FORM OF LIFE Of the Poor Sisters of the
Order of S. CLARE.
J. CHAPT. Of the promise of Obedience.
1. THE Rule, and Form of life, of the Order of the poor Sisters, which
Blessed S. Francis has instituted, is this: to observe In this Chapter,
nothing is mentioned, but the 3. Vovvs: for the Ordinances and Profession,
speak sufficiently of the Vovv, which the Sisters make, of enclosure.
the holy Ghospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; living in obedience, without
propriety, and in chastity.

2. Clare unworthy Handmaid of Christ, and little plant of the most Holy
Father S. Francis, promises obedience, and reverence to Pope Jnnocent, and to
his successors, lawfully and canonically succeeding, in the Church of Rome.

3. And, as in the beginning of her conversion, she, with her sisters, promised
obedience to the most Holy Father S. Francis; so, in like sort, does she
promise to observe the like obedience inuiolably unto his successors. * And
These words are understood of those Monasteries only, which are subject to
the Order; For, when the Monastery is immediately subject to the Bishop, then,
the Obedience here mentioned, is, by authority of the Sea Apostolic,
tra^sferred from the Friar-Minors, and is due to the Person of the Lord Bishop
of the Diocese, vvherin they live, and to his Successors.
the other sisters are always obliged to obey the successors of Holy S.
Francis, and to obey also, sister Clare, and all other Abbesses, who
canonically chosen, shall succeed her.

Of the Examen, and other things to be observed in the Receptio^ of the sisters
into the Order, and of their Profession. JJ. CHAPT.
1. When any one, moved by divine inspiratio^, shall present her self unto you,
to embrace this course of life, the Abbess shall be bound to ask the consent of
all the sisters; and if the greater part give their voice The Bishop by him
self, or his Vicar, is to examen, and receive the nouice thus presented, as is
ordained in the Council of Trent Sess. 25. cap. 17.
[the license of the Lord Cardinal your Protector, being first obtained] the
Abbess may receive her.

2. When she is to be admited, the Abbess shall diligently examen her, or cause
her to be examined, concerning the Catholic Faith and the Sacraments of the
Church: all which, if she do firmly believe, faithfully profess, and will
stidfastly observe to the end; then [if she have noe husband, or if he, [with
leave of the Bishop of his Diocese] be entered into Religion, and has made a
vow of chastity; more-ouer if she be not too far in years, nor have any
sickness, or weakness of head, which might hinder her, from the observance of
this course of life] shall be diligently declared unto her, the contents and
tenor of your form of life.

3. And if she be fit, and willing, those words of the Holy Ghospel shall be
said unto her, that she go, and sell all she has, and This is to be observed
at the Profession, as the Council of Trent appoints Sess. 25. cap. 16,
give it to the poor. *Which, if she can not effect, her good will shall
suffice.

4. The Abbess and sisters shall be very careful, not to busy their minds, by
meddling with her temporal goods, to the end, she may freely dispose of them;
according as our Lord shall inspire her.

5. Nevertheless, if she herein, do ask their counsel, they shall send her to
some discreet person, fearing God; by whose direction, her goods may be
distributed unto the poor.

6. Then her hair being cut of round, and her secular habit taken away, the
Abbess shall lend her three coats, and one cloak: after which time, it is not
lawful for her, to go out of the Monastery, without manifest and profitable
cause.

7. The year of her probation expired, she This is to be understood, that she
be received, if the Superiors judge her fit, and there be noe impediment;
other wise, that she be sent out of the Monastery, as is ordained in the
Council of Tre^t sess 25. cap. 16.
shall be received to obedience; promising perpetually * to observe your manner
of poverty, and form of life

8. None shall receive the veil; during the time of Probation.

9. The sisters may have little cloakes for modesty, and commodity of their
seruise, and labor.

10. The Abbess shall discreetly provide, that the sisters have clothes,
according to the quality of the persons, times, places and climats, as she
shall judge their necessity to require.

11. They, who are received into the Monastery, before sufficient years;
having their hair cut of, and their secular habit taken away, shall be
clothed with such cloth, as the Religious; according to the discretion of the
Abbess; and when they are come to fit age; taking the habit as others do,
they shall make their probation.

12. And the Abbess, as well for them, as for other Nouices, shall carefully
provide a Mistress, one of the discreetest of the Monastery, who is
diligently to instruct them in modest manners and holy conversation; according
to the form of your Profession.

13. The same manner shall be observed in the admitta^ce of the sisters, who
serve without the Monastery; and those sisters may wear shoes.

14. None may dwell within the Monastery, unless they be received; according
to the form of your Profession.

15. J do admonish, pray and request my sisters, that for the love of the most
Holy, and sweet child JESUS, who was wrapped in poor cloutes, and laid in a
crib, and for the love of his Holy Mother, that they alwais desire to be clad
in poor clothes.

Of the Divine Office, fasting, Confession and Communion. JJJ. CHAPT.
1. THe sisters, that can read, when they may have breuiaries, shall say the
divine office, according to the custom of the Friar-Minors; reading it without
song: and they, who sometimes, for some reasonable impediment, are hindered from
reading their office, may say Pater nosters in lieu thereof, as other sisters
do, who can not read.

2. Those sisters, who can not read, shall say 24. Pater nosters for Matines, 5.
for Lauds, for Prime, Tierce, Sexte, and None, for each of them 7. For
euensong 12. for Compline 7.

3. For the Euensong of the dead, they shall say also 7. Pater nosters with
Requiem aeternam, for the Matines 12. The sisters, who can read, are bound to
recite the office of the dead.

4. When any sister of the Monastery is departed this life, the sisters shall
say 50. Pater nosters for her soul.

5. The sisters shall alwais fast; but on the Nativity of our Lord, they may
make two refections, upon what day soever it happens. With the young, weak,
and those who serve whithout the Monastery, the Abbess may charitably
dispense, when she thinks good; but in time of manifest necessity, the
sisters are not obliged to corporal fasting.

6. They shall confess, with license of the Abbess, at the least 12. times in
the year, and then, let them take care, that they mingle nor any words, which
appertain not to Confession, or the good of their souls.

7. They shall receive the H: Sacrament of the altar seaue^ times in the year,
as on the Nativity of our Lord, on Maunday thursday, Easterday, Whittsonday,
the Assumptio^ of the Blessed Virgin Marie, S. Francis his day, and upon the
feast of all saints.

8. The Chaplain may celebrate within the Monastery, for communicating of the
sick.

Of the Election of the Abbess. JU. CHAPT.
1. IN the Election of the Abbess, the sisters are bound to observe the The
Constitution of Gregory the 15. will have the Bishop, or his Vicar to be
present at the Election of the Abbess: And if the Sisters be under the
government of the said Bishop, they are in time, to acquaint him, or his Vicar,
to know his will and leisure; concerning the future election.
Canonical form.

2. Let them procure to have the General Minister, or the Prouincial of the
Friar-Minors, who, with the word of God, shall exhort the^ to concord and union,
and to seek the common good in the election.

3. None shall be chosen, who is not Professed, or if such an one were chosen,
or otherwise given for Abbess, they shall not obey her, unless she first vow to
observe the form of their Poverty.

4. When the Abbess dies, the election of an other shall be made.

5. Jf at any time, it shall seem to the community; that the Abbess elected,
be not sufficient for the seruise of the sisters, and the common good; the said
sisters are obliged to chose an other, as speedely as they can; according to
the form afore-sayd.

6. Let her, who is elected, weigh and consider, what a burden she has taken
upon her, and to whom she must render an account of the flock committed unto
her. Let her strive to be superior in virtues, and to exceed others in holy
manners, rather then in office; to the end, the sisters, moved by her example,
may obey her, more for love, then fear.

7. Let her banish all particular affections, least particularitie breed
scandal to the community.

8. Let her be the comfort and last refuge to the afflicted, least the weak,
wanting relief by her means, may chance to be overcome, by the sadness of
despair.

9. She shall follow the Community in all things, especially in the Church,
dormitorie, refectorie and infirmarie; as also in her attire, the which, her
Uicaress is also obliged to observe.

10. The Abbess shall assemble the sisters to Chapter, at the least, once a
week; where, she and the other sisters are humbly to acknowledge all their
public offenses and negligences.

11. Let her there conferr with all her sisters, of those things, which are to
be treated of, for the good and decency of the Monastery; for it often
happens, that God reuealeth unto the least, what is best to be done.

12. Noe great debts shall be contracted, or made, without manifest necessity
and common consent of the sisters, and that, by means of their Procuratour.

13. Let the Abbess, with her sisters, take care, that they receive, nor keep
any thing for others, within the Monastery; for, oftentimes, by these means,
arises trouble and scandal.

14. For the better conseruing of mutual peace and vnio^, all the officers of
the Monastery shall be chosen by common consent of all the sisters.

15. They shall choose, in like manner, at the least, eight sisters of the
discreeter, whose counsel the Abbess is bound to use, in what concerns their
form of life.

16. The sisters may, and ought sometimes to change the officers and discreets,
and choose others in their places, when they shall judge it expedient and
profitable.

Of silence, and of the manner of speaking at the Grate and speakehouse. U.
CHAPT.
1. THE sisters shall keep silence from the hour of Compline, until Tierce;
those excepted, who serve without the Monastery.

2. They shall ever keep silence in the Church and dormitorie; but in the
refectorie, in time of refection only. And it is always lawful for the
sisters, to speak discreetly in the infirmarie, for the attendance and
recreation of the sick.

3. The sisters may nevertheless, at all times and places, speak briefly, and
with a low voice, of things requisite and necessary.

4. It is not lawful for the sisters to speak at the grate, or speak-house,
without license of the Abbess, or Uicaress; and they, who with leave, shall
speak at the speake-house, shall not do it, but in presence and hearing of two
sisters.

5. None shall presume to come to the grate, unless three, at least, appointed
by the Abbess, or Vicaress be present, of the number of those Discreet, who are
chosen by all the sisters, for the Counsel of the Abbess.

6. The Abbess and Vicaress, as near as they can, are bound to observe this
manner of speaking; which, at the grate, shall be very seldom; but at the gate,
shall never be permitted.

7. They shall hang a cloth within the grate, which shall not be drawn but in
time of a sermon, or whilst they speak unto others.

8. There shall be, within the grate, a door of wood, stre^gthned with two locks
and bolts of iron, which shall be locked principally, in the night time, with
two keys; one of which the Abbess shall keep, and the sacristan the other.

9. The said door is alwais to remain shutt; except in time of reading the
divine office, or for the causes above mentioned.

10. None may speak, at the grate, in what sort soever, before the resing, or
after the setting of the sun.

11. At the speak-house, there shall alwais be a cloth within, which shall never
be taken of.

12. Noe sisters may speak, at the speak-house, within S. Martin's Lent, nor
within the great Lent, but only to the Priest, for cause of Confession, or for
other manifest necessity, which shall be reserved to the discretion of the
Abbess, or Vicaress.

That the sisters may not receive possessions, by them selves, or by any person
interposed. UJ. CHAPT.
1. AFter that the heavenly Father had vouchsafed, through his divine grace, to
illuminate my heart in such sort, What follovveth, has been added, since the
death of S. Francis.
that by the example and doctrine of our Holy Father S. Francis, J began to do
penance, a little after his conversion; J, with my sisters, did willingly
promise obedience unto him.

2. The Holy Father perceiving, that we feared noe poverty, labor,
tribulation, vilitie, or contempt of this world, but that we esteemed these, as
great delights, he, moved with piety, wrote unto us a form of life, in this
manner.

3. Considering, An extract of a letter which S. Francis vvrote to S. Clare,
and her compagnions.
that through the inspiratio^ of God, you have made your selves Daughters, and
Handmaids to the most high, and sovereign King the heavenly Father, and have
espoused your selves to the Holy Ghospel, J will and promise by my self, and my
Brothers, to have alwais a special and diligent care over you, as over them.

4. The which, whilst he lived, he diligently performed, and willed, it should
be allways observed by his Brothers.

5. And, to the end, that we should in noe time, decline from the most holy
poverty, which we had embraced, nor those who should succeed us, he wrote unto
us his last will, a little before his death; saying.

6. J, Brother Francis, being poor, This is an extract of an other letter,
which S. Francis vvrote, a little before his death.
will follow the life and poverty of our most sovereign Lord Jesus Christ, and
of his most holy Mother, and will perseauer in the same, unto the end. And J
beseech and counsel you all, my dear sisters, that you live perpetually, in
this most holy life and poverty: and be careful, that you never depart from
the same poverty, through the teaching, or counsel of any.

7. And, as J have always been solicitous, together with my sisters, to
observe the S. Clare expresses her ardent zeal and desire of most sublime and
rigorous ouertie.
holy poverty, which we have promised to God, and Holy S. Francis; in like
manner, all the Abbesses, that shall succeed me in the office, and all the
sisters, are bound inuiolably to observe it unto the end. To wit, not to
receive possessions, or have propriety, either by themselves, or any person
interposed, nor any thing, that may wrightly be called propriety; except a
little ground, which necessity does require for decency, and repairing of the
Monastery; and this ground may not be cultiuated otherwise, then as a garden
for the use of the sisters.

The manner to be observed by the sisters, in their manual work's. UJJ. CHAPT.
1. THE sisters, on whom God has bestowed the gift of working, shall employ
them selves faithfully and devoutly, after Tierce, in all such work's, as
appertain to the decency and common good of the Monastery. Jn such sort,
that both idleness, the enemy to the soul, be expelled, and the spirit of
holy prayer and devotion, whereunto all temporal things are referred, be not
extinguished.

2. The sisters shall be bound in presence of all, to declare in Chapter, to the
Abbess, or Uicaress, that which they have wrought with their hands.

3. The like shall be observed, if any send alms for the necessity of the
sisters; to the end, that in common, they may reco^mend them to God. And they
shall be all distributed by the Abbess, or Vicaress, with the counsel of the
Discreet, for the good of the Community.

That the sisters shall not appropriate any thing to them selves, and of the
sick sisters. UJJJ. CHAPT.
1. THE sisters shall not appropriate any thing to them selves, neither house,
place, or other thing; but, as pilgrims and strangers in this world, serve our
Lord in poverty and humility.

2. Let them send for alms with confidence: neither ought they to be ashamed
thereof; seeing our Lord made himself poor, in this world, for love of us.

3. This is the height of most sublime poverty, which has placed you [my most
dearly beloved sisters] heirs, and queen's of the Kingdom of heaven; making
you poor in temporal commodities, and exalting you high in virtue. Let this
be your portion, which does lead you into the land of the living; unto which
[dearly beloved sisters] wholly adhering, for the name of our Lord JESUS Christ,
do you never, at any time, possess other thing under heaven.

4. It shall not be lawful for any sisters to send letters, or to receive, or
give any thing, out of the Monastery, without license of the Abbess; nor to
have any thing, which is not given, or permitted her, by the Abbess.

5. And if any thing be sent to any sister from her Parents, or from any other
person, the Abbess may grant it her, and [if need] she may make use of it; if
not, the Abbess in charity, may dispose of it, to relieve the wantes of an
other that needs. Jf money be sent unto any one, let the Abbess, with counsel
of the Discreet, provide her of necessaries*

6. The Abbess is strictly bound, to inquire carefully by her self, or others,
the necessity of the sick sisters, and to provide, as well, what their
infirmity requires in diet, as other things requisite; and, according to the
possibility of the place, charitably and mercifully to relieve them; because
all are obliged to serve and assist their infirm sisters, even as they would
be served, if them selves were detained with any like infirmity.

7. Let them declare freely, one to the other, their necessity: for if a true
mother does love and nourish the child of her womb, with how much greater
diligence and care, ought a sister to love and cherish her spiritual sister.

8. The sick shall lie upon beds of chaff, and have under their heads pillowes
of feathers. Those who have need, may use socks and quilts.

9. The said sick, when they are visited To enter the Cloister to visit the
sick, is forbidden by the Council of Trent; excepting the ghostly Fathers and
Physicians.
by those, who enter the Monastery, may answer briefly unto the^; speaking
good and edificatiue words. But the other sisters, who with leave are present,
shall not speak unto those, that enter the Monastery, except in presence and
hearing of two Discreets, appointed by the Abbess, or Uicaress; who are bound
themselves to observe the same manner of speaking.

Of penance to be enjoined the sisters that offend: and the manner of dealing,
out of the Monastery. JX. CHAPT.
1. IF any sister, by instigation of the Enemy, does sin mortally, against
the form of your Profession, and being twice or thrice admonished thereof, by
the Abbess, or other sisters, does not amend; as many days, as she has
continued obstinate and contumacious, so many shall she; sitting upon the
ground in the refectorie, in presence of all the sisters, have only bread and
water, and undergo greater penance, if it shall seem good to the Abbess.
During her obstinacy and co^tumacie, let prayer be made to God, that it may
please him, to illuminate her heart to penance.

2. The Abbess and sisters shall be careful not to be angry, or troubled at the
offenses of any: for, anger and pertubation hinders charity, in themselves
and others.

3. Jf it happen [which God forbid] that there arise in word, or sign, any
contention, or scandal, between the sisters, let her, who gave the occasion,
before she offer unto God the sacrifice of prayer, prostrate herself immediately
before the others feet, not only asking pardon, but also, humbly entreating
her, that she would interceed unto our Lord, that it would please him to
forgive her.

4. Let the other then, mindful of the words of our savior, who says
[vnless you forgive with your whole heart, neither will your heavenly Father
forgive you] freely forgive her sister the injury committed against her.

5. Let the sisters, who serve without the Monastery, remain noe longer
abroad, the^ manifest necessity does require.

6. Let their gate be modest, their speech little, to the end, that those who
see them, may be alwais edified. They shall take great care, that they keep noe
suspected, or familiar compagnie with any one; and for the avoiding all
occasion of perturbation and scandal, which may arise, they shall not be
Godmothers unto any ones child.

7. They shall not presume to relate, in the Monastery, any news heard from
abroad, nor declare abroad any thing done, or said in the Monastery, through
which, any scandal might arise. And if any, in either of these offend
indiscreetly, let it be left unto the Abbesses prudence, and charity to
correct her; but if she transgress out of vicious custom, the Abbess, with
counsel of her Discreet, shall enjoin her a penance, according to the quality
of the fault.

Of the admonishment and visitation of the sisters. X. CHAPT.
1. Let the Abbess visit and admonish her sisters, and humbly and charitably
correct them; not commanding any thing contrary to their souls good, and
against the form of your profession.

2. Let the sisters, who are subject, be mindful, that for the love of God,
they have renounced their own will; whence they are firmly bound to obey their
Abbess, in all things, that they have promised to observe, and are not
contrary unto your Profession.

3. The Abbess shall be so familiar and ca^did with them, that they may speak
and deal with her, as the Mistresses with their Maids: for, the Abbess ought
to be servant unto all the sisters.

4. J exhort and admonish my sisters in Christ JESUS our Lord, that they avoid
all pride, vain glory, envy and couetousness; that they fly care and
solicitude of the world, detraction, murmuration, and dissension.

5. Let them alwais be sollicitous to conserve the union of charity, which is
the bond of perfection. They, that can not read, let them not be solicitous to
learn, but consider, that above all things, they ought to endeavor, to
obtain the spirit of our Lord, and the holy operation thereof; and alwais to
pray unto our Lord, with a pure heart, to have humility and patience in
tribulation and sickness, to love those, who reprehend and persecute them.
For, our Lord says, Blessed are they, who suffer persecution for Justice; for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven; but they, who persevere unto the end, shall be
saved.

Of the duty of the Portress. XJ. CHAPT.
1, THe Portress shall be of convenient age, discreet and of mature manners; she
shall keep her reside^se in the day time, in an open Cell, without a door;
having a fit companion assigned her; who, as need requires, may in all
things, supply her office. 2. The gate opening in the middle, shall be well
guarded with two strong locks, and diverse iron bars and bolts. It shall be
locked, principally, at night, with two keys; the one whereof, shall be kept by
the Portress, and the other by the Abbess. Jn the day, it shall not be left
open, but always remain locked with one keye, and they shall take diligent care
and procure, that it never stand open, so near as may be. They shall not
Permissions sometimes given, by the Popes, have since, been recalled, by many
Apostolical Constitutions; so that, it is noe more permitted to any person of
whatsoever state, or condition, to enter into the house, by virtue of the
said permissions. See the Council of Trent, sess. 25. cap. 5.
open the gate unto those, those, who would enter, unless license be granted
by the Popes Holiness, or the lord Cardinal Protector.

3. The sisters shall not permit any to enter the Monastery, before the rising
of the sun, neither shall they permit any to remain with-in the Monastery,
after sun set; unless manifest, reasonable and inevitable cause require it.

Jf any Bishop have leave to celebrat Mass within the Monastery, either for
the * benedictio^ of the If any o^ne should enter the Monastery, with
permission, as aforesaid, he is punctually to observe, what the Council of
Tie^t appoints, in the sess. and chapt, above cited.
Abbess, or to consecrate any Religious, or for any other very importa^t
affair, he shall, at that time, be content with a very few followers and
servants, and those, who are of the grauer sort.

5. And when need requires, that any enter into the Monastery, for to do any
work, the Abbess shall carefully appoint one at the gate, who shall let only
those enter, who are appointed. And let the sisters take care, that they be
not then seen by those, who enter the Monastery.

Of the Visitor and Chaplain. XJJ. CHAPT.
1. Let your Uisitor be alwais of the Order of Friar-Minors according to the
will and commandment of your Cardinal; * The chapter speaks of the Sisters,
who be subject unto Regulars: who, notvvithstanding, must be visited by the
Bishop in matters concerning Inciosure* They that be subject to the Bishop,
must be visited by him, or his Vicar, as well in what concerns Enclosure, as
in what belongs to discipline and observance.
and let him be such an one, whose modesty and behavior is experienced:
whose office is to reform, as well in the head, as in the members, the excesses
committed against the form of your Profession.

2. Who, being in an open place, to the end, that he may be seen by others, may
speak both unto all, and unto each in particular, of those things, which
appertain to the office of Uifitor, and according as it shall seem expedient
unto him.

3. We require the These words are added, by way of entreaty and devotion.
favor of the same Order, through the charity of our Lord, and Blessed S.
Francis, to have a Chaplain, who is a Priest, with a companion of good fame and
discreet, as also two lay Brothers, of holy conversation, and lovers of
modesty, to assist us, in our poverty, as we mercifully have had hitherto, of
the Friar-Minors,

4. The Chaplain may not enter into the Convent without his companion; and
entering, they shall be in an open place, that they may be seen by each other, as
also by the sisters.

5. They may enter to hear the confessions of the sick, that can not go unto
the grate, to give them the Blessed Sacrament and extreme Unction, and to read
the recommendation of the soul. Since the Council of Trent, noe one may enter
the Monastery, but with express leave of the Lord Bishop, as aforesaid, and
in necessary occasions. See, the Council of Trent. sess. 25. chapt 5.
But to celebrate the sacrifice of Mass, to read the office of the dead, and
to digg open, or prepare the grave, may enter also other sufficient fit
persons; according to the discretion of the Abbess.

6. Further more, the sisters are bound to have for their Protector, Governor
and Reformer, one of the Cardinals of the holy Roman Church, the same that shall
be ordained by our H: Father the Pope, for the Friars-Minors; that being alwais
subject under the feet of the same holy Roman Church, steadfast in the
Catholic Faith, we may ever observe the holy poverty, and humility of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, and his Holy Mother, and the Holy Ghospel, which we have
vowed. Amen. Dated at Perugia, the sixth of september, the tenth year of the
Popedom of our H: Father Jnnocent the fourth.

Here ends the Rule of the Poor sisters, and follows the remainder of the
Popes Bull for the Confirmation of the same.
Therefore, let not any person violate, or disannull this our letter, or Bull
of Confirmation, or by rash and temerarious boldness, contradict it. The which
if any one presume to do, let him know, that he does incurr the indignation
of Almighty God, and of his holy Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul.

Dated at Assisium, the ninth day of August, the eleventh year of our
Popedom. Laus Deo, Beatae Mariae semper Virgini, Beato Francisco, atque Beatae
Clarae. Amen.
HERE BEGINS THE HOLY MOTHER S. CLARE'S BENEDICTION Unto her sisters present
and to come.
In the name of the Father, and of the son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
MY Deerly beloved sisters, our Lord give you his holy Benediction, and behold
you with the eye of his mercy, and give you his Peace: as also unto all those,
who shall enter and persevere in this our Cloister and Monastery; and unto all
other of the Order, who shall persevere unto the end, in this holy Poverty. J
Clare, servant of JESUS Christ, and little plant of our holy Father S. Francis,
your Mother, and sister, although unworthy, do beseech our Lord JESUS Christ,
that through the intercession of his most holy Mother, of the holy Archangel
S. Michael, and of all the holy Angels, of our holy Father S. Francis, and of
all the holy Saints, it will please him, to give and confirm in you this
Benediction, in heaven and in earth. Jn earth, by multiplying in you, graces
and virtues, in his militant Church, amongst his servants: Jn heaven, in his
Church triumphant, eleuating you among his Saints. J give you my Benediction in
my life, and after my death, in all that J am able, and more then J am able,
with all the Blessings, wherewith the Father of mercies has, or shall bless his
spiritual children, both in heaven and earth; or wherewith the spiritual Mother,
does, or shall be able to bless her spiritual Children. Amen. Be alwais lovers
of God, of your souls and of your sisters: be careful to keep that, which you
have vowed. And our Lord be alwais with you, and you with him. Amen.

An Epistle of the most Reverend Father in God Ladislaus, Lord Bishop of S.
Omers etc. To the Reuer. Mother Abbess and Religious of the order of S. Clare,
in Graueling.
Health in him, who is the spouse of Virgins, our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
AS it has a cheef place in our Pastoral solicitude, to direct and advance
those happy souls, who despysing the vanities of the world, endeavor to
attend to themselves and God, in the Euangelical perfection of a Religious
state: so is it our special duty, to open our Fatherly bosom of charity
toward you [my Dearest Daughters in Christ] whom, the right hand of God,
leading out of Egypt, and the house of bondage, has conducted over the red
sea into the land of Promise exodus 20. Deutor. 8. and safe haven of Religion:
which does not only give us just occasion, to bless our Lord of Heaven, for
having show'red his Mercies on you, Tobiae 12. but does increase our joy, and
add new glory, to see you, though poor and humble, yet to live unanimous in
the house of God, fervent in spirit; having nothing and possessing all things
Act. 3. 2. Romans 12. 2. ad Corint: 6. This Zeal of sublime Poverty, and
highest Perfection was the motive, why you humbly requested of the sea
Apostolic, to have your Constitutions, [which your selves had gathered out of
those of Blessed saint Collett] reuewed and confirmed, without any considerable
change, save only, in some few points, thereby to make them more conformable to
the sacred Canons, and the Holy Council of Trent; and which your selves by long
use, had laudably practiced; yet, in less perfection, [as you imagined] till
they were authorized and warranted by the Oracle of truth Christ's Vicar upon
earth. Whereupon, his Holiness Pope Alexander the 7. inclining unto your
requests, has been graciously pleased, out of his Fatherly love toward you,
to confirm, approve and command them hence forth, inuiolably to be observed by
you, as appears in his Breue sent unto you, bearing date, the 10. of March
1663. in the 8. year of his Popedom.

The which said Constitutions, We all so, having diligently pondered, and
maturely examined them, have signed with our hand and seal; ordaining them to
be printed, and hence forth, to be inuiolably observed by you and your
successors; promising with the Apostle, in the name of Almighty God, to
whosoever shall follow this Rule, peace to their souls and Mercy from God. ad
Galatas 6.

It will be needless for Us, to add further incitement to your already
inkindled zeal, in order to a more punctual obserua^ce of these holy Rules and
Constitutions, framed, according to the seraphical spirit of your Holy Father
S. Francis, affectuously desired by your Holy Mother S. Clare, brought into a
more practical method by the Holy Uirgin S. Collett, facilitated by your own
experience and practice, lastly approved and commanded by authority of his
Holiness the Pope of Rome, and Ours. There will need J say, noe other
incitement, then only to repeat those words used by S. Bernard in like
occasion, to the Brethren of his Order, in his 321. epistle, where he says. Oro
and obtestor vos fratres, sic facite and state in Domino Carissimi, semper
soliciti custodire Regulas Ordinis vestri, vt and Ordo vos custodiat. I beg of
you again and again [my Brethren] that you will so do and behave your selves
in our Lord [my Dearest] as to be ever solicitous, to keep the Rules of your
Order, to the end, that the Order may keep and defend you; giving us hereby to
understand, that there is a strickt kind of league and contract, betwixt the
Religion, and the Religious Person, to help and defend each other; noe other
wise, then in a strong City, whose wales defend the out-worke, and whose
outwork's protect the wales; conspiring mutually to help one an other.

Religion is that strong City, whereof the Prophet Jsay speaks in his 26.
chapt. Vrbsfortitudinis nostrae sion, Saluator ponetur in ea murus and
antemurale. Sion the City of strength, a Savior therein shall be putt a wale
and bul-worke. The wales, which make up and adorn this strong city of
Religion, what are they else, but your sacred Vow's, made at your Profession?
and what are the out-work's which fence this wale of your four Religious
Vow's, but the Constitutio^s and Rules, whereof now we treat? If the out-wale
of your Rule be observed and defended, the city of Religion will flourish, and
our Savior in it, will sleep and rest in Peace; but if this bul-work of your
Rule, suffer any detriment, or be broken down, through your carelessness or
want of resistance, a gapp is opened, the enemy [who is ever watch-ful] creeps
in, and if he be not speedily prevented, and the breach repared, by humble
acknowledgment and penance, he will make immediately, at the maine wale of your
religious Uow's, will give an all-arme, and cause disquiet and trouble to the
inhabitants of that happy City of Peace.

Think it therefore noe small matter [my Dearest Daughters in Christ] the neglect
of the least Rule or Constitution, [though it may seem little in your deceived
eye] whereby your enemy gains ground, and has open access to batter, assault,
undermine, and do mischief in that maine point, your Uow's J mean, which
mak's you inhabitants of this happy City.

Who would ever have believed, that the casting down of an handful of earth,
or a transgressing of a little Rule or Constitution, could ever have occasioned
so much euel? and yet we see, that the strongest Sampson, who was a Nazarea^,
that is a type, or figure of our Religious, in the law of Grace, became a
laughingstoch, and slave to his enemies the Philistyns, by reason only of his
careless loosing of the hair of his head.

Here J give a stop, and dare not proceed further in this similitude, for fear
J disharten you, whereas J intended your comfort, J know, that the very Just
falls seven tims a day, Prou. 24. and as long, as you are charged with these
vessels of earth, your weakness and frailty, will make you stumble, and even
faulter sometimes, against your will; yet all is not lost, noe nor perfection
diminished, but it yields double occasion to your merit and crown, if you
immediately rise again, and repair the fall, occording to virtue and rule.

Neither must you be so abused, as to conceive [saith S. Bonauenture in his
treatise of the 6. wings.] That in ill governed communities only, faults are
committed; for we all faulter in many things, says the holy Writ, Jacob. 3.
and Communities the most holy and perfect have their faults and imperfections,
as you know: but herein consists the difference, says this saint, that in
Religions which are slack and decaying, when rules and statut's are
transgressed, there is noe care taken for the correcting, or amending of them;
wher-as in a Community, that is in it is vigor of observance, noe sooner can
the least rule, or Constitution be transgressed, but by a speedy correction,
there is a mature remedy applied unto it.

Hence, superiors Consciences are severely charged, to be ever watchful, with
a rigorous, yet charitable eye, least the life and vigor of Religion should
slacken, by connyuing remissly, to let pass little transgressions of the rule,
unpunished: or rather the transgressor her self, as she tenders the honor of
her Order, and the perfection of her own soul, ought to prevent her
superiors vigila^cie, and her self to repair the breach, by a voluntary
humbling of her self, and a penal satisfying for her fault; so that, this her
free and humble pe^nance, may breed more edification and profitt, then her
former tra^sgressing, gave occasion of grief and scandal unto her sisters.

It is not our intention, [Dearly beloved in our Lord JESUS] further to oblige
you, to the observance of these your Constitutions, under pain of any sin, but
only so far forth, as God, your Rule and the Church does already oblige and
bynd you: which, Pope Eugenius the 4. in his Bull, beginning ordinis tui, has
declared unto you, and clearly set down in these words. In the Rule, says he,
there is noe other precept obliging under mortal sin, then the Vows of
Obedience, Poverty, Chastity, Enclosure, Election and Deposition of the
Abbess. Nevertheless, We exhort you all, in our Lord JESUS, to take great
heed, least deceived by corrupt nature, under pretext of not committing sin,
you make less account of the transgressing of rules, [the contempt whereof,
though in the least, were noe small sin.] Let the transgressors be therefore,
speedily corrected; and if the superiors, [which God forbid] shoul be found
negligent in correcting them, or themselves careless in their observance, or
in causing them to be observed, they shall by the Uisitor, be severely
reprehended, and enjoined penance, according to the greatness of their fault.

Jf you thus become unanimously solicitous, and careful to repair the
breaches of regular observance, your family will be truly called Nazareth [that
is florid] It will flourish and bring forth such variety of choicest flowers,
in the garden of your souls, as he, with just reason may require, who, though
supposed only a Gardener, by a Magdalen, yet shall be called Nazarean [that is
florid] him-self being the fairest flower of this garden enclosed, the first
teacher and example of sanctity, retiredness, purity and of all Euangelical
and religious perfection.

You are called and permitted to live in this school of virtue, and house of
Nazareth, in compagnie of JESUS, MARIA, JOSEPH; this grace of your so high a
calling, is the greatest of all graces; be ever grateful for it.

Let your ears and eyes be ever open to the voice of your teacher, pointing
the way, and calling after you, by the mouth of your superiors and guides.
Let your hands and hearts be ever ready to perform punctually, what he
requires of you, in your Constitutions and Rule; and if you feel a courage to
undergo great matters, even the greatest for his love, neglect not little
on's, because they are little: for, although they were in themselves little,
yet being now done for love of him, they are become great. And seeing you
perceive your selves to be spurred on, with an earnest desire to undergo
whatsoever might seem hard and difficult for love of him, give me leave [my
Dearest Daughters in Christ] to declare my mind in few words; and if J seem to
require more at your hands, then J dare presume to hope of others, that saying
of S. Gregory gives me the assurance, that when guift's or graces are
increased, the ground, or motive to add more, increases also. S. Greg. Papae
Homil. 9. in Euang. Which our Lord God has so heaped and multiplied in your
souls, that all your endeauours whatsoever, will fall far short of a co^digne
gratitude: for, he has mercifully lead you out of the house of bondage into
the land of promise, and inheritance of his Children; he has drawn you out of
ignorance and darkness, into the light of truth; he has called you out of the
confusion of Babylon and sin, and placed you in the strong Castle of well
ordered charity, this happy house of Religion J mean, where remote from
sinners, you may not only attend, with great retiredness, to God and your
selves, but procure also for others, the like blessings from heaven, and namely
for your poor Country, and the inhabitans thereof.

The which to obtain more assuredly, nothing is to be omitted by you, the
neglect whereof, might hinder the desired effect of your prayers. The habit you
wear, shows the austeritie and rigor of your Order, the Profession of your
Religion and Rule now embraced, supposes perfection in virtue already
acquired, and obliges you to strive to the attaining of more. For although you
should seem to have profited never so much in virtue, yet you must daily
endeavor to increase the same; least, by not procuring seriously to advance,
you stray vnperceiuedly from the beaten path of perfection and sanctity; which
assuredly will happen, when little obseruances, which lead you, by the more
strait and compendious way, to your end, are less esteemed, or neglected. He,
whose mind is bent to horde up riches, mak's his profitt, and increases his
stock by many a little: so he that will make progresss in virtue, must
endeavor carefully to omit nothing, that may give him furtherance in the
course undertaken. For according to that saying of holy Writ, he who
neglects little things, shall fall by little and little. Ecclesiast. 19.

Which being so, walk on [my Dearest Daughters in Christ] as you have begun,
and studiously apply your selves, to a total observance of your Holy
Constitutio^s, until at length, you arrive to the height of all perfection,
true union with God. The which, that you may faithfully perform, and happyly
attain unto, shall be our wish and prayer to God, and that he will please to
hasten on that day, wherein you may be replanted in that Land, once bearing
title of the Dowrei of the Uirgin-Mother, heretofore holy and fruitful in this
kind, but now Alas! ouerrun with Heresy and sin; until at length, when he shall
please to pick you out, for a yet more choice and Virgin soil, this Nazareth
may be again removed, and transferred, by the help of Angels, into that
heavenly Country, where, in the company of other Virgins, you may, for an
eternity, intone that song, which none can sing but Uirgins only, and
following the Lamb, whereuer he goes, enjoy for ever the chaste embracements of
your Lord and Spouse. Which from the bottom of my heart J truly wish you, and
earnestly entreat to be made partaker of your merits, and to be remembered in
your best devotions.

Given at S. Omers, under Our sign and signate. 22. January 1665. LADISLAUS
Episcopus Audomarensis.

Approbation of the Vicar's General of the Episcopal Sea vacant of S. Omers.
THE Uicar's General of the Episcopal Sea vacant of S. Omers, having read and
maturely examined the foresaid Constitutions, drawn out, according to the
Reformation of S. Collett, and the form of life delivered by S. Francis, judge
them to be very pious and laudable, proper and profitable; as framed, according
to the end proposed by holy men, and replenished with the spirit of God. We
esteem also those few things which are added or changed, most proper, both to
make the said Constitutions more conformable to the sacred Canons and Decrees
of the holy Council of Trent, as also that Religious observance, love and Unio^
with God, may take increase. Jn testimony whereof, We have signed the^ with our
hand and seal of our Vicarial office. S. Omers 13. April 1661.

I. de Longueual Decanus Audom. Petrus D'Arras Theologus Audom.


Reuision and Approbation of the most Reverend Father in God, Ladislaus Lord
Bishop of S. Omers.
Having seen the foresaid Constitutions, and Ordinations, with their
Approbation and Confirmation made by the Reverend Lords, the Vicar's General of
the Episcopal Sea of S. Omers, then Vaca^t; and having moreover perused the
like Approbation and Confirmation granted by a special Apostolical Breue, of
our most Holy Father and Lord Pope Alexander the 7. bearing date the 7. of
March 1663. all being maturely considered, and examined by Us; We, LADISLAVS
JONNART, by the Grace of God, and Apostolical Sea, Bishop of S. Omers, do
commend, approve and confirm the aforesaid Constitutio^s and Ordinations, and
command them hence forth, to be kept and observed. Jn testimony wher-of, We
have signed, and confirmed them with our hand and seal.

Given at S. Omers. the 1. of August. 1664. LADISLAVS Episcopus Audom.

An Apostolical Constitution or Breue, sent by his Holiness Pope Alexander the
7. to the Abbess and Religious of the English Monastery of Poor Clares in
Graueling; bearing date. 10. of March. 1663.
TO perpetual memory. This sacred Apostolical office, which We bear, as
derived from God, requires We take a fatherly care of those sacred Uirgins,
and devout women, who forgetting their people, and the house of their father,
have dedicated themselves to God's divine service, under the sweet yoke to
Religion. And, to the end, those Constitutions, which are prouidently ordained
for their happy direction and government, may more firmly subsist, and be more
exactly observed, it behooves, that We strengthen them with the protection of
Apostolical defense. Seeing therefore, that as our beloved Daughters in Christ,
the Abbess and Religious of the English Monastery of poor Clares, instituted
by S. Francis, living in the Town of Graueling, and the Diocese of S. Omers,
have lately proposed unto Us, that there are some statut's, Constitutions, and
Ordinations, made and approved, by their Ordinary, for their, and their
Monasteries happy and prosperous government, and that the said suppliants,
entreat and desire, that they may be stre^gthned with the patronage of Our
Apostolical Confirmation; We, desirous to honor the said suppliants with
special graces and favors; being also inclined thereunto, by the
supplications, which in their name, were humbly presented unto Us, do by these
absolve, and esteem as absolved [for the obtaining only of the effect of
these] each one of their persons, from all other Ecclesiastical sentences,
punishments and Censures contracted, by what way, or cause soever, either by
man, or law, if paraduenture, by any ways, they might be entangled therein. We,
by these present, do confirm and approve, by Apostolical Authority, the
afore-sayd statuts, Constitutions, and Ordinations, and We add unto them, the
inviolable strength of Apostolical firmness, and do supply all and particular
defects, either in fact, or law, if any, any ways should chance to have happened
[supposing they be in use, and good, permitted and approved by the Ordinary,
nor revoked, or comprised under any reuocation, nor contrary to the sacred
Canons, Apostolical Co^stitutions and Regular Jnstitute, or against the Decrees
of the Council of Trent.] We decree that these statuts, Constitutions and
Ordinations, as also these our present letters, are, and alwais shall remain
firm, valid and efficatious, and obtain and bring forth their full and
co^pleat effects, and shall, with all fulness, help those, whom at present, or
in time to come, they may any ways concern, and respectively are by them
inuiolably to be observed; and are thus to be judged and defined in the
premises, by whatsoever Ordinary, or Delegated Judges, even of those we call
of causes, of our Apostolical Palace. And if by any person, in what authority
soever, either wittingly, or willingly, any thing to the contrary shall chance
to be attempted, We declare it to be null and void, notwithstanding any thing,
in any ways to the contrary.

Given at Rome, at Sancta Maria Major, under our seal, the 10. of March. 1663.
in the 8. year of our Popedom. S. UGOLINVS.

CONSTITVTIONS AND DECLARATIONS made upon the Rule of the poor Religious
Women of our H: Mother S. CLARE.



Typis Thomae Geubels, 1665.

Permissu Superiorum.

THESE Constitutions and Declarations, are in all, conformable to those of the
glorious Uirgin S. Collett; having been translated out of an ancient copy,
sent from her Monastery at Gant, where she dyed, and conferred with many other
of her Reformation: only there are certain few alterations and additions, to
make them more conformable to the H: Council of Trent and the sacred Canons:
particularly in the election of the Abbess; partly also, the better to submitt
to the Obedience and Jurisdiction of the Bishop of the Diocese, and partly to
increase Religious Observance, love and union with God, in mental prayer,
yearly renouation of Vows and the use of discipline; whereof, noe mention is
made, in the aforesaid Declarations of S. Collett.

Of the Obligation of the Rule and their subjection to the Ordinary. J. CHAPT.
1. Whereas, in the very beginning and other places of the Rule, it is often
mentioned, that the Rule, or form of life, of the Order of the poor Sisters,
which the Glorious Father S. Francis has instituted, does consist in the
observing and keeping of the holy Ghospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; they may
demand, how far forth, they bind themselves to the obserua^ce of the holy
Ghospel, by force of their Vow, made at their Profession; wherein they promise
to observe the form of life, which is their Rule it self. To this doubt we
answer them, conformably to what has been declared, by sundry Popes, namely
by Nicolas the third and Clement the first, when their resolutio^s were
required by the Friar-Minors, in the like doubts, arysing out of their Rule: to
wit, that the Sisters by force of Vow, made in their Profession, obliging
themselves to the observance of the form of life, do noe otherwise bind
themselves to the keeping of the Ghospel, then other Christians; that is,
precepts are to be observed as precepts, counsels as counsels; those counsels
excepted, which in their form of life, are expressed, or do import the name
of precepts. To other counsels, they are only obliged after the ordinary
manner of other Christians; saving only, they endeavor to go beyond the
perfection of the ordinary strain of Christians; having freely devoted
themselves to Christ, by their Profession, which may justly require a more
strict following of his footsteps.

2. A like doubt may arise, how the Obligation of the Rule under mortal sin,
is to be understood. Wher-vnto we answer briefly, with Pope Eugenius the 4.
to wit, that the Rule contains noe other precepts, then the Uow's of
Obedience, Poverty, Chastity, Enclosure, Deposition and Election of the
Abbess.

3. For as much as concerns Obedience due to their immediate, or highest
superiors; it is to be noted, that although in the first chapter of S.
Clare's Rule, mention is made of Obedience, which the Sisters are to yeald to
the superiors of the Order, in these words. And as in the beginning of her
conversion, she with her Sisters, promised Obedience to S. Francis: so, in
like manner, does she promise to observe the like Obedience inuiolably to all
his successors; and the other Sisters are always bound to obey the
successors of S. Francis. Yet these words are so to be understood, that they
express her Obedience, in those her beginnings, to S. Francis and his
successors, by way only, of respect and devotion toward him, from whom she
received her H: Rule. But in process of time, different Monasteries of S.
Clare, have, for just reasons, humbly requested, of the Sea Apostolic, an
exemption from the Order: the which, the said Sea, was graciously pleased to
grant them; subiecting them by Bull, to the Obedience of the Ordinary, or
Bishop of the Diocese where they reside; as appears namely, in the Bull of
Pope Jnnocent the fourth, beginning Recto assumpto tramite: the which original
is yet extant in the Convent of the Friar-Minors at Paris. And the Monastery
of poor Clares at Graueling, has by especial grant of Pope Urban the 8. of
happy memory, obtained an exemption from the Order, and a subjection to the
Ordinary the Lord Bishop of S. Omers; as appears by their copies above
annexed.

Of the entering into this Religion. JJ. CHAPT.
1. ALthough it be mentioned in the beginning of the second Chapter of the
form of life, that the Abbess may admit any one for Religious; consent of
the greater part of the Sisters, and of the Lord Cardinal Protector of the
Order, being first obtained: We nevertheless; considering the great
difficulties, and extraordinary expenses, not agreeing with your strickt
Poverty, which must necessarily follow, by having frequent recourse to the
said Lord Cardinal, in regard of the distance of place, which, in the beginning
of the Order, could not arise; being then fewer in number, and nearer to the
Court of Rome; and reflecting also, that by grant of the Sea Apostolic, you
are now immediately subject to the Ordinary, the Bishop of the Diocese: We J
say declare, that leave first obtained of the said Ordinary, and the
Conditions specified in your form of life, observed, you may admit unto your
holy habit, all such, who despising the vanities of the world, shall by you, be
judged deserving.

2. We therefore declare, observing the ordinance of Pope Jnnocent the fourth,
that when any person shall present her self to the embracing of your holy Order:
before she cha^geth her secular habit into that of Religion, the most hard and
difficult points to be observed in Religion, shall be first declared unto her;
so that, after her reception, she may have noe occasion to excuse her self by
ignorance, or misunderstanding. And none moreover, are to be admitted, who, for
age, corporal infirmity, or natural simplicity, shall be less able to
undertake this course of life; it oftentimes happening, that the state and
vigor of Religion, is by such like persons, much slack'ned and destroyed.

3. Moreover, We will, and ordain, that in the receptio^ of any one unto your
Order, this ensuing method be observed. That she, who is to be received, be
first sent unto some discreet person, fearing God, and a lover of Poverty; by
whose advise and counsel, her means and estate may be distributed unto the
poor. And special regard is to be had, and care taken, by the Abbess and
Sisters, that neither by themselves, or others, their Convent be enriched, by
the goods of the person so to be received, unless the thing were so
vnco^siderable, that none may take occasion thereby, to judge sinisterly of you;
or unless she, who enters, would of her own free will, bestow something on
you, as on poor people, to relieve, by way of alms, your present, or
neer-hand necessities; the Rule requiring, that those, who enter, be free to
dispose of their goods, as God shall inspire them.

4. The Abbess and other Sisters shall take care, least for the receiving of
any, unto Religion, they make, or permit any contract or bargain to be made,
for themselves, or others, by any person whatsoever, wherein might be feared any
appeara^ce of simonie: neither shall they permit such, as are to be received,
to retain any thing for themselves, of their temporal riches: to the end, that
being wholly despoiled of all things created, they may more entirely resign
themselves, into the hands of their Crucified Lord. And if it should so
happen, that some one, desirous to continue with you, could not be able to ridd
her self so soon, of all her temporal riches, let her then deliver her said
riches over, into the hands of some persons fearing God, to be distributed by
the^, unto the poor.

5. And to the end, they proceed more regularly for time to come, We ordain,
that none be received unto your form of life, unless you perceive, they come
unto it, not moved by persuasion, or Fear of any person, nor by slight
motions, or constraint, but induced by strong motives of the greater love of
God, and saving of their souls; their free will being chiefly moved thereunto,
by a true call and inspiration of the holy Ghost.

6. We ordain moreover, that, according to the sacred Council of Trent, the
Nouice be examined by the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, or some other deputed by
him, before she be admitted unto her Profession. And to the end, this be ever
duly observed, let the Abbess remember to advertise the said Lord Bishop, at
the least, a month before the year be expired. The like is to be observed,
comfortable to the Rule in the second chapter, before she begins her
Nouitiate.

7. They shall also take an especial care, that none be received into the Order,
except she be of a ready free will, a faithful Catholic, sound in body and
mind, discharged and freed of all her temporal mean's, not suspected of
Heresy, or noted of public infamy, not tied with sentence of
Excommunication, or Jnterdict; and if she should chance to be entangled in the
aforesaid like sentence, let her first be lawfully absoluted; according to
the privileges granted to the Order: yet so, that if she return to the
world, it be signified unto her, that her absolutio^ will resume it is first
force and vigor.

8. Let her not be of a servile, but of a free condition. Jf she be engaged to
any one, she shall not enter, without their license be first obtained, to whom
she is engaged. Although the Council of Trent allows the age of sixteen, yet
the austeritie and rigor of your habit and Rule considered, none shall be
admitted unto Profession, before the age of seauenteene completed.

9. None shall ordinarily be admitted for a Quire Sister, unless she be able,
by her self, or with others, to recite the divine office. Neither shall she
exceed the age of 25. unless she were judged capable, without any great
difficulty to her self or others, to learn and say the divine office. Let
none be received unto Profession, of whom it is not manifest, that she has
lived virtuously, from the age of 13. until the time of her reception. None
shall be received after the age of 40. unless such were her nobility joined
with equal piety, that her admittance might be a singular example of virtue
unto the people and Clergy, and she, strong and able enough to serve God and
the Order laudably; according to your state, and form of life.

10. Moreover, that none Professed of any other Order, be received unto your
form of life, without license first obtained of her Abbess, or privilege from
the Sea Apostolic.

11. Jn like manner, if it be apprehended, that the Profession of the Nouice
might be doubtful, the Abbess, before the year be expired, shall, in presence
of the Sisters, declare unto her, that, notwithstanding her probation ended,
she has noe right unto Religion, until by mature deliberation, it be resolved,
what ought to be done in order to her Profession, or return unto the world.

12. The time of their Profession approaching, their hair shall be cut of
round, and above the ears; and from that time forward, they are not permitted
to let it grow; which often in the year, by appointment of the Abbess, all
the Sisters are likewise to observe, unless, for health's sake, it were thought
convenient to permit the contrary.

13. When they receive any to Profession, the party kneeling before the
Abbess, shall pronounce, with a high and clear voice, leasurely and with the
greatest devotion she is able, the Profession, as follows.

In nomine Patris and Filij and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.
I, Sister N. do vow unto Almighty God, the Glorious Virgin Mary, our Holy
Father S. Francis, our Holy Mother S. Clare, unto all the Holy Saints and you
Reverend Mother Abbess, and all your successors, succeding in your place, to
observe, all the day's of my life, the Rule and form of life of the poor
Sisters of S. Clare, which has been given by S Francis unto the said saint
Clare, and has been confirmed by our Holy Father Pope Innocent the fourth;
living in OBEDIENCE, without PROPRIETY, and in CHASTITY, also observing
INCLOSVRE, according to the ordinance of the said Rule.

Then the Abbess, who does receive her, promises unto her, (if she does
observe, what she has vowed) eternal life.

Of the manner, and quality of their habit, and other garments. JJJ. CHAPT.
1. Whereas it is contained in the Rule, or form of life, that the Sisters be
clothed with poor and mean clothes, we declare first, that this poverty or
meanness is to be understood, of the price and color of the clothes. For,
albeit the Rule does mention, that taking away the secular clothes from her,
who is to enter into this Religion, the Abbess shall lend her three coats, and
one cloak: nevertheless, if the condition of the person, place, time,
necessity, or infirmity require otherwise, we declare, conformable also unto
your Rule, that the Abbess, with counsel of her Discreet, may duly provide,
and charitably relieve her, with such necessary clothing, as shall be judged
convenient.

2. It is to be noted, that the three coats mentioned in the form of life,
ought not, of necessity, to be all of the same form, color and fashion; the
two undermost being only granted for warmness, and decency.

3. Moreover We ordain, that the uppermost garment, be esteemed the habit of
the Order: without which, it shall not be lawful for any of the Sisters to
appear in public, or to sleep; unless, by reason of some great sickness,
weakness, or other manifest necessity, the Abbess, or her Uicaress, with
counsel of her Discreet, should judge it otherwise expedient.

4. The habit shall not be so long, that in wearing, it traleth upon the
grownd: and in breadth, it shall not exceed the compass of 16. palms. The
length of the sleeves shall not reach beyond the wrist. The vnder-garments shall
be made of poor and coars cloth, or searge, not lined with furrs, but with
some other meaner kind of things, and that, according to each ones necessity.
Their Cloak also, shall be of mean and coars cloth, and shall not be curiously
pleated about the neck, nor so long, that it trale upon the grownd: but in all
their garments, as well in the Abbess and Officers, as in all the other Sisters,
equality, austeritie and poverty, both in form, price and color, ought
alwais to appear. The girdle, with which the sisters are girded, shall be of
common hair, or hemp-cord, without any curiosity, or show of vanity.

5. Furthermore We appoint, that both Abbess and Sisters, without distinction,
do humbly, decently and religiously veil their heads. And to the end, this
may the better be observed, We ordain likewise, that the Sisters, putt on
their kerchers in such a way, that the greatest part of their forehead, cheeks
and chin be covered; so that, none may ever behold their full face. Their
kercher and veil, shall be of such a breadth, and so put on, that for the
most part, their head, breast and shoulders be equally covered.

6. We will also, that their vailes and kerchers, be of ordinary and plain
linning; so that alwais holy poverty, and the rigor of their profession, may
appear in them; allowing that the Sisters, with consent of the Abbess, may have
black vailes and white kerchers for change, as requisite to conserve
cleanliness and decency. Let them also diligently take care, that their
kerchers be never pleated, or curiously foulded; nor shall they have vailes of
silk, or other costly matter: for all kind of superfluity is carefully to be
avoided, least holy poverty thereby, should be endomaged.

7. All black vailes are prohibited to Nouices, during their Nouitiate; unless
they have formerly been of an other Order: but they shall be decently veiled
with a white kercher, according to the appointment of the Abbess, and custom
hitherto observed.

8. To the end, they may the better resemble him, who said, the foxes have
holes, and the birds their neasts, but the son of man, has not where to rest
his head; as also, that they may be more vigilant and prompt in rising unto
Matins, and more conformable unto their holy Mother S. Clare, who often laid
upon the bare ground, or rather the better to imitate the Holy of Holyes JESUS
CHRIST our Lord, who had noe other bed; living in the desert, then the ground,
and dying on mount Caluarie, then the Cross, We ordain, that noe Sisters shall
sleep otherwise, then upon a sack, and pillows filled with straw; one of flox
being added, for their head, and couerlids, as necessity shall require. But
with such, as are weak and sickly, the Abbess must, with charity, dispense: as
is contained in the Rule, or form of life.

9. Furthermore, We ordain, that in imitation of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, and
of your Holy Mother S. Clare, you go barefoot, in sign of humility, poverty
and mortification; contenting your selves with wooden sandals under your feet,
fast'ned on, with a list.

Of the Divine Office. JU. CHAPT.
1. FOr as much as concerns the divine office, which, day and night they shall
pay, as a debt due unto God, let it be observed, that immediately, after the
first peale given to the Canonical hours, all the Sisters [vnlesse, with leave
and appointment of the Abbess, or Uicaress, they should be lawfully hindred]
are to repair unto the Quier; there to remain, unanimously, preparing their
hearts for God, in recollection, silence, religious gravity, and due
reverence, as the presence of so great a Majesty, whom the Angels assist,
does require.

2. None shall presume to depart the Quire, during the time of the divine
office, without license first obtained of the Abbess, or her substitute.

4. We exhort all the Sisters in our Lord JESUS Christ, that they alwais recite
the divine office entirely and distinctly with due attention and devotion: the
which, all shall equally begin; observing their pauses, and continuing the same
note unto the end: so that, the great office shall be read, with a higher and
more leasurely voice, then that of the Blessed Virgin, or of the Dead. And by
how much greater the feast is, so much the more sole^nly ought the Office to
be performed. For if honor and reverence be to be given to terrene Princes,
how much more without comparison, ought it to be exhibited to the King of Kings?

4. For as much, as co^cernes the ringing to Mass, and the Canonical hours,
together with the postures in sitting, kneeling, bowing and standing, the
Sisters shall observe the customs of the Friar-Minors; such ceremonies
excepted, which are less agreeing with your sex.

5. Moreover, noe sister, of what quality or condition soever; being able to
read, shall be excused either day, or night, from the Quire, but all are bound
to be present at Mass and Canonical hours; the Jnfirme excepted, with their
attendance, together with such, who, with license of the Abbess, or Vicaress,
are otherwise hindered in some necessary emploiment of the Convent. Forwhich
reason, all who are in office, shall as near as may be, so dispose of their
times and offices, that as much as lies in them, they endeavor to be present
in the Quire, and perform this duty with the rest.

6. Furthermore, We ordain that the two day's between the feast of S. Clare,
and the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, the office be of S. Clare, with nine
lessons. The day's following within her octaue, a Commemoration of S. Clare at
Benedictus, and Magnificat. And since her octaue day falls upon the feast of
S. Lewis Confessor, which is duplex mains, a commemoration shall be made of
Saint Clare, both in Euensong and Laud's, as on her feast.

8. We will also, that in time of a General Jnterdict, the Sisters conform
themselves unto the principal Church of the City, or place where they reside:
as soon as the said Jnterdict shall be lawfully intimated unto them by those,
whom it concerns, or by other certain Messangers, or letters. The doors of
the Church being shutt, and the excommunicated excluded, the Sisters shall
recite the divine office, after the same manner, as according to custom, they
use to say the office of the Blessed Uirgin on simple feasts. But if it so
fall out, that any of the Sisters, or of the deputed to the service of the
Convent, should in time of the said Jnterdict, be sick, or depart this life;
the forbidden or excommunicated, as aforesaid, being excluded, they may bury,
or communicate them: but with a low voice; so that nothing be omitted,
appertaining to the office, funerals, or communion.

8. Whereas it is contained in the form of life, that the Sisters, who can
read, must say the office of the Dead, without mentioning day, hour, manner, or
with what obligation they are to discharge it, such is the obscurity of the
Rule, and variety of opinions, and writings concerning it, that nothing has
as yet been determined. We therefore, to take away all further scruple and
doubt, which might arise, and the better to relieve the faithful departed, will
and ordain, that hence forward, the Sisters say every day, the office of the
Dead, with one Nocturne and Laud's, as heretofore they have been accustomed,
and the Abbess shall judge convenient; thursday, friday and saturday in the holy
week excepted, as also Easter day, with the two days following, Corpus Christi
and Christmasse day. The time to be appointed for this one Nocturne, and the
power to dispense with the said Dierge, is left to the discretion of the
Abbess, as she, with the advice of the Discreet, shall judge most convenient for
the Community. The Sisters, who cannot read, shall say likewise every day, the
office of the Dead, with some Pater nosters; as is contained in the form of
life.

9. Seeing Prayer is so very necessary for those, who make progress in the
way of virtue, and union with God; We ordain, that two hours be every day
appointed for prayer; the on in the morning after Tierce, before the Conuentual
Mass, the other after Euensong. Which two hours, are to be observed, unless,
for just causes, the second, should by the judgment of the Abbess, be thought
fit to be omitted: but if the causes of omissio^ should happen more frequent:
then she shall require the advice of her Discreet. Those, who by emploiments of
Obedience are hindered from this second hour of prayer, shall only be obliged
unto the first. The quarter after Compline is appointed for their daily examen
of conscience.

10. Moreover, We require of all those, who can conveniently attend unto it,
that in imitation of the retirement of the Apostles, after the Ascension of our
Lord, and the better to dispose themselves for the receiving of the Holy Ghost,
and renewing of their Uowes, [which We desire may always be on the feast of
Pentecost] they employ, at the least, some of those ten days in recollection
and prayer. The place of renewing their sacred Vows, shall be the Quire, in
presence of the most Blessed Sacrament, according to the form prescribed.

11. To the end, the body may become subject unto the spirit, and in memory of
the sacred Passion of our sweet Lord and Savior, especially of his most cruel
flagellation, We ordain, that the Sisters take a discipline twice a week, in
time of Lent and Aduent, that is, on mondays and frydays; but for the rest of
the year, once a week only, to wit, upon frydays; during the space of the
Psalms Miserere: and De profundis: the Antiphones Ne reminiscaris: Christus
factus est: and the prayers Respice quaesumus: Deus cui pr^prium: and Fidelium
Deus.

Of Abstinence. U. CHAPT.
IT being contained in the form of life, that the Sisters are always to fast,
We declare hence, that abstinence from slesh, is every where, and at all times
to be observed: and although leave be given in the same Rule, that on
Christmasse day, on what day soever it happens, two meals may be taken:
neuertheless, it is to be understood, that upon that day, they are to abstain
from flesh, as upon all the sondays in the year, on the which it is lawful to
make two refections, such as all Christians use to make, on all sondays in
Lent; according to the custom and ordinatio^ of the holy Church.

2. Although it be contained in the said form of life, that the Abbess may
charitably dispense with the young and weak, as she shall think it expedient:
nevertheless, the necessity of this dispensation can not ordinarily be
assigned; it often happening, that some, at the age of thirteen, are of more
strength, then others at sixteen, and some more weakened with a short and
light infirmity, then others with a long and violent sickness: for which
reason, We exhort all in our Lord, that in all occasions, they so prudently
behave themselves, that in imitation of JESUS Christ, their zeal may rather
appear in charity, then in ouergreat and indiscreet austeritie; yet so, that
the Abbess shall not easily dispense, unless true necessity require it:
because, by such like dispensation the first spirit of many Orders has decayed
and failed.

3. Nevertheless, the Abbess, or Uicaress, with counsel of the Discreet, may
dispense with the young, weak and infirm, that often in the day, they take
refection, when it shall be judged needful; seeing that Superiors are as much
obliged to relieve and comfort them in point of diett, as in other necessaries.

4. Moreover, We appoint, that diligent care be taken by the Abbess, for the
equal distributing of Alms unto the Co^munitie; according to the quality
thereof: least the want of sufficient maintenance, might give occasion to the
Sisters, of interrupting their virtuous courses and pious exercises.

Of Confession and holy Communion. UJ. CHAPT.
1. TO the end, that purity of body and mind, may increase and flourish in the
Sisters of this Order, by love and devotion toward the most holy Sacrament of
the altar; We ordain, that over and above the number of twelve times in the
year, expressed in the form of life, wherein the Sisters, with leave of the
Abbess, are to confess, and the seven times specified in the said form,
wherein they are to communicate, they may besides [vnless they be lawfully
hindered] confess twice every week, and receive as often, the most precious
body of our Lord, at the Conuentual Mass, with the greatest devotion and
humility they are able.

2. We grant also, that the Abbess with counsel of her Discreet, may permit
them more frequent use of holy Communion, when it shall seem conducing to their
progress in virtue, and increase in devotion; yet fearing, least so great a
work be performed carlessly, and through custom, We seriously exhort them, in
our Lord, to prepare themselves, and to approach unto it, with the greatest
devotion and reverence imaginable.

3. We ordain also, that noe Sister, under what color, or pretense soever,
presume to confess to any Confessor, whither secular, or regular, of what
condition, or quality he may happen to be, then to the Confessor of the
Convent: in whom is required maturitie, virtue and prudence. Jn this
notwithstanding, the Abbess may dispense, and give leave unto any Sister [when
the cause shall seem just and reasonable] to have the freedom of an other
Confessor; not doubting, but God will mercifully incline the hearts of
superiors, to the affording of such charity, compassion and true freedom of
conscience, as shall be expedient for them.

4. Moreover, We ordain with our holy Mother the Catholic Church, for the
greater comfort and freedom of such souls, as are weak and pusillanimous,
conformable also unto the decrees of the sacred Council of Trent, commanding
all Bishops and superiors of Monasteries, to present them twice, or oftener in
the year, with an extraordinary Confessor, who is to receive the Confessions
of the Religious, We ordain J say, that the Sisters present themselves unto
him; demanding at the least, his Benediction, [to avoid the note of
singularitie] if their difficulty in confessing unto him can not be overcome;
which by all, is punctually to be observed. And great diligence is to be taken
by the Abbess, that noe extraordinary be admited, unless whom the Lord Bishop
and she shall groundedly esteem, will give satisfaction unto all, or the
greatest part of the Community.

5. Furthermore, We ordain, that none shall confess after Compline, or Tierce
begun, unless the number of Confessions, or some other just cause, approved by
the Abbess, should require otherwise.

6. And although in the form of life, it be esteemed lawful, for the Chaplain
to celebrate Mass, and communicate the sick, within the Monastery: We
nevertheless, for the avoiding many inconveniences, and dangers, which from
thence may arise, command the Abbess, Portresses and all others, whom it may
concern, that at noe time, they permit any Priest, whither secular, or
regular, to say Mass, or give the holy Communion to any Sisters within the
Monastery; such only excepted, who by reason of sickness, or some contagious
disease, cannot be present with the rest in the Church, without detriment to
themselves, or others. For in this case, We grant, that seven times in the
year, as is contained in the form of life, or oft'ner also, if the Abbess
with her Discreet, shall judge it convenient for the comfort of the sick, the
Confessor with his Compagnion [if the poverty of the Monastery can allow him
one] may enter, to perform his holy function.

Of the Observance of Enclosure. UJJ. CHAPT.
1. WE declare with Pope Jnnocent the 4. that those, who bind themselves by
Vow, unto this form of life, ought, and are obliged to observe perpetual
Jnclosure; so that, for the whole term of their life, they shall not exceed
the limitts of the Monastery. Neither can any leave, or power, to the
contrary, be granted unto them, unless it be, for the founding, reforming,
governing of some other Monastery, or for the avoiding of some inevitable
danger, and that, with express leave of the Ordinary [if it may be]
conformable to the sacred Council of Trent. And if any one, or more, for the
aforesaid causes, should depart their Monastery, We ordain, that they go
unto the Convent, or place assigned, with what speed they may, in company of
virtuous persons, alwais recollected, vigilant in their words, mortified in
their sight, and modest in their countenance, and whole composure; as beseems
the handmaids of JESUS Christ, and daughters of S. Clare.

2. Whereas it is mentioned in the form of life, that the Lay-Sisters, not
being tied by Uow of Jnclosure, had liberty, for the service of the
Monastery, to go abroad, and return, as occasion should serve: We not
withstanding, foreseeing the evident dangers, which by this occasion, may
happen to the Sisters and Convent, ordain, conformably to the institute and
appointment of Pope Benedict the 12. that from henceforth, noe professed
Sisters, unless for the aforesaid causes, presume to depart the Jnclosure;
Commanding all the Sisters present and future, of what state, or Condition
soever, alwais to observe inuiolably the aforesaid ordination; so that none
hereafter, shall presume, under title of Lay-Sisters, servants, or what cause
soever, [the aforesaid excepted] to exceed the limitts of perpetual Jnclosure.

3. Nevertheless, if it shall happen hereafter, that servants are esteemed
needful, for the occasions of the Monastery, We permit them to make use of
some pious and aged women; yet so, as they are never permitted to wear the
habit of Religion, or to enter into the Monastery.

4. More-ouer, We ordain, that in every Convent, there be erected in some
conspicuous place, one only Wheel or Turn, of a convenient height, and
wideness, and so rounded, that none, on either side, discern, in the least,
through any chink's, or creuises: by which Turn, the Sisters may receive, or
send forth, all necessaries for the Monastery; but if the things be so
considerable, that they can not be conveyed by the said Turn, they may then be
sent forth, or received, by the Monastery, or back Gate.

5. Jn like manner, We ordain, for the greater security and purity of the
Religious and Convent, that for the future, noe other Grate, or Turn be
permitted; excepting those which are before expressed.

6. Furthermore, We will, that near the Turn, there be erected a speaking place,
well fenced with iron pikes, where the Religious may speak, when need shall be;
according to the manner expressed in the form of life, and these present
ordinations.

7. Moreover, We ordain, that within the Jnclosure of the Monastery, oppositt
unto the principal gate, an other gate be made; so that the Sisters be wholly
debarred, from any access unto the outward, or principal gate: in such sort,
that their persons or voices, may in noe ways, be discerned, by seculars
without. We Ordain likewise, that the gardin, and dormitorie doors, be every
night securely locked

8. For greater security, and the avoiding of future inconveniences, We also
ordain, that noe Sister, of what condition soever, shall send, or cause to be
sent any letter, or writings, opened, or sealed, either by themselves, or
others, to any person, by any means, or ways whatsoever, until the aforesaid
letters, or writings, be first perused, sealed, or caused to be sealed, by the
Abbess, or her substitute; nor shall any presume to receive, or open any
letters, unless first delivered unto the Abbess, or Vicaress; unto whose
prudence is reserved the giueing, or not giving them, unto whom they are
directed: and the Sister that shall attempt any thing to the contrary, shall be
liable to exemplar punishment.

Of the Election of the Abbess, Discreet and other Officers. UJJJ. CHAPT.
1. TO the end, the Sisters may proceed with greater security in this
election, We will and ordain, that when the Abbess of any Convent shall depart
this life, or be detained, by some long infirmity, from exercising her office,
or shall be found guilty of any enormous crime, and grievous offense against
her Rule, or holy observance, or when she, for some co^siderable cause, would
renounce her charge, three day's after her death, or after her deposition, or
renuntiation of her office, the Professed Sisters shall provide themselves of
an other Abbess; observing in the Election the Canonical form prescribed in
the Council of Trent, that the Person elected, has accomplished, at the least,
the age of 30. years, and lived laudably in Religion, the space of seven, or
eight years, after her Profession.

2. Jn the Election of the Abbess, this form must be observed. The third day
after her departure, as aforesaid, the Vicaress shall by letter, or otherwise,
acquaint the Bishop of the death, or deposition of the Abbess, and shall request
him to preside at the election of an other, by either himself, or his
substitute. The^ they shall elect beforeha^d, two witnesses, or Assistents,
prudent and pious men, and Priests, if they can conveniently be had, who may
assist the Bishop, or his substitute; that so the Election may be more
securely performed, without partiality, or injustice, according to the
prescripts of the holy Canons.

3. Until the arriual of the Bishop, or his Deputy, the Sisters shall offer
continual and fervent prayer to Almighty God; humbly beseeching him, to
dispose all things to the honor and glory of his Divine Majesty. And We
command, in virtue of Holy Obedience, that the Sisters do not speak unto one
an other, concerning the Election, either by way of counsel, or otherwise;
saying, this or that person seems to me fit, or what think you of such an one:
but let each one referr the Election to the instinct of the Holy Ghost. Let
special regard be had in all Elections, that they proceed sincerely, piously
and Canonically, without dissension; that being united in peace and charity,
they may make choice of her, whom they shall esteem most fit for the good of
the Religious, and advancement of the Monastery.

4. For the better uniting and conforming the Sisters to the divine will, a
Mass shall be celebrated of the Holy Ghost: at the which, all shall receive the
Blessed Sacrament, that so they may proceed more securely in the Election of
the Abbess; wherein this method is to be observed by the Vicaress. She must
write, or cause to be written in the same hand, twice or thrice, as many
biglietts, as there are Professed Sisters; and in each bigliett these words shall
be written. J choose for our R. Mother Abbess Sister N. and the Vicaress shall
deliver to each of the Profes't Religious a bigliett, wherein the Sister shall
write the name of her, whom she thinks in conscience, and in the sight of God,
to be most fit for that office. The Bishop, or his Deputy being arrived,
shall, in order to the future Election, make an exhortation to all the Sisters
assembled at the Grate, in the Quire: and the exhortation ended, the Religious
retyring, shall return in order, unto the Bishop, or Deputy, and cast their
bigliets [in which they have written her name, who^ they elect for Abbess] into
a cup, or vessel prepared for that purpose; and the Bishop, or superior,
showing them unto the Witnesses, or Assistents, shall in order, declare how many
votes, or suffrages each one has, that stands in Election; beginning from
her, that has fewest, and so proceeding unto the rest. She, shall be thought
truly chosen, whose suffrages shall exceed the half part of the Community. And
if it happens, that none be chosen the first scrutinie, they shall in like
manner, proceed unto a second, or third, and so forwards, until their be an
Abbess elected.

5. Which ended, and the suffrages published, the Bishop, or his Deputy shall
confirm the Election in the name of the Father, and of the son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen. Te Deum laudamus being said by the Sisters, the Bishop shall
conclude it with Deus qui cordae fidelium, Concede nos, and the two versicles
and collects of S. Francis, and S. Clare, Confirma hoc Deus, and Actiones. Then
the Religious embracing their new Mother, shall acknowledge her for their true
and lawful Abbess and superior. The same order shall be observed, in the
Election of the Uicaress, Discreet, and other Officers, which they shall choose
by word of mouth only, and without writing. And for these Elections, the
greater part of the voices shall suffice. The Vicaress, together with the other
officers, shall be presented every three years, unto the suffrages of the
Community: in whose power it shall be, to confirm, or depose the^; according
as they shall judge expedient. None shall be elected unto any office, not having
lived laudably four years in Religion, and accomplished the age of 25.
years; unless the contrary should be judged necessary. Three years of
Profession are required unto those, who have suffrages in the Election of
officers, but in the choice of the Abbess, all the Professed shall have an
active voice.

6. To the end, peace, love and purity of conscience, may the more flourish,
and be preserved amongst the Sisters, We exhort them in our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
that in all Elections, or changing of Officers and Discreet, they avoid all
ambition, discord and partiality, in promoting persons less worthy, and
suppressing others more fit; for in such proceedings, their consciences would
be much blemished and stained.

7. The Sisters shall not, in the Election of the officers, take counsel of one
an other, by directly, or indirectly approving, or disaprouing of any. But let
them commend the business unto Almighty God, with fervent prayer, and sincere
desire of his glory, and of the common peace, and good of the Monastery. The
Election ended, they shall not dispute, or deliver their opinions, concerning
what passed in order to the Election, or remoual of any Sister; or by way of
discourse, mention, unto whom they gave, or denied their suffrage: but let
them rest satisfied in the choice and Election, as comfortable unto the holy
will of God.

8. Moreover, We admonish the^, that none, being lawfully elected to any
office, do decline the burden, or labor imposed upon them; but that humbly
accepting it, as from the hand of God, they endeavor conformably to perform
their duty, according to the grace bestowed on the^; not desirous to be
exempted, without just cause, approved with mature advise; but rather embracing
their charge, with true obedience and love of God. And if it should so happen,
that they were removed from their office, they must with indiffere^cie, resign
themselves; conformably to that saying of holy S. Francis: let the taking
from superiority noe more disquiet you, then the remouall from the employment
of washing the Sisters feet.

The manner of holding Chapter. JX. CHAPT.
1. IT being contained in the form of life, that the Abbess is enjoined to
assemble the Sisters, at the least, once a week in Chapter: We appoint
accordingly, that she, or her Uicaress take care, in assigning an hour
thereunto, in which all the Sisters not hindered by infirmity, must be
present. A second, or third Chapter may be also adioyn'd in the week, according
to the number of the Sisters, and variety of occasions; regard being alwais
had to the dinine office and domestical discipline.

2. As often, as it shall please the Abbess to assemble the Sisters unto
Chapter, the sign of Obedience shall be given, by a soft toling of the bell;
whereunto all the Sisters, that are not hindered, either with infirmity,
obedience, or care of the sick, shall repair with speed and diligence; and the
Abbess, or Vicaress making the sign of the Cross, shall reco^mend the living
and the dead; naming, in particular, those benefactours, from whom they have
received any alms. Which ended, they shall all rise, and begin the Psalms Ad
te leuaui oculos, De profundis, and other suffrages, assigned in their proper
place: and the Abbess shall conclude, saying Deus det nobis suam pacem; the
Sisters answering Amen. After which, the Abbess and Religious being seated, the
Nouices [if there be any] shall in the first place, tell their faults; and a
penance being enjoined them by the Abbess, or Vicaress, they shall depart, to
pray for the rest.

3. After their departure, all the Professed Sisters, prostrate on the grownd,
shall in general, humbly confess their faults, and receive a penance,
according to the discretion of the Abbess: which done, each one likewise in
particular, beginning from the youngest, shall distinctly and humbly acknowledge
those faults, of which they shall judge themselves most guilty; to whom the
Abbess, or Vicaress shall impose a penance, occording to the quality of the
fault, and if necessary, friendly admonish and correct them, without the least
sign of partiality.

4. The Sisters shall humbly admit, and piously perform their enjoined
penance; not presuming to bring excuses, or speak in Chapter without leave of
the Abbess, much less to contradict either here, or in any place whatsoever.

5. They shall not exprobrate, to one an other, the faults reprehe^ded in
Chapter, or committed, either in the world, or in Religion: and if any shall
happen to be guilty of this crime, she shall be liable to such chastisement, as
the Abbess shall think fit.

6. If any thing of business shall further occur to be discussed, it may be
now treated; according to the form of life, with due gravity and modesty;
inordinate and superfluous words being avoided. The Abbess at the end, making
the sign of the Cross, and saying Adiutorium nostru^ in nomine Domini, and
the Sisters answering qui fecit coelum and terram, they shall all depart in
peace.

Of silence, and the manner of speaking at the Grate, and Speak-house. X. CHAPT.
1. PEace being a work of Justice, and silence a bulwork and defense of peace,
least the fervor of devotion should grow cold by frequent and inordinate
discourse, We ordain, that conformably to the form of life, from the end of
Compline unto the end of Tierce the next day, silence be exactly observed.

2. Jn the Quire and Dormitorie, they shall observe perpetual silence, and in
the Refectorie, in time of refection: but not in the Jnfirmarie; as is
prescribed in the form of life. And although noe mention be made of silence in
the Cloister, for that in the time of S. Clar's receiving the form of life
from S. Francis, in the Monastery of S. Damian, where she then resided, by
reason of their great poverty, and scarcity of place, noe Cloister was
erected; We, notwithstanding, diligently pondering, that in all well ordered
Communities, the Cloister is ever joined unto the Church, in which, silence is
accustomed to be observed, prescribe and ordain, that for the future, silence
be as well observed in the Cloister, as in other places mentioned in the form
of life.

3. Moreover, We command, that noe Sisters of what condition soever, go to the
speak-house, without license of the Abbess, or Uicaress; or leave being
obtained, speak with any; unless in the presence of two Discreet, who may
clearly hear and perceive, what is discoursed. For if at the Grate in the
Church, three Discreet are assigned, where thy are in the presence of God, and
his Angels: with how much more reason, ought two at least, be present, with
such as have leave to discourse in the Speakhouse.

4. We ordain likewise, that according to the form of life, noe Sister ever
presume to speak unto any extern at the Gate of the Monastery, either in
presence, or absence of her companions. We will moreover, when necessity, or
just occasion shall urge any Sister to speak at the Grate, in the Church, that
before they begin to speak, the Sister appointed for that purpose, raising a
little, the curtine that hangs within the Grate, shall let it fall immediately
into its former place. None shall speak here, unless it be with persons esteemed
for their dignity, or virtue, or with Parents, kindred, or spiritual friends;
and that all so, for reverence to the H: Sacrament, must be seldom permitted,
and for a short time.

5. We ordain also, that noe Sister in the Lent of S. Martin, [beginning the
day ensuing after all Saints, and lasting until Christmasse] as also in the
second Lent, [beginning the Monday immediately after Quinquagesima sonday] shall
speak with any person, in the Speakhouse, or at the Grate, unless for causes
expressed in the form of life; except only the Abbess, Uicaress and Portress,
concerning the affairs of the Monastery, according to custom. At which
times, writing of letters unto their kindred, or friends, is prohibited; unless
it be for great and urgent causes, which shall be left to the judgment of the
Abbess.

6. We also exhort them in our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that when any Sister speaks
at the Grate, in the Church, or in the Speakhouse, [for at the Turn it shall
not be permitted, but for some necessary and inevitable occasio^] all prolixe,
and unprofitable discourses with seculars be avoided, and that their speeches
savor of virtue and piety, as becomes the handmaids of our Lord JESUS, and
the obseruers of the holy Ghospel.

7. The better to avoid familiarity, and unnecessary discourses with
seculars, We ordain, that noe Sister, by her self, or others, be Godmother to
the Children of any person whatsoever. We also appoint, that noe Sister,
although she have license, shall speak with any person entering the Monastery,
for just occasion, or to visit the sick; unless two Discreet, assigned by the
Abbess, or Uicaress be present, and hear their discourse; at which time, they
shall speak with their face modestly covered, and body inclined, in few words,
and with a low voice; as beseems Religious gravity.

Of the obserua^ce of Holy Poverty, and denial of all Propriety. XJ. CHAPT.
1. Seeing that, according to the form of life, the Abbess and all the Sisters
are to observe the holy poverty, promised unto God, and S. Francis, whereby
they dispossess themselves, of all right, or interest to any thing whatsoever.
To the end this poverty may be more entirely observed, We prohibit the Sisters
from hyring any house, field, garden, meddow, vineyard, or other thing
whatsoever, to be husbanded, or possessed for their own private uses.

2. Besides, they shall not have any inheritances, or rents, any annual
provisions, or perpetual alms, either by themselves, or the mediation of any
other: neither shall they have any granaryes, or storehouses filled with
necessaries, bought, begged, or otherwise obtained, for above a years
provision, which they might sell to sustain themselves, without begging; it
being wholly repugnant unto poverty. Nor shall they have, or possess any herds
of sheep, oxen, horses, cupps of gould, silver, or other precious metal: but
let all curious and superfluous things, as well in their house-hold-stuff, as
in the ornaments of the Church, be carefully avoided, that holy poverty may
ever shine amongst you, according to the perfection, and intention of your holy
Rule.

3. We also will and ordain, that the legacyes left unto you, be disposed of,
according to the decree of Nicolas the third, in his declaration upon the Rule
of S. Francis. And seeing, mention is made in the form of life, that the
Religious ought not to possess house, place, or other thing whatsoever, as
their own, and that the said Pope Nicolas, upon the exposition of the said
Rule, together with Clement the 5. and many other Popes, have declared, that
the abdication, and renuntiation of all things expressed therein, ought to be
understood and observed, as well in particular, as in general: We herevpo^,
adhering to the aforesaid declarations, do ordain and command, that the said
abdication, and renuntiation of all propriety [which they, for the love of
God, do vow as meritorious, profitable, and worthy of an eternal reward] be,
by all present and future, as well in particular, as in general, entirely
observed. Notwithstanding they may, with a safe conscience, have the simple use
of those things [yet without proprietie] which are granted them, according to
the form of life, and of such also, which by the same Rule, are not
prohibited; as for example, necessaires requisite for the decent administration
of the divine office, for their habitation, maintenance, and performance of
their emploiments, according to the said form of life, and holy Religion. They
may likewise, make use of those things, which they shall have gained, by their
labor and industry, as also what others, for the love of God, shall give, or
procure to be bestowed on them. For the things given, begged, or earned, do
not repugne with the state of poverty and Religion, which they profess.

4. We ordain likewise, that the alms bestowed on the Sisters, as well in
particular, as in general, be distributed to the needy, according to the
judgment of the Abbess. And We prohibit any Sister from presuming to give, or
bestow any thing sent by her parents, or friends of the Convent, whither to her
self or others, without leave of the Abbess.

5. We will also, that the manner of contracting debts be alwais, and euery-wher
observed by the Sisters, in such sort, as it is contained in the form of life,
and that especial regard be had, that noe sumptuous, or magnifice^t building be
erected; but that they remain contented with poor and humble houses, in
imitation of the sacred poverty of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

6. This point of sublime poverty, has by enforcing necessity, been
dispe^ced whithal, by the Lords Bishops their superiors, in some Conuents of
the English nation, in order to the enjoying of lands, and rents, and receiving
portions, during the time of their banishment out of their native soil, until
it shall please God, to restore Catholic Religion, and raise up Conuents in
their now afflicted Country; not having other subsistence at present, and
being only admitted, and permitted to live in town's of the Low Countries, upon
condition and promise, of not begging, or being chargeable unto them.

Of the Infirm Sisters. XJJ. CHAPT.
1. WE ordain that the infirm and weak Sisters be carefully provided for, by
the Abbess, or Vicaress. The Sisters deputed to the care of the sick, shall have
regard, not to be found remiss in their office, but shall serve them, with all
humility, piety, and fervent charity, as themselves would desire in the same
condition.

2. Jn like manner, the Abbess, unless lawfully hindered, shall of charity
visit, at the least once a day, the infirm, who for some time have been
confined unto their beds: and in her absence, the Uicaress shall perform the
same duty; least through their negligence, the infirm Sisters be deprived of
necessaries convenient for their comfort.

3. The Abbess, or Vicaress, shall not consult any Physician, or Surgeon upon
the recovery of any infirm Sister, that is not pious and Catholic. Such, as
for just occasion are called into the Monastery, during their abode there,
shall be accompanied by the Abbess, or Uicaress, or by two, or three of the
Discreet. And when there shall be present danger of death, let the soul first,
by the Holy Sacraments of the Church, and then the body be diligently provided
for.

4. Moreover, if it should happen to any of the Sisters, to be visited with
some grievous, or contagious disease, as leaprosie, weakness of the head,
frenzy, or such like infirmity, so as they can not co^modiously remain
amongst the rest of the Sisters, a convenient place must be assigned them
with-in the Monastery, separate from the rest, and due attendance be given
the^; as the necessity of the disease requires, without being forced at any
time, to depart the Monastery.

5. We exhort all the Sisters present and to come, that for the love of God,
and the bitter death and passion of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, they do not
esteem it hard and tedious, to serve those, whom God shall visit with
infirmity, but that humbly and piously they extend their charity unto all,
according to their necessity. And if any, deputed to the service of the sick,
are found defective, and that superiors do not provide for them, according to
their condition, quality and place, with advise, diet, and other necessaries,
let them be accused to the Uisitor in time of the visit, and by him severely
punished, as inhumane; if J say they have been found notably defective, in this
their duty to the sick.

6. The infirm Sisters shall repose upon beds of chafe; having a feather
bolster under their head, as is prescribed in the form of life. But if any be
detained by a tedious and long disease, or if some other just and legitimate
cause do occur, the Abbess, or Vicaress, with advise of the Discreet, ought
to provide them of feather-beds, linen, and other necessaries, for their
better repose; as they inspired by God, in their conscience shall judge
expedient, and the infirmity of the sick require.

7. Let especial care be had by those whom it may concern, that at the
departure of any Sister out of this life, she have on, the habit of the Order,
Cord and Veil, and be buried, according to the accustomed manner.

8. Whereas by way of dispensation it is permitted in the form of life, that
the use of socks may be granted unto those, who need them, We ordain, that noe
Sisters of what office, or condition soever, in time of health, use socks,
unless present necessity should require it. Which necessity, shall not be
determined by the opinion of each Sister, but by the Abbess only, when she shall
observe them to stand in need, or they desire a dispensation; which she, with
advise of the Discreet, may grant the^, as long as their necessity shall
continue.

Of the Sisters manual exercises. XJJJ. CHAPT.
1. IT being specified in the form of life, that the Sisters unto whom God
has given grace and strength to work, ought to begin after Tierce; that this
may the better be observed by all, We will, that for the love of God, none
decline work's of labor, charity and humility; and when the Abbess, or
Vicaress shall impose any work to be done, either for the common, or particular
profit of the Co^uent, that it be willingly accepted, without murmuratio^ and
contradiction, and faithfully and piously performed.

2. Noe one, enjoying perfect heath, shall give way to sloth, or negligence upon
pretense, grounded in pride, of not having the tallent of performing this, or
that work; but they must with all obedience and humility, comply with the will
of their superior, according unto their Vow. Let care be had by the Abbess
and Vicaress, that nothing be enjoined the Religious, which can not well be
performed.

3. Although the time mentioned in the form of life, for the Sisters to begin
their work, be after Tierce; We, neuertheless, considering the strickt
poverty, and want, to which the said Sisters may be reduced, do grant unto
the Abbess, or Uicaress free power to dispense, with the said Sisters, as they
shall judge fit, to begin, or finish any work before the said hour.

4. We command likewise, that noe Sister for any cause whatsoever, presume to
begin, or finish any work mixed with curiosity and vanity: but when any thing
in this nature shall be requisite to be undertaken, the Sisters shall consult the
Abbess, or Uicaress, whither or not, they judge it expedient to be done;
nothing being to be undertaken, without their approbation and consent. The
Sisters transgressing, shall be punished, as the Abbess, or Uicaress shall think
expedient.

5. Mass being finished, the sign shall be given to work, at a convenient
hour; at which, all the Sisters not lawfully hindered, shall betake themselves
to their works imposed upon them. We ordain also, that the Sisters, as well
present as to come, alwais, and in all places, abstain from secular and vain
recreations, worldly and fruitless plays, of what kind soever, and howsoever
performed.

6. When two, or three with license, are met together, to talk and recreate,
[for otherwise silence is to be obserued] their discourse is to be of God,
lives of Saints, or some other decent, indifferent and profitable subject,
co^ducing to the progress in virtue, and good of their souls; having especial
regard, to avoid all idle, dangerous, and detractiue words, as beseems the
handmaids of Christ, obseruers of the holy Ghospel, and professors of sacred
Religion.

7. We prohibit the sisters to write, cause to be written, or possess any
book, or book's sauouring of vanity, or secular history: the use
notwithstanding, of pious book's is permitted them, for the good and comfort of
their souls: which they may read, either in particular, or common, at table,
or in other places; according to the will and order of the Abbess.

Of the Correction of the Sisters offending. XJU. CHAPT.
1. WE ordain, that in every Convent the Abbess, or in her absence, the
Vicaress, humbly and with charity, admonish and correct the Sisters offending;
least for want of admonition, they fall headlong into faults and
tra^sgressions. Yet superiors, [as is above sayd] must in their reprehensions,
be mindful of humility, and due ordered charity.

2. Let care be taken, least under pretext of humility and sweetness, they
give occasion to the Sisters of liberty and relaxation, and under the cloak
of charity, they cherish sensuality, which in time, would prove the ruin of
souls. Wherefore, without distinction of persons, they ought to correct all,
according to the quality of the offense.

3. Yet, if it should happen, [which God forbid] that any Sister should co^mitt
so great a crime, as to endanger thereby, her eternal salvation, and blast the
order with infamy and confusion, or if any should remain so refractorie,
incorrigible, and obstinate in her malice, that she would, in noe wise, amend
herself; there must be for such as these, in every Convent, a strong, yet humane
place of correction, wherein the guilty shall be confined to bread and water,
for a week, month, year, and even for ever, if the offense require it, and the
Abbess, with her Discreet, shall judge it necessary.

4. Jf it happen also, that any Sister rebels against the Abbess, or Uicaress,
or casts forth indecent and injurious words against them, she shall in the
presense of the Sisters, sitting on the ground, in time of table, fast with
bread and water.

Of the Portress, and of entering into the Monastery. XU. CHAPT.
1. ALthough it be contained in the form of life, that the Portress should in
the day time, reside in an open cell, yet We, for several and just causes, do
wholly abrogate and disannulle it. For that which in S. Clar's time was lawful
and decent, would now prove obnoxious to many inconveniences and dangers.

2. We therefore, desiring to provide for future security, and decency,
ordain the following method to be hence forth ever observed. That a Sister
fearing God, discreet, and virtuous, be assigned unto the custody of the gate
of the Monastery and Speakhouse; who, as We may confide, will by word and
example edify those, that shall converse and deal with her. She is to have, by
common consent, as in other elections, a fit companion assigned her, who in
case the chief Portress be hindered by infirmity, may laudably supply the
office.

3. Unto these two Portresses, an other Sister shall be assigned out of the
number of the eight Discreet, who shall be present and hear those, that speak
unto the Sisters, and may weekly be changed, or continued, according to the
good lyking of the Abbess; so that, none shall speak unto any externe, but in
presence and hearing of two of the Discreet, as has been said. These Sisters,
at the call of their bell, shall immediately, and with speed, repair all three
together, unto the Speakhouse, so that she that speaks, must have her two
companions ever present, unless one of the^ should chance to go to deliver
some message, or for some necessary occasion, with intention to return
speedily: for if her absence should be considerable, long and frequent, she
shall advertise the Abbess, or Vicaress to appoint an other in her place.

4. The chief Portress shall answer and speak; her two companions are only to be
present and hear. Jf any extern would speak with either of her companions, she
and her other assistent [leaue being obtained before hand of the Abbess, or
Vicaress] shall be present and hear what is said; so that, noe discourse with
externs must be ever permitted at the Grate, or Speakhouse, without the
attendance of two of the Discreet; and the chief Portress shall be always one of
them, unless she be hindered by some necessary occasion.

5. We ordain also, that there be a wodden door made to the said Speakhouse,
with a lock and two keys, and that, day and night it be carefully kept locked,
unless the Portresses be actually there; which neither of them shall presume to
enter, without all three be jointly met. The one key shall be alwais kept by
the chief Portress, and the other by the Abbess in the night time; and in the
day time, by the third Sister, who is weekly deputed to assist.

6. We declare, that noe man, of what condition, or state soever he might
happen to be, whither Secular or Regular, be ever permitted to enter the
Monastery. Moreover, We stricktly command both Abbess and Sisters, never to
give way unto it, without leave first obtained by such as can give it. From
this law are excepted Physicians, and Surgeons permitted to enter for the
relief and attendance of the sick; those also, whose entrance shall be
necessary for fire, ruins, reparations, and such work's, as can not otherwise
be done without the Monastery.

7. Jf any Cardinal should please to enter the Convent, he must be received
with due respect and devotion, but with humble entreaty, that he be pleased to
select, and admit with him, only two, or three, or very few of his train. Noe
Sister shall converse, or speak with them otherwise, then according as is
specified in the form of life. Let great care be taken, that those, who with
leave, shall enter the Monastery, be such persons only, whose exemplar life,
words, and behavior, may breed edification to all.

8. When any provisions of corn, wood, or other necessaries, are brought to the
Monastery, of so considerable a bigness, that they can not co^modiously pass
the Turn, We will, that the Abbess, or Portress, or her Assistents take care,
least the gate be left open longer then necessity requires: neither shall they
permit the Porters, or such like workmen, to enter more in number, to pass
further into the Monastery, or make longer stay, then shall be precisely
necessary for the present occasions. Those Sisters only, who are deputed by
the Abbess, or Uicaress, may speak unto them, with their faces dece^tly
covered: and let their words be brief, and of things only necessary.

9. And to the end, none of the other Sisters may be seen by those, who for
carriages, or other work's, are to enter into the Monastery, let this
following practice be observed. The Portress having ope^ed the inward gate,
shall vnbarr, and unlock with two keys [but not vnlatch] the outward, or chief
gate, which is called the gate of the Monastery; then, withdrawing her self,
and having shutt the inward gate, with the two keys, the Workmen, drawing the
latch of the other, may enter, and lay down their burdens between these two
gates, and depart. Then the Portresses returning, shall bar, and double-lock
the outward, or principal gate, and dispose of things brought in, according to
order.

10. It being also contained in the form of life, that the Abbess is to
appoint two Sisters at the gate, to let in those, who for necessary
occasions, are to enter into the Monastery, We declare, that the said Portress
[supposed in the form of life to be modest and prudent] shall, with one of her
companions, suffice to open the gate, [leaue being obtained of the Abbess] and
to let in, those persons aforementioned, and conduct the^, with modesty,
gravity, and silence, to the place, or work intended.

11. Noe Sister, of what condition soever, shall out of curiosity go to see
the workmen at work; but if any be deputed by the Abbess, for just reasons, to
ouersee, or be with them, she shall alwais have a companion assigned her, and
they shall both remain in a public and open place, till the work be ended;
after which, they shall retire themselves.

12. Let the Abbess and Sisters take care, that noe thing be done with-in, by
externs, which might, without inconvenience, be performed by themselves; nor
permit workmen, or any other person whatsoever, to eat within the Monastery,
without just and necessary cause.

13. We ordain moreover, that the Confessor, entering the Monastery with his
companion, [if he have one] be vested with the sacred garments, of an Albe, or
Surplice and Stole.

14. Moreover, We exhort all the Sisters in JESUS CHRIST, that they be not
importune, and over solicitous for the Benediction of the Abbess, and
Consecration of the Religious; but that they remain satisfied in the holy
simplicity, and innocence of their Profession; for the which, [if duly
complied with all] they may expect from the hand of the high Priest, our Lord
and Savior JESUS CHRIST, a plentiful reward and benediction.

15. By reason of the difference of times and circumstances since your form of
life was first written, We ordain, that hence forth, the Sacrifice of the
Mass, be noe more celebrated within the Monastery, neither for the living, or
burying of the deceased Sisters.

16. None shall be permitted to enter the Monastery for the opening, or
shutting of the graves, but one, or two modest laboring men, as need shall
require; and it shall not be lawful for more to enter, upon occasion of burial
of the Sisters, then the Confessor, his companion and a modest Clarck to assist
them; who, are all to depart immediately, when the ceremonies are ended.

Of the Visitor, and Visit. XUJ. CHAPT.
1. YOur holy Rule does mention in the 12. Chapter that the Visitor shall be one
of the Order of Friar-Minors, according to the command and will of the Lord
Cardinal Protector: which is to be understood, having regard to the difference
of time, place and particular Decrees of Popes, according to the different
subjection and dependence of Conuents. For when in the beginning, Blessed S.
Francis wrote the Rule of S. Clare, the Monasteries, and Sisters, were in noe
ways subject to the Jurisdiction and power of the Friar-Minors, but it was only
permitted and granted them, in process and length of time; wherefore according
to the sense and words of the Rule, the Visitor is supposed only to be of the
Order of Friar-Minors, if by grant of his Holiness, the Monastery be subject
unto them; otherwise, if by the same grant a Monastery be subject immediately
unto the Bishop of the Diocese, or unto any other Order, it is to be visited by
that superior; and this appears to have been the will and meaning of the Lord
Cardinal, who, according to good liking, deputed different and several
Visitors, as is expressed in the Rule, and is allsoe conformable to the
declarations and grants of Jnnocent the fourth, and diverse other Popes.

2. The Prelate therefore, or superior, unto whom the Monastery is immediately
subject, ought to visit it in person, every third year, or oft'ner, if the
Abbess and Discreet should so require; which if he cannot perform, he is to
substitute some one in his place, eminent for prudence and virtue, whom and
none else, the Sisters are to respect and acknowledge. The iuridical visit is
to be performed at the Grate, where he may treat with the Sisters, either in
particular, or in general, according as his prudence shall judge most expedient.
For he is not to enter into the Monastery, without apparent necessity.

3. Being in his Uisit, within the Convent, he ought so to behave him self,
that by his words, and example, the Sisters may take increase, in the love of
God, and in Charity amongst themselves. His companion is to accompany him,
and to remain in a place so conspicuous and near, that they may commodiously
discern each other. He ought so to dispose his time, that he remain noe
longer within the Monastery, then shall be requisite for the co^plying with the
Visit, which ended, he shall immediately retire him self.

4. Let him endeavor to dispatch the Uisit of each Co^uent, within the space
of two, or three day's. It were convenient, [if he be prepared thervnto] that
he first make an exhortation to the Sisters of this subject; having beforehand,
read their Rule, and this present Ordinatio^, wherein the manner of visit is
declared.

5. Moreover, he shall charge and command all, and every one of the Sisters,
that they answer him sincerely and clearly, in those points, which he shall
propose unto them, if they know any thing to be amended: and they are all to
obey him readily, in all things belonging to the Uisit.

6. The Uisitor, if heple ase and judge it expedient, may observe this
following method. He may speak unto the Sisters, either all together, or some
of them assembled, or in private, unto one alone; two others being present, but
not so near, as to understand, or ouerheare what is said, to the end,
integrity and secrecy may the better be observed.

7. Jf Jnformations are to be received, the Sisters shall have access unto him
in their turn's; and if one should be accused of any crime, he shall write
down the said crime together with her name and the names of her accusers.

8. The Uisit ended, the Sisters shall be all called to Chapter, where the faults
of the accused being laid open, if she be iuridically and truly convicted, by
the testimony of two Sisters worthy of belief, a penance shall be enjoined
her, proportionable to the fault. She may notwithstanding, have leave to reply,
and clear her self of the crime objected, if she can; yet so, that she
pretend not to inquire the names of her accusers. Nor must they in any ways, be
disclosed unto her, unless the accused person should iuridically demand them,
to clear herself of the objected crime.

9. Jf it should so happen and be known, by lawful means, that some one were
falsely, or wrongfully accused, the accuser shall be liable to all those
penalties, which the accused should have undergone, if convicted of that crime.
This notwithstanding, if any one Sister have certain knowledge of some
grievous sin of an other, or that she is yet guilty of the same crime, the
Sister that has this knowledge, ought, and is obliged to manifest secretly,
both the crime and the party unto the Visitor: and in this case, in noe ways
may he, ever declare the name of the accuser, to the accused Sisters.

10. Jf it should so fall out, that himself could not correct, or remedy a
fault, let him referr it to the arbitriment of his higher Superior; by whose
authority and command, it may be condignely punished.

11. Let the Abbess be careful that neither by her self or others, the state
of the Monastery concerning mutual charity and the observance of the Rules be
consealed from him: for the contrary, would be a grievous sin, deserving
severe punishment. We will therefore, and declare, that they manifest unto the
Uisitor, either publicquely, or privately, and in the best manner they can, what
is to be amended, or corrected; according to the form of life. And if any one,
either Abbess or inferior, shall be found to have tra^sgressed in this point,
let her be severely punished by the Uisitor, according to the gieuousness of
the fault.

12. The Visitor, being in his visit either public, or private, amongst other
demands, shall inquire of the Sisters concerning points more essential,
belonging unto the Rule; as of Obedience, Poverty, Chastity, and perpetual
Jnclosure: how the divine office is performed by day and night: of the manner
of speaking at the Grate and Speakhouse: of collection of mony's, corn etc. of
the attendance of the aged and sick: of the number, price, and curiosity of
their garments and habit: of superiors negligences, and of the observance of
abstinences and fasts: of the Discreet and Portresses: of Obedience, and
rebellion of subjects: of the observance of Rules, and these present
Ordinations: of maintaining of Union and Peace in the bond of Charity: of
frequenting the Holy Sacraments of Eucharist and penance: of preserving and
continuing the exercise of holy prayer, and devotion in the Convent.

12. Jf one, or more shall be to have been defective in the premises, or in any
other more grievous neglect, let her be duly corrected and punished, according
to discretion, the quality of the offense, zeal of Charity, and fervor of
Justice.

Here end the Constitutions and Declarations made upon the first Rule of the
H: Mother S. CLARE.
THE PRAISE OF THE RULE.
THE Holy Father S. Francis, encouraging his Religious to the observance of the
Rule, said; it was the book of life, the fruit of wisdom, the marrow of the
Gospel, the hope of health, the path of salvation, the ladder, by which one
ascends to heaven, the key of Paradise, and the pledge of eternal peace.

The Perfection of the Rule consists in six Seraphical wings: to wit, in
Obedience, Poverty, Chastity, Humility, Simplicity, and Charity.
1. OBedience is a virtue, containing three degrees: the first is Obedience by
profession, complying with the commandment of God, or the superior; touching
the exterior performance of the action, or work enjoined. The second is
obedience by conformity, when the commandment is performed, not in the
exterior only, but without contradiction also of the interior; conforming the
inte^tion and will, unto that of the Superior, who commands. The third is,
Obedience by union, whereby the true obedient man, has no other respect, then
the pleasure and will of God.

2. Euangelical Poverty has three degrees. The first is Poverty by
Profession; that is, to have no propriety, or right to any thing whatsoever.
The second, to retain the simple use only of things necessary, and rest
content with the most vile. The third, not to have any affection, even in
things necessary; but by way of co^straint, to take the bare use of them.

3. Chastity, is a virtue, that has three degrees. The first is Chastity of
body, by which all the exterior members are restrained from any impure, or
suspicious act. The second, Chastity of heart, by which the heart is preserved
from any dishonest, or unclean thought. The third, chastity of spirit, by
which, we not only refrain from any dishonest love, but also from all
excessive delectation in spiritual co^forts.

4. Humility is a virtue, that has three degrees also: the first is humility
of knowledge by the which man acknowledges him self to be vile and abject. The
second is humility of exhibition, when the interior humility of the will, is
expressed in the exterior; as in mean attire, abject works, and humble words.
The third is, humility of affection, wherewith a soul does not only humble her
self in the sight of God, but of men also; desyring to be by them esteemed
poor and abject.

5. Simplicity contains three degrees. The first is, simplicity of
thoughts, esteeming ones self the most unworthy of all creatures to serve God,
and nourishing a belief of ones vnfittness to honors and worldly dignities.
The second is simplicity of words, avoiding all affected curiosity and
superfluity in speech, which proceed from an ill root of vanity. The third
is simplicity of work's, employing our selves in those only, which are simple
and profitable, yet so, as prudence must ever accompany this simplicity: for
God loves those, that walk in prudence, with a pure, right, and simple
intention.

6. Charity is a virtue of three decrees. The first is, to love God not only
for his benefits, but also, for that he is most worthy of our love. The second
is, to love our neighbor, not only for love of him, but simply for the love of
God. The third is, to love our selves in laboring for virtue, glory, and
eternal happiness, not for our own respect, but to please God, and for love of
his divine Majesty.

Three Privileges, which S. Francis obtained of Almighty God.
POpe Gregory thc 9. said, he had understood of the H: Father S. Francis, that
God had favored him with three privileges. The first, that the more the
religious of his Order did increase, the more he would provide for them. The
second, that none should ever dye unhappily in the habit. The third, that
whosoever should persecute his Order, should be grievously punished by Almighty
God.

Three other Privileges which the Saint said he had received by the Seraphin
appearing unto him, on the mountain of Auerne.
THe first, that his Order should last to the day of Judgment. The second, that
whosoever should live wickedly in the Order, should not continue long. The
third, that whosoever did love his Order, although a great sinner, should
obtain mercy of Almighty God.

Seven other Privileges, which by an Angel, were revealed unto the said H:
Father, in the Co^uent of S. Urban, for all that observed his Rule, and dyed in
the Order.
THe first, that if their intention be good, they shall ever be governed by the
H: Ghost. The second, that in all their temptations, during the course of this
mortal life, they shall still be particularly defended from mortal sin. The
third, that the fire of Purgatory, shall not detain them after their death,
from the immediate enjoying of everlasting glory. The fourth, that themselves
shall be rewarded with that promise of our Savior, made unto his Apostles, of
sitting on the 12. seats, to judge the 12. Tribes of Jsrael. The fifth, that
toward such, as love the Order, Almighty God will increase his graces and
blessings in this world, and in the next. The sixth, that those who are enemies
to it and do persecute the same without repenting, shall either have their
life short'ned, or be replenished with misery here, and after their death,
eternally perish. The seaue^th, that there shall ever be in this Order, religious
persons of good and holy life, lovers of the honor of God, and their Religion.

Instructions of S. Bonauenture for a Religious person.
1. TO be fervent in prayer, and studious in spiritual lecture, the which are
both ohtained by frequenting of the Church, and keeping of your celle; so that
a Religious person never ought to be seen wandering out of one of these two
places, unless it be to comply with obedience, in some work commanded: but he
ought to frequent these two places, there to attend unto heavenly things, and
bewail his sins, and those of his neighbor.

2. To attend carefully to the purity of body and mind; for the obtaining
whereof, he must avoid all particular frendships.

3. To refrain the tongue, neither praising, or dispraysing others, or
answering the^, unless it be first demanded.

4. To be careful not to relate easily things heard, unless they be of
edification.

5. Often to call to mind the thought of heaven, the benefitts of God, your
own sins, the pains of hell, and the deplorable condition of poor worldlings.

6. To judge none but your self, either in thought, or word. And whosoever shall
observe these points shall be saved.

The 12. Euangelical Counsels.
1. Poverty, whereby a Religious person is estranged from all terrene things.

2. Obedience, without which, noe virtue is perfect.

3. Chastity, which beutifyeth and adorneth all other virtues.

4. Charity toward our enemies, whereby all infection of sin is expelled.

5. Mansuetude, which [as S. Ambrose saith] is the medecin of the heart, whereby
the soul is illuminated by God, to know his secrets.

6. Mercy, which extends it self to the help of every one, without limit,
enters sweetly into the heart with pity, and eleuateth it from all sin.

7. The simple word, all ways fructifying in God, in purity of intention, in
charity. etc.

8. Shunning occasion of sin; conducting the soul with prudence, and security
to the purchase of virtue.

9. Right intention, which makes all work's to proceed from humility, to the
edification of our neighbor.

10. Conformity of the work unto the word, whereby all special instruction is
seriously, and with profit accepted.

11. Avoiding of unprofitable solicitude, thereby to atte^d the better, unto
spiritual illuminations, which are obscured by earthly cares.

12. Fraternal correction, which is a light, that illuminateth the
understanding, according unto that of the Apostle saying: that which is
corrected, is made apparent by the light that follows.

Twelve great evils which come by venial sin.
1. THey do so darken and obscure the eyes of our understanding, that they
can not behold God.

2. They kill the fervor of love, and divine charity.

3. They hinder our petitio^s and prayers from being heard by God. 4. They
defile and spott the soul.

5. They contristate the H: Ghost, and rejoice the enemy.

6. They deprive us of the sweet and amiable familiarity of our blessed
Savior. 7. They are a great cause and means of our fall into grievous sins.

8. They occasion the fall of a soul into great sloth and tepiditie, in all
goodness.

9. They weaken exceedingly the forces of the soul, from resisting her bad
inclinations.

10. they incline our affections and desires unto things, that are temporal.

11. They prolong and augment the pains in Purgatory. 12. They hinder us
exceedingly, from seeing, and enjoying the presence of God.

An examen of Conscience for a religious person.
1. WHat are his evil inclinations and bad customs, whence they proceed, and
what resistance and exercise he uses againgst the^.

2. What passions do most reign in him, and by what means he has hitherto
indeauoured to mortify them.

3. What are his most frequent, most troublesome and chief temptations, and how
he has hitherto, behaved himself in them.

4. Jf he be indifferent, and willing to accept any employment of H. Religion,
which shall be appointed him,

5. Whether God be the only intention of all his actions, or if he seek
selfe-commoditie, or praise, in his employments.

6. Whether he do not prefer exterior things: as good qualities, natural
gifts and graces, before the study of virtue and perfection.

7. Jf he desire, and be contented, his superiors should have knowledge of all
his faults.

8. Jf he be confident and open hearted to his superiors and willingly confer
with the^; touching the good of his soul.

9. Whether he be truly united by affection, unto his superiors, or if he have
any auersion, from them and from whence it proceeds.

10. Whether he be not too familiar with some, and if that familiarity be not
hurtful to him-self and the other party, and if by that occasion, he loses
not time, and disedifyes others.

11. Jf he love and embrace interior and exterior mortifications, and choose
rather those things, that be humble and abject, then of esteem and credit.

12. Jf he observe all the rules and constitutions; and of which he makes less
esteem, and for what reason.

13. Jf he desire truly to be penitent for all his faults; humbly confessing
them with strong purpose of amendme^t.

14. Jf he makes daily a particular examen upon some one imperfection, and with
what preparation he receives the H. Sacrament, and how he frequenteth the holy
exercise of prayer.

15. Jf his words and discourses in recreation, or otherwise, as also with
seculars, be of edificatio^; and how he observes silence, and spends his
time.

Certain Indulgences granted among many others, by several Popes, unto all
the religious of the order of S. Francis.
1. THe Religious both men and woeme^ shall gain a plenarie indulgence from
pain and fault, on the days of their clothing, profession, and hour of
death. Also the fathers and mothers of the said Religious, may have the same
given them by any lawful confessor, at the hour of death.

2. All the Religious that shall receive the most H. Sacrament upon all sondays,
throughout the year, all the feasts of our blessed Savior, and of our blessed
Lady, and of the Saints of the Order, shall gain a plenarie indulgence. And if
it should so happen, that any one could not confess and communicate on these
days, [their hind ra^ce being lawfull] they may afterward gain the same,
although the day of the feast be past; if [being freed of that impedime^t] they
do confess and communicate for that intention.

3. The Religious, who shall recite the Rosarie of our Lord, that is 33. Paters
and Aues, in honor of the 33. years he lived in this world, or the Rosarie of
the Glorious Uirgin Marie, containing 72. Aue's with 7. Pater noster's, and one
Pater and Aue for his Holiness, shall gain a plenarie Jndulgence. The same is
also granted, as often as they say the 7. penitential Psalm's, and Litanies,
the Gradual Psalm's, the office of the dead; or assist at the Litanies of every
second sunday in the month.

4. As often as the Religious, either by day, or night, in what place soe-euer
they be, shall recite 6. Paters and Aue's and 6. Gloria Patri, five for the
necessities of the Church, and the sixth for the Pope, shall gain the
Jndulgences of the stations of Jerusale^, of Rome, of S. James, and of
Portiuncula.

5. Jtem, reciting the Psalm Exaudiat te Deus in die tribulationis etc. and 3.
Paters and Aue's for the Popes intention, they shall gain all the Jndulgences
granted by the sovereign Bishops to the Confraternitie of the Rosarie, to the
Churches of our B: Lady of Loreto, of Mont-serat, and of S. James de
Compostella.

6. Every time they say the Angelus Domini at the accustomed time, when it
ringeth, a plenarie Jndulgence; the like also, every time they communicate; as
often also as they hear the Mass of the Conception of our B. Lady, praying
for his Holiness, and the universal Church, is granted a plenarie Jndulgence.
Saying the divine office, or the office of our B. Lady, besides all other
Jndulgences, they gain 100. years of pardon.

7. Saying once every day, one Pater noster, and one Aue Maria, calling
devoutly three tims upon the H: name of JESUS, they gain 300 years of pardon.

8. It is granted unto the Sisters, that 4. times in the year, they may have a
general absolution in full remission of all their sins whatsoever, and be
restored to the state of innocence, as fully as they could receive it from his
Holiness: and the like is granted them, on every feast of our B. Savior, and
of our B. Lady, on the feasts of S. Peter and S. Paul, S. Francis, and S.
Clare, S. Catharine Queen and Martyr, on the feast of all Saints, and every
day of the H. week. Notwithstanding, these graces will profit nothing those, who
should upon presumption to gain them, offend more freely.

9. They may apply all privileges and indulgences granted to themselves, unto
the faithful departed. For the gayning of these, or any other indulgences, it
is requisite to apply your intention for the same.

LITANIAE
B. P. S. FRANCISCI.
KYrie eleison. Christ eleison* Kyrie eleison. Christ audi nos* Christ
exaudi nos. Pater de coelis Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus,
Miserere nobis. Spiritus sancte Deus. Miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus
Miser. nob. Sancte FRANCISCE ora. Pater amabilis. ora, Pater admirabilis. ora.
Pater benign. ora. Pater venerabilis. ora. Vexillifer IESV CHRISTI. ora. Eques
Crucifixi. ora. Imitator filij Dei. ora. Seraphim ardens. ora. Fornax
charitatis. ora. Arca sanctitatis. ora. Cultor Pacis. ora. Vas Puritatis. ora.
Norma Iustitiae. ora. Speculum pudicitiae. ora. Regula Poenitentiae. ora.
Magister Obedientiae. ora. Exemplar Virtutum ora. Patriarcha pauperum ora:
Profligator Criminum. ora. Lumen tuae Patriae. ora. Decus morum. ora.
Viuificator mortuorum. ora. Saluator famelicorum. ora. Obsequium leprosorum.
ora. Praeco magni Regis. ora. Forma Humilitatis. ora. Consors sublimitatis.
ora. Victor vitiorum. ora. Dux Minorum. ora. Praedicator siluestrium. ora.
Portans dona gloriae, ora. Auriga militiae nostrae. ora. Nouis vtens prodigijs.
ora. Coelum caecis apperiens. ora. Gratum gerens obsequium. ora. Templum
Christo consecrans. ora. Hosts malignos proterens. ora. Tenens vitae brauium.
ora. Spargens virtutum munera. ora. Amplians iter ad gloriam. ora. Agnus Dei
qui tollis peccata mundi, Parce nobis Domine Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata
mundi, Exaudi nos Domine Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi. Miserere nobis.

Verse. Ora pro nobis beat P. Francisce.

Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus CHRISTI.

OREMVS.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tua^ B. Francisci meritis, faetu nouae prolis amplificas,
tribue nobis, ex eius imitatione, terrena despicere, and coelestium donorum
semper participatione gaudere. Per Dominum nostrum etc. Amen.

LITANIAE,
B. M. CLARAE VIRGINIS.
KYrie eleison. Christ eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christ audi nos. Christ
exaudi nos. Pater de coelis Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemdptor mundi Deus.
Miserere nobis. Spiritus Sancte Deus Miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus.
Miserere nobis. Sancta MARIA. Ora pro nobis Sancta Dei Genitrix, ora. Sancta
Virgo virginum, ora. Sancta Clara Virgo, Matter nostra. ora. Virgo CHRISTI
Spousa, ora. Virgo Francisci plantula. ora. Virgo electa prae millibus. ora.
Virgo Seraphica. ora. Virgo Matris IESV discipula. ora. Virgo primogenita
pauperum. ora. Virgo gemma Virginum. ora. Virgo norma perfectionis. ora. Virgo
humilisima, ora. Virgo mundo abscondita. ora. Virgo speculum Paupertatis. ora.
Virgo lilium Castitatis. ora. Virgo rosa poenitentiae. ora. Virgo Crucifixi
amore saucia. ora. Virgo Crucis ardentissima amatrix. ora. Virgo stella
clarissima. ora. Virgo sequens agnu^ quocunque, ierit. ora. Matter nostra
honorificata. ora. Matter admirabilis. ora. Matter amabilis. ora. Matter sicut
balsamu^ aromatizans. ora. Matter paranympha Christi. ora. Matter pulchrae
dilectionis. ora. Matter puritatis nutrix ora. Matter Obedientiae magistra. ora.
Matter scala paradisi. ora. Matter gloria filiarum. ora. Matter socia Angelorum.
ora. Matter clipeus in te spe rantium. ora. Matter protectrix pauperum. ora.
Matter consolatrix flentium. ora. Matter terror Infidelium. ora. Matter
triumphatrix Doemonum. ora. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi. Parce nobis
Domine.

Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi. Exaudi nos Domine.

Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi. Miserere nobis.

Verse. Ora pro nobis beata Matter Clara.

Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus CHRISTI.

OREMVS.
FAmulos tuos quaesumus Domine, Beatae Virginis tuae Clarae, votiuam
commemorationem recensentes, caelestium gaudiorum sua facias interuentione
participes, and tui Vnigeniti cohaeredes. Per Dominum. etc. Amen.

THE TESTAMENT OF THE HOLY MOTHER S. CLARE. IN NOMINE DOMINI. AMEN.
AMong all other benefits, which we have received from our bountiful
benefactour, the King of mercies, and daily receive of him, and for which we
are most bound to praise him, one is our Vocation: the which, by how much it is
more perfect and great, by so much are we more obliged unto him.

The Apostle says, acknowledge your Vocation. God has him self made a way,
the which he showed by word and example, and our Holy Father S. Francis, a most
perfect lover and follower of the same way, has taught it us. Wherefore my
beloved Sisters, we ought to mark the inestimable benefit which God has
bestowed on us, among others, and has vouchsafed to work in us, through his
servant our Holy Father S. Francis; not only since our conversion, but also
before, when yet we were in captivity and vanity of the world. For after his
conversion [not having as yet, any brothers] being to repair to S. Damians
Church, where he was visited with divine consolations, and constrained wholly to
abandon the world; filled with joy and illumination of the Holy Ghost, he
prophesied of us, that which our Lord has afterward fulfilled.

For standing on the walls of the said Church, he called with a loud voice in
the Fre^sh tongue, on some poor folks, who lived there about, saying: Come help
me in this Church of S. Damian, for there shall come Women, by whose good life,
and holy conversation, our heavenly Father shall be honored in his whole
Church. Wherein we may mark the great bounty of God toward us, who out of his
abundant mercy and charity, did vouchsafe to prophesy these things by his
servant, of our Uocation and Election. And not only of us did our Holy Father
foretell these things, but also of those, who hereafter shall be partakers of
the Uocation which our Lord has called us unto. With what care of soul and
body, are we then bound, to keep the Commandments of God, and of our holy
Father S. Francis; to the end, that with the grace of God, we may repay him his
talent multiplied and increased: neither has our Lord only placed us as an
example and pattern for the secular, but particularly for all our Sisters, whom
he shall call unto our course of life, that they also may be a mirror and
example unto those, who are in the world.

Seeing then our Lord God has honored us with so high a Vocation, as to
serve for pattern unto those, who ought to be an example unto others, how much
are we bound to bless, and prise our Lord God, and in well doing to remain the
more comforted in him. Wherefore, if we live piously, according to the form
above mentioned, we shall leave good example unto those, who shall follow us, and
after short labors, receive the reward of everlasting life. When our heavenly
Father had vouchsafed, through his great mercy and grace, to illuminate my
heart, in such sort, that through the example and teaching of our holy Father
S. Francis, J began to do penance, a little after his conversion; J, with a
few Sisters whom our Lord joined unto me, a little after my conversion,
willingly promised unto him Obedience, as our Lord, through the light of his
grace, inspired us, by means of his marvelous life, and holy doctrine.

S. Francis then, marking, though we were according to the body weak and
tender, that we were not dismay'dwith any necessity, poverty, labor,
tribulation, or contempt of the world, but that we esteemed all those things as
great pleasures, as he had proved by the example of his Brothers, he rejoiced
in our Lord; and moved with great charity toward us, obliged him self, and
his Brothers to have alwais over us a special and diligent care. We went also
by the will of God, and of our Holy Father S. Francis toward the Church of S.
Damian, to dwell there. Soon after which time, our Lord, through his great
mercy and grace, multiplied us in number, so that then was fulfilled that,
which our Lord had said by his servant; for we dwelt before in an other place.

A little after, he wrote unto us, this form of life, and principally, that we
should persevere in this most holy poverty. Neither was it sufficient unto him,
that he admonished us there unto in his life, by many sermons and exhortations
to move us to the love and observance of the same holy poverty: but also he
gave us many writings, that after his death we might not fall from the same
holy Poverty, but love it, according to the example of the Son of God, who
living in this world, did never leave the said poverty: which also our holy
Father S. Francis, with his Brothers, did honor, and observe, during his life.

Wherefore, J Clare, servant and hand-mayd of Christ, and of the poor Sisters
of S. Damian, although unworthy, the little plant of our holy Father S.
Francis, considering this, with my other Sisters, and together the highness of
our Profession, made unto such a Father; fearing our own frailty, and that of
others, after the death of our holy Father, who next unto God, was our pillar
and comfort, again and again bind my self unto the said holy poverty, to the
end, that the Sisters, who now are, or shall come after my death, may by noe
means, decline from it.

This poverty, J have alwais been careful [with the grace of God] to observe,
and to cause it to be observed, and for more security, J have made Profession
ther-of unto our Holy Father Pope Jnnocent the fourth, in whose time we began,
and have renewed it to his successors, that by no means, and in no time, we
should decline from this holy Poverty, which we have vowed unto God, and to S.
Francis.

Wherefore, J bowing the knees both of my body and soul in all humility
commend unto the Church of Rome, unto our Holy Father the Pope, and especialy
unto the Cardinal, unto whose Protection, together with the Friar-Minors, we
are committed, that for the love of God, who was borne in great poverty, laid
in the Crib, and lived poorly in this world, and dyed poorly on the Cross,
they will preserve this little flock, which God the Father has gained to his
Church, by the words and examples of our holy Father S. Francis; causing them
to follow the Humility and poverty of his dearly beloved son, and of his
holy Mother, and making the holy Poverty to be observed, which we have
promised unto God, and unto S. Francis, and stre^gthning them to observe it.

And as God gave unto us, our holy Father S. Francis, for our founder and
helper in the seruise of God, and in those things, which we vowed unto God, and
unto him to observe; and as he was careful whiles he lived, to water us his
little plants, by word and example: so J commend and leave my Sisters, as well
those who are already, as those who hereafter shall be, unto the successor of
S. Francis, and to the whole Religion: that they will alwais help us to proceed
from better to better, to serve God, and accomplish and observe our holy
Poverty. Jf it shall happen at any time, that the said Sisters should leave
their Contry or City, to go to an other, they are firmly bound after my
death, in what place soever they are, to observe the holy Poverty which they
have vowed unto God, and unto S. Francis.

Those who shall be in office, as also the other Sisters, shall be careful, that
they receive no more ground, the^ extreme necessity does require; as a garden
for help unto their relief: and if for the defense, or decency of the
Cloister, it were needful to have more ground, they shall take but only what is
necessary: in which they may not plough, or sow. J admonish you all, my
Sisters, who are, and shall be, that you labor to follow the way of
simplicity, humility, and poverty; and also the modesty of holy
Conversation; as we in the beginning of our conversion, were tought of Christ,
and of our holy Father S. Francis. So that, not through our merits, but
through the mercy of the liberal giver, the Father of mercies may spread
abroad the odor of our good naem, as well amongst those, who are far of, as
amongst those, who are near.

And for the Charity of our Lord JESUS, keep union of love. The Charity which
you have inwardly, show it outwardly by work's, to the end, that through your
example, the Sisters, which are called unto your Profession, may increase in
the love of God, and mutual Charity.

Also J pray all those, who shall be chose to bear offices among the Sisters,
that they will study to excel the others, rather in virtue, and modest
conversation, then in authority and office that so, by their example, the
Sisters which were called unto Religion before them, may be moved to obey them,
not only in respect of their office but for love.

The Abbess must be careful, and discreet toward her Sisters, as a good
Mother is toward her children. She must carefully provide for every one,
according to their necessity, of the alms, which it shall please God to send
her. She must also be so sweet and familiar unto all, that the Sisters may
without fear, or doubt, declare unto her their necessities, and have
confidently recourse unto her.

When the Abbess and the Sisters shall think anything necessary, let the
Sisters, which are subject, remember, that for the love of God, they have
renounced their own wills: wherefore, J will, that they obey their Mother, as
they have of their own accord vowed unto God to do; to the end that their
Mother, seeing the humility, charity, and union, which they have unto each
other, may easily bear the charge, which she has by her office. Which because
it is heavy and bitter; they must, through their holy conversation, seek to
turn into sweetness. And seeing the way is narrow, and the gate strait, which
leads unto life, and few their are which walk in it and few that persevere
therein, blessed are those, which have received the grace to walk in it, and to
persevere therein unto the end.

Wherefore, let us be careful, seeing we be entered in to the way of our Lord,
that by our fault and negligence, we do not fall from the same, commit, or do
injury unto our Lord, unto his Blessed Mother the Glorious Uirgin Marie, unto
our holy Father S. Francis, unto the triumphant, and militant Church: for it is
written, cursed are those, who decline from thy commandment.

To obtain this grace, J bow my knees unto the heavenly Father, through the
merits of our Lord JESUS, and of his B. Mother, of our H. Father S. Francis,
and of all the Saints, that it will please his divine Majesty, who has given a
good beginning, to grant grace also, that it may augment, and without end
persevere even until death. Dearly beloved Sisters present, and to come, that
you may the better persevere in our vocation, J leave unto you this writing, in
token of our Lords Benediction, and of the Benediction of our H. Father S.
Francis, and of me your Mother and servant.

A Prayer unto the Glorious Virgin Marie Mother of God.
Whosoever shall say devoutly this ensuing prayer, in honor of the most sacred
Passion of our Lord and Savior JESUS Christ, and in honor of his most B.
Mother the Uirgin Marie, and continue the said devotion for the space of 30.
days, shall mercifully obtain his lawful request, as has been often
experienced.

A most devout and efficacious Prayer to the ever glorious Virgin Marie.
Ever glorious and blessed Uirgin Marie, Queen of virgins, Mother of mercy,
hope and comfort of all desolate and desperate souls: through that sword of
grief which perc'd your heart, whilst your only son Christ JESUS our Lord,
suffered death and ignominy on the cross; through his filial tenderness of
purest love in your behalf, grieuing in your grief, whils't from his Cross, he
bequeathed you to the protection and care of his Vicar S. John; take pity J
beseech you on my pouerties and wants, have compassion on my anxietie and
cares, help and comfort me in all my infirmities and miseries whatsoever. You
are the Mother of mercies, the sweet comfort of the afflicted and desolate, the
only refuge of all needy and Orphans. Cast then an eye of pity on the tears
of a miserable, forlorn wretch, and hear my prayers; and seing] for just
punishment of my sins] J am surrounded with many evils and much anguish, unto
whom shall J have recourse, or where can J be more securely sheltred, then under
the mantle or your Motherly protection o Virgin Marie, my sweetest Lady, Mother
of my Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, comfort and redress of our lost nature.
Lend therefore, J beseech you, an ear of compassion and pity, to my humble
requests and prayers; J beg it, by those bowels of mercy of your dearest son;
by that sweetness wherewith he embraced our human nature, when deliberating with
the two other Divine Persons, and with secreet power of the H. Ghost [your
consent first being by the Angel demanded and obtained] GOD BECAME MAN, and 9.
months expired, vouchsafing mercifully to visit the world with his gracious
presence, came forth from the chaste enclosure of your virginal womb; J beg it,
by that anguish of mind, which your afore-sayd dear son our Lord JESUS Christ
endured at mount Oliuet, beseeching his heavenly Father to take away [if
possible] that bitter chalice of his future passion; by his three tims repeated
prayer in the garden, and your mournful stepps, when with tears you
accompaned him to that doleful spectacle of his death and sufferings; by his
whipps, scoffs, cords, ignominies, falls accusatio^s and unjust condemnation; by
that garment gayn'd at a cast at dyce; by his tears and dropps of bloody
sweat; by his silence and patience; by his fear, sadness, and grief of heart;
by his confusion and bashfullness hanging naked on a Cross, in your presence,
and in sight of the whole world; by his royal head perc'd with thorn's, and
struck with a reed; by his thirst, and pain-full potion of vinegar and gall; by
that lance that perc'd his sacred side, and by that blood and water, which
flowing thence, did shower on us, plenty of mercy and grace; by those nails
stuch into his hands and feet; by that precious soul, and sweet spirit, which
he [crying with a loud voice my God, my God why have thou forsaken me
recommended to his heavenly father, and with an inclyned head, gave up the
Ghost; saying, all is consummated; by the rending of rocks, and tearing of the
veil of the temple; by the earthquake and darck'ning of the sun and moon, by
his mercy showed to the good thief; by his adorable Cross and bitter Passion;
by his descent to Hell, and all those souls which he comforted with his
glorious sight; by the joy, glory, and victory of his H. Resurrection,
appearing unto you, his elect Uirgin Mother, and to the rest of his disciples
for 40. days; by his admirable Ascension, when you all behoulding him, he was
elevated into heaven; by the grace of the H. Paraclet, which he in fyerie
tongues infused into the hearts of his Disciples, and by their zeal, inflamed
the rest of the universe; by that last and dreadful day, when he shall come to
judge the living, and dead, and the world in fire; by all the compassion he
bore you, in this life; by the rauishing sweetness of his eyes; and by the
ineffable joy you felt, being in his sight assumed into Heaven; where, world
without end, you live and rejoice in him: comfort my heart, and hear this my
prayer, for which J am your humble suppliant. [ASKE HERE DEVOVTLY WHAT-SOEVER
YOU PLEASE] And as J am confident he can refuse nothing unto you, and does
honor you, so let me speedily, fully, and efficaciously experience your help
and comfort, according to the sweetness of your Motherly, and his Filial loving
heart, who grants mercifully the request of all that love him, and does the
will that fear him. Wherefore sweet Lady [according to my present need in this
and in all other things whatsoever, for the which J humbly inuoque your sacred
name and assista^ce] obtain for me of your dearest Son our Lord God, firm
hope in the Catholic faith, perfect Charity, true contrition of heart, a
fountain af tears, sincere confession and refrayning from sin, condign
satisfaction, love of God and my neighbor, contempt of the world, and true
patience, to suffer affronts, ignominies and [if need be] an opprobrious death,
for love of your Son our Redeemour JESUS CHRIST. Obtain for me perseverance in
good works, execution of my good purposes and Vow's, mortification of
self-will, conversation pleasing unto you, and in the last hour of my life, a
strong and true repentance, and presence to my self in word and mind, and a
happy death, Lastly for the souls of my parents, brothers, Sisters,
benefactours alive and dead, obtain for us all, J beseech you, life
everlasting. Amen.

An other Prayer to the same.
Hail blessed Virgin Marie, Mother of God, Queen of heaven, gate of paradise,
and Lady of the world. Thou art a singular pure Uirgin. Thou were conceived
without sin, conceiuedst also and brought forth without blemish, your Son
JESUS, the Creator and Redeemour of the world. All this do J believe
undoubtedly. Pray for me to JESUS your beloved Son, and free me from all evil.

AMEN.
FINIS.

