FAITH In Five Fundamental Principles, Strongly Fortified against the
Diabolical, Atheistical, blasphemous Batteries of these Times.

Serving for the conviction of Opposers, the satisfaction of Doubters, and the
Confirmation of Believers.

In a Conference which a godly Independent Minister and a godly Presbyterian
Minister had with a doubting Christian.

By E. F. a seeker of the Truth.

2 COR. 13. 8. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. LONDON,
Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bailey. 1650.

The Author to the Reader.
LIke as it is good Military policy, when the Inhabitants of one City do hear
and understand, that the common enemy has not only assaulted, but also
vanquished another City within the same Dominions, to use all the means they
can to fortify themselves against him; even so do I conceive it to be good
Christian policy, when one Christian does hear and understand that the common
enemy Satan, has not only assaulted but also vanquished the faith of others,
to use all the means he can to fortify his own. Therefore I being credibly
given to understand that this foul Fiend has vanquished the faith of some
men, touching these five Fundamental Principles, did think it to be good
policy in me, to use all the means I could to fortify my faith in them, by
searching all the Magazines I could find for the best Ammunition therein
contained, and to place it in the best order I could for my faith's defense.
And having so done (considering it to be Ammunition of that nature as might be
communicated to the defense of others, and yet be no less useful to my self,
I thought it my duty to make it common by committing it to the Press.

But yet alas what are all these humane persuasions grounded on reason, without
the testimony of Gods Spirit in our hearts, truly nothing. Let us therefore in
the reading of these things, lift up our prayer to God for the powerful work
of his Spirit to seal up unto our hearts the truth of these Principles. And
the Lord grant our Petitions for his Mercies sake in Christ.

Amen.
FAITH in five Fundamental PRINCIPLES.
INTERLOCUTORS,
A moderate Independent Minister. A moderate Presbyterian Minister. And a
tempted doubting Christian.
Presbyterian. YOu are well met, good Mr. B. whither are you going so fast this
way, if a man may know?


Ind. Why truly Mr. H. I am going whither I wish you would go also; and that is
to meet a man whom I am persuaded is truly godly, and yet by reason he has
been accustomed of late to frequent the meetings of diverse erroneous persons,
he seems to be somewhat tainted with diverse of their erroneous opinions, at
least to make question of diverse fundamental truths, and is unsettled in his
judgment; and my intent in going to meet with him, is to do mine endeavor to
show him the truth, and settle him in the same* And truly, Sir, if your
occasions will permit you, I think you shall do very well if you go with me,
and afford us your assistance.


Pres. But Sir, if we go shall we be sure to meet with him think you, and will
he be willing to confer with us?


Ind. Sir, the man seems to be of an humble spirit, and willing to see his
errors and to know the truth, and it is his own desire that I should meet him
this day at a convenient place not far hence, to answer his doubts.


Pres. Well Sir, then will I defer the business which I was going about till
to morrow, and go along with you (...) you do desire it, and spend this
afternoon with you.


Ind. The hour he has appointed for our meeting is one of the clock, and I
think it is now about that time.


Pres. Yea indeed I think it is.


Ind. Well yonder is is the place, and yonder comes the man.


Pres. Does he meet you alone?


Ind. Yea so it seems.


Christ. Oh Sir are you come according to your promise, how much am I obliged
unto you?


Ind. Yea, I am not only come my self, but meeting with this godly Minister
by the way, I have desired him to come along with me.


Christ. Sir I humbly thank you, I know Mr. H. very well, and he is very
welcome to me.


Ind. Well now my loving friend, if you will be pleased to propound your
doubts, we shall be ready to answer you as the Lord shall enable us.


Christ. Why truly, Sir, as you know I hinted unto you before, I have lately
been where many points of Divinity have been questioned and controverted, and
some of them flatly denied, which has made many scruples arise in my heart,
and especially about five fundamental principles.


Ind. What be they I pray you?


Christ. Why truly I am afraid to name them, yet being I am in hope to receive
satisfaction from you, I shall adventure to tell you:

First, that I make some question, whether there be a God.

Secondly, whether those Books which are called the Scriptures be the Word of
God.

Thirdly, Whether the Son and Holy Ghost be God?

Fourthly, Whether the soul of man be immortal?

And fifthly, Whether there shall be a resurrection of the body? And to tell
you the truth, all these things are denied by some in whose company I have
lately been.


Ind. Surely it is a sad and lamentable thing that men in these days are
grown to such a height of impiety, as flatly to deny these fundamental
truths, and so as it were to pluck up the foundation it self; surely these men
are mere Libertines and licentious men, for as the firm and strong believing
of these first Principles, is the ground of our exact and even walking with
God, so when men do not only question them, but also flatly deny them, it is
the very road way to all wickedness and ungodliness; it is therefore time
for us that are Ministers to labor to strengthen these Principles both in our
own hearts, and in the hearts of others; but blessed be God, my friend, though
you make some question of them, yet you do not flatly deny them, so that there
is much more hopes of rooting out these seeds of Atheism out of your heart,
then out of theirs who flatly deny them.


Touching the being of the Godhead.
And therefore I beseech you in the first place consider, that the first of
these five Principles, to wit, That there is a God, may be most clearly
demonstrated by plain natural reason; for, as Calvin truly says, God has
planted in all men a certain understanding of his Divine Majesty, so that all
men, none excepted do know there is a God; for indeed there is engraven in the
minds of men a certain feeling of the Godhead. And to tell you truly, this
Doctrine, That there is a God, is such a Doctrine as every man is a teacher
thereof unto himself, even from his mothers womb; yea and such a Doctrine as
the first use of reason is employed about, and which nature suffers no man to
forget: And although there have been some men so sapped in wickedness, that
they have gone about to deface their own nature in themselves, and to the
intent they might practice all wickedness without check of conscience, have
striven to persuade themselves that there is no God to call them to an account,
yet has it been manifest by their conscience accusing them for their sins,
though secretly committed, and by their quaking and trembling at the
apprehension of death approaching, that their conscience have told them by a
secret persuasion, that there is a God. And indeed it has been observed by
some of such as were professed Atheists, who though when they were in health
and prosperity, were not afraid plainly to assert that there is no God, yet
when they came to lie on their death beds, none seemed to be more afraid of a
God, and at his power to judge and condemn them as these men have been.
Whereupon Zenothe the Philosopher has this saying, If I would persuade any man
from Atheism, I would lead him to the bed of an Atheist, where he is gasping
out his last breath.

1. And that it may more plainly appear unto you that this knowledge of the
Godhead is rooted in nature, I beseech you consider that it is manifest by the
practice of the very Heathen, for there has never been heard of any Nation so
barbarous, nor no people so savage since the beginning of the world, that ever
were without some kind of Religion; let a man run from east to west, from
north to south, let him ransack all ages one after another, and every Country,
City, and Family, and wheresoever he finds a man, there shall he also find
some kind of Religion and serving of God; by the which it is evident, that all
Nations do acknowledge a God, and that it is a general effect in the heart of
every man living, and therefore it must needs come from a general cause; I
mean when we find it in the hearts of all men in all Nations and ages, then
must we needs conclude, that it is an universal effect written in the hearts
of all men naturally, by the general Author of all things, and that is the
very same whom we call God.

2. And I would entreat and beseech you also in the second place to consider,
that God has not only planted this knowledge of himself in the hearts and
minds of men, but he has also manifested himself in the whole workmanship of
the world. For according to the testimony of the Apostle, Romans 1. 19. there is
disclosed unto man so much concerning God, as to leave him without excuse,
because all men may thoroughly see his invisible things, even his very Power and
Godhead by the very creation of the world; so that as the same Apostle does
intimate, Acts 17. 27. by the very things which we see, handle, and touch, we
may know there is a God, for which way soever man turns his eyes, there is no
parcel of the world, be it never so small, wherein are not seen at least some
sparkles of his Divine Image; so that I say unto you, if you do not shut your
eyes you must needs see in the creatures a witness of the Godhead.

1. As for example, if you do but look upon your self and consider whence you
are, then must you needs acknowledge that you cannot have your being from your
self; for to have your being from your self, were as much in effect as to be a
God; but I hope you do not think you are a God, and that therefore you have not
your being from your self. Whence then had you your original? if you look to
your father, and think you had it from him, then must you needs consider that
your father had a father, and so from father to father till you come to the
first man; and if you consider the first man, you must needs conclude that he
could not make himself, for no creature can be the author of it self, for if
it could, then should it be both the cause and effect, and so consequently be
both before and after it self, which is impossible. This is most certain, that
whatsoever has a beginning is from another, for nothing that had a beginning
can be the cause of it self: But you and all men had a beginning, and therefore
from another; whence it must needs follow, that you and all men had a
beginning, and that from him who is without beginning, who can be none other
but the same whom we call God.

2. Secondly, if you do but consider the parts of your own body, and consider
so many hundred bones one fitted to another with arteries and sinews knitting
them together, their proportionable agreement and use, the excellent
workmanship that is in all your members, the boiling of your meat and drink in
your stomach, together with the disposing of part of it into neutrement, and
part of it into excrement; as also the beauty, form, and comeliness of your
body, you must needs confess, the working of these things to be wonderful,
and done by a wonderful skillful workman; and that is the very same whom we
call God.

But to speak a little more familiarly unto you, suppose that you should arrive
amongst the Indians, and there find but some silly Cottage in the desolatest
place thereof, would you not thereupon conclude with your self, surely this
Land is inhabited, some man has been here?

Christ. Yea indeed, Sir, for I could not think that it could make it self,
neither could I think that it could be made by any other creature then by man;
and besides, I should therein see some tokens of man's wit, and therefore I must
needs conclude that some man had been there.


Ind. Now then consider, I beseech you, that there are in this world an hundred
thousand things which could not make themselves, neither is it possible that
they should be made by man, for here are many things whtch are impossible for
man to know, and therefore impossible for him to make. For you know that he
that makes a Clock or a Watch, or any such thing, must needs know all the
wheels and all other parts thereof perfectly* or else he could not make them;
but many things there are in the world which no man knows, and therefore could
never make them. Whereupon I beseech you to conclude, That some wiser
workmaster then any man has made them; and that is the same whom we call God.

Again, suppose you should come into some well ordered family or house, and
see all things done according to a complete order, though you did not see any
man for the present that you did conceive were of yeere^ and discretion to do
it, yet would not you conclude that some wise Governor that cast these things
into this order had been there?


Christ. Yea indeed Sir, I must confess I should.


Ind. Why then I beseech you to consider, that in this great house of the world
there are a great multitude of men and beasts, and other things exceeding
wisely ordered, yea so ordered, as all the wisdom and power of man could never
do it. As for example, If you do but consider the excellent subordination of
the creatures, you shall see a wonderful order; if you do but cast your eyes
downward, and behold the lowest creature, in the earth, you shall perceive that
when it is wet with the dew of heaven, it nourishes the grass, and the grass
serves to nourish the beasts, and the beasts they do nourish and feed man;
whereby you may perceive the combination and connection that is amongst these
creatures; and here you may see an order from one thing to another, and all to
one end, all to serve man, and must you not then think and conclude, That man
is to serve him who is the Author of this Order; and that is the very same whom
we call God.

And if you do but cast your eyes upward, you shall perceive such an heaven so
beset and furnished with Sun, Moon, and Stars, as no man could make: And if
you look into the fabric of the world, you shall in your apprehension behold
one thing contrary to another, the water contrary to the fire, and dryness
contrary to moisture; and the nature of contraries, is one to destroy another;
and yet you may see these brought to such a comely agreement, that they do not
entrench or usurp one upon another, but match together in the composing of
many things. The Earth you know is heavy and massy, and very huge in bigness,
and there is no solid thing to uphold it, nor pillar to support it, for it is
founded upon the waters; and yet notwithstanding it is settled, or rather hung
as a Ball in the Air, and stirs not a whit. The Sea likewise does
continually threaten the Earth, and the nature thereof is to overflow the same,
and yet we see it passes not its bounds; now all these things considered, must
it not needs follow that there is a great and sovereign power which
over-ruleth all these things, who makes them thus to keep their order; and
who can that be, but only the God of Order?

Thus my loving friend, you see that the whole world, with all that is therein,
is a plain book laid open to all men, yea even for Children to read, and as
it were to spell God therein; the consideration whereof caused one learned man
Avicen.
to say, that he who acknowledges not a Godhead, is void not only of reason,
but also of sense; yea, and caused another learned man to Duples.
say, that all men ought to be forbidden to call the being of a God into
question, upon pain of being men any more.

Many other lively Characters of the Godhead stamped upon the Creatures, might
be held forth for the further confirmation thereof, but hoping that by this
time you are convinced of this truth, I will proceed no further therein at this
time.


Chris. Indeed Sir I am so convinced, for I know not how to contradict what you
have said; and therefore I pray you proceed to the next point, namely to prove
that the Scriptures are the word of God.


Touching the Scriptures, being the word of God.
Pres. WEll Sir, in my judgment you have done exceeding well touching this
point; And I hope not only done him good, but me also; for though I do
believe that there is a God, yet I hope the hearing of these your arguments,
will be a means to strengthen this my belief, and confirm this conclusion,
and add more to this my assent. But now Sir to the intent that he may perceive
that those whom they call Independent Ministers, and those whom they call
Presbyterian Ministers, do not differ but agree in these Fundamentals, let me
crave leave to speak to the next point,


Inde. With a very good will Sir I beseech you do.


Pres. Well then my good friend, I would pray you and beseech you, as you
tender the everlasting welfare of your soul, to be persuaded in your heart,
that those Books which are called the Scriptures, are the only word of that
one God which Mr. B. has I hope thoroughly convinced you of; and that they are
that only writing whereby he has showed even from the beginning, after what
manner he will be worshipped and served.

1 And that I may with arguments also convince you of this truth* I do in the
first place beseech you seriously to consider, that these Books are more
ancient then any History in the world; I tell you truly that all Historians
have been forced to confess, that the writings of Moses were before all other
writings; and that the very latest of our old Testament writers, are of more
antiquity then the ancientest Authors amongst the Heathen. Have you not read
how Eupolimus, in his book of the Kings of Jury, says that Moses taught
Letters to the Jews, the Jews to the Venetians, and the Venetians to the
Greeks; also Diodorus of Sicilia, says that he understood by the Egyptians,
that Moses was the first Lawgiver of all; now the learned do agree, that the
antiquity of the Scripture does show and prove both the trunesse and divineness
of them.

2 And I would also in the second place, entreat you seriously to consider that
the majesty and authority of the great God of heaven, does wonderfully appear
in the manner of the delivery of his mind in these books, no proeme is there
used, but thus says the Lord, no reason is rendered, but I the Lord have spoken
it: So that they do require credit to be given to the matter, only because
the Lord has spoken it; the duty of every man is therein required without
respect of person, the King and Ruler is there told his duty as well as the
Subject, judgments are there threatened against the Rich man, as well as
against the Poor; there are duties prescribed to the inner man, as well as to
the out-ward man; they require obedience in heart, as well as obedience in
life, they prescribe laws to the thoughts to which no man can pierce, they
forbid lusting and coveting, which no writing of man does. Now who can
prescribe laws to the heart and thoughts, but only he who knows the heart
and thoughts, and that is God only.

And in the third place, I would also bebeseech you seriously to consider, that
the matter contained in those books which we call the Scriptures, does wholly
tend to the exalting of God, and debacing of man, the power, wisdom, justice
and mercy of God, is abundantly set forth in these books, and so is man's
vanity and weakness, yea the greatest sins, and foulest faults of Gods own
people are there left upon record; yea the penmen of these books, were so void
of all carnal affections in their writings, that they neither spared
themselves, nor their dearest and nearest friends in their writings; an example
whereof you may see in Moses, Numb. 27. 13. 14. Deuteronomy. 32. 51. Exodus 6. 20. Number.
12. 1. And also in the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13. from whence we may truly
frame this argument:

That that Doctrine which tends to the advancement of Gods glory, and the
debacing of man must needs be of God, for man's Doctrine does always tend to
his own glory, but the Doctrine contained in those books which we call the
Scripture, do wholly tend to the glory of God, and the debacing of man, as you
have heard; and therefore we must needs conclude they are the word of God.

4 And in the fourth place I would beseech you to consider, that the Doctrine
contained in those books which we call the Scriptures, are both above and
opposite to the wisdom and will of man, as he is by nature; so that it is not
only above the natural power of man to understand them, but also directly
contrary to his will, to yield obedience thereunto; there is neither precept
nor prohibition contained in these books that is agreeable to man's natural
disposition, but directly contrary thereunto; there is no man that is
acquainted with, and takes notice of the disposition of his own heart, but he
finds by experience that naturally he bears little love to the Scriptures,
and that by the little delight he has to read or meditate therein; nay do we
not see, that for the most part, those young men and others that have nothing
in them but flesh and blood, had rather read in any vain book, then in the
Bible; whence we may truly frame this argument, That that Doctrine which is
directly contrary to the wisdom and will of man, must needs be of God; for
man's Doctrine is always agreeable to the wisdom and will of man; but the
Doctrine conained in those books which we call the Scripture, is directly
opposite and contrary to the wisdom and will of man, and therefore these
books must needs be of God.

5 And in the fifth place I would beseech you to consider, that the Doctrine
contained in these books which we call the Scriptures, is altogether heavenly,
and savoureth nothing of an earthly and worldy affection, but every where
renounceth and condemns the same; they do wholly tend to the withdrawing of
man from all earthly things, and to the leading of him to salvation in God;
these Books do point out unto man, wherein true and eternal blessedness
does consist, and how he may attain unto it; there he may see how man by
sin became the enemy of God; and how he may be reconciled unto God, and
saved eternally; there he may see the incomprehensible love of God in Jesus
Christ toward man. Whence we may truly frame this argument, That that
Doctrine which tends to the withdrawing of man from all earthly things, and
to the leading of him to salvation in God, must needs be of God; but the
Doctrine contained in those books which we call the Scriptures, do wholly
tend to that end, and therefore they must needs be of God.

6 And in the Sixth place I would beseech you to consider, that the prophesies
contained in those books which we call the Scriptures, are not general,
doubtful, and abscure, as the Oracles of the heathen are, but particular and
plain, such as express the persons and things by their names, as you may see,
1 King. 13. 2, 3. Isa. 45. 1. I tell you truly, if we do compare the prophesies
contained in Scripture, with the fulfilling of, them we shall perceive that
they cannot be attributed to any thing else saving the inspiration of the most
wise God, as may sufficiently appear by the comparing the prophesies of the
old Testament touching Christ; the calling of the Gentiles, and rejection of
the Jews, with the accomplishment of them in the new; besides the foretelling
of things to come so precizely, and manifestly, and so long before hand, and
the fulfilling of them at the very instant of time foretold, does abundantly
show that these books are not of man but of God.

7 And in the seventh place I would entreat you to consider, that there is in
those books which we call the Scriptures a most holy and heavenly consent, and
agreement of all the parts thereof together, though written in sundry Ages, by
sundry men in sundry places; by the which it is manifest that God guided all
their hearts in writing of them.

8 And in the eighth and last place, I would entreat you to consider, that
these books which we call the Scriptures, have ever been hated and opposed by
the Devil and all wicked men; they have had many and mighty enemies, and
adversaries, who have endeavored by all the means they could, utterly to
extinguish them, yet could they never do it; and though the raging floods of
the Roman Tyrants, have overflowed these books, yet could they never drown
them, no nor yet deface them; they have been condemned to the fire, yet could
they never be burnt, but have ever been preserved by the wonderful providence
of God, in dispight of the Devil and all wicked men, which must needs put all
out of doubt, that these books are not from man, but from God.


Inde. Indeed Mr. H. you have spoken to this point according to mine own heart;
and I hope he is convinced, that the Scriptures are the word of God; and I
shall be glad to hear you speak to the next point also.


Pres. O no Mr. B. if I speak to one, I beseech you, do you speak to another.


Touching the Deity of the Son, and Holy Ghost.
Inde. Well then if it must be so, then I beseech you my friend consider that
the Deity of the Son and holy Ghost, is clearly and manifestly proved by the
Testimony of holy Scripture; and first as touching the deity of the Son, I
would entreat you to consider that there are in Scripture many such things
asscribed unto him, as cannot be properly ascribed unto any but God only; do
you not know that in Joh. 3. 31. Heb. 1. 3. Joh. 15. 16. and 17. he is said to
be Omnipotent, and to have the same equal power with the Father; and how could
he be so, if he were not God? And do you not know that in Mat. 9. 6. Mar. 2.
5, 7, 9. It is said that he forgiveth sins by his own proper power and
authority? and who can do that but God only? And do you not know that in
Mat. 9. 4, 5. Mar. 2. 8. He is said to know the secrets of man's heart; and who
can do that but God only? And do you not know that in Col. 1. 16. he is said
to be the Creator of all things? and in Heb 1. 3. he is said to be the upholder
of all things; and who can do that but God only? and do you not know that in
Mat. 14. 25. he is said to walk upon the waters; and can any do that of
himself, but God only.

And so in very deed we find all his actions whilst he lived here on earth, to
make sufficient proof, that he was God as well as man; for though we read Luke
2. 7. that he was borne of his mother, and wraped in swaddling Clouts, as he was
man; yet we read Mat. 2. 11. That the Star does manifest him, and the wisemen
do worship him as he was God; And though we read, Mat. 3. 16. that he was
Baptized in Jordan as he was man; yet the same verse tells us, that the holy
Ghost descends on him from heaven, as he was God. And though we read, Mat. 4.
1. that he was tempted of the Devil as he was man; yet we also read verse 10.
that he overcomes and expells the Devil as he was God. And though it be said
Ioh. 4. 6. Mat. 21. 18. Ioh. 19. 28. that he was weary, hungry, and thirsty
as he was man; yet is it also said Mat. 11. 28. Ioh. 6. 35. Ioh. 7. 37. that he
refreshes the weary, is the bread of life for the hungry, and gives drink to
the thirsty as he is God; and though we read, Luke 8. 23. 24. That he sleeps
in the Ship, and his disciples awake him as he is man; yet we read in the same
place, that he rebukes the wind, and the raging of the waters as he is God;
And though we read, Mat. 26. 37. that he was sorrowful and heavy, and wept,
Ioh. 11. 35. as he was man; yet do we also read, Ioh. 14. 1. 18. that he
comfort his sorrowful and heavy Disciples as he was God; and though it be
said Mat. 27. that he cried out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? as
he was man; yet it is also said, Luke 23. 43. that he comfort the good
Thief immediately after, saying, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, as
he was God; and though we read, Mat. 27. 50. 60. that he dyed, and was laid in
the Grave as he was man, yet do we also read, Ioh. 10. 18. Luke 24. 6. that he
had power to raise, yea and did raise himself to life again as he was God;
though we read Luke 24. 15. 31. that he talks, and walks, and eats with hs
Disciples after his Resurrection, as he was man; yet we also read, Act. 1. 9.
that he ascended up into Heaven, as he was God. And this I hope is sufficient
to convince you of the Godhead of the second person in Trinity, called the Son.

And that the third person in Trinity called the holy Ghost is also God, is
likewise evident and clear from Scripture; and that first of all from the
testimony of Moses, Genesis 1. 2. where he shows, that even before the Creation,
the spirit of God was busied in the preserving of the confused lump of things,
which does sufficiently demonstrate that he is God. And how fully does the
Prophet Isaiah confirm it, Chap. 48. verse 16. saying, And now the Lord God
and his Spirit has sent me. And when it said in the 6. Chap. and third verse
of the same prophecy, that the Angel did acknowledge one God whom they
worship to be holy, and do three times, one answering another, style him so,
surely they do thereby show the mystery of the Trinity.

And it is evident by their writings, that ancient Jews before Christ did note
this mystery of the Trinity, in their exposition of the word Jehovah, adding
moreover, that this mystery was to be kept secret, until the coming of the
Messiah, who should more clearly reveal it.

And indeed not only the Deity of the Son, but also of the holy Ghost, is far
more clearly manifested in the new Testament then in the Old, for the same
person whom the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 6. 3. 5. calls Jehovah. The Apostle
Paul repeating the very same words, Act. 28. 25. says it was the holy Ghost
that spoke them. And whereas all the Prophets in the Old Testament, do
ordinarily say, Thus says the Lord; the Apostles in the new Testament do
ordinarily say, Thus says the holy Ghost, Act. 21. 11. and the holy Ghost
said, Act. 13. 12. And the holy Ghost testifies, Act. 20. 21. and so in like
manner, the author to the Hebrews, repeating that saying, Psalm. 95. 7. To day
if ye will hear his voice, brings them in thus, Wherefore as the holy Ghost
says, Heb. 3. 7. And whereas the Lord tells Moses Exodus 4. 11. That it is he
alone which gives to man a mouth, and wisdom to speak; the Apostle Paul
tells us, 1 Cor. 12. 10. that it is the Spirit which gives it to man.

And so in the new Testament we find, that as unto the second person, so unto
the third, are ascribed the very same name, artributes and works, which
properly belong unto God; as for instance, if you look into 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.
you shall find that the Apostle does give unto the Spirit of God, the very
name of God, telling the believing Corinthians, that they are the Temple of
God, because the holy Ghost dwells in them; and if you look into 2 Cor. 6.
16, 17, 18. you shall find that the Apostle calls the holy Ghost the Lord
almighty; and if you look into Act. 5. 3. you shall find that the Apostle
Peter tells Annanias, that he had lied unto the holy Ghost, and that he might
give him to understand, that the holy Ghost is God, he tells him verse. 5.
that he had lied unto God; and if you look into Act. 10. you shall find that
in one place it is said, that Cornelius was warned of God to send for Peter;
and in another place you shall find, that the holy Ghost himself tells
Peter that he had sent him; and if you look into 1 Cor. 2. 10. you shall
find the Apostle telling you, that the Spirit scarcheth all things, even the
secret or deep things of God. Now if to search the heart of man, and to know
the secrets thereof, be proper to God only, as you may see it is Ier. 17. 10.
much more to know the secrets of God, is proper to God only; and if you look
into Heb. 9. 14. you shall find that eternity is attributed unto the holy
Ghost, in that the Apostle in express terms calls him the eternal Spirit;
and if you look into 1 Cor. 12. 9, 10. you shall find that the power which
the Apostles had to work miracles and wonders, was from the holy Ghost; now it
is proper to God only, to work miracles and wonders, and therefore the holy
Ghost must needs be God. To conclude, if you look into 1 Pet. 5. 10. you shall
find that God is styled the God of all Graces; and if you look into Ephe. 5.
9. and into Gal. 5. 22. you shall find that all graces in the faithful are the
fruits of the spirit of God, whereby it is evident, that the spirit of God is
God; and thus you see it is evident by scripture, that both the Sun and holy
Ghost are God equal with the Father, and that there are three persons in one
Divince Essence.


Christ. I know Sir, that you Ministers do speak and write much of the
mystery of the Trinity, and that there are three persons, and yet but one God,
and that none of the three persons are greater or lesser then the other, nor
none before or after other, but for my part I cannot conceive how it can be,
and therefore cannot believe it.


Inde. But you ought to believe it, because the Scripture does so fully prove
it, though you cannot conceive how it can be; nevertheless for the helping of
you to conceive how it can be, I pray you consider that it is manifest by Gods
effects and doings, that there is in him a working nature or power, and in
every of his works, there is a singular cunning and a wonderful order; whence
it is evident that there is in God, a sovereign understanding; and there is
nothing in God, that is not his very essence or being, whereupon it follows
that God, not only has understanding, but that his understanding is his very
essence, that is, he is very understanding it self, and that from everlasting;
and God is a meare doing, and therefore this his understanding must needs be
everlastingly doing; and what can it meet withal from everlasting, to be
exercised upon but it self, therefore of necessity this understanding of God,
must needs yield a reflection back again to it self, and so conceive and beget
in it self, a perfect image of its own self; which indeed is the very same
thing, which in the Trinity we call the Son, or the word namely, the lively and
perfect image and wisdom of the Father; and in regard that this understanding
in God is everlastingly doing, this second person must needs be everlasting;
and in regard that the being of the Father, and his understanding are both one,
and his very essence, therefore the being of the secong person, who is begotton
by the Fathers understanding, or minding of himself, must needs be the same;
whereupon we may conclude, that look what the Father is, the same is the Son,
only they differ in the way of relation

Again in the second place, I pray you consider, that in God there is not
only an understanding, but also a will; and this will so far as we be able
to discern it by the effects, is a certain ability, whereby he applies his
workfull power; and this will is his very essence, as well as his
understanding, and is still a doing, as well as his understanding from all
eternity; and therefore as his understanding by a certain reflection of it
self upon it self, has begotten us a second person, whom we call the Son; so
this will which works everlastingly, having none other thing to work upon
but it self, does also by his working stricke back upon it self, and
delights it self in that infinite good which it knows there, and so
sheddeth out it self wholly to the loving thereof; and by this action it
brings us forth a third person, whom we call the Spirit or holy Ghost: That
is to say, the mutual kindness, and lovingnesse of the Father toward the
Son, and of the Son toward the Father, of the Father the understander, toward
the Son conceived and begotten, by his understanding; and of the Son back
again toward the Father, acknowledging all that he has, and all that he is
to be of the Father; now because there always goes some act of the
understanding before the act of the will, therefore we say the third person is
not only from the will, but also from the understanding; and because he is
from two, and that by act of will, and understanding, therefore we term him
proceeding and not begotten; and because the third person proceeds of Gods
will and understanding, and Gods will and understanding is his essence, and of
his essence can nothing proceed which is not his essence, it must needs follow,
that the third person is not only coeternal, and coequall, but also
coessentially; for as to be, and to understand are all one in God, so to will
and to understand are all one in him; and so all three come into one essence;
so that as we have God of God, that is to say the Son of the Father, by the
everlasting in working of the understanding; so have we also God of God again,
that is to say, the holy Ghost, or love of them both, by the joint working of
the understanding and will together; whereupon we conclude three distinck
persons, or in beings in one essence; and though we say, speaking after the
manner of men, that the act of the understanding goes before the act of the
will; yet are we not to imagine any going before, or coming after in these
persons, but only to lay forth these things according to the order of nature.
And now by this time, I hope you do perceive the evident foot-stepts of three
in beings, or persons in one essence.


Chris. But Sir, the thing which I must desire to hear, is some resemblance of
these things in the Creatures.


Indep. If you would have resemblance of these things in the Creatures, then I
pray you consider, that the Sun begets his one beams, which the Poets do
call the Sun of the Sun; and from them two proceeds light, which imparteth it
self to all things here beneath; and yet is not the one of them before the
other; for neither is the Sun before his beams, or the Sun or his beams
before the light, otherwise then in consideration of order and relation, in
that the beams are begotten, and the light is proceeding, which is an apparent
image of what I have said. Likewise in waters, we have the head of them in the
Earth, and the Spring boiling out of it, and the stream which is made of them
both, and sheddeth it self far from thence; yet it is but one self same
continual and unseparable essence, which has neither forenesse nor afternesse
in regard of time, but only in regard of order, and our considerations of it;
for the well head is not a head, but in respect of the Spring; nor the Spring a
Spring, but in respect of the well head; nor the Stream a Stream, but in
respect of them both; and so all three be but one water, and cannot almost be
considered without one another; which is also an express mark of the
original relations, and persons coessentiall in the only one essence of God;
other resemblances hereof might be showed; but I hope by this time, you do
behold this mystery more clearly; and therefore thus much shall suffice to have
been spoken touching this point.


Touching the Immortality of the Soul.
Pres. SIr, you have in my judgment spoken to this point most briefly, and
plainly; and yet fully I hope for his conviction; And now it falling to my lot
to speak to the next point, I say unto you my dear friend, that as touching
the immortality of the soul, I hope you will now give credit to the Scripture;
And therefore I would entreat you seriously to consider, that this truth is
confirmed Eccle. 12. 7. where the wise man tells us, that at death the dody
returns to the dust, and the spirit to God that gave it; and therefore
assuredly the soul dies not with the body, but is immortal. And in Act. 7.
59. it is said that when the martyr Stephen was at the point of death, he cried
out Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, meaning thereby none other thing, but when
that his soul should depart out of his body, Christ Jesus shoul be the
perpetual keeper of it; and therefore assuredly it dyed not with the body, but
is immortal. And in Luke 23. 43. it is recorded, that when our Savior hung
upon the Cross, he said unto the good Thief, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise; whence I pray you take notice, that he could not be there with him in
the body, for that was immediately dead and buried; therefore the meaning must
needs be, that his soul was gathered with the soul of Christ into Paradise, and
so consequently it dyed not with the body. And in Phil. 1. 23. the Apostle
said, that he desired to be dssolved, and to be with Christ; by the which it
is evident that he was assured, that so soon as his spirit did take leave of
his body, he should be happy in the enjoyment of the Lord Jesus Christ. And
does not the same Apostle plainly witness the same truth, 2 Cor. 5. 8. in
saying when the souls of believers are absent from the body, they are present
with the Lord? And does not the Apostle Peter likewise seal to the same truth,
2 Pet. 1. 14. In giving us to understand, that there was some thing in his
bodily tabernacle which must not be put off, which could be none other thing
but his soul; and we may assure our selves, that if the soul did dye with the
body, our Savior would never have brought in the soul of Lazarus joying in
Abraham's bosom after his death, nor yet the soul of the Rich man in Hell
torments, Luke 16. 23. Many other testimonies of holy Scripture might be bought
for the further confirmation of this truth, but I hope these are sufficient.


Chris. But Sir, because I could never yet see either in my self, or in any
other man, any thing but a body; I could never conceive what a thing the soul
should be, nor how it differs from the body; and indeed this has made me of
late to be of their judgments, who hold that the soul and body are both one,
and that the soul dies with the body.


Pres. Well, to the intent that I may clear these things unto you, I pray you
first of all to consider, that Moses tells us Genesis 2. 7. That after the Lord
had formed man's body of the dust of the earth, he breathed into his nostrils
the brtath of life, whereby you may perceive that the soul is of a spiritual
nature, and an uncorruptible substance, and not a body. In the creation of the
soul, says a learned Author, The almighty Author of the French Acad.
made a blast, not of his own nature, nor of his Creature the Air, but even
of nothing, and so new in the ordinary generation of man, the soul is placed in
the body, not by virtue of nature, it is not begotten or produced by nature,
but properly and peculiarly by the special working of God; so that although the
soul lives and dwells in the body, sustaining and moving it; yet it is a
certain substance several from the body; and though the body has no life in
it self, and therefore cannot subsist without the soul, yet can the soul
subsist and live, and preserve it self in its substance, after that it is
separated from the body; the soul is therefore so far from dying, and
corrupting with the body, that it keeps it alive and incorrupt whilst it is
in the body, and does live, move and understand, after that it is out of the
body, and though you see nothing but the body, yet by the doing of the soul,
you may perceive there is a soul, and what the soul is; for the soul being of a
spiritual nature, as aforesaid, and not a bodily, we cannot see it in its own
substance or nature, nor have any knowledge thereof, but by the testimony of
the word, and by the effects thereof.


Chris. Well then Sir, as you have been pleased to give me some light and
knowledge of the soul, by the testimony of the Word; so I beseech you do your
endeavor, to add somewhat more to my knowledge, by showing unto me what be the
effects of the soul.


Pres. Well friend, seeing you do desire it, I shall by the Lords assistance
endeavor to let you see this truth more clearly, by natural reasons drawn
from the effects of the soul; for the truth is, natural reasons are as beams
of the light of Gods Word, and helps that may greatly further us in the
understanding of the souls immortality.

1. And therefore in the first place, I beseech you take notice, that if you
do consider of that eternity which was before the creation of the world, your
thought is not able to comprehend it; but if you do enter into consideration
of times, which shall still follow after us unto all eternity, you shall find
your self better able to comprehend that, and have a more clear in-sight into
it, which shows that although your soul is not eternal in regard of beginning;
yet is it eternal and immortal in regard of end, and was created to live an
eternal life.

Secondly, I pray you consider, that in as much as man's soul was not created
with his body, as the souls of beast were, and that it is not now begotten by
way of ordinary generation, as the souls of all living Creatures are, we are
thereby taught, that God did not intend, that any thing in nature should
extinguish man's soul, nor destroy it; for if he had so intended, then would
he have created, and have ordered it to have come into men by way of ordinary
generation, as he has done touching all other living Creatures that are
mortal; and therefore we may hence undoubtly conclude, that man's soul is
immortal.

Thirdly, I beseech you seriously to consider, that the souls of beasts do
only desire things present; and their desire of some present good, proceeds
not from any knowing virtue that is in them, but only from a sensible virtue;
for though beasts have a soul whereby they live and move, yet is not their
soul partaker of understanding; but man naturally has knowledge of an
eternity, yea and a disposition to believe it, and to conceive it to be a good
and profitable thing for him, and thereupon does he desire it, as it is evident
by that man naturally has to live, (if it were possible) always; There is not
says a learned Author, so base a mind to be Duples. truness Christ. Religion.
found, which coveteth not to live for ever; and because they see by the daily
examples of mortality, that they themselves must dye, therefore they do
endeavor to make their names eternal as much as may be, as does evidently
appear by their care of, and love to, their issue and posterity; and by their
endeavoring to do some extraordinary act, in their life time, worthy of
eternal fame; and by their Tombs and Sepulchers which they build, to make
their names as eternal as they can; and to what end should man desire this, if
there were not a possibility of attaining it? nay we may assure our selves,
that God would not have implanted this natural desire in man, but that there
is such a thing attainable by man; for if he had plainted in man a desire of a
thing unattainable, he had dealt worse with man then he has done with beasts,
who neither know nor believe, nor desire any such thing; from whence we may
also conclude, that our souls being created immortal, they do well conceive
of an immortality, or an everlastingnesse without end.

Fourthly, I would beseech you seriously to consider, that the brute beasts do
fear a present evil of punishment, in this life only, but man naturally does
fear the evil of punishment, after the end of his life; for there is a natural
impression stamped in man, that vice must be punished after death, as it is
evident in that there was never any nation so barbarous, but they were observed
naturally to put a difference betwixt virtue and vice, so far forth as they
knew it; and so to have joy and content when they practiced virtue, and to have
fear and sorrow when they practiced vice; and that neither for hope of reward,
nor fear of punishment in this life; And I dare boldly say, that if a Man who
has committed some gross sin, should be by reason of the secrecy in the
committing of it, be confident that it should never be so much as known to any
one man, woman or child, in the time of this life, yet could he not be without
fear, whenever he thought upon it. And what though some Epicures among us,
are for the present so swallowed up in the pleasures of this life, that they
have no thought of being called to an account for their sins, either in this
life, or at the end of this life; yet when did you ever hear of any such man,
that has not at the hour of death been afraid of the judgment to come? for
mine own part, I am confident that there was never any man, that when he
apprehended death near approcahing, could then persuade his Conscience that
his Soul was mortal, and should dye with his body, but then (though it may be
too late) he begins to think within himself what shall become of his soul;
and could then with all his heart, wish that he had lived the life of the
righteous; and why is all this? but because man naturally does believe that his
soul is immortal, and shall come to judgment.

Fifthly, I would also beseech you seriously to consider, that although man's
body, I mean his sensual appeitite, can with the sensual appetite of beasts,
find rest and content inearthly things here below, yet is his soul in a
perpetual motion, and can find no rest nor content in any earthly thing; and
that because it has a secret longing desire after God, though it know it not;
for as a child that is newborn, does by a natural instinct, in strength of
desire cry after the dugg, and yet knows not what it wants, even so man's
poor soul does desire God; and yet through the blindness of his
understanding, it knows not what it wants; and like as if an ignorant nurse
should offer the child such food as its tender age is not capable of
receiving, it would not be contented, but would still in strength of desire,
cry after the dugg; even so though a man should offer his soul a world of
Creatures, yet will they not content it; for I dare boldly say, that no
earthly-minded man ever met with so much profits, pleasures, or honors in this
world, as did fully content and satisfy him; indeed man's sensual appetite may
feed upon earthly delights, and be as it were filled with the creature; but
what can fill man's mind? not all the world; for it is certain says a learned
and godly Mr. Boulton discourse true hap.
Author, though one man were not only crowned with the soverainty of all the
Kingdoms of the earth, but besides were made commander of the motions of the
Sun, and the glory of the Stars; yet the restless eye of man's unsatisfied
understanding, would peep and pry beyond the heavens, for some hidden
excellency, and supposed felicity, which the whole compass of this created
World cannot yield; so unquenchable is the thirst of man's soul, until it bath
it self in the River of life, and the immeasurable Ocean of goodness ( viz)
until it lives in him, and of him, in whom all things do live, and by whom
all things are upheld. Now then as in natural things, we may know by their
motion where is their resting place; even so by the motion of man's soul toward
God, we may certainly conclude that God is the resting place thereof, which
indeed is a sure testimony, that man's soul is an immortal essence, and so
shall never dye.

Sixthly and lastly, I would pray you to consider, that although man's body may
decay, dye, and perish if it want corporal food, yet will not his soul; for
what can make the soul decay, dye, and perish? can want of corporal food? No,
for it can skill to feed upon things above the world; for the mind of man is so
nimble, that even by way of view, it feeds upon all things; take from it
sensible things, and the things of the understanning remain with it still,
bereave it of al earthly things, and the heavenly remain abundantly, and then
it feeds at greatest ease, and makes best cheer agreeable to its own
nature; the plain truth is, the soul lives best when it is most freest from
all things in this world; it is well known that those who want their eyesight,
have their minds most apt to understand, and most firm to remember, because
their eyes are not busied about the beholding of outward objects, and when we
shut our eyes, then are we best able to conceive of things spiritual in our
minds; yea, and if we consider the matter well, we shall find that when our
senses are most quenched, then does our soul most labor to surmount her
self; and the more the body decreaseth, the more does the soul increase, as it
is commonly seen when a man draws nigh unto death, the soul has then the
most care of her own eternal welfare, in so much as it has been observed,
that when a body has been very far spent, bare, consumed and withered, so that
whosoever looks upon it sees nothing but earth, yet such a man has been heard
speak most spiritually and heavenly. Now when a man does behold such a lively
soul, in so weak and withered a body; may he not say as it is said of hatching
of Chickens, the shell is broken, but there comes forth a Chicken? and may he
not hence conclude, that for the soul to continue in its being, it has no need
of the body? nay may he not hence conclude more then this, namely for the soul
to work and do well, it ought either to be without the body, or else to be
utterly unsubject to the body? and that the full and perfect life of the soul,
is the full and utter withdrawing thereof from the body, and whatsoever the
body is made of; for though the soul be the form of the body, yet it being no
material form, the more it is discharged of the matter, the more it retains
its own peculiar form. To conclude then, seeing that the nature, the
nourishment, and the actions of our souls are so far different from the
nature, nourishment, and actions of our bodies, and from all that is done, or
wrought by our bodies; can there be any thing more childish, then to imagine
our souls to be mortal, because of the mortality of our bodies? And now my
good friend, I hope by this time, your soul has so beheld her self, in the
glass of her own marvelous actions, that she will henceforth conclude her self
to be immortal.


Touching the Resurrection of the body.
Christ. WEll Sir, I do acknowledge that you have very sufficiently proved the
immortality of the soul; and now if Mr. B. will be pleased to prove the
Resurrection of the body, then we shall have done.


Inde. Surely friend, the Scripture is exceeding full and clear for this
point; and therefore I pray you first of all consider, that Job says in plain
terms, Job. 19. 25. I know my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms destroy my body, yet
in my flesh I shall see God. Now does not this Scripture plainly hold forth,
under us the certainty of the Resurrection of the body, in that this holy man
does profess, he does believe that he shall see God with these very eyes, at
that day; And I would also entreat you to consider, that the prophet Isai.
says, Chapter 26, 19. Thy dead men shall live etc. In which words, the prophet
speaks of the Resurrection of the Saints, giving us to understand that all
those Saints who dye, and whose bodies are laid in the dust, all those shall
certainly rise again to life; And I would also beseech you to consider that in
Ezekiel. 37. the Prophet speaks most excellency of the Resurrection of the dead,
in showing that a spirit of life and power, shall come upon the dry bones and
dust of the Saints, and that they shall live in the presence of God; And I
would also entreat you seriously to consider, that the prophet Daniel tells
us, that many who sleep in the dust shall awake, Some to everlasting life, and
some to everlasting shame and contempt: And surly our Savior does confirm the
same, by uttering almost the same words, Joh. 5. 28. 29. saying, They that are
in the Graves shall here the voice of the Son of man, and shall come forth;
they that have done good to the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil, to the resurrection of condemnation. And consider I beseech you, that
Jesus Christ himself is risen from the dead, and doubtless he did not rise as
a private person; he did not rise privately for himself, but as a public
person, representing all the faithful; and hence it is that the Apohle says,
1 Cor. 15. 13. If there be no resurrecteon of the dead, then is Christ not
risen. And again in the same Chapter, verse 19. he concluds, that if there be
no resurrection of the dead, then the faithful are of all men most miserable.
But says the same Apostle to the comfort of the Thessalonians, who seemed to
make some question of the Resurrection, if we believe that Jesus Christ dyed
and rose again, even so them also that 1 These. 4. 29.
sleep in Jesus Christ will he bring with him. And I beseech you also to
consider, that it is said Revel. 20. 21, 15. And I saw the dead both great and
small stand before God, and the Sea gave up her dead which were in her, and
death and hell delivered up the dead. To conclude, I would pray you to mind
the Argument which our Savior uses to prove the Resurrection of the dead Mat
22. 32. in saying, God is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. And God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living. But he should not be the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jocob; if they should not rise again from the dead, many
other places of Scripture might be brought for the further confirmation of this
truth if it were needful, and especially out of the new Testament, for in very
deed there is no Doctrine more plainly and fully taught in the new Testament,
then the Doctrine of the Resurection; and therefore unless we will make both
Christ and his Apostles liars, and all the Ministers of the Gospel Cheaters,
Juglers and Deceivers of the people; we must needs acknowledge the
Resurrection of the body; and soothly, if there were no Resurrection, the most
just and righteous God should seem to be unjust, and unrighteous, who many
times in the time of this life, does not reward the godly as he has promised,
nor punish the wicked as he has threatened; and hence it is that the Apostle
says, 2 These. 1. 6. it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble the Saints, and to them that are troubled,
rest when the Lord Jesus Christ shall be reveled from Heaven.


Chris. But I cannot conceive how it is possible, that when our bodies are
consumed to dust, they should be raised again; and besides, some men's body
have been drowned in the Sea and eaten of Fishes, how then is it possible that
all men should rise again as you say?


Inde. Though it be impossible with men, yet it is not impossible with God, for
with him all things are possible, yea not only possible, but also easy: and
therefore I beseech you be persuaded of it, as an undoubted truth; that that
God who in the beginning was able to create all things of nothing, is much more
able to make every man's body at the Resurrection of his own matter, for
doubtless it is a harder matter for him to make man of nothing out of the
dust; and although until the day of Judgment, the dust of all men buried, do
lie in Common together in the bowels of the earth, and that also with the dust
of beasts; yet if a man skillfull in seeds, be able to separate one seed from
another; and if a man skillful in mettels, be able to separate and distinguish
the earth and dust of Gold from the earth and dust of Silver, and so of other
metals; then surely the great and wise Creator of man, Seeds and Metals, and
all things else, is able to distinguish the dust of men from the dust of
beasts, and the dust of one man's body from the dust of another; and though the
bodies of some men be burnt to ashes, and the bodies of other devoured of wild
beasts, and others drowned in the Sea, and eaten of Fishes; yet God is able,
and will certainly gather together in one, every man's body, and they shall all
receive that substance which belongs to them, so that there shall not be an
heir of their head wanting to any one of them.


Chris. But Sir, can you show me any resemblance of the resurrection in nature.


Inde. Yea, we have many resemblances thereof in nature, for what does the
world daily, in the elements and creatures thereof, but imitate our
Resurrection; as for example, do we not see by the degrees of times, the
whithering and failing of the leaves from the trees, the intermission of their
fruits etc. And behold upon the sudden, from a dry and dead tree, by a kind
of Resurrection the leaves break forth again, the fruits wax bigh and ripe,
and the whole tree apareled with a fresh beauty; consider we also the little
seed, whereout the tree arises, and let us comprehend if we can, how in that
smallness of seed, so mighty a tree can be where were the Wood, the Bark,
the glory of the beams, the plenty of the fruit, when we first sowed it, when
we first threw it into the ground, were any of these things apparent? no they
were not, what marvel is it then, if of the dust of the earth, God at his
pleasure remarke man, when from the smallest seeds he is able to produce so
bigg a tree; do we not also see the dying of the day daily into night, and
freshly arising again in the morning, as if it had never dyed. Aagin, do we
not see that before the Corn can grow and bear fruit, it must be first cast
into the ground, and there rott; and even as it springs up again, and the
Lord gives to every grain its own body, even so at the Resurrection shall
every man be raised up with his own body. And again, both Philosophers and
Divines tell us, that the Phoenix is first consumed to ashes by the heat of the
Sun, and that afterward of her ashes arises a young one. Lastly, to mention
no more, the swallows, worms, and Fishes, which have layen dead in the winter;
yet in the spring time, by virtue of the heat of the Sun, they revive again;
thus you see that the whole Creation does as it were writ a Cmmentary, to give
us assurance of the Resurrection of the dead, and so I hope this may suffice to
assure you of the Resurrection.


Chris. Well Gentlemen; I must confess you have said more for the confirmation
of the truth of these points, then I had thought could have been said, and I
hope that my heart shall be hereby the better established therein whilst I
live, and with many thanks unto you both for your pains, I take my leave of you.


Inde. Fare you well good friend, and the Lord write the truth of these points
In your heart, by the power of his own Spirit.


Pres. The Lord be with you, and grant that what we have said, may take deep
impression both in your heart and ours, that we may be fully confirmed in the
truth of these points. Amen,


FINIS.

