ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Sir HENRY VANES Book, ENTITLED The Retired Man's
Meditations.

EXAMINING His Doctrine concerning Adam's Fall, Christ's Person, and Sufferings,
Justification, Common and Special Grace; And many other things in his Book.

By Martin Finch, Preacher of the Gospel.

And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto
Fables, 2 Timothy 4.4. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Barber, and are sold at the Lamb
in Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

To the Reader.
Reader,
ALL ^ruths whatsoever are precious, as coming from a God of immense truth and
goodness, and as tending to the deliverance of poor creatures from the slavery
wherein all are naturally held.

The more clearly truth breaks forth and shines, the more does the great Enemy
who is a liar, and the Father of lies, oppose it.

In shaking times nothing does more discover a disciple of Christ indeed, then
continuing in Christ's words; he has promised that such shall know the truth,
and the truth shall make them free. We never had more need to put the promise in
suit (ye shall know the truth) then at this day when so many study to darken
it, and by cunning craftiness lie in wait to deceive.

Of all truths, those about Justification are the most precious; and the least
diminution of that must needs wound the heart deep where it is clearly
evidenced; that is indeed the Pearl; if that be safe, all is safe: Whether this
be entrenched upon or no by the book that is here answered, the spiritual
Reader can easily judge. The Gentleman is known to be a man of great honor,
and of eminent parts; but truth is most honorable of all; all titles must
stoop to it, and it will be justified against whomsoever by her children.

The Answerer (though he have not followed the Author from point to point, yet)
has cleared those passages that seemed to be most dangerous, and yet without
any gall or bitterness, I dare say out of mere zeal to truth, having as high
and honorable thoughts of the Gentleman opposed, as can consist with sincerity
and uprightness of Christian charity.

The Lord keep us in the ways of truth and peace, remove all heart-burnings
and self-interests: Pride was the first sin that brought us low, and keeps us
low, and, I fear, the last that we shall conquer. The good Lord make us see our
Emptiness, help us to return all we have and are, to him that is the Fountain
and God of all grace and glory, that he in all things may be glorified, and
Christ be set up in his Royalty and Majesty.

Reader (If thou have any interest in him who is a God hearing prayers) pray
for him who (though he be less then the least of all Gods mercies and
servants, yet) delights more to be known of God by name, that n^^ nsme, and
to be in the hearts and pravers of his people by thousands of degrees, then to
be known upon any civil respect by his civil name.

ROBERT ALFORD.

To the Reader.
Reader,
IT pleased this Noble Knight upon his retirment (after he had been such a
great blessing in public affairs to the Nation) to set himself more closely
then before to the study of Gospel-mysteries, a thing little minded by m^st of
the great ones, Knights and Nobles of this world; most of that rank adicting
themselves to profaness and vanity, making use of the large portion that God
has given them under the Sun, to treasure up more wrath against the day of
wrath) It were well if others of his rank and quality in the world, were
provoked by his example to study the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus our Lord. This Author has not contented himself in the shallows, but
has waded into the deeps of Divinity, possibly so far sometimes as that he
cannot feel the ground of Scripture: Alas, the best are but men, and great
parts and a swinge of reason are great temptations, unless our thoughts and
reasonings be brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ. And indeed it
bath pleased God to leave this Noble Author in his serious enquiry into
Gospel-mysteries to much darkness, and many wide mistakes in the great points
of the Gospel. The desire of some godly friends, and the unsetledness of others
in those matters, being too much like little children, tossed to and fro with
every wind of doctrine; with something else that I shall not mention, put me
upon these Animadversions upon his Book, concerning which I shall desire the
Reader to take notice.

1. That I had no intent to have published these sew sheets if I could have
seen it done by another; I finished what I have done in November last, and kept
them by me, desiring some other might do this work; which I had once some hopes
of, but was afterward informed that it would not be; and so have now sent them
to the Press, in the same crasso filo in which I first writ them; which I did
at spare hours, in a months time.

2. What I have written is not for the learned but for weak Christians.

3. I have written but little of the Trinity, because the Authors judgment is
hard to find out about it, that I knew not where to have him; and indeed it is
such an inscrutable mystery that it is rather to be adored and believed then
disputed.

4. I have endeavored to be brief, because books are so many (whereby men are
hindered from reading of the Scriptures, for which cause Luther wished his books
burnt) that if I wrote it should be as little as might be.

5. If thou see me to be in the right, and this Noble Knight to be mistaken
and in the dark, neither censure him, nor despise his other gifts, but if thou
be godly pray for him, that wherein he is mistaken and otherways minded
from the truth and Saints of God, that God would reveal even that unto him, for
surely he would welcome any light and would not turn aside from the truth and
flocks of Christ's companions; the time is not yet come that the Saints should
be of one min^ and judgment, the Lord hasten the accomplishment of the
gracious promises he has made in that behalf, and grant that we may in the
mean while wherein we differ be found speaking the truth in love, Ephesians. 4.15.
(...) Truthifying (as some render it) in love, and not in gall and bitterness,
not seeking one another disgrace and shame, but the finding out and
maintaining the truth of Christ.

6. If thon think any passages unseemly or any way reflecting upon that
noble Author, Impute it to the hastiness of my writing, assuring thy self it
was not premeditated truly; I would not detract any way from his worth, whom I
so seriously honor; but for writing plainly to my light and conscience I beg
no excuse. And let the Reader consider that these things which are here
handled, are the main points of the Gospel, the foundation of all our comfort
and hope, the things by which we live, and in which is the life of our spirits;
and therefore blame me not if I sometime speak plain English; its not against
his person, but against his doctrine.

The Lord make known his truth more perfectly, and establish us in it, and
grant that all our poor labors may tend to the advancement of it, and that we
may neither speak, nor write, nor do any thing against the truth, but all for
the truth.

Tetuey the 29th of he Month commonly called March 1656. So prays the Lords
most unprofitable servant MARTIN FINCH.

CHAP. I. Concerning the first Adam, the cause of his Fall, and of the Angels,
the cause of their Fall.
GOD made man righteous, created him in his own image, in respect of certain
divine excellencies and qualities he bestowed upon him, placed him in the
garden of Eden, was pleased to forbid him the eating of the tree of knowledge,
nor to touch it, lest he dye; this state of happiness that Adam was in, was
mutable and uncertain, because upon his disobedience he forfeites all his
privileges annexed to his state, and God never resolved by his mighty power
and overruling Spirit to keep him from disobedience, so that he stood a very
little while in innocence, but by disobeying God in eating of the forbidden
fruit, fell from his first purity and holiness of mind, and opens a wide
door for sin to enter into the world, and death by sin; this sin of A-Adam had
many aggravations, as he said to Naaman the Assirian, if the Prophet had bad
thee do some great thing, would thou not have don it? how much more, now he
bids thee but wash and be clean; so Adam, if thy Creator that made thee so
noble and excellent, had required harder service then ever he required of thee,
would thou, or should thou have done it? and if he had forbidden thee all the trees of the garden but one, should thou not have obeyed him in it? how
much more when he forbids thee but one tree among so many, would thou not
forbear it? I might show, if there were need, how this sin of Adam was
spiritual Idolatry, Adultery, and ingratitude toward that God that had done so
much for him; having said this by the way, let us examine what this Author
says of Adams state before the fall, and how he fell.

Page 67. [ He says, that God did not give Adam sufficient grace and strength
to do what he required and commanded, but it was Adams weakness to think so.]
But I answer, then his fall wa^ necessary, whether he would or no, even like
our case, that have cause to complain with Paul, Romans 7. the evil which we
would not do, that we do, for want of strength to resist the motions of sin and
temptations to it, though it be quite against our will, and the desire of our
hearts, as to the inward man, according to which we delight in the Law of God,
and would noe way offend him, but this would lessen the sin of Adam, in
disobeying Gods commands, if he had not power and ability given him by God to
do what God required of him, this impotency which we are sensible of, came by
the fall, and was not before he, and we in him, lost that divine excellency and
strength which God had bestowed upon him.

Page 70. [ He says, that the frame of Spirit and mind, that God had in his
eye, to bring upon Angels and men, stands in direct opposition and cross
constitution, to what the Angels and Adam had at first.]

Unless the Author means here, that men's having life in the way of their own
righteousness, and their having life by Christ and his righteousness, stand
thus in direct opposition, I know not how, what he says is true, and if he
should mean so, he should not have put Angels and men together, for the
Scripture tells us of no Angels that are justified by Christ blood, and made
the righteousness of God in him; but I think this is not his meaning, because
he does not say, that the way of geting life in one state, and another, were so
differing, but he says, the frame of Spirit and mind in the one and the
other, stand in direct opposition; I know the believer in Christ's grace is in
some things differing from Adams, as in closing with Christ by acts of faith,
and seeing such sinfulness and unworthiness in himself, which Adams state did
not admit of, yet neither is this the meaning of the Anthor, neither is there
such a direct opposition, and cross constitution here, such a frame of Spirit
is as suitable to the believers state, as Adams was to his, but surely he
means that the higher Image, which he supposes is the unvailed glory of the
Father, and this lower image, in which Angels and man were made at first,
stands in direct opposition and cross constitution: now the Author makes the
unvailed and original glory, to be the witness of the first person in the
Trinity, and the state of the Angels, and of the first Adam, to be the witness
of the second person in the Trinity; and do these stand in such direct
opposition and cross constitution? surely the operations of the blessed
Trinity stands in the most complete and perfect harmony, that this direct
opposition is not in the operations of the persons of the blessed Trinity, but
in our either mistaken or imperfect knowledge of them.

Concerning Adams state, he says further:

Page 54. [That on the Seventh day there was to be ministered to him a far
higher and more exalted capacity of mind, for the enabling him unto an
everlasting, happy, and complete communion with God.]

The Scripture says nothing of this, that we must reject it, as being but man's
conceit, Adam was already in such a state, as he might have enjoyed such happy
communion with God, as God thought fit to communicate to him, while he obeyed
him, and did his will in what herequired of him, and such communion as was a
high and glorious privilege, and the Scripture says not a word of any higher
state that God offered him^, but there is one Scripture that the Author quotes
for this, 1 Cor. 15.44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49. (he makes corruptible and mortal,
to be meant as the state wherein the first Adam was made, and incorruptible and
immortality, to be meant of the higher Image which Adam was offered and
refused, which he calls Christ in the Spirit, and Christ in his Heavenly
appearances; Now that Scripture speaks of the resurrection, that we shall be
made alive, and the corruptible shall put on incorruptability, and the mortal
immortality, yea, the the very wicked shall never go out of being (which would
be a privilege and mercy to them) but body and soul kept up in being, to
bear the vengeance o^ eternal fire and wrath for ever; and so the Apostle
goes on to show the difference between our bodies here, and in Heaven, how
Spiritual they shall be there, our vile bodies changed into the likeness of
Christ's glorious body, as they are now in the likeness of the first Adams, now
natural, then Spiritual, now earthly, then Heavenly, so that this place is
nothing to his purpose, but speaks of the difference between the believer
here, and in glory.

Page 59. [ He says, that God gave Adam a sight of the higher state, that he
should have come up to, and forbad him to fix his eye upon things seen, there
being a reserve of unseen things, as an enduring substance to be imparted and
communicated to him on the seventh day, but he says, page 60. and in many
other places, that through an inordinate cove^ing and desire in him, to keep in
the state wherein he was, and rejecting of that higher state, Adam provoked
God, and fell, and so also he says, Page 75. That the Angels that fell, it
was because they refused to go into this higher state.]

1. The Scripture nowhere says that God offered Adam a higher state, but
only that the devil told him of a higher, Genesis 3.5. that if they would eat of
the forbidden fruit, they should be as Gods.

2. I do not a little marvel, that the Author should write, that God was
pleased to forbid Adam to fix his eye where he was, but before the seventh day
to tell him, there was a higher state on that day to be propounded to him, does
the Scripture say any such thing? how does the Author come to know this, that
God should say thus and thus to Adam, when the Scripture makes no mention of
any such thing, let us be wise to sobriety, and not above what is written.

And thirdly, where does the Scripture say that Adam had such an inordinate
desire to keep in that state where he was, but rather shows us the contrary,
that he would lose and forfeit that blessed state, and sell it at so cheap a
rate, as for to but eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

Yea fourthly, that the refusing of the higher Image and state, was the cause
of the fall of the Angels; is without book too, as well as the rest, and its
very probable, that their pride in teaching after a higher life and state, was
the cause of their fall, and so 1 Timothy 3.6. and other places, seems to make
pride the sin and condemnation of the Angels that kept not their first estate,
and are delivered into chains of darkness, but I shall rather confess my own
ignorance in such things, then be wise above divine revelation, knowing that
such secret things belong to God, and revealed things (such as God is pleased
to make known to us in his word) to us, and to our children.

And though the Author has told us already that Adam was offered this higher
life, union with Christ in his Heavenly appearances before his fall, and would
not except of it, yet page 78. He tells us, that in all likelihood Adam and Eve
were saved, and brought to that higher state after the fall, and they refused
it out of ignorance before.

It is likely that Adam and Eve were saved through faith in Christ, the
Scripture seems to hold forth so much, in that the Lord did after the fall,
so declare Christ to them, Genesis 3.15. and whether their clothing. v. 21. did
not hold forth their clothing with the righteousness of Christ, I am not
certain, in doubtful things we must speak doubtfully, but this I am sure of,
that the Scripture speaks not of his coming into that state which the Author
calls the higher Image, but Page 333. the Author makes the refusing Christ in
his second appearance, or the higher Image, to be the sin against the holy
Ghost; and elsewhere shows, that he means it of a wilful and knowing
refusal of that higher state, now I say, that if God did so forewarne Adam,
that he should not refuse the higher state, that he would propound to him on
the seventh day, and gave him a sight what it was (as we but now questioned the
Author for affirming) the Author by his principles would make it very probable,
if not plain, that Adam committed the sin against the holy Ghost, because then
he had such a vast knowledge and insight into things, and upon such a clear
knowledge of the excellency of such a state, would yet refuse, it seems to
have been a very wilful act, but in that Page 333. he says, that Adam refused
it ignorantly, and the devil maliciously; but if it be true what the Author
says, Page 59. that God before the seventh day gave him a sight and prospect
of that higher state, it could not be done in such ignorance.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Person of Christ, his Bloody Sacrifice and
Sufferings, to reconcile us to God.
THe knowledge of Christ, and him crucified, being so excellent and necessary,
that blessed Paul counted all things but loss and dung in comparison of it, let
us set our hearts to know him, his person, his offices, his usefulness,
preciousnesse, what he is, what he has done and suffered for us poor sinners,
Who all like sheep have gone astray, and turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all, and by his stripes we are
healed.

He is both God and man in one person, the brightness of the Fathers glory,
and the express Image of his substance, he is that (...) Sospitatoe, that
Savior that does deliver from all evil, and is the Author of eternal
salvation, he is that (...), that propitiation for our sins, expiates our
sins, attones God, and makes him propitious to sinners, he is the blessed and
eternal son of God that came into the world to save sinners, and to reconcile
them to God by the blood of his cross, that was made sin for us, who himself
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Let us see
then what this Author says of his person and death, but first let me tell the
reader, that I will not follow the Authors way in speaking over and over the
same things in variety of words, as concerning the person of Christ, and his
being first in one Image, and then in another, he goes over with that
distinction of the three Images or states where Christ comes forth, twelve
times in the first forty pages, and afterward so often, that I left counting,
but as near as I can I shall at once examine his doctrine concerning the
person of Christ, save that I will forbear a curious prying into that
incomprehensible mystery of the blessed Trinity, but rather leaving him to
delight himself in his own notions about it, I shall cry out, O the Depths of
that Mystery! and confess, that the knowledge of that great mystery is too
wonderful for me, it is so deep, that I cannot search it out, and should as
well as others, but more darken that mystery by my words, neither would I
please the itching desire of any reader, by showing my self wise above what is
written, as Calvin treating upon such great mysteries, in the 13. Chapter of
the first book of his Institutions says, Quos oblectat speculandio
intemperies minime placandos suscipio, he would not go about to please those
who delight in speculations, so as not to be wise to sobriety, no more shall I
after this short digression; let us examine his doctrine concerning Christ.

Page 2. [ He makes Christ to be the similitude of God, that is Immanent and
eternally abiding in himself, and as so, is unexposed to any creature
discerning, and page 3. says, in this communion is one with God, and is God,
this is that, which up and down his book, he calls the higher Image, the
glory of the Father, and the like, and yet he says, Page 2. and elsewhere,
that Christ thus considered, is not to be taken for the second person of the
Trinity, but for the witness that is borne by all three.]

Now promising this, that it has been the way of those that have broached
false doctrine in all ages, to hide and cloud their opinions, with subtle
distinctions, I ask first, how Christ is God, but as he is the second person in
the Trinity, for he makes him God in this state, and yet he says, does not
here consider him as the second person in the Trinity. Secondly, I ask, how any
witness of the Trinity is God, it is something from God, but is not God, for
then we shall make so many Gods, as there are witnesses (to use the Authors
words) from the Trinity; one Michael Servetus was hammering out such notions
about Christ. But now our Author makes this higher Image, Page 12. to be the
personal appearance which all the three persons in the Trinity make in Christ,
and if so, he must make Christ none of the three pervons in the Trinity, but
only with Servetus, some appearance, Image and Idea from the Trinity: but to
what purpose should I follow the Author in these his deep speculations, it
suffices us to know, that our blessed Redeemer is the fellow of the Lord of
hosts, God equal with the Father, though he was found in fashion as a man, and
humbled himself unto death, even the death of the Cross.

Page 2. He says, Christ in a second sense is the Image of God, that proceeds
out of his mouth, to tabernacle with the creature in a temporary ministration,
and he says, Page 4. that this is the witness of the second person of the
Trinity.

Before he had made Christ in that first Image the personal appearance, and
witness of the three persons of the Trinity, and now tells us of a second Image
wherein Christ is, and is the witness but of one of the persons of the Trinity,
but we take Christ to be the second person in the Trinity, and not only some
witness from him, and image that he exhibits to the creature, and the Author
makes this the state wherein the world have union and communion with Christ;
which state he, by the operation of the third person in in the Trinity, was
persuaded to offer up and exchange for the higher Image, and yet faith he, was
in the higher Image first, such diverse and strange doctrine we meet with in
that hook, if he was first in the higher Image, how could he offer up the
lower Image to get into it? The Author quotes for these three Images and
witnesses of the Trinity, the 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear record in
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. But
I hope that place does not say it was the witness of the Father to bring forth
Christ in one Image, and the witness of the word to bring forth Christ into
another Image, and the holy Ghosts witness to bring him into another, but if we
mind the eleventh verse of that Chapter, we shall see what the record or
witness is, This is the record, that God has given to us eternal life, and
this life is in his Son, that God has chosen and appointed Christ, and none
other, to be the Prince and the Savior, to give repentance unto Israel, and
forgiveness of sins, neither is there life and salvation in any other; and
therefore the Apostle, v. 10. chargeeth those that believe not this record of
God, concerning Christ, that in him is righteousness and life, and will not
come to him that they may have life, and be saved through him, I say, he there
charge such with making God a Liar, by not believing the truth of the Record,
that the blessed, Trinity bear in this behalf, and so page 4. he quotes, Rev.
1.8. he says, that Christ is there called, he that is, by way of distinction
from himself, considered as he that was in the witness of the Father, and he
that is to come in the witness of the holy Ghost.

This Scripture surely is not a little wrested, for the foregoing verse
speaks of Christ's second coming, behold he comes with clouds, and every eye
shall see him, and I am Alpha and Omega, which shows the eternity of the Son
of God, which is, which was, and which is to come, the Almighty which is now
set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, which was found in fashion
as a man, and put to death in the flesh, is to come the second time without sin
to salvation, the same Lord Jesus, that after he had purged our sins, by the
sacrifice of himself, was taken up to Heaven, is to come again, Act. 1.11.
Jude. 14.15. So that this Scripture will no way serve his purpose, nor bear
his exposition; besides, his exposition will be very inconsistent with his own
judgment, for he thinks Christ is now in the higher Image, brought into it by
the third person in the Trinity, but if by Christ to come, should be meant that
Image and state, Christ should not be yet in it, but it were a thing yet to do.

Let us see whether a third Scripture, which he quotes in many places, will
favor his judgment, and that is, Ephesians. 3.9. And to make all men see what is
the fellowship of the Mystery, which from the beginning of the world lay hid in
God, who created all things by Jesus Christ. This place he supposes holds
forth the first and second Image, in which the Trinity brought forth Christ;
let us therefore consider what is meant by this Mystery, which from the
beginning of the world lay hid in God, and how God created all things in Jesus
Christ.

The Apostle is there treating of the Gentiles, being partakers of the promise
in Christ by the Gospel, and of his being employed of God to preach among them
that unsearchable riches of Christ's love, righteousness and grace, and so to
make more evident and plain what is the (...) fellowship or dispensation of the
Mystery, which from the beginning of the world lay hid in God, which was, that
he would by Jesus Christ, the seed of the woman, break the serpents head, and
save his Elect, among which there were not only Jews by nature, but sinners of
the Gentiles, this mystery of salvation by Christ Jesus, from the beginning of
the world, has lain hid in God, that though something of it was discovered to
Adam, Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets, yet as v. 3.4. and 5. the mystery of
Christ in other ages was not made known to the sons of men, that is, so fully
and plainly as it is now revealed to the holy Apostles and Prophets by the
spirit; and so Colos. 1.26.27. Its said, this mystery has been hid from ages
and generations, but now is made manifest to the Saints, to whom God would make
known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery, that among the Gentiles
Christ was Preached and believed to he the hope of glory; so that this place is
not meant of Christ's being in the higher image, the image of God in original
and substance, as the Author would have it; and for the other words, that God
created all things by Jesus Christ, if we understand those words according to
the 1 John, that all things were made by the word, so that without him was not
any thing made that was made, it will not make in the least for the Authors
second image, but this place I take rather to be meant of the new creation
spoken of, 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 2.24. that he saves all his people, Jews or
Gentiles, and makes them new creatures by Jesus; but take it which way we
will, it is true that God created all things by Jesus Christ, but I say, I take
it rather to be of the Spiritual creating, and so says the Apostle Paul, Ephesians.
2.10. we are Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good works, which
God before ordained that we should walk in them.

Page 89. [He says, that the death of Christ must not be confined to his
offering up in the days of his flesh, but what he did then in a visible manner
in man's nature, he did from all eternity, in an invisible manner, in his
Heavenly and mystical state.]

That place, Heb. 9.27.28. will be against the Author do what he can, for it
tells us Christ was once offered, that is, but once he speaks exclusively; and
see Hebr. 7.27. that he did it at once; and so Heb. 9.12. and says v. 25. that
Christ does not offer himself often, as the Highpriests of the law, that
offered often, entering into the holy place every year, with the blood of
others, and Heb. 10.10.11.12. By the which will we are sanctified, through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, that is, to offer himself
but once as a secrifice for our sins, not like the Highpriests that stood
daily Ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifice, but this man,
after he had offered up one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right
hand of God; and v. 14. for by one offering, he has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified: I know not how the holy Ghost could more plainly confute
this Author, then in these words I have set down out of that Epistle, does
this Author think that Christ from eternity was wounded for our
transgressions, was crucified and put to death in the flesh, and his soul made
an offering for sin, was bruised and put to grief; by Gods eternal decree and
purpose, he was thus to suffer for our sins, in the body prepared him, in the
volume of Gods book it was written of him, that he should come thus to do the
will of God, in suffering for our sins, the just for the unjust, and in the
days of his flesh did suffer nothing but what God had appointed, and before
determined, but Christ never died and suffered for our sins, until he was made
flesh, and dwelt among us, but I know what this Author means by Christ's death,
that is to say, his being broken, and crucified to the lower image, to go up
into the higher, the image of God in original and substance, and thinks this
was from eternity, and that we shall examine in its proper place.

The next thing we shall consider, is what the Author says.

Page 77. [ That they proclaim their short-sightedness into Christ's fullness
and rich grace: (I wonder who of us are not short-fighted herein, as knowing,
but in part, and seeing, as thorough a glass darkly, 1 Cor. 13.) That look
upon the Lord Jesus, as an accidental provision only, that God had in
reserve, in case of the entrance and coming in of sin, and says, there was no
other way whereby the creature could obtain a sure, safe, incorruptible and
immorall life, but by faith in Jesus Christ, who was from the beginning the
right object of faith to Angels and men, if they would have received him on
the seventh day, before the coming in of sin.]

This Author does not very fairly lay down the judgment of others in this
business, for they from whom he differs in this matter, do hold, that God
from all eternity did purpose to save the elect by Christ, and that fall of man
did not make any change in God, that he should do any thing upon it, which he
had not determined, and purposed from al eternity to do, which counsel of his
stood firm and constant, and the fall of man gives accasion to the Lord, to
show what he eternally intended, which was to mignifie his rich and free grace,
in saving his elect in such a wonderful way, of justice and mercy, as by
sending his only begotten Son that we might live thorough him, laying our
iniquities upon him, that by his stripes we might be healed, but yet he that
thus eternally intended to make Christ's soul an offering for sin, decreed the
fall of Adam, and to glorify the riches of his mercy another way, that
considering Gods decree and eternal counsel, it was impossible but Adam
should fall, and so it is a vain and frivolous question, whether Christ should
not have come, if he had not fallen, Servetus that we spoke of before, and O
stander, were of this opinion with this Author, that Christ should have been
incarnate, whether Adam had fallen or no; such entertainment unthankful men
give to the glad tidings of the gospel, that Christ came into the world to save
siuners, that instead of admiring the great and inestimable love of God herein,
and coming to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, that they might have
life, door about questions, that instead, I say, of thankfulness for this great
salvation, and looking up to Christ this brazen serpent, that they may be
healed, fall a disputing, that this brazen serpent should have been set up,
whether men had been stung with the fiery serpents or no, but instead of their
speculation herein, let us say with the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.15. this is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ came into the
world to save sinners, which we had never been, if we had not fallen, for God
made man righteous; and Gal. 4.4.5. God sent his son, made of a woman, made
under the Law, he was sent to seek and to save that which was loft, he came to
call sinners to repentance; he was set forth to be a propitiation for our sins,
thorough faith in his blood, with innumerable places of Scripture to that
purpose.

And we may very well in answer to this Author affirm, that God, if it had
seemed good in his sight, could have given eternal life to Adam, and preserved
him to the Heavenly kingdom, in the state wherein he created him; but he
says, Jesus Christ from the beginning, was the right object of faith to
Angels and men; but I answer, that the Lord Jesus could not be so the object
of faith to them, as he is to us, since the fall, for before that, they were
whole, and needed not the Physician, could not come to Christ the brazen
serpent for healing, as those that were stung with the fiery serpents, they
could not come as lost creatures, and weltring in their blood, to Christ, that
they might have life, could not apply his blood to cleanse them from sin, when
as yet they had not sinned, nor any guile found in their mouths, but if men,
instead of admiring the rich and great salvation brought to light through the
glorious gospel, will curiously pry into the state of the Angels, and things
which they have not seen, vainly puffed up with a fleshly mind, under the
notion of a spiritual mind, and will be contentious about these things, we have
noe such custom, nor the Churches of God, but leave them to flatter themselves
in their own speculations, desiring our selves to he found thankful to God,
and admirers of his love, who when we were Enemies, reconciled us unto himself
by the blood of his son, and desirous to give all diligence to make sure our
union and communion with him, the Lord our righteousness, who when we were
lost, came to seek us, and to save us.

Page 94. He says, that Jesus Christ was the surety and Mediator of both
Testaments, (...) sponsor is one that undertakes to pay another debt, and that
Jesus Christ is said to be the surety of the better Testament, Hebr. 7.22.
which better Testament is the covenat of grace, not the covenant of works, and
he is surety of no other Testament but that, and according to the tenor of
that covenant, he the surety pays our debts, to God the creditor, pays that
which he never took, suffers for our sins, the just for the unjust, to bring
us to God, and so does the holy Ghost distinguish between Moses and Christ,
John 1.1.7. Telling us, the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ; and Hebr. 8.6. Christ has obtained a more excellent ministry, by
how much also he is the Mediator of a better covenant (not of the old) which is
established upon better promises then Do this and live; and so likewise Hebr.
9.15. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament, that by
means of death, for the redemption of transgressions under the first
testament, they which were called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance, and so the believers under the old testament, by this Jesus the
Mediator of the new testament, being called, were justified, and received the
promise and possession of the eternal inheritance as well as we; to name no
more Scriptures where I might abound, see Heb. 12.24. And to Jesus the Mediator
of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, making it a great part of
the glory and excellency of the Gospel dispensation, above that of the Law,
that Jesus is the Mediator of this covenant, which if they had been of the
Authors mind, they might have slighted, saying, that so he was of the other,
but enough to show the Authors mistake in this particular.

Page 69. [He says, that Christ had an exercise of a new life set up in him,
in a way of faith, by which he did not only perform the righteousness and
obedience required of man by the Law or first covenant, but that also which is
required of him by the new and second Covenant.]

Concerning the new life and faith (as the author calls it) that was set up
in Christ, the author will give us accasion to speak afterward, for he
thinks Christ had a new birth and regeneration, as well as we. In the mean
while, this is not very clear, that Christ did perform that righteousness and
obedience which is required of man by the new and second Covenant; the gospel,
or new Covenant, calls for Faith in Christ, repentance, thankfulness, mourning
for sin, I wis the Gospel calls for these things, and if the author had said
Christ purchased these things for us, and all things the gospel or new Covenant
calls for, so that those for whom he Purchased them, shall have them in the
appointed time bestowed upon them, if he had said thus, we should have agreed
with him, but to say, that Christ by a new life, and way of faith, performed
all that the new Covenant or gospells requires, will hardly go down with us;
did Christ believe, repent, mourn for sin? and we must note all this while,
that the author does not speak this of Christ's passive obedience, whereby he
performed the Fathers will, in b^aring our sins in his own body upon the tree,
but he speaks of it as a part of his active obedience, neither does the
dispute come in here, whether we are justified by both Christ's active and
passive obedience, but the question here, is only of the nature of Christ's
active obedience, whether therein he performed the obedience that the Gospel or
new Covenant requires, that is, did believe in a Savior, repent and mourn for
sin, I wis Christ was no sins, that he needed to believe in a Savior, he was
no sinner, that he needed to mourn for his sins, these are things no way
suitable to the person of Christ to do, but suitable to us, who are to believe
in him that justifies the ungodly, and to loath our selves for our iniquities
and abominations, but we shall see by and by how he levels the Lord Jesus,
debases him, whom God has so highly exalted, and given him a name above every
name, and so he says.

Page 97. That Christ by bringing his fleshly principles into the cossation and
rest, required by the law of the new Covenant, he attaines the end for which
they were at first given him, arriving at that most near and intimate
communion with God, which only by faith, or the exercise of a newness of life,
and operation, can be attained.

Now I would feign know what fleshly principles there were in Christ, that the
law of the new Covenant required to be laid down, and brought into cessation,
are these words of truth and soberness, concerning our blessed redeemer, God
blessed for ever? that he had such fleshly principles in him, as the law of the
new covenant required, should be brought into cessation, truly we have other
manner of thoughts of Christ the Lord, our righteousness, and so the author
tells us, that ceasing from his fleshly principles, he gets to near and
intimate communion with the Father; so then it seems he had not such near
and intimate communion with the Father before, but we do believe that the very
human nature of Christ, had of Christ, had always very near and intimate
communion with the Father, excepting the time when it pleased the Father to
bruise him, and put him to grief, when he made his soul an offering for our
sins, then God hid his face from him, that made him cry out My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me.

Page 97. He makes Abraham's offering up Isaac, spoken of James 2. To hold forth
his offering up the first image.

I need not say much to throw down his exposition of that place, but I shall
only say this, that if that act of his were the throwing up of the first
image, then it should seem Abraham had not offered it up before, and so
according to the authors way, was not in a saving state, which if it were
needful, might abundantly be confuted out of Genesis.

But Page 98. He says, Abraham herein was but the type, or figure of Christ,
who performed this in himself, and this act of obedience, being imputed to us,
presents us righteous, and without ^lame before the Throne of God.

But surely if we will put an allegorical sense upon this passage of Abraham's
offering up his son Isaac, they do better that make Abraham to represent God
the Father herein, that offered his Isaac, gave his Isaac for a sacrifice for
our sins, the beloved son in whom he was so well pleased; but this author makes
Christ, both Abraham and Isaac, he makes Isaac his fleshly part, but I would
have the author follow his allegories a little better and wiselier, not to
plainly contradict the holy Ghost in his allegories, for Gal: 4. The holy ghost
makes Ishmael to signify the covenant of works, and Isaac the covenant of
grace, and verse 28. So we, as Isaac was, are the Children of the promise; so
that when the holy ghost makes Isaac to signify the new covenant, the author
is too bold to make him signify the law, and the offering of him, to signify
the offering up of a legal state.

And so this author says more plainly, Page 99. That Christ actually
sacrificed the true Isaac, crucifiing in himself the life of his fleshly seed
and legal principles.

Thus we see how he thwarts the holy ghost, who will have Isaac to hold forth
the new covenant, the free woman, the Jerusalem that is above, and to hold
forth those that are borne after the spirit, in that 4. Galath. But this author
will needs have Isaac to signify the fleshly seed, and legal principles.

Page 99. [He says, that Christ and his whole seed enter into rest by Faith.]
But the author must have a care how he rank Christ and the Saints together, and
liken them in believing, we come to him, that is, believe in him, and so our
troubled, weary, heavy laden souls enter into rest, Matt. 11.28. And there is
no such way in the world to get rest for a weary soul, but by faith in Christ,
applying his blood, which speaks better things then the blood of Abel; but
how Christ needs to enter into rest by faith, as we sinful creatures do, is a
paradox; but as I said before, he levels the Lord Jesus, and mightily debases
him.

Page 103. He says, that which in the first sense Christ's natural man was a
sufferer in, consisted in the weakness and disabilitie which was brought upon
his fleshly mind, to resist the powerful workings of his faith, or spiritual
mind.

A strange passage, that Christ had a fleshly carnal mind in him, as well as
a spiritual mind, but we believe there was no fleshly mind in our Redeemer,
and wonder that this author is so bold as to affirm it, and he makes it the
work of his death and cross, to subdue his fleshly mind, and if there were
such a fleshly mind in Christ Jesus, it was no suffering and affliction to have
that taken away, but rather a great mercy; but far be it from us to have such
low, and mean, and base thoughts of our dear Savior.

But in the same 103. Page [He says, that Christ was thus brought into such a
frame of spirit. that he was disabled from doing any thing against the truth,
and thereby qualified to do all for the truth.]

As if there was a time when Christ had such a frame of spirit, that he might
have acted against the truth and will of God, but by taking up the higher
image, was disinabled from doing so, and before that time, was not qualified to
do all things for the truth; and he adds in the same place, that this
profitable weakness and disability, (namely, not to do any thing against the
truth) came not all at once upon Christ's natural man, but gradually; then this
author would make him for a time to be in great danger of sinning, but that by
degrees he grew disinabled from sinning.

And Page 104. He says, thus in this first part of Christ's passive obedience,
he through the law, becomes dead to the law, through the law of the spirit of
life in the second Adam, becomes dead to the law and life of the first,
fulfilling the whole law of righteousness, by being rendered utterly unable to
perform one tittle of it in man's first activity and sufficiency, or as left
alone to the grace and strength received by his first covenant principles.

Let us examine how Christ by the law, became dead to the law, Paul indeed
says thus of himself. Gal 2.19. I through the law, am dead to the law, that
is, seeing the law, spirituality, and my own weakness to keep it, that if I be
under the law, I must needs be under the curse. I am dead to the law, that is,
will not put my self under it, as a covenant of works, to do it and live,
but I seek to have my life hid with Christ in God, and to have him to be the
end of the law for righteousness to me; but Christ could not be dead to the law
in this respect, for he was able to perform every tittle of it, which Paul and
we were not able to do; but I say, Christ needed not, as we, to fly from the
law, as that which is weak, and unable through the flesh, and inability in us,
to keep it, to bring us unto life, and so to go unto another for righteousness
and life; and he goes on, to make Christ one while keeping the law out of
strength that he received by first Covernant principles, but afterward he
faith, he could not perform one tittle of it, as left to those principles,
thus does he represent Christ, one while obeying upon the principles of the
Covenant of works, and another while he could not obey at upon these
principles, running into these notions about Christ, by slighting the
simplicity of the gospel, which is, that Christ came into the world to save
sinners, and that he by the appointment of God, according to the Covenant
between him and the Father, as our surety, performed the whole will of God, in
that body prepared him to purge away our sins, by the sacrifice of himself,
and the principles upon which he acted, were out of obedience to the Father,
and love to sinners, to compass the blessed design of God, his glory, and our
eternal salvation.

Page 111. He goes about to show what was the nature of that wrath from God,
that Christ was capable of undergoing, which to make out, he defines the wrath
of God, thus says he, wrath, as God is capable of exercising it, consists in
that posture of an enemy, and face of displeasure, wherewith he clothes and
arms himself in Christ, the Mediator to Angels or men.

A strange definition of Gods wrath, for if it were so, that God is not capable
of exercising wrath to Angels or men, but as he clothes and arms himself to
do it through Christ, then I say it will follow, that God could not have
reserved any of the Angels in chains of darkness to the judgment of the great
day, nor could not have damned any of the sons and daughters of men, if Jesus
Christ had not been Mediator, surely the Reader will wonder at this notion of
the Authors, and he does not say, that God does exercise wrath in Christ, or
thorough Christ, as if he had meant that God was the most provoked to wrath for
slighting Christ, and neglecting so great salvation, and will execute the
fierceness of his wrath upon those that trample under foot the blood of the
Son of God; but he says, that God is capable of exercising wrath no other way,
but as he clothes and arms himself in the Mediator, God is said to be angry and
wrath, when in his dealings with the creature, he walks contrary to him, and
sets himself against him; suppose it be eternal wrath, then God dawns that
creature, and turns him into hell, and does the Author think that God could
not have done thus, if Christ had never been a Mediator between God and us,
could not God have exercised wrath upon all of us that are the fallen sons of
men, and appointed us our portions in the dark nooks of hell, without CHrist
had been the Mediator? and this Author will make Christ necessary to be the
Mediator and Savior upon this account, that else God could not have exercised
wrath upon any of the creatures.

But I pray how could Christ bear the wrath of God, if that it be true that the
Author says, that God is not capable of exercising wrath, but in Christ the
Mediator; well, we unthankful men, instead of admiring the Lords free mercy in
Christ, whereby we are delivered from wrath to come, who has attoned God, made
peace, and reconciled us to God; we fall a disputing, that God is not capable
of exercising wrath, but thorough Christ the Mediator; but if it had not
pleased the God of all grace to have sent his blessed Son to turn away his
wrath from us, and reconcile us to himself, we should have seen to purpose, and
by lamentable experience, that God could exer^ise wrath without Christ the
Mediator.

CHAP. III. Shows, that the highest seize of the natural man come very
far short of what this Author assigns to him, and proves his misinterpreting
abundance of Scripture about this matter.
AS this Author does exceedingly debase Christ, marring his visage, who is
altogether lovely, often saying, he had a fleshly mind, and fleshly principles,
which were to be subdued in him; so on the other hand, he cries up the natural
man's seize far above that which any natural man ever arrives at, and
indeed takes the most of the Characters of a true Believer, and claps them upon
a natural man.

And so page 117. That Christ may be the received Lord and Christ in the heart,
and give a participation and fellowship with him in spirit, by the power and
presence of himself there, either in his first or second appearance, and all
along he makes the receiving of Christ in his first appearance only, to be no
saving state; and yet he says in this state, Christ may be the received Lord
and Christ in the heart, and give the soul a participation and fellowship with
himself in spirit.

But how plainly does the Holy Ghost confute him, John 1.12. That to as many as
receive him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God; and Romans 8.17. If
sons, then heirs, heirs of God, and coheirs with Jesus Christ: So that
wheresoever Christ becomes the received Lord and Christ in the heart, eternal
salvation at that very time is come to that soul, forasmuch as he is made the
child of God by faith in Jesus Christ, or by receiving Christ, which are all
one, as that 1 John 12. makes plain, yea, this Author says, that such a soul
Christ gives a participation and fellowship with himself in spirit, but then
is not this soul in a safe and saving state, for Christ to give a soul
fellowship with himself in the fathers love, to make him a sharer in his death,
blood, and righteousness, and spirit, and he that is thus called into
fellowship with Jesus Christ, is surely in a saving state; and by the way I
would note this to the Reader, that whereas now the Gospel is preached more
then in former ages, so that many places, and poor souls that have sat in
darkness, see a great deal of light that way, and men are told much of Christ's
being the way, the truth, and the life, and are earnestly pressed and invited
to receive Christ that they might have life, it is now one of the devils grand
designs, to make men believe, that men may receive Christ, and have fellowship,
union, and communion with him, and yet not be in a saveing state, but be under
the Covenant of works all this while, thinking if this doctrine would take, it
would keep thousands from Christ, therefore it concerns us to way lay his
designs, and unmask him that transforms himself into an Angel of light, that
under pretense of carrying us higher, would beguile us of the simplicity that
is in Christ, the sure way of life and salvation, by receiving of Jesus Christ,
the Lord our righteousness, and truly for ought I know, this Author is the
first that ever broacht this doctrine in print, that a man might receive Jesus
Christ, and have fellowship with him in spirit, and be made the righteousness
of God in him, and yet not be in a saving state; for the Arminians never had
the face to say it was not a saving state if they continued in it: Let us
examine the Scripture he quotes, one is, 1 Cor. 10. the beginning of that chap,
especially the fourth ver. that the Jews did all eat of the same spiritual
meat that was Manna, our fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, that
Spiritual food, the unbeleevers among them eat that food, the true Believers
eat the hidden Manna, and lived for ever, and it follows that they all
drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed, and that Rock was Christ, but
what is the meaning of it, but that they drank all of the Rock that is Spoken
of Exodus 17.9. which Moses smote, and water came out, that they might all
drink, which Rock was Christ, that is, a type of Christ, the rock of ages, who
being for the transgressions of Gods people smitten and bruised by the Father,
from him comes living waters, springing up to eternal life; so that this place
holds forth this only, that all the Jews did drink of the water of that Rock
which was a type of Christ, and this will not do him any service to make out
his judgment. Another Scripture he quotes, is Jerem. 31.32. That my Covenant
they brake, though I was an husband to them; that is, I showed a great deal of
kindness to them, and made a way thorough the Red Sea for them, leading them
thorough the deep, as a horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble,
and notwithstanding all this, they soon forgot his works, and quickly turned
aside out of the right way, and walked contrary to him, and provoked him with
their iniquities and abominations, and therefore God speaks of a better
Covenant that he makes with the spiritual Israel, that is, to write his Laws
in their hearts, and put his fear into their hearts, which they never had done
for them who were the unbelievers among the Jews, neither did they receive
Christ into their hearts as Lord and Christ, which is the thing in question;
and Isai. 63.8.9, 10. which he quotes, holds forth the same, even the great
deliverances that the God of salvations wrought for the children of Israel,
when he led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm, dividing
the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name; but this place
holds forth nothing of the Authors doctrine, that they had all received
Christ into their hearts, to be their Lord and Christ.

Ezekiel. 16. He quotes often for these things, because its there said, that when
they lay in their blood, God said unto them live, and made them perfect through
the comeliness put upon them, which he says was the comeliness and
righteousness of Christ, and yet they and God parted, and he became their enemy.

But let us well weigh the 16. of Ezekiel. The Lord is there declaring what he had
done for the people of Israel when they lay in their blood; and as Exodus 1.14.
Their lives were made bitter to them with hard bondage, and then God heard
their groaning, and God had respect to them, he heard their cry, and knew their
sorrows; and so in this place of Ezekiel, the low and helpless condition of the
people of Israel is compared to a poor infant newly born; but ver. 14. God did
so much for them, that they prospered, into a Kingdom they became a great and
glorious Nation, that the children of Israel were now grown to be like the
sand of the Sea shore, innumerable, so that he says, ver. 14. that their
renown went forth among the Heathen for their beauty, that is, that the heathen
took notice of their strength and glory, and that God had done great things for
them, so that many of them sought to make league with them, for they were
perfect through the comeliness that he had put upon them, he had given them
glory above all the Kingdoms of the earth, Statutes and Ordinances, Laws and
righteous Judgments, he had not dealt so with any Nation as he had done for
them. Now when we make use of these passages in this Chapter to hold forth
regeneration, Christ's righteousness, and such things, then we must be careful
of not overthrowing the true litteral sense of them, and when we take it in a
spiritual sense, and so understand these things of the body of the Jews, then
it is easily detected to be a wresting of the words, to say all the Jews had
spititual life by Christ, and had his righteousness and comeliness put upon
them, we have seen the meaning is otherwise; but this we must understand, that
those things that are literally spoken of the whole body of the Jews, are
spiritually only to be applied to the people of God, Jews or Gentiles, for
many of this people of the Jews were so far from having such an union with
Christ, and were so far from such a sanctification which he says men have by
union with Christ in the flesh, that they were Idolaters, Adulterers, and their
lives worse then the Heathen, and whosoever shall read out this 16 Chap. of
Ezekiel. shall see how wicked and ungodly this Nation of the Jews were.

They committed spiritual fornication, they joined themselves to idolatrous
Nations, verse 15. adorned the high places and Temples of their Idols, ver. 16.
God had given them plenty of gold and silver, and they made images and idols of
it, ver. 18. and set his oil and his incense that should have been used about
his service, used them about their Idols, ver. 18. and so he goes on to show
the wickedness of this people; and will this Author, or any man upon second
thoughts think, that such men as these have union with Christ, and have
received him into their hearts as their Lord and Christ, and have his
comeliness and righteousness put upon them.

The Author goes on, page 118. says he, It is evident then, that upon such
conditional terms as are comprehended in the tenor of the first Covenant,
Christ can, and does cause his own reception in the hearts and consciences of
men, and that there are inseparable benefits attending and accompanying this
manner of reception or believing in Christ, which is begotten, and held but
upon the wavering principles of the first Covenant.

The Author had laid down his judgment, and quoted four Scriptures for it, and
not so much as tells us how he would argue from them, which Scriptures we have
taken the pains to weigh, and find that they do not prove any thing for his
purpose; and now without any more to do, the Author tells us, it is evident;
truly if he makes it no more evident then he has don yet, he will fail mightily
in his undertaking; but what is it he has made so evident? why, that Christ
can, and does cause men to receive him upon the conditional terms of the first
Covenant; and what were the conditional terms of the first Covenant, but do
this, and live? and does Christ bring men to believe in him, and cast anchor in
their storm upon his righteousness and blood upon the terms of the old
Covenant, Keep the Law, and ye shall live? no surely, but upon the terms of the
Covenant of Grace, Believe, and ye shall live, come to Christ, and ye shall
have life: But let us hear what benefits the soul has that receives Christ in
this way, though he will not have the soul to be in a saving state here, yet
says, there are three benefits such a soul has.

He says in that 118. page, he says first, They that are thus made receivers
of Christ, are called out of the world, to come out of that Heathenish state
wherein men live, as without Christ, and without God in the world.

Truly this is a great benefit, and surely whosoever is truly called out of the
world, is in a saving state, to be called out of the worlds profaneness,
hypocrisy, will worship, formality, called out of the worlds way, in going
about to establish their own righteousness, and living to themselves and their
lusts, I think a soul that is thus called out of the world, is in a happy
condition, whatsoever this Author says; for being by Christ called out of the
world, he shall not be condemned with the world, and I am sure Christ, John
15.19. makes a man's being of the world to be a natural man, and his being not
of the world to be a state of true Saintship, such as the Disciples themselves
had; and so if we consider what it is to live without Christ, to wit, to live
without the righteousness, the spirit, the grace, the faith of Christ, we may
well say, that a man that Christ has truly called out of a state of living
thus without him, is in a saving state, for it must needs follow, that he being
called out of a state of living with Christ, he must needs now have Christ his
righteousness, his spirit, his grace. But the Author will grant us, that a man
may have Christ his righteousness and spirit, and yet not be in a saving state.

For in the same 118. page, he comes to show a second benefit which those
receive from Christ, that receive him in the first Covenant, he says, Christ
is made unto such righteousness in a way of justification, and they are made
the righteousness of God in him, and that he affords such the benefit of his
legal righteousness, so that the Law has nothing to say against such; and page
119. he says, this justification the world has in common with true Believers.

I think this opinion may call this Author father, for I think he is the first
that ever affirmed (I mean one that went for a Christian) that to be made the
righteousness of God in Christ, was not a saving state; and truly we may say in
this case as he said, if I am bereaved, I am bereaved, if to be made the
righteousness of God in Christ does not save us eternally, then we are bereaved
indeed, and are of all men most miserable, and the generation of Gods children
the most deceived that ever any were in the world; but this Author must not
think to carry it thus, let us search the Scriptures, Philip. 3.5.9. Paul
counted all things but dross that he might win Christ, and be found in him, not
having on him his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, and
does any man think that this was not a saving state? and 2 Cor. 5.21. He has
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: And is not this a certain and unfailing way to
bring us to eternal life, to be made the righteousness of God in him the Lord
our righteousness? has God appointed any other way to justify sinners, and
bring them to eternal life and glory, then by being made the righteousness of
God in him, when God out of his rich grace makes a poor sinner accepted in the
beloved, righteous in the righteousness of Christ, what should hinder his
salvation for ever? who should lay any thing to such a souls charge to condemn
him, when God justifies him through Christ's righteousness? and the Author here
confesses, that the Law has nothing to say against such, when a soul can truly
say by faith, as Isaiah 45.24. Though I have sinned, and come short of the
glory of God, yet Christ Jesus was made sin for me, that I might be made the
righteousness of God in him; and surely in him have I righteousness, life, and
strength, that soul is in a saving state, and shall never come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to life, let all the devils in hell say
what they will to the contrary; and though these places that I have already
named be sufficient to prove that which I am about, yet I shall name another
that is as full as we can desire, Romans 5.17. For if by one man's offense death
reigned by one, much more they that receive abundance of grace, and of the gift
of righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. Let us mind this
blessed Scripture, so full of marrow and fatness to feed our souls, If, says
the Apostle, by one man's offense death reigned by one, that is, if by the one
man Adams offense, or his one offense of eating the forbidden fruit death
reigned thereby, that is, we were all brought to death and condemnation, that
his disobedience being imputed to us, we were brought to such misery and
condemnation, much more they that receive abundance of grace, the grace of God
which brings salvation, and of the gift of righteousness, that is, Christ's
righteousness, to have that imputed to them, they shall reign in life by one
Jesus Christ; that is as certainly as death and condemnation came upon us by
Adams disobedience, so certainly shall we have salvation, and reign in life and
glory for ever, receiving the gift of Christ's righteousness, the second Adam,
and this is more explained in the 21. verse of that Chapter, That as sin has
reigned unto death, even so might grace reign thorough righteousness unto
eternal life, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, which plainly affirms this, that
as Adams sin brings eternal death and condemnation, so the righteousness of
Christ brings eternal life and salvation.

Let us see whether he be not as much mistaken in the third benefit by Christ,
that men may have, and yet not be in a saving state.

Page 119. he says, The third benefit inseparably accompanying this kind of
Christ's giving himself by the first Covenant, is that which we call
sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. consisting in a real and actual change of the
heart, which lies in our conformity to Christ's legal righteousness.

That place 1 Cor. 1.30. says, Christ is made of God unto us sanctification
and redemption, unto us, that is unto us that truly believe in him, but he does
not say that he is made so to others; what does he mean by this real and actual
change of the heart? does he mean that which is called a new heart, and a new
spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26. if so, he is out, for that only God gives to those that
are eternally saved; and truly methinks, that men instead of disputing that the
natural man may be sanctified so as to have new hearts, should rather question
whether they themselves be so sanctified, and their hearts so really and
actually changed, as to have new hearts and spirits, and when we come to
examine this very thing, we shall find that it is not such an ordinary thing
to have the heart, which by nature is so desperately wicked, to be so really
and actually changed, though the life may be much changed, yet the heart may be
the same, even like a painted Sepulcher, beautiful without, but within full of
dead men's bones; but for this he makes use of 2 Pet. 2.20. of men's escaping
the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who yet may be again entangled in them.

But does the Author know no difference between men's hearing of Christ's calling
for holiness, and departing from iniquity, in the preaching of the Gospel,
that they do now leave their former profaneness and pollutions, hoping to get
heaven, or make themselves worthy of Christ by this their reformation, I say,
is there no difference between this, and the having of the heart really and
actually changeed, because Herod did many things, and heard John Baptist
gladly, does it therefore follow, that he was so sanctified, as to have his
heart really and actually changed and purified, Acts 15.9. the heart is
purified only by true faith in Christ Jesus, the life may be reformed by
education, by convictions of conscience, and by a common head, and notional
knowledge of the Gospel, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; yet I confess
in a good sense, the hearts of some natural men may be said to be changeed, but
it must be very warily understood.

Another place he quotes for this attainment of the matural man, is Heb. 6.
Those that tasted of the heavenly gift, and yet might fall away, etc.

What if these are said to be (...) enlightened, so was Balaam, and others,
that I hope were never justified and sanctified by Christ, we do not deny but
that the natural man may have illumination; what if they are said to have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and if this heavenly gift be Christ himself, men
may taste of Christ, as Cooks do of their sauce which they spit out again; men
may come to try Religion, and taste Christ, and not having a pallat that savours
the things of the spirit, may not like him: there is a great difference
between the unbelievers tasting; and the true believers experience; what if
they are said to be made partakers of the Holy Ghost, that may be said of any
man that is any way enlightened by the Holy Ghost, and partakers of his common
gifts only, yea, Bezaliel and Aholiab are said to be filled with the Spirit of
God, when yet it was but to enable them to devise cunning works, in gold, and
in silver, and in brass, Exodus 31.3.4.

What if they tasted of the good Word of God, I question not but a natural man
may do so, as Herod that heard John Baptist gladly, which showed he was
affected with the word, and tasted some sweetness in it.

And what if they tasted the powers of the world to come, and have often been
scared, as Felix was, Acts 24.25. when Paul reasoned of the Judgment to come,
Felix trembled, and so may other natural men do; but does this Scripture say as
the Author does, that they received Christ in their hearts, as their Lord and
Christ, and were made the righteousness of God in him, this is the thing that
we deny any natural man attaines to, but we grant they may taste of the heavenly
gift, and of the powers of the world to come, as that place in the 6. Hebr.
does declare.

Page 134. he says, These in the first Image are righteous workers, according
to the Law, in the most Gospel administration of it, but at the bottom, are
still upon the tenure and account of debt.

What is the most Gospel like administration of the Law, but Christ's fulfilling
of it for us, and taking the Law now into his own hands, and prescribing the
obedience the Law requires, as duty to him the Lord our righteousness, so that
there is a modification of the Law to the fallen estate of man, that Christ now
does not propound the Law to us as a Covenant of works, that we should seek
righteousness to justify us by the works of the Law, but he himself is made
of God unto us righteousness, and his blood cleanses us from all sin, and now
will have us obey the Law, as he exhibits it to us in the way of the Gospel,
that we should now obey out of love, thankfulness, and obedience to our
Redeemer, and this is the Gospel, and Christ's administration of the Law; but
this Author tells us, that all the bottom they are upon the account and tenure
of debt, and that they are but still under the first Covenant, which is a mere
contradiction; for the obeying of the Law in the most Gospel like
administration of it, implies a disclaiming our own righteousness and
confidence in our own obedience, and obeying it upon Gospel principles, even
our love and duty to Christ that constrains us to do his will, and what is
acceptable in his sight; and I would ask the Author, whether those that came
into his higher image, are not to obey the Law, and if so, surely he will say
they must obey it in the most Gospel like administration of it, and then the
obedience of them both are alike, the confounding of Law and Gospel does a
little hang in this Authors light.

Page 136. [He says, This sort of men were incorporated with the true
spiritual seed, in every one of the seven Churches mentioned, Revelations 2.
and 3. Chapters.]

But I pray were the Laodiceans that were neither hot nor cold, that said they
had need of nothing, and knew not they were miserable, and poor and blind, and
naked, did this frame of spirit show them to be made the righteousness of God
in Christ, and to be sanctified in Christ Jesus, which is the question under
debate, but do not these things rather show the contrary, and that they had but
a name to be thus, but were dead and without Christ; and Philadelphia, which
was one of the seven Churches, does the Lord say there were any of that Church
that were not in a saving state, are any enemies to the Cross of Christ
detected in that Church, let the Author read, Revel. 3.7. to 13. and then let
him tell us how he comes to know that there were such in that Church as were
not true Saints, and the spiritual seed, I am sure he that is holy and true in
his message to them, says no such thing, finds no such fault with them as he
does with the rest of the Churches, but truly whatsoever this Author says, it
would have been well if all the members of all those Churches had been such as
have Christ to be the Lord their righteousness, and truly received Christ into
their hearts to be their Lord and Christ, for then it would have been well with
them for ever, though this Author makes such a state but the first image, and
most unwarrantably calls such the devils subjects, page 361.

Page 151. [He says, Those that come into this first image, (who yet he says
are not in a saving state) have by Christ renewed in them the same pure nature
for kind, wherein man was at first created, and in that state are fed and
nourished up at Christ's own Table, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, to
the growing up into one living body with him.]

Whatsoever this Author says of the natural man's having the same pure nature
for kind that was in Adam at first, if we will believe the Scriptures, they
will tell us the contrary, as Genesis 6.5. And God saw that the wickedness of man
was great in the earth, and that every imagination of his heart was only evil
continually; where then was the pure nature for kind that man was at first
created in; and in the Psalms its said, that God looked down from heaven, and
behold there was none righteous, no not one; and Jer. 17.9. The heart is
deceitful above all things, yea desperately wicked, who can know it; and Jer.
4.14. Wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved; which
plainly imports thus much, that though there may be a great deal of outward
reformation in the natural man, yet the hearts of none are truly washed from
wickedness and purified, but they shall be saved; and 2 Pet. 2.14. the Apostle
says of the false teachers, (who yet no question made a fair show) that they
had eyes full of adultery, or of the Whore, and could not cease to sin, where
was the same pure nature in kind that was in Adam, when they could not cease
to sin; but the Author says further, that these men are nourished up at
Christ's own Table, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood; but he is
sufficiently mistaken, for what is it to be nourished up at Christ's Table, but
to be nourished up in faith, love, holiness, and is the natural man thus
nourished up? what is this but to be nourished up to eternallife? and whereas
he says, they eat his flesh, and drink his blood, I answer then they must
needs be saved, if we will believe Christ's own express words, John 6.54. who
so eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life; for though this
Author makes nothing of eating Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood, and
makes it but his first Image, in which there is no salvation, yet says Christ
in the 55. verse of that chap: My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I
in him; and least we should believe such doctrine as this Author brings, that
this is but the first Image or Covenant of works, and falls short of
salvation to eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood, the Lord Jesus makes a
solemn asseveration to evince it, he says in 57. verse, As the living Father
has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eats me, shall live by me;
Thus notably has Christ confuted this Authors doctrine, and left it upon
record for a witness against him, he says further, that by thus eating of
Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood, they grew up into one living body with
him, and yet by his doctrine in no saving state for all this, so that men may
be living members of Christ, and yet never be saved, strange doctrine indeed!
shall any that are one living body with Christ be damned? the Apostle says
Ephe. 5.23. that Christ is the Savior of the body, and I think we may believe
him, but he quoteth, Luke 13.25.26. How men shall plead they have eaten and
drunk in Christ's presence, and he has taught in their streets, but what is
this to the purpose? did all that sat at table with Christ in the days of his
flesh, and eat and drink with him, eat his flesh, and drink his blood, and were
all those that heard him teach in their streets made one liveing body with him;
this would be as strange an inference from this place, as those that conclude
7. Sacraments from the five loaves and 2. fishes, and alas these were so far
from being one living body with Christ, that the next verse tells us, that
Christ shall say to them, I know not where you are, and so far from having pure
nature of the same kind with Adam, that Christ shall say to them, Depart from
me all ye workers of iniquity.

What a slurre he casts upon the Godly and Churches of Christ, Page 153.
calling them the worldly church, the incorporated body of visible Saints,
called out and separated from the world, a very cleaver contradicition, for if
they be called out and separated from the world, how are they a worldly church,
yea, and he after confesses, they have a manifest selfe-distinguishing
proression, not only from all heathenish worship, but from corrupt Christian
professions and practices, but then will I ask this Author how then are they a
worldly Church?

Page 154. [ He says, that these are a true Church, and as Revel. 12.1. are
clothed with the Sun, yea, are the Nursery or womb of all the true Spiritual
seed.]

But if they be the true Church of Christ, then they are in a saving state, and
then they are subject to Christ, Ephesians. 5.24. Christ loves them, and has given
himself for them, v. 25. and presents them to himself a glorious Church
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, holy and without blemish,
sanctifies and cleanses them, by the washing of the water through the word, v.
25.29. and surely all this amounts to eternal salvation, and to be clothed
with Christ, the Son of righteousness, Revel. 12.1. wrapped up in these beams of
light and life, holds forth salvation fully, and I pray how can these be the
nursery and womb of all the spiritual seed, and yet not be the spiritual
seed themselves, he makes these but flesh in their highest attainements; and
John 3.6. that which is born of the flesh, is flesh, and no better, he makes
them but the Law and the Covenant of works, and does he think the Law and its
righteousness, is the nursery and womb of all the spiritual seed, the Apostle
will teach us another lesson, Gal. 3.2. where he asks the Galatians such a
question, received ye the spirit by the hearing of the Law, or by the preaching
faith, was the Law or first Covenant the nursery or womb which brought forth
the Spirit in you, surely no, but the hearing of faith, and so Gala. 4.23. he
who was of the bondwoman was after the flesh, but he that was of the freewas
by promise, the bondwoman and all that are her children are in bondage. Now
this Author counts this Church, and this state that we are treating on, to be
but the bondwoman and the Law, and yet says, this is the nursery and womb of
all the spiritual seed, but v. 30. What says the Scripture, cast out the
bondwoman and her Son, for the Son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with
the Son of the freewoman; but he says v. 26. Jerusalem that is above is free,
which is the Mother of us all. The new Covenant of grace, that is the womb, the
nursery, the Mother of us all, not the Law, the bondwoman, and tells us
plainly in the last verse, that we are not the children of the bondwoman, but
of the free: thus we see how this Author clasheth with the Scripture.

Page 166. And in diverse other places, he makes use of the 2 Cor. 5.16. to
prove his doctrine, that Christ may be known, received into the heart as Lord
and Christ, and yet no saving state, the words are these, wherefore henceforth
know we no man after the flesh, yea, though we have known Christ after the
flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more.]

What is the meaning of this Scripture, we may understand it thus, wherefore
henceforth know we not man after the flesh, that is to say, Jew and Gentile,
that because a man is a Jew, that therefore he must pe accounted one of Gods
people, or because he is a Gentile, that therefore he must be a lost creature
without hope, and without God in the world, yea, though we have known Christ
after the flesh, that is, have looked upon him only as a Jew; and of the seed
of David, according to the flesh, but we henceforth look upon him on more
Barely under such a consideration, but as he that is the only begotten Son of
God, full of grace and truth, we know him as he that was sent into the world
to save sinners, and was delivered for our offenses, and rose again for our
justification, as the verse before says, that he dyed for us, and rose again,
or take it thus, though we, that is, some of us, the Apostles of Jesus Christ,
have conversed with Christ in the flesh when he dwelt amongst us, and had too
humane and natural affection to his bodily presence, yet we knowing, as John
6.36. that it is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing; that
the bodily Presence of Christ profits nothing without the presence of his
grace, righteousness, and spirit in our hearts; henceforth we know him no more
after that manner, but our love and affections are set upon Christ, as he that
has offered up himself in the eternal spirit, to obtain an eternal
redemption for us, and has ascended to his Father, and to our father, to his
God, and to our God, where he ever lives to make intercession for us, and
therefore I do not see, how this place will make in the least for the Authors
doctrine, but he makes to know Christ after the flesh, to be the receiving of
Christ into the heart, as Lord and Christ, and being justified by his blood,
and sanctified by his spirit, according to the first image, as he calls it, I
hope such knowledge of Christ should be retained, not thrown up, though he calls
it but the first image.

Page 170. [He says, God is pleased through the blood of Christ to declare
himself reconciled to the whole Race of mankind, beholding them in the seed of
the woman, the second Adam, and to prove this, quotes 2 Cor. 5. Jer. 31.
compared with Ezekiel 18. where he says, Christ challenges all souls to be
his.]

But the Author should have quoted the verses of those chapters that he thought
would prove this, and should have shown how he would have argued from them, and
then I would have taken the pains to have answered him, though there is no need
at all, seeing Perkins, Twisse, Mr. Owen, and Mr. Kendall, and others, have so
fully canvassed that opinion of general redemption, to whom the Church of God
owe much for their labors and travels in that point; but whereas he says,
that in that Ezekiel. 18. its said, all souls are mine, what if it be spoken of
God as Creator, and not of Christ as Redeemer, nay, plainly enough it appears
so to be meant, if we view the place, and let the Reader well consider Romans
5.10. If we were reconciled by Christ's blood, how much more shall we be saved
by his life, by him reigning in heaven, and sit down at the right hand of God.

But in the same page he says, That this is so evident, that the creature it
self, Romans 8.19.20. entrnestly groans and labors, exspecting a restonation by
this price of redemption paid by Christ.]

There is no question but the creature, suo modo, according to its own manner
and capacity, both waits for a restoration, and for the manifestation of the
sons of God, but does this make the point of universal redemption evident?
surely no, for I hope that the Author will not say, that Christ died for their
irrational creatures, then indeed we might do as he did, that went and
preached to the Wolfes and wild beasts; truly this which he says makes it so
evident to me, comes not within many miles of a clear proof, or any at all of
universal redemption.

Page 172. He says, of those in this first image, that God does not impute
sins past to them, and often renews pardon to them for sins present,
exercising his forbearance for the sake of his own Justice, as pacified and
attoned by Christ's Sacrifice, and for this he quotes Psalm. 78.38.

But I pray what sins does the Author account sins past, that God does not
impute, what all sins before their coming into this image, all their unbelief,
pride, hatred of God, and all their sins whatsoever, before they came to have
this union with Christ, he calls union with Christ in the flesh, and does he
think that the gifts and calling of God are not without repentance? does God
justify, and unjustifie again? pardon, and then fall upon the sinner, cross
the book, and then make him pay the utmost farthing, no, with him is no
variableness, nor shadow of changeing, once pardon, and ever pardon, once our
God in Christ, and ever so; its one thing for God to exercise forbearance to
men, and another thing to pardon their sins, its one thing to forbear the debt,
and another thing to forgive it, and cancel the bond, this forbearance is no
payment, nor forgiveness of the debt, though God does not presently sue the
bond, and vengeance be not executed speedily, yet this does not argue that he
has forgiven the debt: But let us see whether the Scripture he quots, Psalm.
78.38. prove what he says, the words run thus, but he being full of compassion
for gave their iniquity and destroyed them not, yea, many a time turned he his
anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath: But with forgiveness was this,
but that the generality of that people God was propitious to them, as the word
is often rendered, and did not stir up all his wrath, and the elect a mong them
their sins were Covered for ever by the robe of Christ's righteousness; let us
compare Scripture with Scripture, Psalm. 32.1.2. with this place, where it is
said, Blessed is he whose transgressions are forgiven, whose sin is covered,
blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity; where the Holy Ghost
plainly makes it a state of blessedness and salvation to have our iniquities
forgiven, and our sins covered, that so the Analogy of faith and harmony, that
one Scripture has with another, teaches us how to understand that Scripture,
to wit, that it was the elect among the Jews whose iniquities were truly
forgiven, the rest were forgiven in the sense there declared, that is to say,
so as they were not presently destroyed, neither did God stir up all his wrath,
but when ever he punished that people yet, he left a seed, he spared some, he
did not deal with them as with Sodom, nor make them like to Gomorrah; but why
does the Author think that all the Jews were in that state, which he calls the
first image, its said, ver. 36.37. That they flattered God with their mouths,
and lied to him with their tongues, and their heart was not right with him, how
were they then sanctified by a real and actual change of the heart, which the
Author makes the first image, yea, ver. 10. of that Psalm, its said, they
refused to walk in Gods Law, how then were they in this state that the Author
talks on? they would have their high places, and graven images, ver. 58. surely
those were none of the Authors Images.

Page 173. He says, The Giants spoken of, Genesis 6. were in the first image.

We have seen before what he makes the first image to be, to wit, to receive
Christ into the heart as Lord and Christ in his first appearance, and to eat
his flesh, and drink his blood, and does any body think these Giants did so?
they were called Giants, because of their great statute, and Lion-like strength
and disposition not I wis for any holiness they had more then other men, for
holiness and grace they might shake hands with their brother Goliath, whom
David slew, they were men of renown for the greatness and strength of their
bodies, not for the goodness and holiness of their hearts; truly those Giants
are much beholden to this Author for the good opinion he has of them, for
other men think they were wicked and profane men, that lived without God in
the world, and I would fain have him show us one expression in all that 6. of
Genesis that shows them to be in such a state as he calls the first image.

Page 185. and 186. That those that are in the first image, are taken out of
that stock the first Adam, and are transplanted into the good Olive tree (the
man Christ Jesus) and made to partake of the fatness thereof, Romans 11.
becoming thereby wholly a right seed, Jer. 2.21. a holy and righteous seed in
the principles and operations of their mind, answerable to the holy and
righteous flesh of Christ, and are taught to see the need of coming to God, and
being accepted with him in the sacrifice or death of Christ, who as considered
as coming in the flesh, is given to them for a new head and root, yet he says,
they become exalters of this their legal righteousness against the excellency
of the knowledge of the Cross of Christ.

Though Romans 11. has another meaning, yet let us take it in his sense, and see
what it will hold forth in this matter, to be transplanted into Christ, and to
partake of the fatness of that good Olive tree, surely this is a saveing
state, a man cannot be taken out of the old Adam, and be truly transplanted
into Christ, but he must be grafted upon the righteousness of Christ, and
planted into the likeness of his death, spoken of Romans 6. and to partake of
Christ's fatness, is to receive of his fullness, and grace for grace, to derive,
quickening, strengthening, sanctifying, comforting, and all grace from Christ a
blessed state, and for holiness he says, they are answerable to the holy and
righteous flesh of Christ, good still, and I would fain see such a man that is
thus, and is not in a saving state, I am sure the Giants he talked on before,
were far enough from this state, and I would we could all find such principles
and operations of mind in us, that the same mind were in us that was in
Christ Jesus, Philip. 2.5. That we had the same mind for humility, the same
mind for patience, the same mind for submission to the Fathers will, the same
mind for self-denial, the same mind for contentment in all estates, the same
mind for public Spiritedness, the same mind for tender love and affections
to the Saints, the same mind for pity and compassion to men's souls, But
truly instead of these notions, that the natural man may have principles and
operations of mind answerable to the holy and righteous flesh of Christ, we
should rather examine our own conformity unto him, and mourn for our short
coming in these things, who should have the same mind in us, that also was in
Christ Jesus. And he thinks these in the first image are taught too, he
says, to see their need of being accepted in the beloved, in the sacrifice or
death of Christ; good still, and surely they that are thus taught of God to see
their own righteousness, a covering too scant for them, and look truly to be
accepted in Christ, are built upon the Rock that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against; but he says, for all this they became exalters of this their
legal righteousness, against the excellency of the knowledge of the cross of
Christ, what does he mean by their legal righteousness, which they exalt? no
other but the righteousness of Christ, who he supposes to be their legal
righteousness, who are in the first image, and their Evangelicall
righteousness, who are in his second image, for he makes it all one to have
this kind of righteousness either inherent in us, or by Christ imputed to us,
and makes the trusting to it, whether as inherent in us, or as inherent in
Christ, and made ours by imputation, to be a trusting in our own
righteousness, and man's righteousness, for that kind of righteousness in
Christ, he makes but man's righteousness, and but flesh, a dangerous mistake,
but the Scripture distinguishes between them in many places, as Romans 8.3.4.
and Romans 3.20. verse, and so on, and so he distinguishes that sort of
righteousness which was in Christ as he fulfilled the Law, and bear the curse
of it for us to be but man's righteousness, and imputed to those that shall
never be saved, and the righteousness of Christ, as he was taken up into the
higher image, he calls the righteousness of God, not considering the reason
why the righteousness of Christ is called Gods righteousness in many places of
Scripture, as 1. because it is the righteousness of him that was both God and
man, and therefore his blood is called Acts 20. the blood of God, not that the
divine nature could die, but because he that shed his blood upon the Cross,
was both God and man. Again, secondly, the righteousness of Christ is called
the righteousness of God, because it is the righteousness God accepts for
justification, and has appointed for the salvation and justification of his
people, and the only righteousness that he imputes to us, when he justifies
us, and thus it is said, Romans 10.3. that they being ignorant of Gods
righteousness and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God, that is to say, they not
knowing that Christ's righteousness was the only righteousness that God would
accept for the justification of a sinner, they went about to establish their
own righteousness, they thought their own obedience and righteousness would
do it, and so never saw the shortness of their own obedience to bring them
unto life, and therefore never submited to the righteousness of God, never came
to Christ that they might have life. Thirdly, Christ's righteousness may be
called Gods righteousness, because Christ's righteousness imputed to us,
declares Gods righteousness in justifying of us, that he is just in it, Romans
3.29.

Page 188. He says, that the Apostles meaning Romans 7. when he says the Law
has dominion over a man as long as he lives, is that the Law has dominion
over a man as long as he lives unto Christ as his bridegroom and husband,
under the first covenant, and are as it were his married wife, Isaiah 54.1.
bearing Children, or becoming fruitful unto Christ in that state.

But I wis his meaning is, that the law has dominion over a man, that is, has
power to curse us, and condemn us, so long as we live under it as a Covenant of
works; for so here the Apostle is showing the difference between a man that
is united to Christ, and one that is not united to Christ, not the difference
between a man that is united to Christ in the flesh, and a man that is united
to Christ in the higher image, as this Author supposes, and how plainly does
this Author contradict himself herein, for page 118. he tells us, that those
that are married to Christ, and receive him according to the first covenant,
that they have the benefit of Christ's legal righteousness, by which he
satisfied the Law, so that he says, the law has nothing to say against such,
but here he says the Law has dominion over such, that is, has power to curse
them and condemn them, if the Author does not plainly contradict himself in
these two places, let the reader judge; and he goes on here to tell us, that in
this state men are married to Christ, and bear Children, or become fruitful
unto him, truly then our issue are not bastards, when we are married to Christ,
bear children, and are fruitful to him, surely Christ will for ever own such
to be his spouses, and their Issue to be his, but what Isa. 54.1. will prove
for him, I know not, neither is he pleased to tell us how he will argue from
it, but I am sure it will make against him, for those that are there said, now
to bear and bring forth fruit, are said in the 5. verse, to have their Maker
to be their husband, and ver. 8. God says with everlasting kindness he will
have mercy on them, which surely is a saving state.

Page 189. He says the fleshly seed of Israel were implanted into Christ, so
that by his righteousness, and not by their own, they were made righteous,
and in him, as in the first fruits, the whole lump was rendered holy.]

The elect among the children of Israel were so, but we shall stay long enough
before the Author can prove that all the fleshly seed of Israel were implanted
into Christ, and made righteous by his righteousness, if they had, they had
surely been in a saving state, will the Author never leave undervaluing the
righteousness of Christ, and saying that a man may be made righteous, not in
his own righteousness, but in the righteousness of Christ, and yet not be in a
saving state, the worst I wish the Author is, that he may be righteous in the
righteousness of Christ (which he has lifted up his hand so high against in
his book) that so he may find mercy in that day, when he must give an account
of his book, and of all things he has done in the body, if the righteousness
of Christ will not stand us in stead, we perish for ever; He is mistaken in
Romans 11. for by the first fruits there spoken of is not meant Christ, but
Abraham with whom God made such a gracious Govenant, according to which the
Jews shall at last find favor in Gods eyes, who are beloved for that Fathers
sake, and therefore the Scripture often tells us, that when the Jews provoked
God, he remembered the Govenant that he made with Abraham, and did not forget
the Covenant of their Fathers which he swear unto them.

Page 190. He applies, 2 Colos. 11. and 13. verses, to men in his first image,
that they are made partakers of all that is there spoken.]

But we will try that, the eleventh verse it is thus, in whom also ye are
circumcised with your circumcision, made without hands, in putting of the body
of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ. I do not a little
marvel that he should apply this to men in the first image, wherein there is
no salvation, for who does the Apostle speak these of, but of such as in the
chapter before he calls Saints, faithful, verse 2. says, that they had faith
in the Lord Jesus, and love to all the Saints, tells them, there was hope
laid up for them in heaven, verse 5. and second chap. 10. tells them, they were
complete in Christ, and were not such as these in a saving state, to have true
faith in the Lord Jesus, and be complete in him, is not this a saving state?
And now the Apostle goes on further to show what these believers had received
from Christ, how your hearts were circumcised by the circumcision that Christ
is the worker of, which is no other but the true regeneration of the spirit,
and verse 13. says, how they were quickened together with Christ, and all their
trespasses forgiven them, if to be thus, be not a saving state, I know not what
is, and let this Author have a care of misinterpreting Scripture in this
manner, wresting the Scriptures to make out his notions of his images, and thus
calling light darkness, calling true regeneration, and the faith of Gods
elect, but common grace.

Page 191. He says, those that are in the first image, have writ out in the
fleshly table of their hearts, a conformity to that image of God that shines
forth in the flesh of Christ, and this is their sanctification; and there, and
page 192. he says too, that Christ himself is made their head and covering,
as to their justification, they are made righteous, not in themselves, but in
another, even through the Mediatorship of the man Christ Jesus, as their Head,
in whose natural righteousness and perfection they stand blameless before
God.]

Here is Christ's righteousness imputed for justification, and Christ's
righteousness imparted for our sanctification, and yet the Author would make
us believe all this is not a saving state, but I wis the writing of Gods Laws
in our hearts, is a peculiar benefit of the new Covenant of grace, Jer. 31. but
he makes it to be given as a benefit by the renewal of the old Covenant again
by Christ, and o how dishonorable is this to Christ the Lord of life, that men
may have him for their head and covering, for their justification, and yet not
be in a saving state; but what says the Scripture, Romans 8.30. Those whom the
Lord justifies, them he also glorifies, then which what can be plainer to
prove, that such as are justified by Christ, are in a saving state, for the
text tells us, such shall be glorified, let this Author say what he will to the
contrary, that this is but the first image, and Christ in the flesh, the sure
word of the Gospel, tells us, that those whom the Lord justifies, shall
certainly be glorified, brought to heaven, inherit eternal life; and whereas he
says, Christ is made their covering for justification, then I say they must
needs be in a sure and saving state, Psalm. 32.12. Blessed is the man whose
iniquities are pardoned, and whose sins are covered by the robes of Christ's
righteousness, such can never come into condemnation, God sees no iniquity in
such with a judicial eye, to take vengeance and damn them for it, for Christ
covers their sins in that respect, that in that sense God sees no iniquity
in Jacob, nor no transgression in Israel, but only sees the sins of such with
the eye of a Father, (which is well for them) to reclaim them, better them, and
heal their backslidings, as Isaiah 57.18. We see the Author makes no bones of
counting Christ's righteousness invalid for justification, and yet sufficiently
contradicting himself, says, that this righteousness of Christ's, makes us to
stand blameless before God, but then are not such in a saving state, if we be
blameless by Christ before God, then I may ask this Author, as Romans 8.33.34.
who shall lay any thing to their charge? who shall condemn them, seeing God
Justifies them, and the Author confesses they stand blameless before him.

Page 193. He says, these are represented in Paul's own person, Rom 7. as
having that workmanship set up in their hearts and minds, which stands in an
exact conformity to the Law or image of Christ's natural righteousness; but in
the next page, he says, they find by experience no good thing dwelling in
their flesh, that is, abiding, and of a continual residence with them, being in
such a wavering condition, that whilst with their mind they serve the Law of
God, they are ready with their flesh to serve the Law of sin, and the good they
would do, that they do not, and the evil which they would not do, that they
do.

But stay, first the Author is mistaken in this, that he thinks the true
saints that shall inherit eternal life are not represented by Paul's own
person, that which is there said in that 7. of Romans was true of Paul, and then
surely as true of other saints; and this Author goes about here to make Paul
but in the first image, for Paul says all that of himself, and the Author
thinks this was but the first image, and calls this a being under the Law;
alas he that minds the 9.10.11. verses of that Chap. will see that Paul, and
the persons represented in him, were of from the Law for life, for he says,
the Law ^^ew him, he found that to be but death, well, but why must this be but
a man in the first image, and out of a saving state? why the Author says, that
these have no good thing dwelling in their flesh, that is, faith he, abiding
and of a continual residence with them; but hold a little, that is not the
meaning of it, for in us, that is, in our flesh, is nothing spiritually good,
not only that there is nothing that does abide and continue, but there is
nothing at all good in us by nature, in me, that is in my flesh, that is, as I
am natural, and as considered without the grace and spirit of God, so I have
no good thing dwelling in me, and so it is with every saint of God, that they
may all say as he said, Horreo quicquid de meo est, I abhominate what is of my
self, or with Paul, in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing; I have no
good in me, no good thoughts, desires, inclinations, but as God works in me
to will, and to do of his own good pleasure; but I pray let the Author show
us any thing to the contrary, but that a man in his higher image may not have
cause to say and confess as much, that in them, that is, in their flesh,
dwells no good thing; in a word, there does not only no good thing abide and
continue in our hearts by nature, but it was never there to be found, but we
are transgressors from the womb.

Well, he says further, as v. 25. that whilst with their mind they serve the
law of God, they are ready with their flesh to serve the law of sin; and I pray
who is not so? Paul there says it was so with him, and we are content to
acknowledge it is so with us, though the Author for it say we are but in the
first Image, we confess we are fle^h and spirit, and the flesh in us rebelleth
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and while we with our
minds and hearts desire to serve the law of God, and do his will, the flesh in
us draws another way, this enemy in our own bosoms, the flesh and law of
our members is often too hard for us, and brings us into captivity, this is our
burden, our gall, and wormwood in this world, and makes us cry out often with
Paul, ver. 24. O wretched man that we are, and with Isaiah, we are unclean, we
are unclean; and yet for all this, we know that the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin, and the spirit of Christ will sanctify us wholly,
and cast all our sins into the depths of the Sea, and the time will come when
we shall sin no more, and all things in us shall be made subject to Christ,
though we see not yet all things made subject unto Christ, yet having faith in
Christ, the work is doing, and we shall be purified one day, even as he is
pure, and our sanctification shall be as complete and perfect hereafter, as our
justification is here; the remainders of corruption are left in the saints in
this world, to keep them low and vile in their own eyes, to make them prize and
value the blood of Christ, which cleanses them from all sin, to keep them from
going about to establish their own righteousness, to make them desire to be
dissolved to be with Christ, to imbitter the world to them, to let them see
their own weakness and nothingnesse, and in judgment to the world, that they
are oftentimes hardened and prejudiced against the ways of God, by the
failings and spots of Gods children, but they are saints for all this remainder
of corruption, and I do believe a man in the Authors second Image, may
complain of this as well as Paul and others.

But the Author goes on, and says, as v. 19. that these in the first Image,
the good which they would do, that they do not, and the evil which they
would not do, that they do.

Which surely is true of all Saints in this world, they do not pray, hear,
meditate, live unto God as they desire, and by the remainders of corruption are
often hindered from doing the good which they would, and surely were it not
that it is so at present with the best saints, that they cannot do the good
which they would, they would be more holy, and heavenly, and spiritual, and
thankful, and sincere, and active for God then they are, if they could do the
things which they would, and again, were it not that the saints are so, that
the evil which they would not, that they do, there would not be that pride,
deadness, earthliness in the saints that there is, for they pray against their
corruptions with strong crying and tears, and had rather be freed from them,
then from any crosses and afflictions whatsoever; thus we have examined whither
Paul in the seventh of the Romans does represent in his own person a man that
is in the Authors first image, and nor in a saving state; we see the contrary,
that Paul here does personate the true saints, and what is there said, is true
of all saints this side glory.

Page 207. He says, these are but after such a manner Christ's house, as is
intimated, Heb. 3.6. whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end.

But this place proves not that any are the house, and of the family of
Christ, that yet do perish and miscarry for ever, but quite contrary, that none
are his house, and of his family, but those that do hold fast the faith, and
endure to the end; that this perseverance is an evidence of true grace, as
Christ said, if you continue to the end, then are ye my disciples indeed, else
you are my disciples but in show, so if you hold fast the confidence and faith,
which you profess to have in the Lord Jesus, then you are Christ's house
indeed, else you have but only a name, to live a name, to be Christ's house and
members, and this Author must needs, according to the tenor of his judgment,
make the confidence here spoken of to be but such as a man has in the first
image, and he makes the throwing it up, and not the keeping of it, to be the
way to be saved.

Page 208. He says, This state is called in Scripture the first faith which
may be departed from; and prove a faith that fails.

I suppose the place of Scripture the Author means, is 1 Timothy 5.12. the
Apostle is there speaking of widows, for the service of the Church, to visit
the sick, and the like, and wishes them not to choose young women to that
office, for he says when they have waxed wanton against Christ, they will
marry, having damnation, because they have forsaken their first faith; there is
no necessity that we should understand here by damnation, eternal damnation,
but that they are to be faulted and condemned for going from their faith and
promise to continue single for the service of the Church; if we will understand
it of faith in Christ, then those that leave it did but seem to have it, as in
these parables, one Evangelist says, from him shall be taken that which he
has, the other Evangelist explaines it thus, that which he seems to have, so
many men leave the faith, sincerity, and holiness, which they once seemed to
have, but however this place be understood, it will make nothing for this
Auther, for they are said to have damnation, because they left their first
faith, now if this first faith were the Authors first image, yet he makes not
the leaving of this first image, but the keeping it, and siting down in it, to
be men's damnation.

Page 209. He makes Christ's second appearance spoken of, 1 Timothy 6.14. to be the
higher image, that the first image is to be kept without spot unto.]

But that appearing of Jesus Christ, is his 2. coming, when he shall come with
10000. of his saints to execute judgment upon all that are ungodly, and take to
him his great power and reign; but its the Authors way to make scripture bow
down to his image, and so in the same page he makes the Angels calling to
Jacob to let him go, Genesis 32.26. that Angel, to signify the first Image,
which calls to be let go, because of the day break of Christ's second coming,
the higher Image; he that shall thus expound Scripture may even say what he
will, and surely if the Author does not quote these, and most of the Scriptures
he quotes, merely for illustration, and to use Scripture phrase, and not at all
to prove what he is about, he will be deeply guilty of that which the Apostles
call wresting of the Scriptures.

Page 210. He says, these are said 1 Timothy 1.19. and 5.12. to have faith
accompanied with a good conscience, but such as may be lost and shipwrackt. The
words are these, holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put
away concerning faith, have made shipwreck.

Now what is the faith that Paul bids Timothy hold fast here, not so much the
grace of faith in his own heart, but it is the doctrine of faith, as Paul
says of himself elsewhere, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith,
and so he would have Timothy against all opposers, and this doctrine of faith,
he had said down in ver. 15. which was this, that Christ came into the world
to save sinners; now Hymenus and Phyletus, and such as had only received a
notionall knowledge of this doctrine, had not received this truth in the love
and power of it, not having a good conscience, and hearts brought to the
obedience of Christ, concerning this faith they made shipwreck, God gave them
up to strong delusions to believe a lie, they fell into errors concerning the
faith and ways of Christ, and said the resurrection was past already, and so
overthrew the faith of some that were persuaded of the contrary before, so that
this place proves not, that men may have true faith in Christ and lose it; the
notionall and historical faith and belief of the Gospel may be lost, and men
may sin away such inlightnings and convictions of the spirit, but such faith as
truly receives Christ into the heart, and unites us unto him in the greatest
storms, will not be shipwrackt, and that man having this faith and hope in
Christ, has an Anchor for his soul both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6. ult. this
faith swims in the sea of Christ's blood, in the Ocean of free grace, where it
cannot suffer shipwreck.

Page. 221. and 222. He says concerning Abraham's calling, that his first
remove was out of the state of degenerate nature, and his heathenish life, into
circumcision or experience of that commumon with God which is by the first
Covenant, which he made use of but as an Iun in his passage to the higher state.

If the Author had consulted with the fourth Romans he would have bloted out this
passage, for in that Chap. the Apostle having spoken of justification, Gods
imputing righteousness without works, and remembering their sins no more, he
tells us in the 9.10.11.12. verses, that before ever Abraham received the
sign of circumcision, he was thus justified, and therefore had true saving
faith, He received circumcision, a se^l of the righteousness of faith which he
had, being yet uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all them that
believe, though they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to
them also; and the Author is mistaken to think that circumcision was a seal of
the Covenant of works, for it was a seal of the righteousness of the new
covenant, which Abraham had believed in before.

Page 318. He says, these under the first image (wherein yet there is not
eternal life) are planted into Christ, as branches in the vine, and good olive
tree, and so rendered righteous in the righteousness of their head and root.

That place, John 15.1. Every branch in me that bears not fruit is taken
away, the learned very well, and according to the original read thus, Every
branch that bears not fruit in me is taken away, and so the meaning is, that
though men bear never so much fruit by their husband the law, yet all these
children are but bastards, unless they be married to Christ the true husband,
and though such may go for true saints, yet they are not, and does not at all
hold forth that any man may be truly in Christ, and yet not be in a saving
state, which will be more evident if we compare this place with Romans 8.1. where
the Apostle says, That there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, to them that are truly in Christ, and planted into him, to such there is
no condemnation, but they are passed from death to life, and this Author
confesses, that these men are rendered righteous in the righteousness of Christ,
their head and root, and if so, what hinders their eternal salvation? will not
Christ's righteousness justify them and save them for ever? we are content to
leave it upon that issue, and venture our souls upon that score, that if our
being rendered righteous in the righteousness of Christ our head and root, will
not bring us to Heaven, we are willing to miscarry for ever, but we know
assuredly that his righteousness will justify us for ever, and save us to the
utmost, that come to God by him.

In that Page 318. He says, these go about to establish their own
righteousness, not submiting to the righteousness of God.]

But has not the Author often said, that these men in the first image seek
acceptance with God only by the righteousness of Christ, and in this same page
says, they are rendered righteous in the righteousness of Christ their head,
and if so, how do they go about to establish their own righteousness? but the
mystery lies in the Authors understanding of the righteousness of God,
distinguishing between the righteousness of Christ, and the righteousness of
God; but its the righteousness of Christ that the Scripture calls the
righteousness of God, and we have showed before why the righteousness of Christ
is called the righteousness of God, not as if the righteousness of Christ by
which we are justified, was the eternal righteousness of the Godhead, as
Osiander dreamed, which is not communicable unto us; but whatsoever the Author
says here of men in the first image, that they will not submit to the
righteousness of God, yet page 118. he says, they are made the righteousness
of God in Christ.

Page 320. He says, these are begotten again into Gods own likness, wherein
man was created at first, and have the visible characters thereof shining forth
in it, not written with ink, and on tables of stone, but with the spirit of
the liveing God, and on the fleshly tables of the heart, showing it self a
right change, and a real heart work, above and beyond all that is accounted
civility and morality, and above all notion and spirituality, that is but head
work and fancy, and the tempter persuades them to rest here, and praise and
bless Gods word; and makes them say its good for us to be here, especially if
we be upon the Mount, and brought hither by Christ himself.]

It being supposed what the Author confesses, that these look for acceptance
with God only in the beloved, this is a blessed state, and all they that are
brought into it are taught of God, and not by the devil, as the Author
imagines, to bless Gods word, and be thankful for this rich grace, and say
its good for us to be here, whither should we go, we are with him that has
alone the words of eternal life; we are with him that justifies us, sanctifies
us, stays us with flaggons, comforts us with apples, quickens us, influences us
with his spirit, kisses us with the kisses of his mouth, whose love is better
then wine, guides us by his counsel, and afterward brings us to his glory,
surely we may bless the word of the Lord, and magnify his grace, and say its
good to be here, and bless the Lord that he brought us to this blessed state,
and for sanctification, who are partakers of it, as the Author here describes
it, but the true believers? its they only that put on the new man, which after
the image of God is created in righteousness and true holiness, (...) 3.3.
rejoiced in such, as the Epistle of Christ, whose hearts were so written on by
the spirit of the living God; and Hebr. 8.10. its made a special blessing of
the new Covenant of grace, I will put my laws into their mind, and write them
in their hearts, such have God to be their God in Covenant for ever, and they
his people for ever, and though the heart of a natural man may in some sort be
swept and garnished, yet not thus written on by the spirit of God, as the
Author says.

Page 325. He says, That these in the first image have their consciences
purged from dead works by the blood of Christ, and so fitted again for the
service of the living God.

But where does the Scripture say thus, its the Saints only that have their
hearts purified by faith, the natural man's conscience is so far from being
purged from dead works, that all his works, whatsoever he or others think of
them, yet in Gods esteem they are dead works, because they come from him that
is dead in trespasses and sins, void of the life and spirit of Christ, none
of the living in Jerusalem, and though he may have a name to live, yet he is
dead, and his works dead works; and whereas he says a man in the first image
is fitted again for the service of the living God, then he must be a true
believer, no man is fitted for the service of the living God, without he be a
true believer, for without faith its impossible to please God; he must also be
a spiritual worshipper, for God is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit
and truth.

Page 329. He says further of these in the first image, that they feed
mystically upon Christ's flesh, and drink his blood, so as that they are
nourished up in a way of righteousness, like unto that of those young men, 1
John 2.14. who were strong through the word of God thus dwelling and abiding in
them, whereby they had overcome the wicked one, as to all fleshly impurity and
filthiness.

That the natural man feeds mystically upon Christ's flesh and blood, we have
disproved before, and for those in John, surely they were in a saving state,
they were strong, surely not in themselves, but in the Lord, and the power of
his might, the word of God abided and dwelt in them, if we take it for Christ,
they had him abiding in them, and surely they that abide in Christ, and have
Christ abiding in them, are true Saints; if we take it as meant of the Gospel,
none have that word of Christ dwelling richly in them but Saints, and they have
overcome the wicked one, conquered him through him that loved them, this is
peculiar to the true Saints, and where the devil is truly overcome, its not
only as to the filthiness of the flesh, but of the spirit also, if the devil
reign in the heart, he is not yet overcome.

Page 329. He says, these men in the first image, and Christ, are so knit
together in this sort of marriage union, that Christ and they make but one
flesh, one bread, and one body, so as all the glory, beauty, comeliness, and
perfection which is Christ, according to the flesh, that is not incommunicable,
is Christ, they have the righteousness of his natural perfection, whereby he
fullfilled the law, imputed to them for their justification in the sight of
God, and the indwelling life of it working in them inherent righteousness and
sanctification.]

I anwer, none have marriage union with Christ but true believers, and such as
shall be saved, for Christ the Heavenly bridegroom hates putting away, when
Christ the fairest of ten thousand, marries any of us Blackmoores, he says as
Hosea 2.19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea, I will betroth thee unto
me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercyes,
thus its upon terms of mere grace and mercy, and therefore this love knot,
neither the Law, nor sin, nor Satan can untye it, to be the Bride, the Lambs
wife, is a sure and certain estate of salvation, yea, this Author tells us,
that there is such a near union between Christ and men in this first image,
that they are one flesh, one bread, and one body, if so, then if they perish,
Christ must perish too, or else if he live who is the head, the body must live
also, can the head live when the body is taken from it, I believe great men
would be loath to try that experiment, Christ personal is complete in himself,
Christ mystical is not complete without the body; and let the Author show us
where ever any o^ the limbs and members of Christ's body were cut off and
thrown into hell, and he tells us, that they are justified and sanctified by
Christ, what lack they yet to bring them into a saving state? there is union
with Christ, justification and sanctification, who shall lay any thing to their
charge? God will not, for as this Author confesses, they are justified in the
sight of God, Christ will not, for he has died for them, and the Author
confesses, that they and he are one flesh, and one body, and did ever any man
hate his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, as the Lord the Church,
Ephesians. 5. The Law cannot, for the Author confesses, page 118. that the Law has
nothing to say against these men in the first Image; here the poor sinner is
acquitted by the Law, and by the Judge of the Court, who then can condemn him,
its well this Author is not Judge in this matter.

Page 330. He quotes Zach. 11.10. And I took my staff, even beauty, and cut it
asunder, that I might break my Covenant which I had made with all the people.

But what is this to the purpose, does this prove that men may be one flesh,
one bread, one body with Christ, and yet perish; this Covenant was a temporal
Covenant, which God is said to break, when he did not so protect them, and
fight against their enemies, and give them rest round about, as he had done in
times past, and because this staff which God breaks, is called baauty,
therefore this Author will needs have it meant of Christ's beauty and comeliness
being put upon their souls, and that this was taken away, and by breaking of
the staff bands, to be meant the breaking of the marriage union between Christ
and them, as if all the Jews had a marriage union with Christ; but ver. 14.
tells us what is meant by the staff called Bands, Then I cut asuuder mine other
staff, even Bands, that I might break the brotherhood between Judah and
Israel, not break the marriage union between Christ and them, but break the
brotherhood between Judah and Israel.

Page 363. He says, Those in the higher image are cleansed from all
filthiness of the spirit, as well as of the flesh, which those in the first
image come short of, having had only a cleansing or washing away of the filth
of the flesh.

But had not he said before, that there was a heart work in these men, and that
they were begotten into Gods own similitude, and likeness, wherein man was at
first created, if so, then they must in principle and measure be cleansed from
filthiness of spirit, as well as of flesh, for the law is spiritual, as Paul
teaches us, Romans 7. and reaches to the principles, and thoughts, and
intents, and holiness of the heart; thus cleaverly can the Author contradict
himself when he pleases; and so sometimes he tells us, they look only to be
justified in the righteousness of Christ their head, and it may be in the same
page tells us, they go about to establish their own righteousness.

To conclude this Chapter, after the Author has so cried up the seize of
men in his first image as we have seen, when he has affirmed them to be called
out of the world, Christ made their righteousness in a way of justification,
and told us how they are one flesh, one body with Christ, knit and married to
Christ, faithful walkers with Christ, he tells us very fairly at last.

Page 361. That these are the devils subjects, though he tells us in that
same page, that they own themselves in a professed subjection and conformity
to the law of God, that is, to what is righteous, holy, and good in its nature,
and not only as it is within themselves, but as they are made righteous in
another, viz. Jesus Christ the righteous.

Truly we never thought the devil had such subjects, but the Author could not
this Gordian knot, if he were set about it; for if righteous in Christ, in a
way of justification, and sanctified by his blood, how are they the devils
subjects? nay, the Author before had told us, they were Christ's subjects, and a
man at the same time cannot be Christ's subject, and the devils subject, a man
is translated from the power of darkness, when he is translated into the
Kingdom of Christ. Thus have we examined the Authors notions concerning men in
his first image, so full of contradiction to themselves and the truth. Now to
examine his doctrine about men in his higher image, which he makes a saving
state, shall be the work of the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Examines the Authors doctrine about his higher Image, which he
counts a saving state.
HE tells us, Page 7. That this higher Image is the communion of the Holy Ghost,
2 Cor. 13.14. ( which Paul wishes unto them after the grace they had shared in
from Jesus Christ our Lord, as the common salvation, Jude 3. and as the fruit
of the love of God the Father.)

This shows the Author to be a Critic indeed, as if a man might have the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and yet be shut out for ever from the love of God the
Father, and the communion of the Holy Ghost; but what is it to have the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ? but to have the pardoning, strengthening, sanctifying,
quickening grace of the Lord Jesus; and he that has this to be sure has the
love of God; he both loves God, and God loves him; and this communion of the
Holy Ghost is an effect of the love of God, and the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who gives the blessed Spirit to those who are partakers of his grace
and righteousness to sanctify them wholly, comfort them, lead them into all
truth, and seal them to the day of redemption, and the common salvation spoken
of Jude 3. which the Author quotes is the grace of God which brings
salvation to all true Believers, Gentiles as well as Jews, called there common,
because this righteousness of God, which is by faith in Jesus Christ, is upon
all and unto all them that believe, whether Jews or Gentiles; for the same Lord
is rich in mercy to justify and save all that believe on him, though they be
not Jews by nature but sinners of the Gentiles; in this respect is the grace
and righteousness that is in Christ, called common salvation, and not that it
is common to them that are eternally saved, and to them that perish.

Page 58. He describes the higher Image to be a beholding of Gods very
similitude open and bare faced.]

But is this saving faith to be beholding Gods very similitude open and bare
faced as the Authors phrase is? Alas! we can have no access to him as an
absolute God with comfort and for salvation without relation to a Mediator
sesus, the surety of the better Testament. John 14.6. No man comes to the
father but by him, and he saves them that come to God by him. Hebr. 7.25. that
is true saving faith, not the seeing of Gods similitude open and bare faced;
but how much better does the Apostle describe faith and saving grace. 2 Cor.
4.6. where he calls it Gods shining into our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ! There is a very
near approach to God that the Saints shall have in glory, and a glorious view
of him in the beatifical vision in glory, but that is not faith, but
glorification, not here, but hereafter; as God told Moses Exodus 33. No man
shall see my face and live. But blessed be the Lord for ever, that he puts us
into the clift of the Rock the Lord Jesus, and there we see his goodness
passing before us, and hear him proclaming his name the Lord, the Lord God
gracious and abundant in mercy, and that by beleiving in Christ we are his
children, and that because we are thus his sons he sends the spirit of his
son into our hearts, whereby we can call him Abba Father; this is unspeakable
comfort to us in our present state, that we thus know that we are now the sons
of God, though yet it does not fully appear to us what we shall be, but we know
that when he shall appear, even Jesus Christ the righteous, that we shall be
like him, and see him as he is, as 1 John 3.3. and however others pretend to
see God in his very similitude open and bare faced, we confess, as 1 Cor.
13.12. that we now see but through a glass darkly, though we yet expect at that
day break of eternal brightness in Heaven, to see face to face, and know as we
are known.

That which the Author says of saving faith, and the higher Image. p. 75, 76.
we will grant, taking it in a good sense, and with this caution that what he
there says is improperly called the newbirth, but rather glorification, and
that his expressions are too liable to mistakes, but for quietness sake we will
pass them by, and come to

Page 139. He says these in the higher Image are under the ministry of
Christ's second appear ance wherein he does not only appear a King of
righteousness conveying a seed of righteousness answerable to that perfection
commanded by the Law, but also a King of peace conveying a seed of everlasting
peace.]

But the Author must know that where Christ is to any soul a King of
righteousness, he is also a King of peace; The peace of God which passes all
understanding; for its sweetness and comfort is an effect of Christ's
righteousness, and so says the Scripture Isaiah 30.17. the work of
righteousness shall be peace (to wit peace with God) and the effect of
righteousness (to wit Christ's righteousness) quietness and assurance for ever;
for as Romans 5.1. being justified by faith (that is, by Christ and his
righteousness believed in) we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, so that this is the difference between the first Image and the second,
that in the first, Chrst is only to the soul the King of righteousness; and in
the other both the King of righteousness and peace is a mere notion; for they
are inseparable; if Christ be the one to the soul, he must of necessity be the
other; and he is upon this notion too, page 214. that the higher image forms
the heart into the subjection of Christ, not only as he is the King of
righteousness, but as he is the King of peace: but we have seen that these two
are inseparable, and the latter the effect of the former.

Page 224. He says after effectual calling that which is the precious saving
faith of Gods elect (which he counts the higher image) may lie und^stinguished
in operation from that first faith which the spiritual seed may continue a long
time in the single exercise of in common with the children (...) the first
covenant, as was most evident in Pe^^^ who after he was effectually called, yet
how (...) and weak did the operation and power of fa^^ remain in him to the
suffering of him to fall (...) shamefully as he did!

This we deny, that a man that is a believ^^ his faith may lie undistinguished
in opera^^^ from the legal work that men have that a^ under the covenant of
works; and that the^^^liever, as this author says, may go on ^^ single
exercise of legal principles; for (...) true faith is in any soul, that soul
has a (...) incumbence and reliance upon Christ (...) for life and salvation,
which no man has (...) der the covenant of works; and this incumbence and
reliance upon Christ, is an act and operation of true faith, that is
distinguishing from the legal principles of men under the covenant of works;
so that, the man does not as this author says, go on a great while still in
the single exercise of the principles of the covenant of works; for if so, he
is not a believer; and whereas this Author says, that this is most evident in
Peter, he is greatly mistaken; for though his faith might not act when he fell
into denying of Christ, yet he had before that time acted faith on the blood of
Christ, and so much the authors own words imply, and so are a sufficient answer
to him. but as the Author jumbles the covenant of works and the covenant of
grace together in justification, so does he in faith and sanctification; but he
must know that as soon as a man believes in Christ, he obeyes upon principles
of faith, and love, and thankful^esse in measure; and we may as well imagine
that the Sun can be without light, as faith be in the heart without its
effects and operations, more or less; and as high as the Author would seem to
carry us, the Apostle James will tell him, that such a kind of faith as he here
speaks of to be the higher image, is but a dead faith, James 2. where he tells
us, Faith without works is dead, a dead faith, v. 17. That faith that does not
work the soul out of its self into Christ for justification, and does not
work out sin upon Gospel principles in some measure, is a dead faith; if this
be the faith that he calls the higher image, its an image indeed, as the Lord
said of those images the people made, that they have eyes but see not, and
cares but bear not, and feet but walk not; and so could this Author have his
higher image to be that a man for all it goes on in the single exercise of
legal principles, and sees not, acts not at all by faith; well, the Lord keep
me from such a faith, and give me faith that works by love, and is
distinguished in operation from a legal work.

But the Author says in that page and in the next, that when James 5th says,
Faith without works is dead, the meaning is, that it is dead in point of
comfort; but not only so, but it is a dead faith, and the man that has such a
faith is dead in trespasses and sins; the Author pretends to show us a higher
state, and puts us off with a dead faith, a dead image; but this is plain, that
he that has truly believed in Christ, faith has acted and operated in him to
an adherence to Christ, to the receiving of Christ in his heart, and does work
in him Gospel-holinesse in some measure; so that he that has true faith and
hope in Christ, that blessed work is doing in his heart, it is begun even to
purify as he is pure, 1 John 3.3.

Page 304. He says, by this faith and higher image man is made no longer able
to keep his selfish power to do his own will, to speak his own words, or think
his own thoughts, or find his own desire, or exercise his own lust, to good or
evil, as living upon his natural root.

That after we have true faith in Christ, we have yet remainders of corruption,
is plain enough by Scripture and all our experiences, that we too much think
our own thoughts, and speak our own words; but how comes it to pass that
this Author tells us that we cannot lust to do good or evil as living upon
our natural root? How then say I? either the true Saint must never sin, which
the Author will not affirm; or else he must do it as he lives in part
according to his natural root the law of our members; for so far as we live
upon Christ, his spirit, his love, so we sin not; and so far as we live up to
the principles of the new creat^^e laid in our hearts in the new birth, so far
we sin not; and let the Reader examine how this passage and the last we
examined will hold together; he had said before, a man in the higher Image
might be like others.

These are the clearest descriptions that I can find him give of his higher
Image; and now let the Reader judge, whether this which he calls the higher
image be any thing more then the first image, setting aside some improper
expressions wherein he confounds the new birth and the glory which follows; for
that is the Authors way to apply Scriptures that speak of the future glory of
the Saints, those he applies to his higher Image.

But now let us consider seeing that among all the writers in all ages since
the Apostles there has none written in this Authors way, unless in some small
matters; and there has been and yet is a remnant according to the election of
grace, how does the Author mitigate the asperity of his doctrine as to those
who have not known of his notions?

Page 213. He tells us that he does not condemn those professors of Christ and
saints of God who have dyed, or yet may dye without ever acknowledging a higher
or better state of acceptance with God then under the first Image.

So that as much weight as he lays upon his higher Image, he confesses it is
such a thing that a man may dye without any experience of it, or acknowledge
there is any such thing, and yet be saved; then I hope the Authors principles
will teach him to be charitable to us, and not unsaint us though we will not
acknowledge his higher Image; but alas this is only to claw a little with
Professors; for Page 207. He tells us that after a man is brought into the
first Image unless he yet further abide the trial of fire which is to pass
upon him, by the spirit of judgment and burning of Christ's second appearance,
he will not long abide in Sion, but make God swear in his wrath that he shall
never enter into his rest; let any intelligent Reader judge how these two
places of his book agree together.

And yet he tells us Page 213. His doctrine is so far from straituing or
lesning the number of those that are saved, that it discovers how they may be
h^d out of the observation of visible professors (among those they exclude as
Heathens) and so may seem to be men in the flesh, but live according to God in
the spirit whilst yet they themselves may be either without law, or so zealous
of the law as to fly in the face of Paul himself, for witnessing a higher light
then they have yet experience of or can bear.

We shall not dispute with this Author whither any are offectually called and
saved among the heathen who have not the Gospel preached to them; we will not
limit the holy one of Israel, who has mercy on whom he will have mercy; but
this we know that faith ordinarily comes by hearing, and hearing the word of
God preached; for it follows how shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans 10.
but however this is certain, that if they be heathens before effectual calling
they are not left so, but are justified and sanctified in Christ Jesus, and
have the faith of Gods elect, and they will not fly in the face of Paul himself
for witnessing a higher life then the first covenant; no, but Paul and such as
bring glad tidings, as the Gospel or new covenant is, their very feet will be
beautiful to them; that a man should have his faith and life in the covenant of
grace, and fly in the face of Paul for witnessing such a state to be the true
state, is a contradiction.

But stall this Authors doctrine (if he mean as he says) will force him not to
unsaint us, though to use his own words we should n^ in his face for talking of
his higher Image, which is not more then to fly in Paul, face, which yet the
Author says a man may do and yet be in the higher Image; this is a strange
Image indeed that does so con^radict it self.

And so he says Page 298. That he does not deny but many Saints of God may
have dyed without the experience or acknowledgment of this higher Image.

And yet he makes this higher Image to be faith and the new covenant, and
Gospel; but surely that man that does not acknowledge that the new Covenant, and
Gospel is the only way of life and salvation and that they only that believe
on Christ shall be saved, surely they are not yet Believers.

Thus we have taken a short view of this Authors higher Image, and setting
aside some obscure expressions of glorification, his higher Image is lower then
his first Image, as may easily appear by what has been spoken of that before;
and this is the way of men to take us off where we are, but where to fix us
next there they are to seek, but only the Author tells us its a higher Image,
and the glory of the father, so the beholding God barefaced, and there is
spiritual senses, but how it is so, he leaves us where he found us and speaks
very little of the higher Image through the book.

And that we may not leave this Chapter in the Authors dark notions about faith
and regeneration, a few words upon that point, least the weak should stagger.

And here we must take notice that the holy Ghost in Scripture sets out
regeneration by diverse expressions, some of which we shall briefly explain.

For the most part Regeneration in the new Testament is called faith and
believing, and that is the receiving of Christ and reliance upon him alone for
righteousness and salvation; this faith works by love, Gal. 5.16. purifies the
heart, Act. 15.9. brings spiritual peace and comfort. 1 Pet. 1.8. gives us
access with confidence to the father. Ephesians. 3.12.

Sometimes Regeneration is called the new ^^eature, as 2 Cor. 5, 17. if any man
be in Christ he is a new creature; and that phrase shows us what a great
change is wrought in the soul at Conversion; old things pass away, and all
things become new; not only a new head, but a new heart, a new life for
justification, a new life for sanctification, new light, new comforts, new
defires, new affections, new ends, new aims, new strength.

Sometimes Regeneration is called a new birth, as 1 John 3.5. a being born of
water and of the spirit; to show us how the Spirit does sanctify and purify
the soul at conversion, as it is written, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you,
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

Sometimes Regeneration is called our being in Christ, as Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; the believer is in Christ, a
member in his body, a branch in this vine; he is in Christ clothed, and wrapped,
and folded up in the robes of his righteousness.

Sometimes Regeneration is set out by Christ's being in us, as 2 Cor. 13.5. Know
ye not that Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? And John 17.23. I in
them, and thou in me; the true believer lives in Christ, and Christ in him;
Christ's being in us shows his acting, quickening, strengthening, and
sanctifying of us; and so it is said Romans 8.18. If Christ be in you, the body
is dead because of sin, and the spirit is life because of righteousness.

Sometimes regeneration is set out by being under grace, as Romans 8.14. to show
that the true believer does not seek life in works of righteousness which he
has done, but freely by grace through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ.

Again, regeneration is set out by our being called into the fellowship of
Jesus Christ our Lord. So 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye are called
into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. This shows that the true
believer is called into fellowship with Jesus Christ in the Fathers love; that
the Father loves them as he has loved him, John 17.23. and the true believer
is called into fellowship with Jesus Christ in the annovnting of the Spirit,
though yet Christ is anointed with that oil of gladness above his fellows,
Heb. 1. and the true believer is called into fellowship with Jesus Christ in
his death and sufferings, that he partakes of the benefit of that bloody
sacrifice; such a fellowship and share he has in Christ's sufferings, that what
Christ did in suffering for his sins is imputed to him by an act of the free
arace of the Pather, as if he himself had done it.

Again, the believer is called into fellowship with Jesus in persecution; that
he suffers with him, is despised with him; and thus, as the Apostle says, As
Christ was, so are we in this present World, without form or comeliness, of no
reputation in the worlds account.

Sometimes Regeneration is set out by a planting into the likeness of Christ's
death, Romans 6.5, 10, 11. Christ in that he died, he died unto sin once; but in
that he lives, he lives unto God, and we are planted into the likeness of
his death, when as v. 11. we likewise are dead indeed unto sin, and live unto
God through Jesus Christ our Lord; that as it follows, v. 12. sin does not
reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the lusts thereof.

Again, sometimes Regeneration is set out by putting on the Lord Jesus Christ,
as Romans 13.14. Then it shows how the true believer puts on the rigteousnesse
of the Lord Jesus, is willing to be uncloathed of the menstruous rags of his
own righteousness, that he may be clothed upon with the righteousness of
Christ.

Sometimes also it is set out in Scripture by coming unto Christ, and taking
his yoke upon us, as Matthew. 11. ult. to show us how the true believer is
submitted and given up to Christ, is his servant, is under his voke, under his
rule and government, is willing to be ruled and governed, and commanded by
Christ, whose commandments are not grievous.

Sometimes Regeneration is set out by fleeing for refuge, to lay hold upon the
hope set before as in the Gospel; so Heb. 6.18. to show us that the true
believer sees his lost estate without Christ, and flees unto Christ as a City
of refuge from the Avenger of blood; and whereas there is mercy, and life, and
pardon, and righteousness tendered to sinners in the Gospel, and open
proclamation, that whosoever will may come and take of the water of life
freely; and sorgivenesse of sins, grace, and glory is preached in Christ's name:
this soul has laid hold upon this hope set before him, accepted of this
grace, accepted of these terms of mercy and peaee, and so lays down arms
against Christ.

True Regeneration is a difficult thing, and therefore there is great need of
the Seal of the Spirit to satisfy us about the work of grace upon our hearts:
for there is a counterfeit faith and a counterfeit repentance; there is both an
acquired faith, and an infused faith; there is a believing, that is only a work
of a man's understanding, and not the work of the Spirit. Romans 10.10. With the
heart man believes to righteousness. It is not enough to assent with the
understanding; its a mavelous difficult thing to find out the difference
between that faith that is of a man's own making upon conviction and
illumination, and that faith that is wrought by the spirit of God by way of
creation and infusion; and therefore thousands in the world are everlastingly
cheated and cousened in this matter: But when a man comes to be outed of
himself, of self-righteousnesse, and self-strength, and self-wisedome, and
close with Christ in a word of grace in a free promise, that is the work: To
rest in legal conviction, to rest upon duties and qualifications, to rest in
amendment of life, to rest in Notions and head-knowledge of Christ and free
grace, these are false rests; but for the soul to be nothing and utterly lost
in himself, and to apply the blood and righteousness of Christ, is a safe and
saving state; for this is the will of the Father that sent him, That whosoever
sees the Son, and believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life.

CHAP. V. Treats of Justification, and shows that whosoever is justified by
Christ's blood, and made the righteousness of God in him, is in a sasing state,
and shall never come into condemation.
THe Doctrine of Justification was well called by Luther the Doctrine of the
standing or falling of the Church of God; this Doctrine so necessary, so
precious, has this Author miserably mistaken. Page 118. He tells us that men in
his first image, who are not yet in a sasing state, have Christ for their
righteousness in a way of Justification; and page 119. tells us this
Righteousness and Justification the world has in common with true Believers.
This Doctrine of his is most dangerous, and is most highly dishonorable unto
Christ, making the blood of the Covenant a common and vain thing, that men may
be made the righteousness of God in Christ, and yet not be in a saving state,
which this Author does in so many words affirm in that page before mentioned;
therefore let us treat a little of this blessed doctrine of Justification.
Justification is to be considered either as an immanent or a transient act in
God; in the first consideration it is a gracious purpose in God from all
eternity not to deal with the Elect according to their sins, but to absolve
them, and forgive them all their trespasses: Justification considered as a
transient act, is Gods justifying and absolving the poor sinner in his own
conscience, and actually imputing Christ's righteousness to him when he
believes in him that justifies the ungodly; none but those that are eternally
sa^ed, are thus justified; for men are not justified and unjustified again, as
this Author fancies; Christ has taken away the curse of the law from them,
Gal. 3.13. Now as 1 Cor. 15.46. The strength of sin is the Law; the strength
and power that sin has to cast any man into hell is from the Law, that the Law
is broken, and the Law is not satisfied; but now Christ having for any man
taken away the curse of the Law, sin has no power to condemn that man; it
has no strength and power to do it; for it has its power from the Law, and
Christ has satisfied that, and is become the end of the Law for righteousness
to every one that believes, Romans 10.4. Who can lay any thing to the charge of
those that are thus justified by Christ? the Law cannot; for Christ has
satisfied the Law, and paid it the uttermost farthing; yea God, through the
righteousness of Christ, is a just God, in being a Savior of them that
believe in Christ; Christ the surety of the better Testament having paid the
debt, God is just in being the justifier of him that in Jesus, Romans 3.26. Just
to deliver them from going down to the pit, for whom Christ has paid a
ransom: And so Romans 5.10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to
God by the blood of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by
his life, by hum living and reigning in Heaven, where be makes intercession
for them whom he died for. And though this Author thinks that a man may be
made the righteousness of God in him, and not be saved; yet surely Paul was of
another mind when he counted all things but loss and dung that he might win
Christ, and be found in his righteousness; and its the first time, I think,
that ever any man maintained this Doctrine, that men men might be made the
righteousness of God in Christ, and yet not be in a saving state; but what
says the Scripture? Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus; though there be enough in them that deserves condemnation and
wrath for ever; yet there is no condemnation, nor never shall be to such,
because Christ is Jehosah their righteousness; his righteousness covers all
their sins, for they are found in him, and not in themselves; but this Author
fancies a conditional justification, but God justifies none but those whom he
justifies freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus,
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation for our sins through faith in his
blood; and so the Author makes the offering up the first image for the second,
the condition of the continuance of justification and Christ's righteousness;
and this second image he often calls faith, and no man has this righteousness
and justification in his own person until he does truly believe. The death of
Christ has both satisfaction and merit in it; not only satisfaction, to
satisfy for all our sins, to pay our debt, and quit our score with God; but
merit, to procure both grace and glory, and so consequently the blood and
righteousness of Christ sets us in another kind of state then Adam had in
innocence: And because this Author all along his discourse is telling us that
our reparation and salvation by Christ's legal righteousness is no more lasting
then Adams state, mistaking the nature of Christ's obedience, whereby we are
made righteous, and not considering Christ's death to be both satisfactory and
meritorious, and the like, I shall endeavor briefly to show the grounds upon
which the Believers estate by Christ is immutable, that he can never come into
condemnation, which Adam state was not. 1. Negatively, and 2. Positively.

1. Negatively, not in regard of any strength that the believer has which Adam
had not, I mean the believer in himself; but as the believer is strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might, and kept by the mighty power of God
through faith unto sal^ation; for the believer in himself is weak; and (...),
that is, in his flesh dwells no good thing; and as thus considered, its
impossible but he should fall, having in him another law, that when he would
do good, evil is present with him, as it is at large described Romans 7.

But 2ly. Positively, Let us consider upon what grounds the believer in Christ's
state is immutable that he can never come into condemnation, and there are
several reasons for it.

1. That because the new Covenant according to which God deals with the
believer, is a covenant of grace, Romans 4.16. Therefore it is of faith, that it
might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; but
thus was not Adams state, it was not by faith and of grace, and was not
therefore sure; but he stood upon his own legs, upon his own righteousness; he
was not justified and accounted righteous freely by grace, and therefore his
state was not sure, but as soon as he sins he dies, and this is excellently set
forth 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us and called us with a holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. Adam stood upon his own works
and obedience; we stand upon Gods purpose and grace in Christ Jesus; and so
Titus 3 5. Not by works of righteousness which we ha e done, but by his mercy
he has saved us; Adam stood upon the works of righteousness which he was
commanded to do; we are saved by the free grace of God and mercy in Christ
Jesus, which mercy of the Lord endures for ever: Adams obedience was
uncertain; Christ's obedience, by which we are made righteous, is certain, his
righteousness is everlasting, the covenant of grace is everlasting, and the
gifts of God therein are without repentance, Isa. 55.3.

The second reason is taken from the merit of Christ's death and perfection of
his righteousness; it is the righteousness of him that is God and man, which
Adams was not; however this Author undervalues it as if it will not justify us
for ever; yet to those who believe, it is precious, by a compact and covenant
between the Father and Christ; it is decreed that by Christ's obedience to
death, even the death of the cross, we should be made righteous, and saved
with an everlasting salvation; and what is this Author, that he should gainsay
it, and say men may be damned for all their being made the righteousness of
God in Christ? but the Apostle says, Heb. 10.14. That Christ by one offering
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; And this Author says, that
men in the first image, when yet they are not in a saving state, are both
justified and truly sanctified; but I would wish this Author to be more wise
and wary then to clash thus with the Scriptures. But let us believe the holy
Scriptures, which tells us that Christ has obtained eternal redemption for
us, Heb. 9.12. and he has obtained redemption for none but it is an eternal
redemption; and so Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost all them that
come to God by him; and this Author says men in the first image do come unto
God by him, and yet they are not in a saving state; but Christ saves such to
the uttermost, that is, perpetually and perfectly, fully and for ever; and so
Christ said upon the cross, when he had borne our sins in his own body upon
the tree, It is finished, the thing is done.

The third Reason is taken from the immutability of Gods counsel, mentioned
Heb. 6.17, 18. God that cannot lie, has promised and sworn to keep them for
ever that are found in Christ's righteousness. And if this will not fatisfie
this Author, yet we desire to be persuaded that he that has thus promised and
sworn by himself, will perform the thing to us; and so we have strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge from the curse of the Law to the hope
that is set before us of being delivered from the wrath to come, by being made
the righteousness of God in Christ, and do assuredly believe, that by this
righteousness of Christ we shall be found of him in peace, faultlesse before
the throne of his glory.

Lastly, Those that are made the righteousness of God in Christ, are kept by
the mighty power of God unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. (...), as in a strong guard
or garrison, that the Devil can never take, as he did Adams state, by craft,
when the serpent beguiled Eve; yea, when Satan desires to have us that he may
winnow us as wheat, Christ prays for us that our faith fail not, but he that
has begun his good work in us, to have our faith and hope in Christ, will
perform it to the day of Jesus Christ; the righteousness of Christ is imputed
to no man, but by an act of the free grace of the Father; and being so freely
imputed, its continuance is certain and for ever; God by his mighty power keeps
them from drawing back to perdition, keeps them in a way of believing, and
preserves them to the heavenly Kingdom; eternal life is freely given them by
Christ, and therefore they shall never perish, neither shall any man be able to
pluck th^^ out of his hands, John 10.27, 28.

CHAP. VI. Treats more particularly of the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant
of Grace, and the difference between them.
THe Author, to make his Doctrine more taking, up and down his Book would
persuade the Reader, that those that he says are called Orthodox, do but seek
their life and righteousness from the Covenant of Works; and that we may be
made the righteousness of God in Christ, and yet be but under the covenant of
works: This we have touched before, and here by the grace of God shall more
particularly treat of. First then, Let us consider what the Law and Covenant of
Works is; It calls for full and perfect obedience on our part, with promise on
Gods part to give life thereupon, and threatening death and damnation to him
that disobeyes, that the soul that sins, it shall dye, as Gal. 3.10. As
many as are of the works of the Law are under the curse; for it is written,
Cursed is every one that continues not in every thing that is written in the
Book of the Law to do it; which shows us how the Law curses and condemns all
that are under it upon the least transgression and disobedience; and therefore
as the Apostle says here (being we have all sinned) as many of us as are under
the Law, and not under grace, are under the curse; and if under the curse of
the law, then its false that the Author says in many places of his Book, that
a man may have Christ made righteousness to him in a way of justification, and
yet be but under the law and covenant of works; for a man cannot at the same
time be both justified and be under the curse; and we see whoever is under the
covenant of works, is under the curse; and so consequently it is a mistake that
the Author holds, that such have Christ made righteousness to them in a way of
justification. According to the law and covenant of works the least sin damnes
a man; one vain thought, one idle word brings the vengeance of eternal fire;
every disobedience receives such a just recompense of reward; therefore says
the Scripture, Romans 4.15. The Law works wrath; for where no Law is, there is
no transgression; no man under the covenant of works can be justified, as this
Author imagines; for the law and covenant of works works wrath, sets justice
against us, and makes all the world become guilty before God, Romans 3.19. No man
is absolved under the covenant of works, and has remission of sins, but all
become guilty before God. Hence also 2 Cor. 3. 6,9. the covenant of works is
said to kill; the Gospel only to make alive; the covenant of works to be the
ministration of condemnation; the covenant of grace to be the ministration of
righteousness; and so Romans 7.8. Without the law sin is dead, has no power to
condemn us; for the strength of sin is the law; and Paul ver. 11. says by it,
to wit the law, sin slew him. Adam was the primus faederatus in the covenant of
works; the Lord Jesus the second Adam in the covenant of grace: The first Adam
was a common person in that covenant of works, and stood in the room of all
mankind; he Broke the conditions of that covenant, and there can be no renewal
of that covenant of works, no coming to life that way; that covenant is broken,
and so all the world become guilty before God; there is no receiving of Christ
upon the terms of this covenant of works, as this Author says, page 118. and
in many other places; and in the same page says, that we are made the
righteousness of God in Christ upon the tenor of that covenant; for we have
seen that by the covenant of works we stand upon our own obedience, not upon
Christ's; we have our life in our own righteousness, not in Christ's; it is by
the Gospel, the covenant of grace, that any man comes to have Jesus Christ,
made of God unto him wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption;
which Covenant of grace comes next to be explained.

This Covenant of grace whereof we now speak, was made principally with Christ
as the common person representing all the elect; as the Covenant of works was
made with Adam, a common person representing all mankind; and Christ Jesus is
said, Isa. 49.8 to be given for a Covenant to the people, the father and Christ
having struck hands in that Covenant of grace and peace between them both; Now
this Covenant of grace is a blessed compact and agreement between the father
and Christ Jesus, that Christ's soul should be made an offering for our sins,
that he should purge away our sins by the sacrifice of himself, reconcile us to
God by the blood of his Cross, and that God would be our God, remember our
sins no more, accept us in him the beloved, justify us, sanctify us, bestow
upon us grace and glory, and bless us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things in him; this is that which we count to be the Covenant of grace; and let
this Author if he can show that this is but the Covenant of works. Our standing
in the Covenant of works depended upon Adams obedience; while he stood, we
stood; when he fell, we fell; our standing in the Covenant of grace depends
upon Christ, that while he is righteous we are righteous that are found in,
him, and so Christ tells us, John 14.19. because I live, ye shall live also; he
has performed that commandment, that he received of the father, to lay down
his life for his sheep, and so God is reconciled for ever; in the volumn of
Gods book it is written of Christ, that he should thus do the will of God in
bedring the chastisement of our peace in the body prepared for him, Heb. 10
Christ according to his agreement and Covenant with the father to purchase
eternal life, grace and glory for those whom he had given him, did bear our
sins in his own body upon the tree, was delivered for our offenses and rose
again for our justification; and his having died thus for our sins, is as if we
had all died, the Law fully satisfied. To explain a little what Christ
according to this blessed Covenant of grace has done for us in his death and
sufferings for our sins;

1. He has taken away the curse of the Law, by being thus made a curse for us,
Gal. 3.13. that the law cannot curse us or condemn us for ever; he has borne
the curse of the Law for us, that the Law has lost its sting in Christ: it
inflicted its curse upon Christ, he by the will of God and his own will
spontaneously yielded to it, so that now the Law can lay nothing to the charge
of the believer; because Christ has paid all; thus as Psa. 89.19. God laid
help upon one that was mighty; we could not pay the debt, we could not satisfy
justice, but the Lord has found out one that was able and willing to do it;
that was able to bear the curse of the Law, and be more then a conquer or; if
that the Lord Christ has not satisfied the Law to the full, let the Law lay it
to his charge; then indeed we had not a perfect righteousness and remission of
sins; but help was laid upon one that was mighty, that upon the Cross said it
was finished, all was paid, all the curse borne, all the wrath suffered.

2. He purged away our sins by this sacrifice of himself, Heb. 1.3. there was a
commutation of persons, he was made sin for us, who himself knew no sin, 2 Cor.
5. ult. the sins that we had committed, he (according to the Covenant between
him and the father) is willing to bear, and God lays all our iniquities upon
Christ, Isa. 53. he has all our sins charged upon him, and he purges them all
away by bearing the punishment of them, which makes full satisfaction for them
all; the Law is satisfied either by our performance of what is required, or
hearing the punishment for not performing, Christ he freely suffers for our
sins, bears the punishment, the just for the unjust; and so God accepting of
his suffering in our stead, according to the agreement between the father and
Christ, in that behalf we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace; and if this Author
will call this but a legal righteousness of Christ's, and will seek another to
be justified by, and have remission of sins, let him; we know that thus our
sins are purged away for ever, and we can never come into condemnation, but are
delivered from going down to the pit, because Christ has thus paid our
ransom; the God of all grace according to the Covenant of grace between him
and Christ, having thus set forth Christ to be a propitiation for our sins
through faith in his blood; and thus we are justified freely by his grace, and
all our sins purged away through this redemption which is in Jesus Christ, as
Romans 3. and no man is justified through the redemption which is in Jesus
Christ, but he is justified freely by grace; not upon the tenor of the
Covenant of works, as this Author imagines, but upon the tenor of the Covenant
of grace.

3. Christ thus dying for us, and in our stead, has obtained an eternal
redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. not a temporary redemption, and upon the terms of
the Covenant of works, as this Author supposes; Christ tells us, John 16.10.
that his spirit shall discover unto us that there is (perfect and everlasting)
righteousness in him, because he goes to the father, and we see him no more,
he having undert aken to expiate and purge away our sins for ever. If he had
not fully and perfectly done it, the father might have sent him to die again,
but that makes it evident that he had paid the utmost farthing, in that he
goes to the father and we see him no more, but there he sits down at the
right hand of God. Thus our redemption in Christ is an eternal redemption,
never to come into prison again; an everlasting peace he has made between God
and us by the blood of his Cross; his righteousness and comeliness he puts
upon us, which presents us to the father without spot or wrinkle or any such
thing for ever.

4. Christ's death is not only satisfactory but meritorious, so that faith and
saving grace is Christ's purchase also; both grace and glory; we are blessed with
all spiritual blessings in him; this is the Covenant of grace, and surely fitly
so called; for all in it is mere grace, mere grace that God and Christ who had
been happy for ever, though we had all perished, that there should be such
blessed counsel and Covenant between them, that the second person in the
Trinity should suffer for our sins, the just for the unjust, and that by his
stripes we should be healed; if ever any thing was grace, this was surely, that
God the Father should appoint his only begotten son to dye for us enemies and
ungodly; and that application is made of this blood of sprinkling, is rich
grace also, which is the blessing of the New Covenant to give us new hearts;
faith and holiness; is no this blessed Covenant truly enough called the
Covenant of grace? Iet this Author call it the Covenant of works; we see cause
enough to call it the Covenant of grace, and to cry grace; grace unto it.

Thus we have seen the nature of the Covenant of work, and the Covenant of
grace, and we see there is no justification to be had upon the terms of the
Covenant of works, (as this Author imagines) but only by the Covenant of grace;
but alas this Author not well understanding the nature of the Covenant of
works; and the Covenant of grace, jumbles the Covenant of works, and the
Covenant of grace together in our justification, and so overthrows the Covenant
of grace, as will appear.

Page 334. He there says that the Saints for their justification have the
robes of Christ's righteousness, as they are worn by Christ in his own person,
made white by himself in his own blood, imputed to them for justification of
his legal righteousness for their justification, upon the ^^nour of the first
Covenant.

And Page 120. He says the spiritual seed receive Christ not in part only,
whereby they have in common with those in the first image all the forementioned
benefits ( viz. calling, justification and sanctification, upon the tenor of
the Covenant of works) but in whole whereby they have over and above that which
excels, possessing and enjoying the riches of both Covenants absolutely and
unchangeably.

From these passages of the Author it is plain (and indeed has a perfect
analogy with his judgment) that the true believer is justified upon the tenor
of the Covenant of works as well as a man in the first Image; but this is not
all his justification, but over and above he is justified by the robes of
Christ's righteousness, as they are worn by him in his own person, imputed to
him, as he says; but now the Covenant of works and the Covenant of grace are
so differing (as we have already discovered) that its impossible that a man can
be justified upon the terms and tenor of the Covenant of grace and works too;
for what says the Scripture? Romans 11.6. If it be by grace, then it is no more
of works; otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is
no more grace; otherwise work is no more work: and to be justified by faith,
and to be justified by the Law, and upon the tenor of the Covenant of works,
are everywhere in the Scripture rendered inconsistent. I say not this as if I
owned the Authors judgment in that particular, as if what he calls being
justified upon the tenor of the first Covenant, were so indeed; for there is
no such thing, but whosoever is justified by Christ, is justified upon the
terms of the Covenant of grace; but to show how the Author makes a
linsey-woosley business of it, and falls into that mistake according to the
tenor of his judgment that he would impose upon us, to wit our looking for
justification by the Covevenant of works, whereas we look for our justification
only upon the terms and tenor of the Covenant of grace, and think the
justification of the new Covenant so entire and perfect, that we look for no
justification upon the tenor of the Covenant of works to complete it; for as
Paul told the Galatians if they were but circumcised (to wit with a conceit to
add that to the righteousness of the new Covenant for their justification)
Christ should profit them nothing; no though this Author insinuates, that those
that are called Orthodox are ignorant of the way of justification by the
Covenant of grace; yet they are not to seek for the knowledge of it, nor do not
distract men's faith as this Author does, to send them first to Christ for a
justification upon the terms and tenor of the Covenant of works, and when
they have got that, to see that they are not safe there, but then they must get
a justification according to the Covenant of grace; no, they do not go about
the bush thus, but hold forth Christ's righteousness and the Covenant of grace
and mercy, directing men to apply the blood of sprinkling, to receive Christ to
be their Priest to save them, their King to rule them, and their Prophet to
teach them, and then they have an Ancre for their souls both sure and steadfast.

CHAP. VII. Takes a general View of the Authors Book.
HAving already particularly singled out some of the Authors Doctrine, and
examined it under several Chapters, I shall now give the Reader a more
miscellanious and general view of this Authors Doctrine: And here we shall not
oppose all that might be opposed, but keep to the end which I propounded to my
self, to wit, to deal with those passages in the Book that obscure the Gospel,
and are most likely to mislead or stumble-the unwary Reader.

Page 83. He says, Cain and Abel were both for a while worshippers and
servants of God, approaching to him by Sacrifice in testimony of their coming
and relying upon the blood of Christ; Cain without faith, only by a life
derived from Christ as he is head of the natural man; and he hated Abel because
he was in the higher Image.]

But what Scripture says, Cain was a servant of God, or had such a life from
Christ, as the Author speaks of, though he offered sacrifice as well as Abel?
yet every one that offers sacrifice, is not presently the servant of God:
what though Cains mother said she had gotten a man from the Lord? of him are
all things that any mother may say in a sense of the wickedest child; and
though he offered sacrifice, yet it does not follow (as the Author says) that
he relied upon the blood of Christ; a man may do a hundred times more then
that, and yet never rely upon the blood of Christ; and if Cain did hate his
brother Abel because he had true faith in Christ, and so offered up a more
acceptable sacrifice then he: yet it does not therefore follow that, as the
Author says, he was the servant of God, and relied upon the blood of Christ,
and was in the first image; but rather the contrary, that he was not thus; for
if he had owned and relied upon the blood of Christ, his sacrifice would have
been accepted as well as Abels; for it was by faith and relyance upon Christ's
blood, that Abel offered a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain.

Page 175. He says Christ brings us to eternal glory the same way he came to
it himself, who was made perfect by sufferings.]

But we are brought to eternal glory by the righteousness of another imputed
to us; but so was not Christ; we are brought to glory by Christ's sufferings,
not by our own; let us have a care of S^^^ianism.

Page 175. He says that every man may keep himself from such high provocations
for which God swears in his wrath they shall never enter into his rest.

God can keep men from such high provocations and wilful resistance of him and
his ways, but man cannot keep himself; God can do it by his restraining
grace, but man cannot: The way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps; without Christ we can do nothing; and therefore
David prayed that God would incline his heart to his testimonies, and not to
covetousness; the very inclination of the heart in man to the ways of the
Lord, is from the Lord, not from our selves. Truly, I think even those that are
Saints, if the Lord had left them to themselves, would have fallen into those
high provocations, and wilful resistance and refusal of Christ, which is the
main thing for which he swears in his wrath that we shall not enter into his
rest: If Saints, and such Saints as Noah, David, Peter, and Solomon, when left
to themselves did fall so shamefully; then what power is there in other men to
keep themselves from the greatest sins? David, one of them, says Psalm. 73.22.
So foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee: These Saints that
fell as they did, would have backslided and revolted more, even into all evil,
were it not that God kept them by his mighty power, and plucked them as
firebrands out of the fire; let us not think every man has power to keep
himself from such high provocations, and wilful resistance of Christ and his
grace, but rather admire and be thankful to him, who is so rich in mercy as to
keep any of us from the greatest transgression and transgressions; for we, who
as the Scripture tells us, are not able to think a good thought of our
selves; are not able to keep our selves from the highest provocations what are
we but an infinite and endless evil? we go astray as soon as we are born, are
transgressors from the womb; and if le^t to our selves, grow worse and worse,
revolt more and more; and if what the Author says were true, then every man
had power to keep himself from unbelief; for to be sure that is one of the
highest provocations for which God swears in his wrath men shall not enter into
his rest: And the Author here tells us, that men may keep themselves from
such provocations; and if they have power to keep themselves from unbelief,
then consequently they have power to believe, and then farewell the
discriminating grace of God his making us to differ; we know men have their Will
nots as well as their Cannots; there is both, they will not, and they cannot;
they want will and power; there is both wilfulness and weakness; such vile
and miserable Creatures are we of our selves; and let not the Author make our
case better then is is; let us have a care of Freewill.

Page 182. and 183. He says, men may have a fear of God to keep them from
sinning against him, and may have an experimental sense of the emptiness of
their good works to justify them, and yet neither be under the Law, nor
Believers; and so it was with the Centurion, who was neither under the Law, nor
a Believer, until Peter came to him; and this he speaks in reference to those
that are usually called the Heathens.]

But though the Heathen have such a light set up in their understandings,
according to which their consciences accuse them or excuse them; yet where does
the Scripture say, that the fear of God keeps them from sinning? nay most of
them have denied that there is a God, that infinite first being of all things;
and then they could not through the fear of him be kept from sinning; and the
truth is, no man but the true believer is truly kept from sinning through a
true fear of God; the fear of hell and wrath may be without a true fear of God;
the true fear of God is a peculiar benefit of the covenant of grace; and how
have the Heathens an experimental sense of the emptiness of their good works
to justify them that know not of heaven or hell to come? the business of
justification before God, and forgiveness of sins is not in all their
thoughts: But let us come to the Centurion, and try whether he were thus; and
whether he was neither acquainted with the Law, nor was a Believer before Peter
came to him; and the tenth chapter of the Acts will resolve us in these things;
out of that Chapter we may gather that Cornelius was a Proselyte in his belief
and Religion, and so might be a true believer in Christ, though he did not know
that Christ was already come; and therefore the Lord sent Peter to acquaint him
with it; and so ver. 22. shows us that this Cornelius was of good report among
all the Jews, and the word which God sent unto the children of Israel
preaching peace by Jesus Christ, that word Peter told Cornelius he knew, Acts
10.36, 37. From all which it is plain that Cornelius was not to be reckoned
among the Heathen; and that he might be a believer in Christ before Peter come
to him; he might believe in Christ as to come, though he might not have light
to believe that he was already come, as he was taught afterward by Peter's
Sermon.

Page 183. He says, Paul when he says that he was alive once without the Law,
Romans 7. shows that he lived in good conscience in such a state.]

But when Paul says he was alive without the law once, his meaning is not that
he was not acquainted with the Law that was written in Tables of stone, but
that he was not acquainted with the spirituality of the Law, but only made an
overly Exposition of it, not knowing how the Law reached the thoughts and
principles of the heart; for otherwise Paul knew the Law, and was no Heathen in
that sense; for he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, a Jew by father and mother,
and circumcised the eighth day; but it shows how a man may have the outward
knowledge of the Law, and yet be without the inward and spiritual knowledge of
it.

Page 197. He says those that hold general redemption, and their opposers that
go under the name of Orthodox, do both bear a true witness and a false, one
against another, and both of them oppose and exclude upon diverse grounds the
true righteous seed that live by faith.]

But they cannot be both in the right in that dispute; either Christ did die
for the whole race of mankind, or he did not; and either there is an election
from all eternity of a certain number to grace and glory, or there is not, and
so throughout that controversy; so that I say they cannot be both in the right
in these disputes. Well, but he says they both oppose and exclude (though upon
diverse grounds) the true righteous feed that live by faith. God forbid: But if
it be so, is not the Author one of them? for I am sure he holds general
redemption, as his book does sufficiently witness; and though those that hold
universal redemption, are surely mistaken in that, yet it does not follow that
they and their opposers therein do exclude the righteous seed that live by
faith; for most that hold universal redemption, and those that oppose them,
agree in that, to wit, that he that truly believes in Christ, shall be saved,
and no other; many who are mistaken about the extent of Christ's death, are yet
sound in the Doctrine of Justification.

Page 198. He says those that are for the general extent of Christ's death,
finding the truth of their belief expressed in the Letter of the Gospel (as
indeed it is) satisfy themselves in that, and rest there, thinking it
sufficient to try and judge all men, as they reject or own this literal
knowledge of the Gospel.]

I shall not mingle so many disputes together, or else I might undertake to
show that general redemption is not expressed in the letter of the Gospel, if
by the letter the Author means the meaning and mind of the holy Ghost; but
that has been sufficiently witnessed by the worthies of our times; but yet
this Author does not do well to charge all those of that judgment in general,
that they rest there, and try or judge all men as they reject or own that
Doctrine; for though I have known some that have been so rigid, yet it is not
so with all; there are those of that judgment, that do not own all to be
saints that believe general redemption, neither do they disown others that
differ from them in that point; but notwithstanding their judgment in that
particular, they do own or disown men according to their faith in Christ and
power of godliness; neither do they as the Author says, rest there, but hold
the necessity of applying the blood of Christ, and of a new birth, though yet
some of them may take up in notions and opinions, as others do in other
opinions; but we use to count it great uncharitableness to charge all of a
judgment with that which some being of that judgment do hold; but if all of
that judgment were of this mind, the Author should be of it; for he holds
universal redemption; yet I hope he does not rest there, nor own or reject
others as they hold or hold not with him in that point; but the Author
misrepresents others judgments as well as the udgement of those that are for
general redemption.

Page 199. He tells us those that differ from those that are for general
redemption, do evidently contradict and deny unto them, most clear, certain,
and undeniable truths; and all that which they say concerning conditional
reprobation, freewil, falling away, and the like, as relating to the children
of the first Covenant, will find that from the Scriptures which will justify
it.

The Author is very confident and profuse in his accusation of the
Anti-Arminians, and too highly exalts their opinions that are for universal
redemption, as if they were the very Gospel, calling their opinions most clear,
certain, and undeniable truths; but what are their opinions that are most clear
and undeniable truths? why he says, their opinions of conditional reprobation,
freewil, falling away, and the like, as relating to the children of the first
covenant. Let us hear their opinions, and first of conditional reprobation.

The Arminiuns opinion is, that there is no absolute and irrevocable but only
conditional decree of predestination to damnation or salvation; and that the
number of the elect and reprobate is not so certain, but that is may be
diminished or augmented; and that the primary cause of the decree of
reprobation (not of its execution) is the praeconsideration and praevision of
sin, and not the mere will and pleasure of God.

And is their opinion such a plain and most undeniable truth? their doctrine is
such that notwithstanding Gods decrees, either to life or death, there might
either none have been saved or none damned. And according to their doctrine the
grace of election is made void; for if it were not Gods free will and pleasure,
that was the primary cause of the reprobates reprobation and non-election, but
works foreseen; then consequently it was not Gods free will and pleasure that
was the cause of the elects election, but their works foreseen; and then fare
well that discriminating grace and love of God from all eternity;
nevertheless, we still make sin the cause of damnation; but Gods free pleasure
the cause of Gods non-electing and passing men by, in his eternal counsels,
resolving to leave them in their sins; and to condemnation for their sins.

Concerning free will, the Arminians hold that there is a sufficient universal
grace, derived upon all men, by which they may believe and be saved, if they
will.

And is this most clear and evident in the Scripture? no the contrary is
evident in the Scripture, Isa. 53.1. John 6.44, 45. John 12.38, 39, 40.

Page 205. He says that the flesh of Christ may be received and eaten either
worthily or unworthily, men not distinguishing between Christ's living body, and
his crucified body.

The Author if he had pleased, might in this case have considered of the old
distinction of the Martyrs, of eating and receiving panem demini and panem
dominum, of that which is the sign and sacrament, and the thing it self; no man
but the true believer eats of the bread of life the Lord Jesus; for hic edere
est credere, by eating is meant believing; but he says they do not distinguish
between Christ's living body and crucified body. Alas, the same body of Jesus
Christ that was crucified, is a living body; for it was impossible for that
holy one to see corruption; and it is not the mere body of Jesus Christ
considered as living or crucified that saves us, as Christ tells us in that
case, it is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing.

Page 225. He says Abraham was justified before God, by that faith wrought out
in Christ his head.

The Scripture tells us, that by Christ's obedience we are made righteous, and
that we are justified by his blood; but no where that we are justified by the
faith that is wrought out in Christ; we are justified by his righteousness
imputed to us, not by the faith that Christ had; the Author seems all along
to have many wide mistakes about the righteousness by which we are justified;
when the Scripture tells us we are justified by the faith of Christ, the
meaning is, that we are justified by Christ believed in, not that we are
justified by the faith which he had.

And so he says in the same 225. page, that faith considered as abiding in
Christ, and not in us, is that which properly just^fieth the believer.

But Christ though in some sense he had faith, that is to say, he trusted in
the father that he would carry him through the work of bearing our sins, and
that he would so accept of his bearing the chastisement of our peace, that he
would deliver us from going down to the pit, because of the ransom that he
paid, and believed that he should see his seed, and that the pleasure of the
Lord should prosper in his hands yet he had not such faith as in Scripture is
called saving and justifying faith; for he was no sinner, that he received
another for his righteousness. The Author leaving the simplicity of the Gospel,
runs in vain and unscriptural notions in those things.

Page 291. He says, that Christ's Disciples were called the children of the
bride-chamber, and yet then had no higher knowledge of him then in his fle shly
glory and perfection.]

The place he m^aneth is Matthew. 9.15. which holds forth no such thing, but
what a forrowing there should be in the Disciples when they were deprived of
Christ's bodily presence, but that was not a depriving of them of that which the
Author calls the first Image; but ^^vay what fleshly glory and perfection was
(...) Christ that the Disciples should know Christ only in that? Alas he had no
fleshly glory and perfection, his visage was marred more then any of the sons
of men. Isa. 52. never was so glorious a person so obscured as he was, insomuch
that the people said, is not this the Carpenters son? his fleshly glory and
perfection was so little, that those which looked only at that, could see no
form nor comeliness in him wherefore they should desire him let the Author have
better thoughts of the Disciples, then that they followed Christ and left all
for him only for his fleshly glory and perfection; no, they saw him with better
eyes, they saw him to be Jehovah their righteousness, the only begotten son of
God full of grace and truth.

Page 300. He makes this the great sin of those in the first Image, that they
set up the sons Kingdom in their hearts in competition with and opposition to
the fathers.

View the Scriptures a little, 2 John 9. Whosoever transgresses and abides
not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God; but he that abides in the
doctrine of Christ, has both the father and the son: No man has the sons
Kingdom in his heart, but he has the fathers Kingdom there ton; if Christ be
the souls husband, the soul will acknowledge God that is Christ's father to be
his father, Christ's God to be his God; the spirit of this son being sent into
our hearts makes us willingly and gladly call God Abba father, Ga. 4.6. and so
we are taught Jo. 5.23. That we should honor the son even as we honor the
father, and he that honors not the son honors not the father; and what
more plain to our purpose then what Christ said to his Disciples, Mat. 10.40.
He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me, receives him
that sent me; which shows us that whosoever receives Christ, receives the
father which sent him; there is no such thing as a man's receiving of Christ's
kingdom into his heart, in opposition to the fathers Kingdom; no man can come
to Christ and have his Kingdom set up in his heart, except the father which
has sent him draw him, Joh. 6.44. And this is the will of the father that sent
Christ that whosoever sees the son and believes in him, should have
everlasting life; this shows us that the father and Christ have one will and
the same will and design and Kingdom in the Saints; its the father that sets
up Christ's Kingdom in the heart; for says Christ, no man comes unto me
except it were given him of the father, Jo. 6.65. and so Jo. 8.9. Ye neither
know me nor my father; if ye had known me, ye should have known my father also;
see how they go together and so Christ tells us, John 1479. He that has seen
me, has seen the father also; I might quote twenty Scriptures more to show the
Authors mistake in this particular, which is not without danger; for here would
scare and affright poor souls, that they set up Christ's Kingdom in their
hearts, in opposition to the fathers; but we see that where any soul receives
Christ, he receives the father that sent him.

Page 326. He says that the Disciples could cast out those Devils that dwell
and acted in hearts unswept and ungarnished, but they could not cast out that
sort of Devils Mat. 17.14, to 22. which delight to rest in swept, cleansed and
garnished consciences.

No question but the Devil has the strongest hold in those who have been swept
and garnished, as it is said Mat. 12.43, 44. where the Devil is said to walk
through the dry places seeking rest and finding none; by those dry places may be
meant the true believers that are baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire,
and that had the spirit of judgment and of burning; this makes them dry
places; and though the Devil does in some particular temptations prevail upon
these believers, yet the Lord recovers them again that he can find no rest
there; but those that have only had common grace and enlightnings, and so are
like houses swept and garnished, though the Devil seem to have left such men,
yet they will find at last a repossessing, and their latter end to be worse
then their beginning; but what manner of Devils were these that are spoken of
in this 17. Mat. that they delighted only (they were so cleanly) to dwell in
swept and garnished consciences? he that was there possessed, its said v. 15.
was lunaticke; and have all such men swept and garnished consciences? what
ground is there for the Author to gather this from hence? no question but the
Devils delight to dwell in a man that is in the height of profaness and
impiety; and where they cannot keep men such, but they are pricked at the heart
and convinced of sin and reform, and yet are ignorant of Gods righteousness,
and go about to establish their own righteousness, they are very well content
to dwell in such hearts; and the reason why they could not cast out the Devil
out of the lunaticke person, was because of their unbelief, Christ says; and
this unbelief was not such unbelief as men are condemned for, the not receiving
of Christ; but the faith of miracles is that which is here spoken of; I hope
that every one that has true saving faith in Christ cannot cure the lonatick,
but if they had exercised this faith here spoken of, they might have cured the
lunaticke person; The Apostles had the faith of miracles, but they did not
always act it, not at this time; and to overthrow this notion of the Authors,
we find Luke 9.1. That the disciples had power and authority over all Devils.

Page 333. He makes the sinning against Christ in his second appearance to be
the sin against the Holy Ghost.]

The Author leaves out nothing that might appall and agash the poor soul that
will not close with his notions of a higher image and life; and here tells us
this is the sin against the Holy Ghost, a grievous sin indeed, that shall never
be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come; we have seen before that
the Author makes Christ in his second appearance to be, namely Christ shining
forth in the glory and naked similitude of God; but where does the Scripture
make this the sin against the holy Ghost? the sin against the holy Ghost, is an
opposing of Christ, and the truth knowingly, wilfully, and out of mere malice,
that it is not the pleasure or profit that men find in their ways, that makes
them oppose and set themselves against Christ and his ways, but merely hatred
and malice against Christ; and this is called the sin against the holy Ghost,
because that the person thus sinning has been so clearly and fully convinced
and enlightened by the holy Ghost to the contrary of what he is resolved thus to
do unto death; this sin against the holy Ghost, is not only a falling in the
way; for so a Saint may fall but a falling away from Christ and the truth; and
not every falling away from Christ and the truth neither, but such a falling
away from Christ and the truth that is wilful and merely of malice and hatred
to the truth and Christ Jesus; and so if a man fall from Christ, and leave him
in this manner, as has been said, whether it be Christ in his first or second
appearance, as the Author distinguishes, it makes him guilty of the sin
against the holy Ghost. I hasten toward a conclusion, lest I should quite tire
my self and the Reader with these things; but I cannot pass over what our
Author says.

Page 269. Where expounding Rev. 17. where it is said the whore sits upon
many waters, and with her the Kings of the earth have committed fornication; he
expounds it thus, That by the Kings of the earth, is meant men in the honor
and dignity of the first Adam's purity and principles; that they stuck to this
whore in opposition to Christ's heavenly appearance.]

The Author might have been pleased to have known, that our Expositors
understand that place to be meant of Rome; and such clear arguments they have
for it as he cannot answer in haste; but these the Author is pleased to reckon
under his first image; I know indeed they are too much upon images; yet I think
they are not in the Authors first image; and whereas this Scripture tells us
that the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with this whore of
Babylon; the Author tells us, thot by the Kings are meant those that are in
the honor and dignity of the first Adam's purity and principles: Truly, if
there be any such, I am persuaded they will not meddle with this whore of
Babylon, they will not come nigh the door of her house; but alas that is not
the meaning, there is no need of such an Allegorizing of the place; its plain
and clear enough that the Kings of the Earth (literally taken) have committed
fornication with the whore of Babylon; he that has but glanced his eye upon
the Surface of History, may see that, and even of the Kings of this Nation; and
how may we take up a lamentation in this respect for the Kings of many of the
Nations of the world at this day, that yet have it not in their hearts to burn
that whore with fire!

Well, but Page 370. He says, that this whore of Babylon is arrayed with purple
and scarlet color, with gold, and precious stones, and pearls (which he
expounds thus) many admirable excellent spiritual gifts received from Christ.]

But that purple, scarlet, gold, and pearls, sets forth the worldly glory and
riches of whore of Babylon, of which Rome has abundance, and not many
admirable, excellent, spiritual gifts received from Christ; the Author speaks
very Emphatically, spiritual gifts, and excellent and admirable gifts, and many
of them too; they that have been so devout as to go on P^lgrimage to Rome,
many of them that have been ingenuous, have confessed them to be a cage of
unclean birds, and not to have those many excellent admirable spiritual gifts;
more of those excellent admirable gifts may be seen in a leather-coat
Christian, I wis, then in his Holiness the Pope; he that goes to Rome, may
happily see abundance of these precious stones and pearls; they say there are
very precious stones in his Holiness triple Crown, and they say his Pantofle
which he holds out to be kissed, has the picture of the cross set in pearls
and precious stones, ut plenis faucibus crucem Christi derideat, as one says;
but I doubt they will see few of those many admirable excellent gifts received
from Christ among them; but I see the Author does not understand these passages
of Rome, but of those that are in his first image; we have scanned it already
in the third Chapter.

I shall here leave off; some things are truth in the Author, and there I close
with him; some things are of doubtful disputation; some things I have past over
for brevity sake; and because the Lord, whose truth is precious to him, may
call out some fitter person to deal with that Book, that may examine more and
better then I have done, I shall say no more; I only intended these few sheets
for the establishing of the weak of my acquaintance that are or may be of
doubtful minds in chese matters.

The Lord establish our hearts with grace, make us valiant for the truth, and
give us steadfastness of faith in Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

