A Gagge for Lay-Preachers.
WHEREAS Illiterate men or such as can but read the English Bible, in contempt
of a learned and settled Ministry, according to the variety of Sects, undertake
publicly to preach the word of God, and exercise other Ministerial Acts
amongstus, and pretend to receive countenance, or at least connivance, from the
higher Powers for so doing; It is to be considered that (what license soever
they may assume unto themselves) they want both Power and Authority so much as
to preach the word.

For Power or Ability, I.
1 The word of God not being to be known by it self, such men are not able
without other Principles to discern and distinguish it from other writings. 2.
God having declared himself in Hebrew and Greek, but not in English that we
know of; nor no Translation of holy Scripture by men subject to error (however
it render the sense) being the word of God; nor the Truth of a Translation
being to be known but by recourse to original Tongues and Copies, our
Translation especially being the work of men otherwise condemned as
Antichristian; without skill in languages they cannot so much as understand his
word. 3. Though they were expert in the languages, As we distinguish betwixt
Principal and Accessory parts in the holy Scriptures the main of the Gospel
belonging unto all men taking up little room, and the greatest part even of the
New Testament bearing reference to Particulars, as Romans, Corinthians, etc.
unto whom we are nothing akinne, and not importing laws but Judgments or
reports of Judgments and practice in particular Cases (legally binding us
Englishmen no more then Judicial or Ceremonial laws given to the Israelites)
they cannot conceive or explicate the sense thereof as it was intended, without
skill in the Histories and Antiquities of those Nations. 4. Nor lastly could
they understand thus much of Scripture, can they Apply and bring home these
Presidents to rule our collateral Cases (which is the proper use we are to
make thereof) without Logic and Discourse to make the Parallel, which
Explication and Application we call Preaching. So that for want of Arts and
Tongues and other humane Learning, the People cannot approach the mount of
Divinity as it stands exposed unto all men in the prime Revelations, the holy
Scriptures; nor much less bring us mysteries from thence, but borrow the light
which they have thereof more remotely from the Learned. And for private
Spirits, or new revelations of the will God not having his Probat by miracles,
or any other Gospel then is derived from these writings (which some well spoken
under the name of gifted men to salve the matter by an extraordinary manner
without learning boast of) we pass not.

And how then can we conceive these are the men entrusted with the ministry of
the Gospel? II.
where choice is to be had, men (while they are Reasonable) delegate not
incapable subjects; especially to a work whereto all the reverence that can be
used (in choosing and raising Persons, in regard of his Majesty with, or for,
whom they are to deal) is too little: And certainly God sees such as he
imployes qualified. Yet personal sufficiency is not enough without a
Political ordination; supposing these men had Ability, for Authority or
commission either from God or men to put that Faculty in office (which even in
handicrafts for freedom in Trade is stood upon) they are still to seek, and
have no more to show for Preaching then for further Judging or Ruling their
Brethren, when (upon insinuation with the multitude) they shall dare to declare
themselves. Corah's sin Numb. 16. being the bottom of it. Wherefore such lay
Idiots must keep their distance, and leave the dispensation of these sacred
ordinances unto their Spiritual Guides (men of nearer access and intimacy
with the mind of Christ separated to that work) unto whom they properly
belong. And however these men carry the matter, we cannot suspect that the
higher Powers are our Adversaries herein; who though they have seen cause to
reject the corrupt order that was established in the Church, have reason to be
jealous of the Peoples motions; and though they have been willing to try the
spirits, intend not surely upon that score (without all regard either of
learning or modesty) to let loose such incoherent tongues to advance confusion,
and try the mastery amongst themselves; or to believe any Spirit but according
to its qualifications, and the evidence men shall make thereof.

If it be objected, Object. I.
That the holy Scriptures were written to Persons of ordinary Capacity and
Literature. We must consider. 1. That these men unto whom they were directed
understood the Divinity, the Language, and all the Circumstances of these
Writings, which made that easy unto them, which without study we cannot attain
to. Secondly, They that were directly concerned needed no such help of Logic
and Discourse to Apply them, and make collateral Inferences and Deductions as
we do.

If it be objected that the Holy Apostles, II.
the primitive Paterns of our Ministry, were Illiterate men. It is to be
considered. 1. That all Illiterate men in those days, were not Apostles; And
though the twelve Apostles were such Illiterate men, Saint Paul was not, nor
Barnabas, nor Timothy, and Titus, whom Paul Instituted: which shows that
unlearnednesse is no proper qualification for an Apostle or Preacher of the
Gospel. Secondly, Witnesses and Publishers of things which they had seen and
heard (such as the Apostles in a manner wholly were) needed no such learning as
Expounders and Appliers of Ancient and foreign Writings. And lastly, though
our Savior took such Ignorant men, he left them not such; he took
Fishermen, whom he made Fishers of Men (that his Power and the Grace of God
might be seen in their weakness.) Yet he took time for it; He called
Disciples, Matthew. 4. but made them not Apostles till Matthew. 10. As we take
Servants or Apprentices, whom we afterward make free of our Trades. These
Teachers of the Times (we deny not) may be gifted men too, and gifted in some
sort for Preaching or Declaming roundly to the People: But we see they are not
gifted like Apostles for Preaching of the Word of God as now it stands (which
is the only thing which should bestead them.) 1. The Apostles understood that
they taught the Word of God, and that they had Commission from God to teach it.
Secondly, As they were sent to Preach, they were supplied with Arts and
Tongues, where they were requisite: And lastly, they had a further power of
working Miracles, to witness such their Mission and Authority unto others. In
all which these men remain as defective as other mortals.

We do well indeed to be imitating the Apostles, but it must be in these
things wherein they are imitable; not so much in their extraordinary Office, or
Supernatural workings, (which are not in our power) as their Christian purity
and holiness, their diligence and humility, not judgings of our selves above
that which is meet. Yet i^ nothing but their Spirit will serve the turn
(considering that God now adays works not ordinarily, but by means) one would
think that Divines (such as with some reasonable qualification upon their
Industry, by public Ordination, orderly succeed the Apostles in their Charge
of regulating and teaching others) might as well pretend to the Spirit the
Apostles wrought by, as those men that see but with their eyes, and believe
upon such grounds as they afford them, and have nothing Apostolical but their
own Presumption and noise to show for it.

The Wife man gives good Advise, Prove. 26. 4, 5. Answer not a fool according to
his folly, lest thou also be like unto him. And again, Answer a fool according
to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit. And thus (I conceive) we may
observe the latter part thereof; In showing these men the weakness of their
grounds in general, and remonstrating what blind Guides they are like to
make, to take down their conceits of themselves, and keep them to their Lasts.
To descend with them to their particular Debates, upon these grounds, (they
being no better Disputants then Preachers) were the way (I am sure) to
transgress the former part, to enter a Brawl, and make our selves like unto
them. Whatsoever therefore their Provocations of Divines to Conference and
Disputations therein be (till they rectify their Principles, and improve
their Learning) they are to be esteemed but as the extravagant workings of
their Distempers; and Indignities, as if a Carter should challenge an Officer
of the Army at Cudgels, or dare our renowned General to Cuffes. Such weapons
being fitter (with their noise and dust) to offend even Spectators, then decide
differences; And such Challengers rather to be kicked then encountered.


