Encouragements TO FAITH. Drawn from several Engagements Both of GODS CHRIST'S
HEART To Receive Pardon
SINNERS.

By THO: GOODWIN, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for R. DAWLMAN, 1645.

JOHN 6. 37, 38. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; [and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.]
For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me.

A Preface.
THere are two Persons whom Faith has to deal withal in seeking of
Forgiveness, and laying hold of Salvation, God the Father, and God the Son;
the holy Ghost being that Person that sets the heart a work to seek out for
salvation, and reveals the love of them both. And therefore it is, that Grace
and Peace (which are the object of Faiths inquest) are still wished from God the
Father, and God the Son; so generally in all Epistles, excepting that of the
Revelation, given immediately by word of mouth from Christ himself.

And accordingly when Faith comes to treat with these two about the great
business of Salvation, the first and maine thing that it is inquisitive after,
is, What their heart and mind is, and how they stand inclined toward the
receiving and pardoning of sinners: it listens most to hear something of that:
and when a man's heart, through faith is fully and thoroughly persuaded of it,
then he is fully won.

Hence, because the Scriptures were written for our comfort, and so, fitted to,
and for the workings of faith; therefore they were so written, as especially to
bring down and lay before us the Heart of God and of Christ: and so the maine
thing they hold forth, is, the full intent and purpose both of God and of
Christ to pardon and receive sinners: This is a faithful saying, (says Paul
with open mouth) that Christ came into the world to save sinners; and this
Christ himself every where indigitates; and to hold forth this, is the scope of
these words uttered by Christ himself. And such speeches do contain the very
heart, marrow, and pith of the Gospel.

And though the heart of a sinner will never be fully satisfied, till a
persuasion be wrought, that God and Christ are purposed and willing to save a
man's own self in particular, (which persuasion is that which we call Assurance)
yet when once there is a through persuasion settled upon the heart, but of so
much indefinitely and in general; that God and Christ are willing and fully
resolved to save some sinners (so that the heart does truly believe that God is
in earnest) this draws on the heart to come to Christ, and is enough to work
faith of adherence, such, as upon which Christ will never cast us out (as the
Text has it.)

The great business then for the working faith in men, is to persuade them of
Gods good will and gracious inclination unto sinners, to beget in them good
opinions of God and Christ this way; Men naturally having hard and suspicious
thoughts of both, as that speech of Christ John 3. 17. implies, [ God sent not
His Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved.] Christ would never have hinted such a jealousy, nor suggested
such thoughts to men's minds, had they not been in them before, and this, to
prevent and take off such jealousies. Men are apt to think, that God had a
design upon them as upon enemies, and laid but an Ambushment for their further
condemnation, in his treaty of peace tendered to them by his Son. An example of
which we have in Luther, who fell into such suspicions as these, for he
misunderstanding some words he met with in the Epistle to the Romans, as they
were rendered by the vulgar translation then in use, namely, these, that God
sent his Son to declare his righteousness (as they are by us translated) he
thought the meaning of them to have been this, to declare and set forth his
judgment on the world, (so he interpreted [ adjustitiam suam. etc.]) The truth
is, the jealousies of men's thoughts herein were those that have put God to his
Oath, [ As I live, I will not the death of a sinner, etc.] so also Heb. 6. 17.
Men do not so usually question the power of God, he is able enough to save them
they think; he is able to engraft them in (as the Apostle speaks to the Jews,
Romans 11. 23.) but all their doubts are about his Will. Gods will was the
Fountain and spring of our salvation, in the contriving of which he wrought
all things according to the counsel of his own will, (as the Apostle to the
Ephesians speaks) and in another place it is said, He will have mercy on whom
he will, etc. and therefore the great queries in our hearts are concerning the
will of God toward us.

The words of the Text opened.
NOw these words of my Text do hold forth the full willingness of both these
two persons, both of God and of Christ:

1. Of Christ, he here professes himself willing to entertain all that will
come to him, [ He that will come to me, I will in no wise cast out.] Which
words are not to be understood, as if spoken only of casting out them that are
already come unto him, as if they were only a promise against being cast off
after being received; and so intended against fears of falling away: but they
are chiefly intended as an invitement to all that are not yet come, that they
would come to him, and so, to express how ready and willing he is to entertain
all comers, as one who sets his doors open, keeps open house, and beats back
none that would come in, [ Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.]
And though it may seem to be but a slender and sparing expression of his
readiness to entertain such, to say only [ I will not cast them out,] yet though
he speaks with the least, yet he will do with the most, he being abundant in
goodness and truth, and one that is better then his word in the performance.
As when he says, he will not despise a broken heart, is that all the esteem he
will manifest to such a heart? Oh no, it is the most welcome thing, and
endeared frame of spirit that can be in any creature. His meaning is to show
what he elsewhere says of a meek spirit (which is all one with a broken heart)
that, with God it is of great price, for so in Isaiah he expresses himself, I
that inhabit eternity, with whom will I dwell? with a spirit that is broken and
contrite. He uses also this expression of not casting them out, in relation,
and for a more direct answer unto the fear which he knew usually possesses
the hearts of poor sinners when they are about to come to him; they fear he may
reject them, they know not their entertainment, their welcome. To meet with
this Scruple, he says, [ I will not cast such out] choosing rather thus to
remove the doubt that is in their hearts, then to express the fullness of his
own: the Scriptures speaking potius ad cor nostrum quam cor suum, rather unto
our hearts, then fully what is in his own, (which can never be done.)

And yet even in this diminutive expression, there is that inserted, which
argues not only a willingness and readiness, but a resolvednesse joined with
the greatest care and faithfulness that can be, [(...)] I will [in no wise]
cast out. We may see his heart through this little crevis: he does herein as a
faithful man, who to give the more full assurance puts in some binding word
into his promise, as [ I will at no hand, or in no wise fail you.] Thus does
God also in that known Promise, Heb. 12. 5. (to the horns of which sanctuary
many a soul has fled for refuge) I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee,
where there are no less then five negatives to bind and assure it, I will not,
in no wise, (etc.) leave thee.

Now this willingness of his, on his part, Christ shows by two things:

First, by that great journey he took, from heaven to earth, and that to no
other purpose but to save sinners. For this (says he) did I come down from
heaven. Great actions of one who is wise, must answerably have great ends; now
this was the greatest thing that ever was done, that the Son of God should come
from Heaven. And when there can be but one end of an action so great; that end
must needs be accomplished, or else the action is wholly in vain. Now in
coming down from heaven, he could have no other end but the saving of sinners,
he could have no other business to do, that he did here; therefore the
Scriptures put his coming into the world wholly upon this, to seek and to save
that which was lost, and do attribute his taking upon him the likeness of
sinful flesh to have been [ for sin] so Romans 8. though other ends might be
supposed, and were accomplished by the assuming man's nature, yet he had no other
end of taking frail flesh, especially there could be no other end of his
dying, but merely and only for sin: John 12. 24. he says, If he had not
fallen to the ground and dyed, he had then remained in Heaven alone, and no
sinners had come thither: that therefore they might ascend to heaven, he
descends from heaven, I came down from heaven, etc.

Secondly, He demonstrates his willingness by this, that his Father had sent
him on purpose to receive and to save sinners: I come (says he) to do the will
of him who sent me: and John 8. he says [ I came not of my self, but (my
Father) he sent me] And if he were sent by his Father to this end (as he
affirms he was, and as by the coherence appears, for he makes it the reason
why he will cast none out) then certainly he will faithfully do the work he was
sent for: In Heb. 3. 1. he is called the Apostle of our profession [Apostle]
that is, one sent, so the word signifies; and what follows? who was [faithfull
to him that appointed him. Now upon these considerations, Christ tells you that
you may build upon him, that you shall certainly find him willing.

2. For his Fathers willingness, he tells us we may be much more confident of
it: for he puts his own willingness and all upon that: Him (says he) that the
Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out. For I came down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will
of him that sent me: and this is the Fathers will that has sent me, etc. In
which words you may observe both wherein he declares his Father to be engaged,
and how much.

First, Wherein: and that by two things:

1. That he sent him to that end, and so, it is his Fathers business more then
his own. So also Luke 2. 49. he expresses himself: [ Shall I not do my Fathers
business?] as elsewhere in Isaiah he is called his Fathers Servant in it, and
John 5. 36. he makes it his Fathers work.

Secondly, that he in a solemn manner gave unto him them whom he would have to
be saved, with charge to lose none [ All that the Father has given me shall
come unto me:] and this is his will, that I should lose none, but give him an
account of every soul of them at the last day. They are given him as jewels,
and as his Beniamins, to look to, and see to bring back and keep from
destruction. Now whom he so solemnly gave to Christ to save, he will never cast
away, when they shall come unto Christ.

Then 2. he shows how much, and how deeply, his Father is engaged, and makes
it his Fathers will rather then his own: [ I come not to do my own will, but
the will of him that sent me:] The meaning whereof is, not to show that he came
unwillingly, or receives sinners unwillingly, but that his Fathers will was
first in it (as I shall show anon,) and so much in it, that (if you will
resolve it into its first principles Christ's coming was principally to please
his Father. It is such a speech, as that in John 5. 22. [ The Father judges no
man: but has committed all judgment to the Son, etc.] Not that God is not a
Judge as well as Christ, (for Heb. 12. 23. he is termed the Judge of all men)
but because all judgment is visibly committed unto Christ, therefore the
Father is said to judge no man. So here, because the Fathers will is chief,
and first in it, Christ therefore says, he came not to do his own will, but
the will of him that sent him.

And so you have the meaning of the words.

The maine Observation out of the words: Demonstrations of Gods heart herein,
from his engagements from everlasting: How his heart stood to sinners before the
world was.
THE Observation, which I single out of these words to insist upon, is this,
That

Both God the Father, and Jesus Christ the Son are fully willing, and resolved
to save sinners.

1. For God the Father, There are many Demonstrations of his will herein, that
may be taken ab extra from his Oath, Word, Promise, etc. which I shall handle
in another method: but those which I shall first hold forth, are more intimate
and Intrinsecall, and homogeneall to the argument which Christ uses here in
the Text, which we have seen) to be these, that it was Gods will first, and
Christ's, but because it was his, ( I come not to do mine own will,) and that it
was he that dealt with Christ about it, and wrought him off to it, and made it
his business; ( but the will of him that sent me.) So that the Demonstrations
which I shall pitch upon, shall be drawn from Gods engagements, both from his
transactions with Christ from everlasting, before he came into the world, and
those that now lie upon him from Christ's having fully performed what he sent
him into the world for. And from either may be fetched strong consolations, and
confirmations to our faith, that Gods will must needs continue most serious and
hearty to save sinners.

Many other sorts of Demonstrations of this point might be fetched and drawn
from the riches of his mercy, lying by him to bestow on some great purchase:
and on what greater purchase could they be bestowed, to show forth the glory
thereof, then upon the salvation and pardon of sinners? But these also I shall
at the present let lie by untold, having elsewere counted them up, and set them
forth, such demonstrations being only proper to this Text, as argue an
engagement of his will; whereas all those riches of mercy that are in him
(although the moving cause of all) might have for ever remained in him as his
nature, without any determination of his will to save any man. When therefore a
poor sinner shall hear (besides the merciful disposition of Gods nature) that
acts and resolutions of his will have past from him, about the pardoning of
sinners, so as his will has engaged all the mercies of his nature to effect
it, this brings in strong consolation.

Now the deepnesse of these engagements of his will to pardon sinners, may be
demonstrated,

1. From such transactions of his, as were held by him with Christ from
everlasting; which has both put strong obligations upon him, and also argue
him fully and firmly resolved to save sinners. Now all the particular passages
of those treaties of his with Christ, about the reconciliation of sinners from
everlasting, I have elsewhere also at large handled; and therefore it is not my
scope now to enumerate them. I shall now only draw Demonstrations from some
few of them, by way of Corollary, to help our faith in this point in hand,
namely, Gods resolvednesse to pardon sinners.

The first is drawn from this, That God the Father had the first and chief
hand in this matter of saving sinners (as I then showed) the project was his,
and the first motion his.

1. The Project, he laid the plot of it, and contrived all about it, for the
effecting of it. Therefore John 5. 19. Christ says the Son can do nothing of
himself, but what he sees the Father do.

2. The first Motion was his, I came not to do my own will, (says Christ) but
the will of him that sent him. Both which ( Project and first motion) are shut
up in that one sentence, Ephesians. 1. He works all things by the [counsaile] of
his own [will.] Now, for God thus to have the first hand in it, did put a great
and deep engagement upon his Will in it. We see among men, the Projector and
first motioner of a business is always most forward in it; because then it is
most peculiarly his own; and the greater will be his honor in the compassing
of it. How many great affairs have been spoiled, because some men have not
been the chief and first in them that affect the pre-eminence? Now this honor
God the Father may challenge, that he was the first in reconciling and saving
sinners: It is therefore called Gods wisdom, Ephesians. 3. 10. and his purpose,
Ephesians. 1. 9. Gods righteousness, Romans 1. 17. and the pleasure of the Lord,
Isa. 53.

Secondly, this Project and Motion did rise up in him unto a strong resolution
and purpose, and to an unalterable decree to save sinners by Christ: so Ephesians. 1.
9.

And 1. For his purposes, they are immutable. Would not Paul lightly alter
purposes taken up by him, When I therefore was thus tamed (says he, 2 Cor. 1,
17.) did I use lightness? or the things that I purpose do I purpose according
to the Flesh, that with me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay? Would not
Paul (I say) alter his purpose because he preached the Gospel, and will God
(think you) alter them who gave the Gospel? no, it is the ete nall Gospel,
Revel 14. 6. and God is of the same mind still, so it follows in that place to
the Corinths, But as God is true (or varies not) so was our word to you, which
yet is his more then Paul's, etc.

2. For Gods Decrees, (whereof this was one, they are also immutable. The great
Monarchs of the earth, the Persians, took to themselves the infallibility, that
they would not alter the Decrees which they made: (therefore when a thing was
unalterable, it was said to be as the Laws of the Medes and Persians) which
was to show their greatness, and their wisdom, that they could so resolve, as
no person or power whatsoever should be strong enough to cause them to change
their resolutions: and yet, they were forced, though not to alter a former
Decree, yet to give countermands unto it, (as Ahasuerus did, and men do alter,
because they cannot foresee all events, and so cannot make unalterable Decrees
without prejudice. Therefore the Pope, who takes on him the style of
Infallible, and so assumes to himself the highest prerogative that ever man
did, yet of him it is said, Papa nunquam l^gat sibi manus, that he never binds
his own hands by any Decree he makes, because he cannot fore see all
inconveniences, notwithstanding what ever he assumes: But with God it is not
thus, He is not a man that he should have cause to repent, for he knows and
foresees all that can or will follow.

Now 1. this immutability of his counsel he shows by two oaths; the first
made to Christ, the second to us.

1. To Christ, Heb. 7. 21. This Priest (Christ) was made with an oath, by him
that said unto him, The Lord swear and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for
ever, etc. And this was from everlasting; for then it was that Christ was first
made Priest: Now then God foresaw that he could never have a relenting thought
at the pardoning of sinners through him, this his Son would so satisfy and
please him: and thereupon he swear.

2. To us, Heb. 6. 17, 18. God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs
of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: that by
two immutable things (in which it was impossible for God to lie) we might have
a strong consolation, etc. The thing I allege this place for, and which I
would have observed, is, that this oath is not mentioned as that now which
makes God so immutable, (though that be a truth) But Gods oath is here made
that whereby God did declare unto us the immutability of his purpose formerly
and from everlasting taken up, and so that immutability of his counsel was
the cause of his oath, and that was to pardon sinners: for it is the Promise
made to Abraham and his seed, that is there specified.

Yea 3. God set his seal unto all, further to confirm it. He both sealed
Christ to the work, Joh. 6. 27. and likewise sealed up in his Decrees the
persons of those sinners that shall be saved. 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of
the Lord remains sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his. And if
it were but a Kings seal, it could not be reversed, but this is Gods. Yea, he
has sealed up their sins also by and through Christ, Dan. 9. 24. never to be
remembered or looked upon more.

Thirdly, God rested not in a Decree only, but entered into Covenant with Christ
to save sinners by him, if he would die. This Covenant you have Dialogue-wise
set out, Esaias 49. Frist, Christ begins at the first and second verses, and
shows his Commission, telling God how he had called him, and fitted him for
the work of Redemption, and he would know what reward he should receive of him
for so great an undertaking: God answers him, ver. 3. and at first offers low,
only the Elect of Israel. Christ who stood now a making his bargain with him,
thought these too few, and not worth so great a labor and work, because few of
the Jews would come in, but would refuse him, therefore ver. 4. he says, he
should labor in vain, if this were all his recompense: and yet withal he tells
God, that seeing his heart was so much in saving sinners to satisfy him, he
would do it however for those few, comforting himself with this, that his work
was with the Lord. Upon this God comes off more freely, and opens his heart
more largely to him, as meaning more amply to content him for his pains in
dying: It is a light thing (says God to him) that thou should be my servant
to raise up the tribes of Jacob, that is not worth the dying for, I value thy
sufferings more then so, I will give thee for a salvation unto the ends of the
earth. Upon this he made a promise to Christ, 1 Tit. 2. and a promise is more
then a purpose. A purpose may be in ones self, as Ephesians. 1. 9. but a promise
is made to another. Now God cannot lie in himself, but most of all, not to his
Son.

A second sort of Demonstrations. The engagements of Gods heart to sinners,
from, and upon Christ's having dyed at his request.
A Second sort of Demonstrations are drawn from Christ's having already come and
performed all this: for

1. Christ is now to be satisfied for that his dying, as well as he by his
death had satisfied God: he is now to have his reward. God never set any on
work, but he gave them wages. Thus unto Nebuchadnezzar he gave Egypt as his
hire for his service at Tire, and to Cyrus he gave hidden treasure. Now it is
not Christ's own glory that will satisfy him, for that he could have had, and
never have dyed: there remains therefore nothing that can or will satisfy him,
but to have the end of his death, To see his seed and be satisfied, and to see
of the travail of his soul: and to justify many, as it is Isa. 53. He dyed
(as himself speaks, John 12. 24.) that he might not be alone in heaven: his
desire is, that those whom he dyed for might see his glory.

2. If we consider the act it self, of delivering Christ unto death, there was
not, nor could there ever be any thing more abhorrent unto God; no act ever
went so much against his heart: for if he be afflicted in all our afflictions,
and does not willingly punish the sons of men, neither wills the death of a
sinner that deserves it, much less would he will the death of his own Son. Now
what was there to sweeten the death and sufferings of his Son unto him, except
his end in it? (for it is the end that sweetens and facilitates the means
tending unto it) Now the end of Christ's death could be no other but to take
sins away, and to procure the pardon of sinners, and so it must needs be
infinitely delightful unto him, and his heart strongly set upon it, seeing it
did sweeten unto him an act otherwise so abhorrent, and of this end therefore
it is impossible he should ever repent. Now Ephesians. 5. 2. the very offering of
Christ is called a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor: and what was it that
made it so, but even the end for which it was done, (and which is there put
upon it) that it was out of love unto us, and out of a mind to have sinners
pardoned; for else in it self it must needs have been abominable unto him.

Agai 3. if at any time he would have repented him of his purpose, it would
have been at the time of Christ's being crucified, when he came to bruise him:
then his heart would have recoyled, and especially when Christ poured out his
soul with such strong cries and tears as he did. At other times in punishing
but his children, we find, that when he comes to do it, his heart as it were
fails him, as Hos. 11. 8. [ How shall I give thee up?] the rod falls out of his
hand, and his bowels yearn within him; yet he relented not when he saw the
soul of his Joseph in bitterness, but still made an impossibility of it for
him to avoid suffering, because his purpose was thereby to take sins away.
Therefore Christ's request was, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass:
The necessity lay only in Gods will in reference to his end, to forgive sins.
If God would ever have relented or repented him of this purpose, it would have
been then: we read of his repenting him of other of his works, but his mind is
so fully carried to take away sins, that he did not then, or can ever repent of
putting his own Son to death, for the effecting of it: To pardon sinners is
more natural to him, then to kill his Son was unnatural. Now his end and
purpose being thus fully set to pardon and save sinners, if he should be
frustrated of this his end, he would then indeed repent him of using his Son as
he had done. Nay, it is not only said, that he repented not, but that it
pleased him to bruise Christ, in respect to that his end, which was so pleasant
to him: So you have it Isa. 53. 10. And therefore surely it pleases him much
more, to pardon sinners, now he has thus bruised him: and so indeed it
follows there, The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, It is
spoken of his saving and justifying of sinners. It troubled God to hear a soul
bemoan it self for its sin, Ier. 31. 20. but we read not that it did so, when
Christ bemoaned himself in his sufferings; and the reason was, because the work
that Christ was about to do, was a sweet Sacrifice to him; and it would trouble
God more to condemn a sinner that Christ dyed for, then it did to sacrifice
Christ for him.

4. Upon that ancient agreement between God and Christ: God pardoned millions
of men under the Old Testament upon the bare word of Christ, before he came
into the world, or had paid one penny of the debt he must needs therefore be
supposed to be much more willing now to do it, when Christ has done all that
was required, and failed not, and that at the due time, (as it is said Romans 5.)
If Christ had failed or come short but of a little of what he was to do, God
might have denied to let the world go upon trust any longer: But now Jesus
Christ has performed all, and is aforehand with him, and has put in stock
enough to pardon sinners to the end of the world.

Yet 5. Now even Justice it self will call upon him to discharge sinners, it
will not let him rest in quiet till he has pardoned and showed mercy unto poor
sinners that come to Christ, and has given in their bond, and this, though we
had no promise to show for it, yea, though Christ himself had nothing to show
for it: Gods very justice would trouble him (I may so speak with reverence, for
he himself says, that he was troubled for Ephraim, Ier. 29.) till he had given
out an acquitance, because he knows the debt is paid, and also, that Christ's
and his own intent was, that when Christ had once dyed, sinners should thereby
be justified: Even as if an honest man had a bond for a debt that is
discharged, lying still in his hands, of which payment, he whose debt it is,
knows nothing, although he or they that paid this debt were dead, so that
there were no one left that were able to challenge an acquaintance from him,
and a cancelling of that bond; yet mere honesty would cause him to give it in.
Now Jesus Christ dyed, and God himself put him to death merely to pay our
debts, and says Christ at his death; Let sinners require my blood, and the
merits of it at thy hands, and have out in pardon.

That was Christ's will which he made at his death, (as you have it Heb. 9. 16,
17. where the Apostle calls it Heb. 9. 16, 17. where the Apostle calls it a
Testament confirmed by the death of the Testator) now there is nothing so
sacred as the performance of the will of the dead. And now Christ himself is
alive again, and is ordained by God to be his own Executor, and so lives to
claim an acquitance; therefore certainly God will never withhold it: In
justice he cannot, he will not, have a bond lie by him that is discharged.
Hence it is said, that God is just to forgive our sins, 1 John 1.

There are three things which do cry for Justice, and all do meet in this.

1. The wages of a hireling (if detained) are said to cry. So in the 5. of
James it is said, The wages of Hirelings detained, do cry in the ears of the
Lord of Hosts: They cry wages being due in justice, and because Gods Justice is
thereby provoked, and cannot be quiet till God has avenged it. And so would
Christ's satisfaction having been made for us; It would restlesly cry to God,
and not suffer his Justice to be quiet, unles we were pardoned. For he was
truly and indeed Gods hired Servant in this work: And God covenanted to give
him the salvation of those he dyed for as his wages and reward, as Isaiah often
represents it, Chap. 53. and elsewhere. So that if God be just, he must give
forth salvation; otherwise Christ's obedience would cry as the work of an
hireling does for wages.

A Second thing that cries for justice, is the will of one that is dead
unperformed, who has bequeathed legacies, and left wherewith to pay and
discharge them. And this is yet a louder cry then the former. Now Christ before
he dyed, did thus make his will, and bequeathed pardon of sin and
justification, and that eternal inheritance in heaven, as legacies to those
for whom he dyed, and to be given out by God after his death, as I observed
even now out of Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. where it is said that Christ was The
Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death they who are called
might receive the promise (or bequeathed legacy) of eternal life. And
thereupon ver. 16, 17. the Apostle calls this a Testament, confirmed by his
death, and which at his death began to be in force, so ver. 17. And of all
things that in justice are held due, the performance of the will of the dead,
has ever been held most sacred.

There is yet a third thing which cries for justice, and that is innocent blood
spilt. And this cries louder then all the rest. So Genes. 4. 10. And the
Apostle Heb. 12. 24. sets forth the cry of Christ's blood for us, by Abels blood
crying against Cain.

It may be notwithstanding this that God may put the bond in suit against a
sinner to make him come to acknowledge the debt, (as the Apostle there speaks
[ If we confess our sins]) But if any soul does say, I have sinned and it
profited me not; God then cannot withhold from throwing down his bond canceld,
saying, Deliver him, I have found a ransom, (Job 33.) God will not have
innocent blood, such as his Sons is, to ly upon him. If he should not pardon
sinners, Christ's blood would be upon him, for it was for them only that Christ
dyed, being in himself innocent.

6. God mends not himself by damning those for whom Christ dyed: Now there were
not only an injustice to Christ and us in it, but God himself also would prove
a loser. For the end of Christ's death was not simply to satisfy justice, so as
without it justice could not have permitted a pardon, that might have been
dispensed with, but it was chiefly to declare the glory of Gods justice, which
required such a satisfaction, (as the Apostle says Romans 3. 25.) To [declare]
his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through Gods
forbearance. Is was we see the manifestation or declaration of the glory of his
justice that he aimed at in it. So as if any one man's sin satisfied for by
Christ, should be left unforgiven, Gods justice should lose so much glory. And
if justice should think to get a greater glory out of the sinners, that could
never be: for the sinner is unable ever to satisfy, and so to glorify Gods
justice by suffering as Christ has done. Yea, and besides, God would be a
further and a greater loser in the glory of his mercy also, which by his
pardoning sin is advanced.

The second part of the Observation. Demonstrations of Christ's willingness to
receive sinners that come to him. First how his heart stood from everlasting.
--
AND so now I come to Christ's willingness, which was the second thing
propounded in the doctrine, to be demonstrated. Now though his will was not
first in it, (as was said) yet we shall find him to have been no less willing
then his Father. As Christ in subsisting is the second person, and has his
personal subsistence from his Father, so he is second also in order of
working, and consequently, of willing too, yet he is not second to him in
heartinesse of willing: but as his Father and he are equal, so in all that his
Father wills, his will is equal with his Father, and so, is as much in this
business as his.

In the demonstrating of this, I will take the same course that I did in the
former:

First, I will show how hearty he was in this, To have sinners saved before he
came into the world.

And Secondly, How willing he was since he came into the world, and since his
death and going out of the world.

And as a general introduction to either, I shall premise this, which shall be
as the corner stone in this building, joining both parts of this discourse
together, and is a consequent of what has formerly been delivered.

The thing to be premised is this: That if God the Father be willing, then
Jesus Christ must needs be willing also, and look how much the will of the one
is in it, so much the will of the other must be in it also, for the Father and
he are all one; And this will serve for our further assurance of the wills of
either; and we may make use of it both ways, either to argue to our faith,
that if the Father be willing, Christ must needs be so also; and that if Christ
be willing, the Father is so also. That whereas some men's thoughts have been
more taken up about, and so more taken with the consideration of how much the
Fathers heart was in it, and how active and plotting he was about it: and
again, others men's apprehensions have been carried more unto Christ's heart in
the work: this Demonstration which I have in hand shall be a help to the faith
of either of these; so that if your hearts have a door of Faith, (as the
Apostle speaks) set open, or a window to see either into Gods heart, or
Christ's, you may raise a confidence of the one from the other, and so come to
be sure of both.

And this also I do first mention, because it is the most intrinsecall
bottome-demonstration that can be made of Christ's willingness, and is the
utmost reason of it.

This demonstration I found upon Joh. 10. 30. [ I and my Father are one] That
whereas in this my Text he shows how his Fathers will and his agree in one, he
there gives the reason of it, for (says he) we are one: and the words there,
as they stand in their coherence, are proper to the purpose in hand. For Christ
there alleges them, as the reason why his heart, and power, and all in him is
so engaged for the salvation of his own, that if he have any power in him, and
be able to do any thing, not one of them shall perish, because his Father and
he are one. For mark the occasion upon which he speaks this, it is the same
that here in my Text. He had been speaking of saving his sheep, and of his
power and will to save them; and concludes, that they shall never perish. And
he says not only, that he will never cast them out, (as here) but that,
neither shall any man pluck them out of his hand. And in that speech he shows
and utters the strength of his will, as much as of his power. For otherwise
although his hand of power had been never so potent to have held them, against
all opposition, yet if his will had not as strongly resolved to hold them in
his hand, and so, if they were not as deep in his heart as they are fast in his
hands, this speech of his had not been made good, That they shall never perish.
And then he gives the reason both of this resoluteness of his will, and this
prevalencie of his power, from his Fathers both will and power, engaged as much
as his own, in this fullness: My Father (says he) that gave them me is greater
then all, and none is able to pluck them cut of my Fathers hands. He pleads
here first his Fathers will, [ He gave them me:] And then secondly, his power,
(whom these Jews he spoke to acknowledged greater than all, though him they
did not) He is greater then all; none can pluck them out of his hands: and then
argues to himself, [ My Father and I are one:] One in nature, therefore much
more in will. Two persons that have distinct essence, may yet be one in will,
as the Ten Kings are said to be of one mind when they agreed in one thing,
Rev. 17. 13, 17. so Act. 4. 32. it is said, that they that believed were of one
heart, and of one soul, that is, in judgment and consent of mind. But Christ
and God the Father are one yet nearer; one in nature, and therefore much more
entire in will, for by nature they have but one will between them. And that
place speaks at once in relation to both their willingness to save, as to both
their powers to save sinners. And this is not only an Argument that they did
both agree, and were like to agree in it; but that they can never disagree. Two
that essentially have two wills, though for the present agreeing in one; yet it
may be supposed that they may come to disagree, and not will the same thing:
but if they essentially have but one will, it is impossible then but that they
must ever agree. This great security therefore does Christ give for the
salvation of sinners. You have not only two Persons engaged, Persons greater
then all, but all that is in them engaged, both their Power and Will; and what
more can be desired? And if the one holds his purpose, the other must also; for
they are one. You have the one-nesse of God and Christ given you for security;
so that if they can never be made two, and wrought asunder, then sinners must
needs be saved. Till these two Persons do disagree, you are sure enough; and
they must cease to be, ere they can cease to agree; for they are one, and one
in being.

We have another testimony as full as this, 1 John 5. 7. There are three that
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, (we are yet
surer here is a third Person that comes in) and these three are one. Now what
is the thing that these do witness unto? ver. 11. it follows, This is the
record, that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
Here their truth is pawned, as in that other place their power was: for the
Apostle alleges this as such a truth, as they all agree and stand in to make
good. And to prove this, he says (as in that other place, Joh. 10.) that these
three are one: that is, one in nature, therefore one in will; and so also one
in witness to this truth. He says not only, They agree in one; for you shall
observe, that whereas there are three other witnesses mentioned to be on earth,
there is this difference put between their concurrencie in their testimonies
and that of these, that they agree in one, (so ver. 8.) but there is more said
of these, namely, that they are one; that is, in Nature, and so in Will or
Purpose; and so must needs much more agree in one. Now that thing which their
wills, and testimonies, and all agree in, is (as has been said) that God has
given us eternal life; and this life is in his Son, to all that shall come for
it. So that for Demonstrations of this, I need go no further. If there be any
Power, Will, or Truth in these Persons, Sinners shall be saved.

This being premised, as the most bottom ground of Christ's being at first, and
his continuing to be for ever willing to pardon sinners; let us more
particularly see, first, how his heart stood to the salvation of them before he
came into the world: and then secondly, how it stood inclined unto it after he
was come; and what confirmations our faith may have from both. So that the
thing that I am herein to speak to, is not so much his willingness to the work
of Redemption it self, (that I have elsewhere handled apart) but his
willingness and readiness to save sinners.

1. Let us see how his heart stood to this before the world was, and before he
came into it. And for this we find, that his delights were set upon it; so
Prove. 8. 31. [ Rejoicing in the habitable parts of his earth; and my delights
were with the sons of men.] Which words are more properly spoken of Christ,
then of God the Father; and therefore I produce them under this Head. For they
are said to be spoken by Wisdom, that is, Christ himself, he therein showing
how his mind stood toward us before the world began: for he speaks what he
and his Father did before the mountains were, etc. I was set up from
everlasting, ver. 22. Then I was by him, etc. ver. 30. And how did they pass
away that long aevum? (as the Apostle calls it) in nothing but rejoicing and
delights. He there speaks of nothing else that they did. And what was the
matter of delight unto them?

1. He and his Father delighted one in another, ver. 30.

2. In the salvation of men, My delights were with the sons of men, so ver. 31.
And he speaks of men as fallen; for it is said in the beginning of the same
verse, that he rejoiced in the habitable parts of his earth; which is spoken
not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles too, and of men all the earth over.
Now first, Delights arise out of the strongest and choicest desires. Men are
pleased with many things in which they delight not. Christ's heart and desires
must needs have been most on that which his delights are in. Again, secondly,
the greater the persons are, and the greater their minds are, the greater are
their delights. Things of great concernment are usually the objects which are
the delights of Kings, and which they take pleasure in. Now the great God and
Jesus Christ singled out the pardon and reconciliation of sinners for their
chief delights.

3. Their delight herein is mentioned, and in no other work of theirs: not the
Angels, nor the World, nor any thing in it.

4 This their delight is mentioned next to their delighting in each other.

And fifthly, this delight he took aforehand, whilst his heart was only in the
expectation of it, and his mind but laying the plot of it. He delights in it
ere he does it. And if all this joy of his be only in the thoughts of it, how
much more will it delight him when he comes to do it? All this argues how great
a matter this was in his esteem, and how much his heart was in it, and that
from everlasting.

Demonstrations from the disposition of Christ's heart, and his carriage upon
earth. As also some engagements since his death.
IN the second place, when Christ had assumed our nature, and whilst he
remained upon earth, how did this disposition of his abound in him? It were
endless to give all the instances that his story and Sermons do afford hereof.
See but how welcome all sorts of sinners were at all times unto him: He cast
out none that acknowledged him for the Messiah: he turned none away that gave
up their souls unto him to be saved his own way. He was indeed most reserved
unto that rich young man of any other, yet he used him courteously, the Text
says he loved him; Christ turned him not away, but directed him the right way
to follow him: And he went away of himself, undervaluing Christ to his
possessions. And another time Christ indeed seems to discourage the Canaanitish
woman, and put her away, calling her dog: But it was only in words; for
underhand he strongly draws her heart to him by his Spirit, and suggests
thereby to her heart by way of answer, a consideration of the highest Faith
toward him, that dogs might partake of the crumbs that fall from their Masters
table. I instance in these, because I would prevent and remove any exception
which might be taken from them. For otherwise Christ's professed entertainment
of all sinners was so open and notorious, as it was turned into his disgrace
and opprobry, That he was a friend to Publicans and Sinners; which yet he ownes
and glories in, professing that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance. And how glad he was when any such came in unto him, he
sufficiently expresses by those parables on purpose taken up, of the joy of
the Prodigals father for his return, and of the rejoicing for the finding of
the lost groat, and likewise of the lost sheep more then of the 99.

We read of Christ's joy but seldom, and when it is at any time recorded, it is
at the conversion of Souls. He had little else to comfort himself in, being a
man of sorrows: and he had nothing else on earth which he took delight or
pleasure in. When he was converting the poor woman of Samaria, (which he does
as a pleasure and recreation to him) he forgets his meat, (although before he
had been very hungry) and tells his Disciples that he had meat which they knew
not of, which was indeed the saving that poor woman's soul. In Luke 10. 21. we
read that Jesus rejoiced in his spirit; but observe the occasion: He had sent
out his Disciples to preach the Gospel, and they had in his Name and through
his Power cast out Devils: He bids them not rejoice in that, ver. 20. but shows
them what they should rejoice in, by his own example, and by what most
comforted him. Father (says he) I thank thee, that thou have revealed these
things unto Babes. This in in the next words following recorded to be the
matter of his rejoicing, he saw now an handsell, and an experiment of the fruit
of his Disciples ministry, and comforted himself beforehand, in that as their
souls had, so others of the poorer and meaner sort should thus come in unto him.

We find him at another time in like manner rejoicing, namely in the story of
his raising Lazarus, John 11. 15. And what was it for? Not that himself should
be glorified by so great a miracle, (even the greatest that ever he wrought)
but (says he) I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the end that
you might believe. He rejoiced if any of his got a little more or further
degree of faith. And on the other side, as sorry was he when men came not in.
Witness his tears over Jerusalem, and those speeches of his, John 5. 34. These
things I speak, that you might be saved. And thereupon in the ensuing verse he
complainingly utters himself, You will not (says he) come to me, that you may
have life. He speaks as one greedy of winning souls, and as sorry that any
customers or hearers of his should pass by, and not turn in; ( You will not
come to me, etc.) And he relieves himself with this, that there w^^e others
that would, though they would not. So here in this place, when in the verse
before my Text he had complained of them, that they would not believe, he
comforts himself with this in the words of the Text, All that the Father gives
me shall come unto me. And the like you have, Ioh 5. 25, 26. You believe not;
but my sheep, they hear my voice, etc.

And then at his death, when he was upon the Cross, he then converts a thief
that was crucified with him, and prays for those that crucified him. And after
his Resurrection his last words recorded in Luke 24. 47. are [ That remission
of sins should be preached in his name, beginning at Jerusalem,] that so those
whom he had prayed for (though they had crucified him) might be converted and
saved. Thus stood his heart all the while he was on earth, both before and
after his death.

And then (in the third place) now that he has dyed and laid down that price
which was to purchase the salvation of sinners, he must needs be much more
willing (if it were possible he should be) then ever. Many Demonstrations there
are from those obligations, which Christ's sufferings and death do put upon him,
which I have already given in a Treatise upon this very argument, The heart of
Christ in Heaven, Part 2. only I have reserved one or two for this place. As,

1. It was the aim and utmost intent of Christ's soul, in his being crucified to
have sinners saved, and saved effectually. It was that travail which his heart
was then big with. And certainly, Christ would not that so many and so great
sufferings, now that they are past and over, should be in vain. The Apostle
makes a motive of it unto the Galatians, Gal. 3. 34. Are ye so foolish, -- have
ye suffered so many things in vain? To be sure Christ's death shall not be in
vain: He will not lose the end of his sufferings, (as the same Apostle
intimates but 4. verses before Chap. 2. ult.) A business that a man has
prayed for much, how does he long to see it accomplished and fulfilled? and how
glad is he when it falls out as he has prayed? and why, but because it is the
fruit of his Prayers? Now much more glad is Christ to see the fruit of his
death, The travail of his soul, and thereby is satisfied, Isai. 53. 10. (a
place I often quote to this purpose.) I will add but this to it. When a woman
has been in travail, she forgets all her pains for joy that a man-child is
borne, (which is the fruit of that her travail) and so does Christ. And then
again, for that other word, that Christ is said to be satisfied. Satisfaction
is the accomplishment of desire, or the fulfilling of ones longing. So in that
speech of Christ, Blessed are those that hunger for they shall be satisfied. So
that this does argue and presuppose the most vehement desires and longings in
Christ for the salvation of souls, and his having dyed must needs increase them.

And 2. Add this engagement unto that former, That his death can be put to no
other use then for the pardon of sinners. So as if he should not expend it that
way, he should utterly lose the fruit of it, or let it lie useless by him. For
divert it to any other use he cannot. And yet if he knew how to improve it to
any other purpose; yet his love (he having intended it for the sons of men)
would not suffer him to do it. But besides, if it be not employed and bestowed
this way, it will be wholly in vain; for the good Angels, though they stand in
need of his Personal mediation, to confirm them in grace; yet his blood was
not requisite thereunto. And for the bad Angels, they are utterly excluded the
benefit of it. And then Christ himself he stands in no need of it, nor can he
have any benefit by it; all that Personal glory which now he has in Heaven
being due unto him by that Hypostaticall union. So that his death serves for no
end, if not for this. Christ indeed has an honor in Heaven, besides the glory
of the personal union: but then it arises to him from the salvation of
sinners through his death, which salvation is the purchase of his blood; as you
have it. Ephesians. 1. which might afford a third engagement, In that Christ should
not only lose the fruit of his death, but that glory that is ordained him by
the salvation of men. So that he should be a loser not only of his sufferings
bypast, but of all that glory that is to come from the salvation of believers;
which is no small thing unto him. As Officers in Courts of Law, or in
Universities, get the more fees, the more Clients, and the more Commercers
there are: so it is the more for Jesus Christ's gain, that many sinners get out,
and are received to grace and mercy.

Some Extrinsecall demonstrations of Gods and Christ's willingness to pardon
sinners.
ANd unto all these secret engagements both of God and Christ mutually to each
other, and to us, we may add all the professed publications of their minds
herein unto us, which have been made upon all occasions and by all means
possible. As,

First, This news has been published by all three persons, first God the
Father he began to preach it to Adam in Paradise, and has renewed it again and
again, as with his own immediate voice from Heaven when Christ was baptized,
This is my welbeloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him: which the
Apostle Peter records and confirms, as spoken a second time upon the Mount, as
a matter of highest moment to be known by us, which voice he heard (says he)
and is no fable, 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17.

Secondly, Christ who is the faithful and true witness, Rev. 1. 5. he came from
the bosom of his Father, and preached peace, Ephesians. 2. 17. Yea and it was one
of his first texts he preached upon, Luke 4. 18. The spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel, to preach deliverance to
the captives.

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost he also herewith bearing witness, that God has
exalted Christ to be a Prince and Savior, to give repentance and forgiveness
of sins. Acts 5. 31, 32. And so Heb. 2. 45. And these are these three
witnesses in heaven, 1 John 5. 7. whose record as it follows is this, that
there is life to be had in his Son Jesus Christ, v. 11.

Secondly, God has published this news both by all creatures reasonable, and
to all creatures reasonable.

First, the Angels they came and preached it, singing, Peace on earth, good
will toward men Luke 2. 13, 14.

Secondly, By men, and to that end he has given gifts to men, powerful and
full of glory, Ephesians. 4. 8. etc. And a commission with those gifts, a most
large and gracious one, And he has committed to us the ministry of
reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to
himself. 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Yea and thirdly, he has maintained this ministry in all ages, even to our
times, all times have rung of the news hereof, and the world is still full of
his Ambassadors to treat with men about this peace, and they are to proclaim
that he is fully willing; and upon that ground to beseech men to be reconciled,
and so long as Leiger Ambassadors reside uncalled home, or not sent for away,
so long the treaty of peace holds.

Fourthly, He has proclaimed this by these this Ambassadors in all places; he
bad them go and preach it to all the world, to every creature, Mark 16. 15. And
his Disciples did accordingly. Now he would not have had it spoken so openly
and generally, if he were not most serious in it.

Fifthly, Add to this, that he has declared it by all ways and means that do
argue faithfulness and seriousness.

First, Not by bare word of mouth, but we have it under his hand, he has left
his mind in writing. This book which is dropped from heaven, the title of it is,
The word of reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5. 19. the main argument of it being
reconciliation. In this book we find, proclamation sent forth after
proclamation, book after book, line after line, all written to this end, that
we sinners might have hope and strong consolation, as the Apostle witnesses.

Secondly, He has added to this writing those seals of the Sacraments, and
further an oath to both, and that made advisedly with the greatest earnestness
and deliberation that might be, Heb. 6. 17. God willing (the text says) more
abundantly to manifest this his intent, the immutability of his counsel, he
confirmed that promise with an oath, that by two immutable things, his word and
oath, we might have strong consolation.

Thirdly, If this be not sufficient, he has pawned heaven and earth, the
Covenant of day and night in Mortgage to forgive iniquity and pardon sinners.
Thus Jer. 31. 34, 35, 36. This is my Covenant (says God there) that I will
forgive their iniquities, and remember their sins no more, so ver. 34. and
then it follows ver. 35. Thus says the Lord, who gives the sun for a light by
day, and the ordinances of the moon and stars for a light by night: If those
ordinances depart from before me, then the seed of Israel, etc. The like you
have, Chap. 33. 25, 26. Day and night we see stand still, and therefore this
Covenant holds good still; but we have a greater pawn then this, the death of
his Son.

And lastly, Let his actions and courses, which he has taken from the
beginning of the world speak for all the rest, as satan has been a murderer
from the beginning, so God has been a Savior from the beginning, and Christ
is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. God began with the first of
mankind, even with Adam and Eve, the ringleaders, the heads of this rebellion,
who drew all the rest of the world into that enmity, these were yet reconciled.
Kings usually hang up the heads and chief in treasons, for examples of their
justice, though they pardon others; yet these did God save and pardon as
examples of his mercy, to all that should come of them; and it is observeable
that the first thing he did, after the world was fallen, was this act of mercy,
both in preaching this Gospel, and in pardoning them, he began to do that soon,
which he meant to be always a doing to the end of the world, it argues he
delights in it, yea and according to Christ last promise on earth, ( that he
would be with us to the end of the world,) God is to this day reconciling the
world of men to himself. Some that walk in your streets by you, live among you.
And he will have thousands when you are gone, and what are these but as flags,
and patterns of mercy, hung forth by God to toll and bring others in, as
Ephesians. 2. 7.

Use.
WHat should the consideration of these things work in our hearts, but what the
scope of the text it self puts men upon, even that they would come in unto
Christ, and believe on him, and give up their souls unto him? He that believes
shall in no wise be cast out. As Christ therefore is willing: so should we, be
a willing people. That which keeps men off, is, that they know not Christ's
mind and heart, think it not to be an indifferent thing to him whether you
believe, or no; as if he came into the world to do this duty of dying for
sinners, singly in obedience to his Father, so that men might be rendered
savable if they will: and that however, if they will not, he yet has enough to
satisfy and quiet himself with, even this that he shall be glorified in what
he has done, though few or none of the sons of men be saved. It is a
prejudicial doctrine this, to the salvation of men, and derogatory to Christ's
free love. What, do we think that Jesus Christ is gone to heaven, there to
complain unto Angels of the unkindnesse and hardness of men's hearts, that will
not turn to him notwithstanding he has done so much, and to tell what he had
done for them, and what they would not be persuaded to do for themselves; and
that so he can sufficiently please himself with such just complaints? no
surely; our effectual salvation concerns him more then so: and his heart is
more fully bent upon it then thus to leave it, of what he has bought he will
lose nothing. The truth is, he is more glad of us then we can be of him. The
Father of the Prodigal was the forwarder of the two to that joyful meeting.
Have thou a mind? he that came down from Heaven (as himself says, in the
text) to dye for thee, will meet thee more then half way (as the prodigals
father is said to do) by his spirit; he will send him from Heaven to thee, and
at the latter day himself will come again to fetch thee and receive thee to
himself. If among the Angels in Heaven there be joy at the conversion of a
sinner, how much more joy is there in Christ's heart? If there be joy in the bed
chamber men (as John speaks) what joy is there in the bridgrooms hearts? or if
among the standers by, when a manchild is borne into the world, how much more
does the mother that was in travail for it (as Christ's soul was,) how much
more does she rejoice? O therefore come in unto him. If you knew his heart you
would. As they that crucified him knew him not, so neither do those who believe
not in him. If you had been on earth with him, or if he were now here, and had
this day preached these things unto you, and uttered these his own desires, and
longings after you; how would you in troops go all thronging after him when
the Sermon were done, and each of you come about him (...) that had diseases
did) and beseech him to pardon and save you; and not leave him till you have
obtained some word of comfort and favor from him! Let me tell you, he had
preached this day, but that he had other business to do for you in Heaven, where
he is now praying and intereceding for you, even when you are sinning; (as on
earth we see he did for the Jews when they were a crucifying him.) Now because
he could not for this other business come himself, he therefore sends us his
Ambassadors, and we in Christ stead do beseech you; and it is as if Christ by
us did beseech you: and we preach but such things as were first spoken by the
Lord himself, (as it in Heb. 2.) And he sends his spirit, and continues to
give gifts unto men to this very day: and in all these respects, when ever the
Gospel is preached, he is said to spe^k from heaven, Refuse not him that speaks
from heaven, Heb. 12. 23. And though you have not his bodily presence as they
had who heard himself preach here on earth; yet you may by faith have as free
an access unto him, and know as surely that he hears you, as if he were in
the same room with you. Retire therefore into your closet, and treat with him
in private, and there press these things on him; say them all over again unto
himself, and ask him if they be not true: get the match struck up between thy
soul and him; which if once made, will never be undone again. Say unto him,
Lord, why may it not be made up now? Only let me add this; see you come not to
him without a wedding garment, and wedding-affections. Take up a resolution to
love him. For if thou come to him, what do thou come for? pardon of sins?
and what is it in him that must procure that? his having dyed for thee; that
was it. And what was it that moved him to die? an infinite love; such a love,
as were the thing yet to be done, he would certainly do it, and die to satisfy
God for thee. Now then, seeing he has already done it out of such a love with
what face can thou ask pardon of him, as the effect of such a love, and not
love him again, and obey him in all things? But to make short work with you,
know this; that if thou will not come in to him, thou will be damned. So says
Christ, He that believes shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be
damned. And I could tell you another, and as large a story of Christ's wrath
against those that refuse him, as I have told you of his love: The Lamb can be
angry; for he is a Lion also, O consider this therefore, lest he tear you in
pieces, and th^^ be none to deliver you.

FINIS.

