(...). Luke 18. THE Unrighteous Judge, OR An Answer to a Printed Paper,
pretending a Letter to Mr Io. GOODWIN, by Sir FRANCIS NETHERSOLE Knight.
Wherein the rough things of the said pretended Letter, are made smooth, and the
crooked things straight: and the predominant design of it fully evinced to be,
either an unscholarlike oscitancie and mistake, or else somewhat much worse. By
the said JO. GOODWIN.

False witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I know not.
Psalm. 35. 11. Quidam Christianae ac fraternae charitatis obliti, in tantum
existimationem nostram quoquo modo student laedere, ut suam se evertere nocendi
cupiditate non videant. Aug. ad. Artic. sibi falso imposuos. LONDON, Printed by
G. Dawson for Henry Cripps, and are to sold in Pope's Head Allie. 1649.

AN Answer to a printed Paper, pretending a Letter to Mr. Io. GOODWIN, by Sir
Francis Nethersole Knight.
A Letter to Mr. Jo. Goodwin, etc. I clearly found your Present to be (...), a
giftlesse Gift, by discovering your heart to be far from (...).
me. Sir, though all undue comportment with the greatness of this World, be
the first born of abominations to my soul, which as well my reason, as long
experience, have taught me to be a temper very creative of enemies, and
oppositions in the highest, from the world; yet, God assisting me, the method
of my warfare against my enemies, as it has been, so shall it still be, that
of Heaven, which encountreth evil with good, and attempteth the reconcilement
of enemies, by the pardoning of their sins. So that though your Pen be very
provoking, and the attempt of it (at least in appearance) to cast me out of the
patient and peaceable possession of my Soul; yet you shall not need fear any
reciprocation of incivilities from mine, nor that I will offer with your fire.
Only I must desire you to bear that Christian freedom at my hand, which
commands me to show men their errors in their true shapes, without the least
palliation or partiality when I am called to it.

Your address in the first word^ of the Letter you sent me, is this: Sir, I
send you here with a printed letter, with the books therein mentioned, whereof
I have no doubt, but you will find your self obliged to take notice in print.
I heartily presume that it was only some oversight in you, that (with the
Scribes and Pharisees) you said and did not, and do not look upon it as any
breathing of that spirit in you, which wrought in them. But assuredly I
received no printed Letter from you, whereof I find my self any ways obliged
to take notice in print. And for that printed letter, subscribed with your
name, which I understood you had published many days before I came to a sight
of it; and of which I might very possibly never have so much as heard, (many
papers of that quality, rising and falling in the world, without my cognizance
of either) upon my first perusal of the contents of it, conceiving it to be
purum putum, quanta quanta est, convi^ium, I was in suspense, whether I should
return any other answer unto it, then that of Hezekiahs servants unto
Rabshakeh, which was by silence; or at most, then that of Michael to his
Antagonist. (...), The Lord rebuke thee. But upon further thoughts, considering
how apt men of weak understandings, and strong affections unto evil, are, to
bless themselves with a thing of naught in order to their encouragement in
their evil ways: I rather inclined to draw up somewhat a more particular
answer unto it; chiefly to wipe off the undue aspertion of that iniquity
(falsely so called) variableness of judgment, and withal to correct the
malignitie of some other ingredients therein.

A letter to Mr Jo. Goodwin, which you never sent to him, nor took any probable
course that he should ever come to the sight of it. If you had considered the
nature of the writing, and upon what terms you published it, might you not
rather have styled it, A defamation of Mr. Jo Goodwin? I confess I find a few
lines in it, of some affinity with part of a letter, which about ten or eleven
days since was brought to me by an unknown Messenger, from a (then) unknown
Author, and who at that time judged it a point of wisdom to veil his name
(though presently after it seems he condemned himself of iniquity, and
variableness in judgment, by proclaiming his name upon the house top) but
such a Synecdoche as this unless Charity in her more then humane exaltation
be the interpreter, will not save the credit of such a title from the
disparagement of an untruth. Concerning this Letter, you tell me (page 5. of
your printed paper) that God did not give me the grace to entertain the
friendly purpose of him that sent it, (therein expressed) with suitable
friendlinesse, but suffered me to reject it with this slighting, if not
scornful answer, that I would make no answer to the letter of an unknown
Person. But Sir, upon this account I must crave leave to tell you (I know not
how you and your messenger will agree in dividing the shame between you) that I
rejected not any friendly purpose of yours, nor any other man's, with any
slighting, or scornful return. My answer to your Messenger was to this effect,
that if the Gentleman, who sent the letter, would please at any time to repair
unto me, I was ready to give him the best satisfaction I could* but that it was
contrary both to my mind and practice, to return answers in writing to the
letters of unknown persons, refusing to trust me with their names. I know no
delinquency in this answer against any principle of civility (much less of
Religion) if you shall please to show me any, you shall find me very pliable
to the impression.

take the name of God in vain, in telling me, that God did not give me Grace to
intertain, but suffered me to reject such a motion, as you are pleased to call,
a friendly purpose: whereas you might much more reasonably, and with less sin;
have said, that God gave me grace to reject it, and suffered me not to
entertain it. All the friendlinesse of purpose that I was able to discern in
that Letter, was to draw from me my judgment particularly, and that under my
hand in writing, touching all the proceedings of the Army, how far I go
along with them, and where I leave them; an intention or demand, as in it self
captious and insnaring, and requiring much more time to answer, then the
writing of a few lines of plain English, or then I could through the
pressingnesse of much business upon me, spare; So proceeding from an unknown
Person, especially from one, who refused to be known so much as by his Name,
much more suspicious, and theatning. Besides, I had so much the more reason to
be jealous of this importune and sudden demand of my judgment, in matters of
such high import (for the account was demanded by the return of the messenger)
because I had distinctly, and in plain English, declared my self, how far my
intent was to justify the Army in their late and present proceedings, in my
Right and Might, toward the end of the second Section; viz. in all such
actions, which were of like tenor and import, with that of their late
garbling, or sifting of the Parliament, i. (if English yet more plain can be
spoken) in all such actions; the equity or justness whereof is not impeachable
upon any other terms or ground, then that.

Friendlinesse of purpose toward me, as you profess, which my understanding,
though assisted with much charity, knows not how to break, or tune into such
an harmony. For I had much rather believe, though upon weaker and less
convincing grounds, the Friendlinesse of any man toward me, then the falsnesse
of his heart, upon the clearest demonstrations. But to deal plainly with you,
I must borrow the says of that generation of men, who (as Solomon says) will
believe every thing, to believe, that so many reproachful terms as your pen
mustreth up against me, as Pope, New Light, selfe-condemned Heretic, and so
many groundless suggestions, as that Soldiers and Officers of all degrees
have been seduced by me, that the Members of the House of Commons now sitting,
have been led out of the rode of their loyalty by me, that I greatly appear in
the Face and Body of my late Discourse, entitled, Right and Might, etc. to
teach things contrary to what I assert in my Anticavalerisme; and moreover,
that so many instigations of persons of several Interests and capacities,
Independents, Soldiers, Parliament men, etc. to fall foul upon me, in case I
shall refuse to do that, which is most unreasonable, senseless, and impious
for me to do; I must (I say) borrow the Faith of Fools, to believe that such
symptoms as these, are consistent with a sound mind, or Friendly purpose
toward me, in him, on whom they are found.

in the Army, as well Soldiers as Officers of all degrees, may reasonably be
judged to have been seduced by me, as likewise that the Parliament now sitting,
(though you are not wise enough to call them a Parliament, nor to determine in
what capacity they fit) may have bin led out of the rode of their loyalty by
the observation of my irregular motion, etc. the God on high, who must shortly
judge both you and me, knows, and these worthy persons themselves, both
Parliament men and Soldiers know, that I never was the man from whose tongue
or pen the least word, or syllable, tending to the forming, fashioning, or
directing of any their proceedings, ever came. Only when I clearly discerned,
that through better teachings then mine, they were engaged in ways of
Conscience and Honor, such as were (through the blessing of God) like to
bless the nation, wherein notwithstanding, in stead of thanks and
encouragements deserved, they met with contradictions and hard sayings from
many, and were (with their Lord and Master) numbered amongst transgressors, I
conceived my self obliged in duty, to being forth the righteousness of their
cause into the clearest light I could, and to stop the mouths of gainsayers
with my pen. And therefore whereas you desire, that the Members of the
Honorable House of Commons now sitting (though in what capacity you are not
wise enough, you say; not willing enough, I fear, to determine) would change
their game, and give over hunting of Lions and wild Boares, I mean the grand
disturbers and destroyers of the Nation, and pursue after dead Dogs and Fleas,
or hunt Partridges on the mountains, harmless, weak, and contemptible men,
do you not at once declare your self an enemy to the peace and safety of the
Kingdom, and to all those that are righteous and innocent in it, and a Friend
to Thieves and Murderers. Whether you do declare your self, or no, upon such
terms as these, I am not wise enough to determine: but I beseech you do your
self judge.

so shenuously to obtain, is to disparage me as a man of a variable and
inconsistent judgment, yea to Article against me as a Selfe-condemned
Heretic* unless I shall presently with the turning of an hand, or in the
twinkling of an eye, remove mountains, ^. (in your Dialect) give you such
reasons for the change of my judgment [since the writing of my
Anticaval^risme] which may satisfy you, that they are of sufficient importance
to make such an alteration in me. Good Sir, at this point I must deal plainly
with you, and tell you* that here you speak so irrationally, that you leave me
very little hope of finding much strength of reason in those other writings of
yours, the perusal whereof you commend unto me, and so have much obstructed my
way to the reading of them. For first, must be needs be an Heretic (much more
a selfe-condemned Heretic) who changes his judgment, without giving an
account unto the world of his change? Change of judgment even upon such terms
as these, may as well be a reduction unto Orthodoxisme, as a deviation unto
Heresy, Secondly, every opinion, whether retained in judgment, or deserted,
does not make an Heretic, whether in the one case, or the other. Thirdly, as
to the particular opinion, a recesse from which you presume in me, but prove
not at all, and conclude to be Heresy; I desire to learn from you, when,
where, or by what Author it was ever adjudged Heresy, to hold, that whosoever
sheddeth man^ blood, be he never so high, or never so low, his blood lawfully
may be shed by man in a judiciary way. Fourthly, It is (...), an importune and
very unreasonable demand, that a man should presently, and (as it were) with a
wet finger, especially at all times, and under any circumstances whatsoever,
give an account of the change of his judgment, though in the greatest and
weightiest matters. Fifthly, It is yet much more unreasonable, to stigmatize a
man with Heresy, unless upon the change of his judgment, he shall account to
men of opposite judgment, for his change, in such arguments and grounds, which
shall be satisfactory unto them, that such an alteration in him is justifiable.
Do not your self say (in the postscript of your printed letter) that for a man
to confess himself convinced of an error he has made public, especially if
his judgment has not bin swaied by weight of reason, but overballa^^ed by
private Interest, is one of the hardest points of selfdeniall? So that*
according to your principles, he is an Heretic, nay a self condemned
Heretic, who cannot justify or maintain those opinions which he holds, by
such arguments, which will make men of contrary judgment, deniers of
themselves, yea and this in one of the hardest points of self denial. If this
be your touchstone to try Heretics, and self condemned Heretics by; I
fear that neither you, nor any of your party will stand before the touch. But
Sixthly (and lastly, for this) that which (in this quarter of your discourse) is
at deepest and most desperate defiance with all principles of reason, and
common sense it self, is, that you pronounce him a self condemned Heretic,
who shall not give such an account, as has been described, and evicted for
most unreasonable, unto you, and others, of the alteration, of his judgment.
For (I beseech you) is it not possible for a man, to have grounds and reasons
satisfactorie to himself, and to his own judgment and conscience, for what he
holds, unless he publishes them in print? Or is a man self condemned, who
verily, and in the simplicity of his heart believes, that he has sufficient
ground, for what he holds, or professes, unless he makes public
profession of his grounds also? Were you a self condemned Heretic, until the
other day, when (as you say) you took off your mask, and declared for the King,
against both Parliament, and Army, and their proceedings? For doubtless till
of late, you gave neither me, nor the world, any reason at all, much less any
that did satisfy either me, or others (as neither yet have you done) that you
were not, I will not say, in an Heresy; but, in an error, or failer in
judgment, whilst you stood by the Cause of Prerogative, and Will, turning
your back upon the Cause of Equity, and of the just interest of the Kingdom;
which, being interpreted, is none other, but the cause of God. Were you
therefore a man condemned in your self, because you did not justify your self
before others? Or if you were a man justified in your self, though condemned by
others, whilst you kept your reasons and grounds to your self, of that
opinion, for which others condemned you, why may not I be admitted to take part
with you in the privilege, upon the same terms?

bruise the heel of my Right and Might well met, that so the credit of it may
halt in the apprehension of men, by going about the bush to represent the
Author of it, as a man of a desultorie, and variable judgment, and hereby
condemning himself of iniquity; I perceive hereby, that you deal more in
colors, then in substances. For whatsoever my judgment was in the point you
wot of, whether Negative, or Affirmative; when I wrote my Anti-Cavalerisme,
certain I am, and certain also might you have been, if you had looked a little
better, before you had leaped, that there is nothing, either in the passage
which you transcribe, or in any other part of the discourse, of any import for
your turn, I mean, which asserteth, or presents it, as a thing unlawful, to
touch the lives of Tyrants, or (in your dialect) of Kings (for day and night,
it seems, to you are but ths same) in a due process or course of Justice.
Again, whatsoever my judgment is now about the same question, or point, whether
I judge it lawful, or unlawful, to smite the lives of Tyrants, or King
Tyrants, with the sword of Justice upon sufficient evidence of crimes deserving
death: certain I am, that in my late discourse, entitled Right and Might, etc.
I affirm nothing positively, on the one hand, or the other. Suppose that in the
one discourse some things were expressed not with so much steadiness or
circumspectnesse of terms, (though I am conscious of no such defect here, as I
shall account presently) but that a weak understanding might infer, and
possibly think that my judgment stood against the lawfulness of all
judiciarie proceeding, against Kings, in matters of life and death; and upon a
like failing in my other discourse, (though to my best understanding I am as
blameles here, as in the other) that I seem to hold a lawfulness of such
proceedings; Must I upon the account of other men's weakness, or incogitancie
in reading, be condemned for variableness in judgment, or as one, who have
condemned my self of iniquity? These (questionless) are Prerogative dealings,
and have no communion with principles of Equity, Reason, or Religion.

p. 7. of my Anti-Cavalerism, stareth the Composer of my late Pamphet in the
face with a wide oden mouth, whereby (if your Rhetorique transcendeth not my
Grammar) you mean, that it manifestly contradictetth what I affirm herein,
suffer me in a few words to show you how vain your rejoicing is in this behalf:
For,

First, that I speak nothing in the passage, concerning, much less against,
any judiciarie trial of, or legal proceedings against Kings, is clear;
first, because in the very first words of the passage, which lead the sense of
the whole, I use the expression of offering violence to the Person of a King,
or attempting to take a way his Life [viz. by violence] Now the taking away of
the life a malefactor, by the hand of Justice, in a due and regular process
of law, was never (I believe) by any man, termed the offering of violence to
his Person. Secondly, that unlawfulness of offering violence to the Person of
a King, which I here insinuate, I oppose to the known Doctrine and Practice of
the Jesuits. Now the manner and methord of offering violence to the Persons,
or of taking away the lives of Kings which the Jesuits both teach and
practice, is known to be, not by bringing them to a judicial trial, or upon
evidence of matter of fact against them, deserving death, but by ways of
assasination, poisoning, and such extrajudiciall and murtherous practices.
Thirdly, for the proof of the unlawnes which I here plead, of taking away the
life's of Kings, I mention David's conscience smiting him, when he came but so
near the life of a King, as the cutting off the lap of his garment. This also
plainly shows, that the unlawfulnes of taking away the lives of Kings, which I
here maintain, only respects the fact as perpetrated, or to be perpetrated, by
private men, or out of a course of public Justice. For David, when his
Conscience smote him upon the occasion specified, was a private man. Now for me
to argue thus; a private man and without due process of law, ought to make
conscience of taking away the life of a Malefactor, how worthy so ever to die;
therefore a Magistrate upon evidence of the fact in a legal way, ought to make
conscience of it also, were to beat the air, or to give water instead of wine.
Fourthly, by the tenor of the objection, whereunto the passage under contest is
reponed by way of Answer (in part) the relation and proportion between which,
is soon seen in the discourse it self (though it would be somewhat long here to
argue it) it evidently appears that the said passage looks not toward any
trial of Kings for their lives by lawful Magistrates, but only impleads all
violence offered, or to be offered, to them, by private men.

^ives of Kings are resembled to consecrated Corn, meet to be reaped or
gathered by the hand of God himself, necessarily import any such thing as you
would worm, and work out of it, as viz. that it should be sinful, or
unlawful, for any man, or men whatsoever, in what case soever, to take away
the lives of Kings. Because, whatsoever is done in a way of justice, and
according to the Will, Word, or Commandment of God, is frequently in
Scripture, and may in sufficient propriety of speech, be said to be done by
God himself. This rule, though perhaps you cannot find in the Homilies of the
Church of England, yet may you find it more then once in the writings of
Reformed Divines. It is frequent in the Scriptures (says Mr. Ainsworth) to
make one the doer of a thing, which he commands to be done. In Numb. 193.
Thus Joshua says unto Achan: Insomuch as thou have troubled us, THE LORD
SHALL TROVBLE thee this day. Immediately it follows: And all Israel threw
stones at him, and burned them with fire, etc. Ioh. 7. 25.
The Lord himself is said to have troubled Achan, because what Joshua and the
People did to him in this kind, was according to his will and appointment.
Thus God himself said unto Moses, I will smite with the rod that is in mine
hand upon the waters Exo. 7. 17.
: whereas the sequel plainly shows that it was Aaron, and not God himself,
otherwise then by his command, that smote therewith upon the water. See also
Matthew. 19. 6. 2 Cor. 12. 21. upon the former of which places, Zanchie (I well
remember) delivers the same rule, for substance, with that mentioned from M.
Ainsworth. So then, God having commanded, that who so sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed; Genesis 9. 6.
whose blood soever is shed in a regular obedience to this command, may be said
to be shed by by God himself.

We conceive it to be the just Prerogative of Kings, in what case so^^^^, to
be secure from the violence of men. You by making majorites of those words, IN
WHAT CASE SOEVER, and minorites, of those which follow, would (as it should
seem) feign imply, that those words, which you make great, comprehend more,
and extend farther, then their fellows following them, which you make little
as viz. not only to secure Kings from the violence of men (whereunto they are
expressly limited) but from the justice of God also administered by men. Take
heed what y^^ do (says the good King Jehosaphat to the Judges which he
appointed in the land) for ye execute not the judgments of men, but of the
Lord, and he will be with you in the cause and judgment, Take heed and do it:
for there is no iniq^itie with the Lord our God, neither respect of persons. 2
Chro. 19. 6, 7.
Besides, if I should have intended to say, without all limitation and
exception whatsoever, that it were the privilege of Kings, not to have their
lives taken from them by men, without sin, in what case soever, I must have
supposed, that the Philistines sinned in flaying Saul in battle; that Eliud
sinned in killing Eglon, Joshua in putting so many Kings to the sword, as he
did, Samuel in having Agag to pieces etc. which certainly never came within
the verge of my thoughts nor (I think) of any other man, who knew his righthand
from his left in matters of Religion.

violence of men in an extrajudiciall way, I made them herein but equal unto
private and ordinariemen; it being the privilege, of the meanest of men, that
their lives cannot be taken from them without sin, otherwise then by the sword
of the Magistrate, and that in a due process of law For to this the answer is
easy; that there is no inconvenience or absurdity in it at all, to assert that
in an emphaticall and peculiar way unto Kings, which in a general
consideration belongs unto other men also. The Scripture it self does this
frequently. The Apostle Peter, charge Christians to honor the King: and yet
in the same verse, and in the same term, he commands them also to Honor
all men. (...). 1 Pet. 2. 17.
In like manner, it is written (says the Apostle Paul) thou shall not speak
evil of the Ruler of thy people: Act. 23. 5.
and yet the same Apostle asserts the same privilege (I mean, of not having
evil spoken of them) unto all men; charging Christians (and in them, all
others) to speak evil of no man. Yet again, he exhorts that supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made * Tit. 3. 2.
for all men; and immediately adds, For Kings, etc. So that it * Tim. 2. 12.
is no soloecisme at all in reason, or discourse, either to say, or imply that
common privileges, having an accent put upon them, are presents for Kings. More
might be added upon this account: but I desire not to be tedious unto you*

the shadows of the mountains do not seem men unto you. And yet I confess
that C. B. has justified P. D. in his un-cleark-like and frothy mistake. For
he being a D. D. standing in Christ's stead, and speaking in Christ's Name, unto
men, abused at once his great Lord and Master, his Auditorie, his calling, his
brother, and himself in a most desperate and shameful manner teaching for
Doctrine the empty traditions of your pen, and making part of his Audience
glad, and part sad, with that Lie, which the sight of your paper (it seems)
had put into his unhallowed mouth.

Before I leave the business in hand, because I would secure you against all
mistakes, (if it be possible) I beseech you once again that you will please
tounderstand, that in all that I have said to vindicate the innocence of my
mis-understood passage, from the offense, which either you take at it, or would
fasten upon it, I have said nothing, either by way of affirmation, or negation
concerning the state of my judgment, about the question of the lawfulness,
and unlawfulness, of judicial procedings against Kings, at the time when I
composed my Anti-Cavalerisme. All that I have said or done, upon this account,
amounts to no more, then only to a clear probation, that there is nothing at
all in the passage so often mentioned, that can reasonably, or with any tolerable
construction of the words, be drawn to a comportance with their judgment, who
judge it absolutely unlawful to subject Kings to that righteous Law of God,
which says, that Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his bolod be shed.

Selfcondemned Heretic, unles I shall either strengthen your hand by a
public avouchment of my standing in the same judgment still, or weaken it,
by giving such an account of the alteration of my judgment, which may satisfy
you? If you shall pretend, that the reason why you would tie me to this sour
apple tree, is, because I speak doubtfully upon the point in my Right and
Might, my clear answer is, that in this discourse I interpose nothing at all
concerning it, unless (happily) it be, by holding forth and asserting such
grounds, in order to the clearing of another Question, wherein (possibly) you,
and others of your judgment may conceive, that the negative of what (according
to the supposition mentioned) I formerly held touching the universal exemption
of Kings from trial, is concluded also. But Sir, give me leave to say, that if
those grounds and principles of Reason and Religion, which I assertin my
discourse, and upon which the whole fabrique of it is built, be first in
themselves solid and clear: and secondly do with alike soliditie and
cleereness, contradict and overthrow that judgment of yours, which you suppose
to have been sometimes mine with you; then I have already performed that hard
task, which upon your supposall of the alteration of my judgemennt, you impose
upon me; and have given you and others, such reasons, which may, and ought to
satisfy all reasonable men touching such an alteration of judgment in me.

If the said grounds, be not solid and clear in your apprehension, and withal
seem to you to oppose that judgment of yours, which (as you will needs
suppose) was sometimes mine, the confutation of them lies upon you, not upon
me, who judge them inconfutable. And howsoever it is a thing ridiculously
^^reasonable, for a man, when his judgment is opposed in a discourse, to
impose upon the Author a confucation of his own discourse. Or if this be the
task you would enjoin me, to declare whether these principles and grounds. I
assert, do contradict and overthrow that judgment of yours (supposedly mine
quondam) this is (in a manner) as unreasonable, as the former. For it is a
labor of much difficulty, and requiring long study, and in some cases not far
from an impossibitie, for a man to beat out all the particular consectaries,
consequences, and conclusions, which are virtually contained in all such
principles, which he has occasion to deliver and assert. If you shall yet
pretend and say, that what you desire of me to vindicate my self, is obvious,
and easy to be done, being no more but this, that I would declare, whether I
conceive, or apprehend, that supposed former judgment of mine concerning the
untouchablenesse of the lives of Kings, to be consistent with those grounds
and principles, which I build upon in my late discourse: I must again answer,
that such a thing as this is indeed easy to be done, but no ways honorable or
comely, for me in this, nor for any man else to do in the like case. He that
shall (especially in public) deliver his judgment, in matters of great
weight, presently, yea without a proportionable retirement of himself for the
exact Ad poenitentiam properat, qui cito judicat.
casting up of all particular accounts relating to such an undertaking,
apparently runs a double hazard; the one, of misleading others; the other, of
dishonor to himself.

self condemned Heretic, unless to gratify your prerogative humor, I shall
acquit my self from that, which is no crime, by an act of self condemnation.

for ought you know, I am the first, and only Minister of any Reformed Church,
that ever was of this, by my self styled Jesuitical, opinion; but are not able
to bring the least proof that I am of any such opinion, which I so style, I
should sin against the law of Charity, which forbids me to suffer sin to rest
upon my Brother, if I should not reprove you for it, as a saying of as much
unworthiness, as could lightly fall from the pen of a sober man. For, I
beseech you, where are your evidences, where are your proofs, nay where are
your presumptions, where are your shaddows of conjecture, that I am of any such
opinion, which is by my self styled, Jesuitical? For ought I know, you are the
first and the only man professing Christianity, who ever aspersed me with
the blot, or blood rather, of such an opinion. But if a Declaration of my self*
against this Opinion* will satisfy you, I here profess, with an heart
enlarged, and mouth wide opened, in the presence of Heaven and Earth, of God,
Angels, and Men, that I seriously detest and abhor that Opinion, which is by
me styled, Iosuiticall. But if you suppose that Opinion, to be by me styled
Jesuitical, which maintains a lawfulnes of judiciarie proceedings, as well
against Kings as other men; supposing withal that I am of this opinion (though
I am as yet sensible of no obligation upon me to tell you whether I be of this
opinion, or no) yet I must inform you of this, that in case I be of the
opinion, I neither am the first, nor the only Minister (by many) of the
reformed Church, who so judge: yea, and were not my inclination strong, to hope
the best, until I know the worst, I could hardly allow you the sanctuary of
those words, for ought I know, as clean, for your refuge. It is very hard to
believe, but that you know that many Ministers of the Reformed Church have been
of that opinion before, and besides me, if I should be of it. Or if you do not
(indeed) yet know it, Mr. Prynn's large Tract, entitled the Sovereign Power of
Parliaments, and Kingdoms, published in the year 1643. if your please to
peruse it, will abundantly satisfy you in this behalf. In the very front and
title page of this Book he rejoices over it, as being such a piece, wherein
the superiority of our own, and most other foreign Parliaments, States,
Kingdoms, Magistrates, collectively considered, over and above their lawful
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, is ABUNDANTLY evinced, confirmed by pregnant
reasons, Resolutions, Precedents, Histories, Anthorities of ALL Sorts, etc.
Page 199. of his Discourse, he cites a large passage from Zuinglus, which
begins thus: When Princes shall act perfidiously and besides the rule of
Christ, they may, [cu^ Deo] with Gods leave, or approbation, be deposed, by the
consent and suffrage, either of all, or of the better part of the people.
Afterward, in the same passage, the Author imputes it to the defact of
public Justice, that the wickednesses of Tyrants escape without punishment,
as they do. And (says he) there wants not ways or means, for the taking away
of Tyrants, but there is a mant of public Justice (with much more of like
import.) In the same page there is a passage likewise of Calvin, which makes it
dissimulation joined with nefarious perfidiousnesse, and a fraudulent betraying
of the Liberty of the People, in Magistrates, if they connive at Kings
outragiously encroaching upon, and insulting over the inferior common people,
and shall not withstand their raging licentiousness, etc. But there is a book
entitled, Lex, Rex, Printed here at London, anno 1644. Composed (as is said,
and as the style, and worth of it imports, though the style of it, I
confess, is the least part of its worth) by a Minister, a man of the greatest
eminency for parts of learning and judgment in the whole Kingdom of
Scotland, and (if fame be not a flatteresse) inferior to none in piety; this
book I would gladly recommend to your serious perusal, if you have not already
met with it. To relate what this Author says of his own, and cites of other
men's, in full comport with the opinion now enquired after, would far exceed
the bounds of my intended answer. Take a first fruits of the harvest. If a King
(says this Author, page 234.) turn a Parricide, a Lion, a waster, and a
destroyer of the People, as a man he is subject to the coactive power of the
Laws of the land. If any law should hinder that a tyrant should not be punished
by law, it must be, because he has not a superior, but God: for Roiallists
build all upon this? But this ground is false: for the Estates of the Kingdom,
who gave him the Crown, are above him, and they may take away, what they gave
him, as the law of Nature and God says. The substance of this passage he
proves by several substantial arguments following. Page 404. he says thus:
We hold that the Law says with us, That VASSALS LOSE THEIR FARM, IF THEY PAY
NOT WHAT IS DVE. Now what are Kings, b^^ Vas^als to the State, who, if they
turn Tyrants, fall from their right? again p. 1. 3. If then any cast off the
nature of a King, and become habitually a Tyrant, in so far he is not from God,
nor any ordinance which God does own. A while after, thus; There is a Court of
necessity, no loss then a Court of Justice* and the fundamental laws must
then speak; and it is with the People in this extremity, as if they had no
Ruler. Many other passages there are in this piece relating to the cause in
hand, which I respit to your perusal of it.

I may peradventure find more cause to retract the main scope of my whole
Anti-Cavalerisme, then the above mentioned passage thereof. Truly Sir, if upon
the peruseall which you recommend unto me, I shall find no more cause to
retract the main scope of my discourse, then I have yet found to reverse the
passage you speak of, I shall find none at all. Howsoever, if you have
acquitted your self in these writings, like a work man that need not to be
ashamed, you could not have recommended their perusal to a man more
proselyteable, then I. Balance my reasons and grounds, and I shall demurre;
over poise them, and I am yours. One of my chief Employments is, quotidie de
erroribus meis demere: and I shall be really and heartily thankful unto you,
or any man, that will help me in my work. I have not the least expectance that
any error should ever bless me* least of all those, which I have published to
the danger of others. Make me to see in the one, what I apprehend in the other,
and my Anti-Cavalerisme shall be no more to me, then your (...). The grounds I
build upon in the discourse, as I remember are but few, the number of them, but
five: Their names those, First, That Kings have no power, but what is given
unto them, either by God, or men. Secondly, That God gives power or Authority
unto no man to do unrighteously. Thirdly, That if men give any such power, it
is a mere nullitie. Fourthly, That to resist any power, which God has not
given, is not to resist any ordinance of God, nor sinful. Fifthly, That self
defense incase of lawless opposition, or assault, is a clear dictate of the
law of nature. Whether there he any more of this kind, or no, in that
discourse, I do not at present perfectly remember. Do but either shake these
foundations, or discover to me, that I have built besides them, you and I shall
agree in two words about the retractation of the main scope of my
Anti-Cavalerisme. I thought to have drawn forth after the same manner, the
principles upon which my Right and Might, stands: but these being many more in
number, I shall not tempt your patience with the muster of them. Only I freely
make the same offer concernning these, which I did about the other; either
present me with such other principles and grounds, which will serve these, as
Aarons rod did the rod of the Inchanters, devour them; or show me, where my
building stands awry, or off from my foundations; and the same hand which built
it, shall soon pull it down.

Not to be further troublesome unto you at present, if you please to strike
talies, and take satisfaction for my boldness from the consideration of your
own, I shall take it as a pledge of Christian ingenuitie from your hand.
Howsoever, you may aslure your upon sufficient ground, that, any thing in these
papers notwithstanding, I am, Sir

Your very loving friend, JOHN GOODWIN.
Colemanstreet Jan. 18. 1648. Postscript.
I acknowledge that since the printing of the former part of this Answer, I
received a printed copy of that Letter from you, which toward the beginning
hereof I deny to have received.



Errata
Page 1. line 10. for (...), read (...). p. 6 l. 1. for shenuously read
strenuously. p. 7. l. 2^. for ground, r. ground^* p. 8. l. 15. for the, r. the.
p. 9. l. ^5. for methord, r. method. p. 11. l. 8. for limited, r. limited. p.
13. l. 5. for bolod, r. blood. l. 27. after, in r. this.


