A SERMON OF THE Fifth Monarchy.

Proving by Invincible ARGUMENTS, That the Saints shall have a Kingdom here on
Earth, Which is yet to come, after the Fourth Monarchy is destroyed by the
Sword of the Saints, the followers of the LAMB.

Preached by Mr. THO. GOODWIN, on Rev. 5. 9, 10.

By which it will appear, that it is for the same Truth (that formerly was so
much contended for) that some of the People of God suffer at this day.

Published for the Truths sake.

Prove. 24. 21. -- And meddle not with them that are given to change.

Printed at London, for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1654.

To the Reader.
THe doctrine of the SAINTS REIGN ON EARTH, is matter of great Comfort to the
People of God, because of the glory which shall be revealed in that day. This
Sermon coming to my hands, at such a time as this, wherein the Truths of
Christ's Kingdom (this Reign of the Saints) are SO blasphemed and spoken
against, even by the quondam-Assertors and Professors of them; and, when men
are become SCOFFERS; this term FIFTH-MONARCHY-MEN being made a mark of Ignominy
and Reproach: I thought it my duty to communicate it to thee (Reader) that the
Truth may be vindicated, and the Saints comforted in this evil day.

This Excellent man has proved this Truth by such undeniable Demonstrations,
that I am persuaded all the Enemies Christ and It has, are not able to
gainsay. To persuade thee to ponder them, I suppose I need not: the honor and
esteem the worthy Arthor has in the hearts of all good men that have either
heard or read him, will be a suffictent Motive.

Only give me leave to point out a few things to thee.

We are told, page 6. That the Saints have an influence in the managing the
affairs of the world, by their Prayers. If so, let us consider, what a
TOTTERING CONDITION they are in, who have the trayers of the Saints engaged
against them; yea, though but of a few despised ones, who are not clothed with
the glory and power of this world. I do remember that this good man told us in
another Preached Feb. 5. 1645. on Rev. 15. from ver. 1 to 5.
Sermon, That the prayers of a few Saints have a mighty prevalencie to turn the
state of affairs in the world: The prayers of the Saints against those that
oppress them, will still bring the vintage ( the vintage of Gods wrath on
Protestants that provoke him) on them. An Angel cries out of the Temple, seeing
the Name of Christ profaned by those that profess Christ, and yet are opposers
of the Saints: God hears their voice, and sends it for them, and will continue
to do it, etc.

Further, we are told in the aforementioned page, That though the Saints know
not what Christ will do next, yet they are guided (as it were) by a spirit of
Prophecy, to seek for those very things which he is about to do. Then how
cautious ought we to be, of CENSURING those of Gods people who go beyond us in
their prayers and desires, lest we prove Opposers of the Spirit of God in them!

Again, page 6, 7, etc. That the Saints in heaven rule the world, and, by
converse with the Angels, have a knowledge of the great things that are done on
earth. When a soul is converted, there is joy in heaven; and when Rome is
destroyed, there will be joy in heaven. Rev. 18. 20. and Rev. 6. 9, 10. The
souls under the altar, newly slain, they cry to God to avenge their blood. Now
what may we think the Saints in heaven (who within these ten years last past,
lost their lives in the Cause of Christ) are EMPLOYED ABOUT at this time, they
understanding by the Angels what great -- are come to passion our earth! May we
not justly fear, they are crying to God, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do
thou not judge and avenge our blood! etc. Surely things are not now, as if THE
GREAT INTEREST OF STATES AND KINGDOMS were minded; the Imprisonment of the
Saints speaks another kind of language. But let us not be discouraged: our
Lord Jesus has foretold these things, that so we might prepare our selves, and
when they come to pass, our hearts may not be troubled. These are signs of his
coming; and many more he gives us, that he is coming, and will not tarry. Come,
Lord Jesus, come quickly. Even so. Amen.

By a servant of the Saints, who waits

A SERMON OF The fifth Monarchy.
Revel. 5. 9, 10. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us
to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation:
And have made us, unto our God, kings and priests: and we shall reign on the
earth.
THe scope of this whole Chapter is (as I have showed you heretofore) to set
forth (in the beginning of this Prophecy) The solemnity of Christ's undertaking
to be king, and to execute under God all his decrees contained in this book, to
fulfill and accomplish them, in governing this world to the end thereof, for the
good of his Church.

In the first verse therefore, you have (all being acted in a Comic way) God
the Father, sitting upon a Throne, holding a book in his hand: and (to glorify
Christ the more, that he alone was able to undertake the execution of the
things contained in that book) a Proclamation was made, Who in heaven or in
earth was able to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof: so verse 2. In
this strait, (because none was found worthy to do it) Jesus Christ steps up,
and takes the book out of the hand of him that sat upon the throne: so verse.
7. And then, from verse. 8. the Chapter is spent in the acclamations of the
spectators, of all sorts, which are cast into three several Rings or Rounds,
standing round about the throne. There is first the acclamation of the Church
of men on earth, verse 8, 9, 10. There is secondly the acclamations of the
Angels, standing round about the Church of men, in a Ring remoter then they
from the throne, verse. 11 and 12. And then you have the common multitude that
do stand without, every creature in heaven, and in the earth, and in the sea,
all singing, Praise and glory to him that suteth on the throne, and to the
Lamb, for ever and ever.

I am yet in the acclamation of the Church of men on earth, contained in the 8,
9, and 10 verses. Where you have, first, their description, verse. 8. Secondly,
the song which they sing, in the 9 and 10 verses; and that for two things:
first, because that the Lamb had redeemed them: so verse. 9. and secondly, for
advancing them to be kings and priests unto God. And then lastly, you have an
Inference, or a triumphant conclusion they collect from all what they had seen;
and that is this: WE SHALL REIGN ON EARTH.

I finished that of Redemption, a day or two ago.

I came secondly to their Advancement: Thou have made us, unto our God, kings
and priests. There are these things to be observed in it.

First, the persons that are made kings and priests, US, the generality of
Saints.

Secondly, I showed you what it was to be a king and a priest.

Kings they were,

1. In regard of the inward frame of their spirits. And

2. In respect of the outward Royalty which he bestows upon them, as upon
Kings.

Jesus Christ himself is here presented both as a King, and as a Priest; as a
Lion, and as a Lamb slain: and answerably, he makes the Saints partakers of the
privileges which he himself has. Thou have made us (say they) kings and
priests. Jesus Christ himself is naturally a King; he has it by inheritance:
so Heb. 1. 4. He has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name then the
Angels: but we are made, and made by him. He is the Heir; but we come in
through him to be coheirs with God: so the Apostle says, Romans 8.

See and acknowledge the prerogative of Jesus Christ above all the Saints.
Though all the same privileges that are in Christ himself, are in the Saints;
we are sons as he, we are kings as he, priests as he: yet all these with this
difference; he is naturally so, we are made so, made so by him.

In Heb. 5. 5, 6. when the Apostle would prove that Christ is a Priest, and
hold forth that title of his, he quoteth two places; and a man would wonder why
those two plaees should be put together: First, verse. 5. says he, He that
said, Thou art my son, to day have I begotten thee. As he says (so verse. 6.)
in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.
How does the first of these places, viz. Thou art my son, this day have I
begotten thee, prove that Christ was a Priest? Thus: The law of Nature, before
Moses, was, that the eldest, the firstborn in the family, was both the Judge,
and also the Priest of that family. Now because Christ is both the natural and
the eldest Son of God, therefore he is a Priest by inheritance; but we (I say)
are made so by him.

And take this for a certain Rule, That that which is derived, can never arrive
to that fullness of prerogative with what is natural. An adopted son can never
come to be a natural son. A made King and a made Priest, can never come to the
same height of prerogative and title that he has that is naturally so. And
therefore though all that is in Christ, and all his privileges are by way of
participation in the Saints, yet it is impossible they should be in that
fullness: Why? Because it is derived: Thou have made us kings and priests.

Thou have made us, unto our God, kings and priests. I take it, those words,
unto our God, do not refer to Kings, but to Priests, and to that alone: and my
reason is this; Not only because it cannot in any propriety of speech be said,
We are kings unto God: We may be said to be kings unto the creatures, and unto
all things else. But to be Priests unto God, to offer up sacrifice unto him,
that is proper. And the reason further is this, Because in Rev. 20. 6. (where
this thing is fulfilled) though he speaks there of their reigning, and of their
being Kings, yet he does not say they are Kings unto God, but only says, They
are priests of God, and of Christ.

And Priests they are unto OUR God; because that God becomes their God by a
free choice, though in Christ, yet not for Christ: We are chosen in Christ, but
not for the merit of Christ; he is our God freely.

I told you that these words, Thou have made us kings and priests, respect
especially their privilege and honor to rule this world, and the affairs
thereof. When they saw Jesus Christ undertook the managing the affairs of the
world, and to execute the Decrees contained in that book held in the hand of
him that sat on the throne, which contained how God would have the world
managed unto the day of Judgment, and that Christ was thus crowned king; they
upon this utter this song of praise, That they are made kings with him; as in
respect of the glory to come in heaven, being coheirs with Christ, so also as
being joined in commission with him for the managing of the affairs of this
book, and accomplishing the things contained in it. We also (say they) are
kings and priests. And their inference implies as much, We shall reign on
earth: the lowest interpretation of which, that can be given, must be this: We
shall have an hand in guiding the affairs of the earth; which although it shall
have an eminent accomplishment at a certain season to come, therefore they say,
We SHALL reign: yet notwithstanding they are kings at present, and it is in
some degree fulfilled now.

I told you last day, I thought there were four degrees of the fulfilling of
this their being Kings.

First, in this world, they by their prayers having an influence in the
managing the affairs of the world, and into the accomplishment of all the great
things that Christ does do for his Church. And though it may be, and it is
certain, they have not in all ages known (according to what is in this
prophecy) what Jesus Christ will do next, yet still, by the spirit of
Prophecy, as it were, the Saints have been guided to seek for those things at
the hands of God and Christ, which he was about to accomplish.

Secondly, in heaven; and for that I quoted first that place in Rev. 2. 26.
where, To him that over comes, (therefore it is meant of a state after death)
and keeps my commandments to the end, will I give power over the nations, and
he shall rule them with a rod of iron: as a vessel of the potters shall they be
broken in shivers, even as I have received of my Father. When is this to be
fulfilled? Not before death; for he speaks of him that overcomes, and keeps
his commandments to the end. Not at the day of Judgment only; for it is the
same promise was made to Christ in the second Psalm, which is evidently to be
understood of Christ's Government committed unto him by the Father until the day
of Judgment, which here you see he says he has received of his Father. If
therefore that in the second Psalm be meant (as clearly it is) of Christ's
government of the world unto the day of Judgment, and that he promises his
Saints after death the same privilege; then of necessity it must needs follow,
that they have a share and a hand therein.

I quoted likewise another place for this, namely, out of Dan. 4. 17. where
when that great business, the greatest work then in the world, was to be done,
the cutting down of Nebuchadnezzar, and turning him out for seven years to feed
among the beasts of the field, the Angel that comes down, and gives the command
for it, says, This matter is not by me alone, but it is by the decree of all
the watchers, that is, of all the angels, and by the word of the holy ones:
they all concur in it. And thus Junius interprets that place.

I added likewise, for the strengthening of this, a third Scripture, Revel. 6.
9, 10. where the souls under the altar, newly slain, having their souls severed
from their bodies, under that great and last persecution under Dioclesian, (for
to those times does that cry refer) they cry for vengeance upon their blood:
Not only does their blood cry, as Abel's is said to do from the beginning of
the world, but their souls are said to cry.

The Papists, that they may bring in the doctrine of the invocation of Saints
departed, (which is that great doctrine of devils, or of Demons rather, which
the Apostle foretold should be brought up in the world, and is the greatest
idolatry that ever was upon earth) they teach that the souls in heaven do there
know all things here below, in the glass of the Trinity, and of the Godhead.
And our Divines, that they may wholly take away that Argument for invocation of
Saints, from the Papists, many of them have denied that there is any knowledge
at all of the things that are done here below. But, my brethren, there is no
connection between their knowledge of the great affairs of this world, and
having an influence into them; and their invocation, none at all. For,

First, no man is able to affirm that they know all particular things here: and
yet me-thinketh no man should deny, but that they have knowledge (by the Angels
that are continually messengers from heaven to earth) of the great things that
are done here. There is joy thorowout all heaven, when a soul is converted. And
in Rev. 18. 20. when Rome is destroyed, as there will be joy thorowout the
whole earth, so there will be joy thorowout the heavens also, when that City is
ruined, in which is found the blood of all the Apostles, and of all the Martyrs
and Saints slain by the power and authority of that City (for so God has
ordered it) from the Primitive times to this day; then says he, Rejoice over
her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets: for God has avenged you
on her. I say, there is no connection between those two; That because they may
be supposed to know some of the great affairs of the world, that therefore they
must be invocated. Invocation therefore is upon these grounds denied by our
Divines, and justly too: For,

First, it is certain, and cannot be denied, that the Angels do know the things
of this world; for they attend there as ministering spirits continually, which
the other do not: and yet because they know them, it is no argument at all,
that therefore we may invocate Angels, or pray unto them to pray for us. If a
man were sure that an Angel were by him, and now attending on him, (as I am
certain there are Angels attending the Saints; for they are their great guard
in all places, especially in the Churches, in their public Worship) yet he
has no warrant at all to desire that Angel to pray for him: God has not
appointed such a way of communion between us and him.

Secondly, we have no warrant to believe that the Saints in heaven do hear us
when we pray unto them to pray for us; and least of all, to think that one
Saint should be able to hear a thousand, nay ten thousand Saints on earth at
one time; it is the greatest absurdity in the world to imagine it: and yet how
many suitors has that one virgin Mary? The Saints departed may be supposed to
have a great interest and privilege, and participation with Jesus Christ, and
a great honor communicated to them, for the managing of the great affairs of
this world; and yet there is no consequence, nay the clean contrary, that
therefore we should invocate them; because that no man can be assured, nay it
is certain they do not hear the prayers of any, much less can they hear the
prayers of so many: which is the dotage of the Church of Rome.

But lastly, it is flat Idolatry, and that for this reason, Because that Christ
being ascended into heaven, is constituted and appointed a Mediator there; and
therefore for any to pray to the Saints in heaven to pray for them, is to have
another Mediator before Christ's face, whereas he alone has took on him that
office: for, There is one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

And so now I pass from the Explication of those words; and come to the third
thing, which, I take it, is more eminently aimed at in the text, and in these
words, We shall reign on earth.

I shall open what I conceive to be the meaning of these words, exceeding
briefly, not intending to make a Subject of any thing in this Chapter. For when
I first took it in hand, I only purposed to run cursorily over it.

First then, it is evident, that there must be some great eminent advancement,
yet to come, as the consequent of Christ's being King; which these Saints here,
had in their eye.

This I shall open to you by degrees.

For first, if you mark it, upon Christ's taking the book, (which was his
undertaking to be King of the world) they fall out into this Outcry of praise
and rejoicing, We shall reign on earth. This is the fruit, this is the issue,
this is the conclusion of Christ's having taken the kingdom, and undertaking to
be King. And it must needs too be some great and eminent thing, which must have
an eminent and conspicuous accomplishment: for it is that thing which is next
in their thoughts. They overlook all privileges else, and do pitch upon this,
and parallel it with Redemption. For, if you mark it, their song of praise runs
but upon these two things; Thou have redeemed us with thy blood, and have made
us kings, and we shall reign on earth.

Secondly, it is some eminent thing, to be fulfilled at an eminent time to
come. For mark the difference; Thou have made us kings, say they; thou have
given us that title, and that honor at the present: but we SHALL reign;
speaking of it, as of a thing yet to come. They are kings, and they do reign in
that respect by prayer; but yet they reign in sackcloth: yea, but we SHALL
reign, say they.

Now that you may the better understand how it is to come, and when it is to
come; for otherwise in all other respects the Saints are Kings in all ages; but
I say, that there is a peculiar time in which it is to be accomplished, which
they have now in their eye.

To make this clear to you, do but consider the natural contexture of what now
follows in this discourse.

They utter this, you see, in the beginning of the book, in this vision of
Chap. 5. which (as I have shown) is the prologue to the whole that follows.
They utter it when they did but first see Jesus Christ undertake to be King of
the world, and had taken the government thereof upon him, and the execution of
the decrees contained in that book he took out of the hand of him that sat on
the throne. Before the end of the world should come, there was a long time, and
a great many things that were contained in this book, in this roll which Christ
took, which was written within and without, that were orderly one after another
to be performed; therefore, in the next Chapter to this, after this Vision is
past, (which as I said, is the prologue) there is first a going forth to
conquer; Behold, (says he, verse. 2.) a white horse, and he that sat on him
had a bow, and a crown was given unto him; and he went forth conquering, and
to conquer. He had begun to set upon the world then, he went forth conquering;
but he must go on to conquer; for he had the Heathenish world to conquer, and
he has the Antichristian world, and he has the Mahumetane world to conquer.
And all his conquest is carried on, till toward the later end, by his bow; he
takes nothing out with him else; he overcomes by his Word, which are the arrows
he shoots into the hearts of the Kings enemies, as you have it in Psalm. 45. 5.
So that now all the story thorowout this book afterward, it is but the story
of Christ's conquering of his Kingdom with his bow, and with his arrows, and
executing the decrees that were contained in the roll he took out of his
Fathers hand. When you come toward the end of the book, in the 19 Chapter, he
that in the sixth Chapter you saw when he went first out, riding upon a white
horse, you shall see him with Armies attending of him, whereof he is the
General, riding likewise upon a white horse. I saw (says he, verse. 11.) heaven
opened, and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon him was called Faithful
and True; and in righteousness he does judge and make war. For toward the
later end, when he comes to grapple with the Antichristian world, he does do it
by the Sword, and not by his Bow only. And therefore when he speaks of the
Beast (chap. 13.) who had made war with the Saints, he tells us, (verse. 10.)
that he that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword. It shall be
the sword that shall end it. Therefore he that at first went forth upon a white
horse, with nothing but his bow, you see him in the nineteenth Chapter coming
to make war, and the Armies which were in heaven following him. And what is the
issue of it? Verse. 20. The Beast was taken, and with him the false prophet,
(whether the Mahumetane party, and the Pope, I will not now determine; but)
they were altogether ruined and destroyed, cast into a lake of fire burning
with brimstone. All this Jesus Christ does, before he comes fully to possess
his kingdom. And this you have related to you between the 6 Chapter and the 20
Chapter.

Well now, at the 20 Chapter, you shall see, that what they said at the
beginning would be the issue of Christ's taking upon him the government of the
world, and undertaking to fulfill the Decrees contained in the book, the same is
declared to be made good then, as being the eminent season for it. For after
that he had taken the Beast and the false Prophet, an Angel came down from
heaven, (so verse. 1.) having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain
in his hand; and he lays hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the
devil and Satan, and binds him a thousand years, and casts him into the
bottomless pit, and there shuts him up, sets a seal upon him, that he should
deceive the nations no more, etc. And then, verse. 4. I saw thrones, and they
sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them. And I saw the souls of them
that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which
had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark
upon their foreheads, or in their hands: and they lived and reigned with Christ
a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not again, until the thousand
years were finished. This is the first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he
(verse. 6.) that has part in the first resurrection; on such the second death
shall have no power; but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall
reign with him a thousand years. Mark; what they say at the beginning, when
they saw Jesus Christ undertake the Kingdom; the very same (after he had
conquered all his enemies, the Beast and the false Prophet, and then taken the
devil and all, and flung him for a time into the bottomless pit) is here
fulfilled. That which before they said would be the issue of Christ's
government, is here in the very same terms said to be accomplished. Here in the
5 Chapter they say, Thou have made us kings and priests; in Chap. 20. 6. they
are said to be priests of God, and of Christ. Here they say, And we shall reign
on earth: in the 20 Chapter it is twice repeated; first, verse. 4. They reigned
with Christ a thousand years: and again, verse. 6. And they shall reign with him
a thousand years. This, I say, shows it evidently that at the beginning they
had this in their eye, as that which should be the issue and close of Christ's
governing the world.

But you will say, Is what is said in Chap. 20. meant of the Saints reigning on
earth?

Certainly yes: and the reason is this, Because during this reign, Satan is
said to be bound. Now to have Satan bound while the Saints reign in heaven, is
unnecessary and needless: for how can he disturb them, or be an annoyance to
their kingdom there? Whereas you see, that by way of preparation to this
kingdom they shall have on earth, both the Beast and the false Prophet are
taken, and Satan himself bound. Neither, secondly, can it be meant of the reign
of the Saints in heaven; for that is for a longer time then a thousand years;
and those Saints that were slain in the Primitive times, they have already
reigned longer then a thousand years. But that which does most clearly evince
it, is this, That in the 7 verse the devil is said to be let loose: And when
the thousand years are expired, (says he) Satan shall be loosed out of his
prison. Therefore it must necessarily be meant neither of the kingdom of heaven
after the day of Judgment, nor of the kingdom of heaven before the day of
Judgment; but of a kingdom which they shall have on the earth, as the words
are in this 5 Chapter.

Methinks (my brethren) that thus much should be evident to all men's
apprehensions, by paralleling the words used here at the beginning of Christ's
reception of the government of the world, and the words expressed at the later
end, ( viz. in Chap. 20.) when Christ had thus accomplished the decrees
contained in the book. I say, Methinks thus much should be conspicuous to all
men's understandings, That there is some eminent kingdom for the Saints after
all; when the enemies of Christ, the Beast and the false Prophet, and Satan
himself is overthrown; when the decrees of this book are accomplished, when the
time of this Prophecy is run out, that then, I say, there is an eminent
kingdom for the Saints to have on the earth. Thus much, I say, methinks should
be evident to any man's understanding: It is that which in the beginning these
say will be the end of Christ's kingdom here; it is that which they comfort
themselves withal; and, it is that which in order follows Christ's
accomplishing the decrees of his Father, and the ruin and destruction of his
enemies.

There have been those that have made this to be already fulfilled, namely,
That there has been a time wherein the Saints in heaven that were killed in
the Primitive times, had a great deal of honor put upon them for a thousand
years; and the Saints on earth had a great deal of peace; which they compute to
be from the time of Theodosius the Emperor, till the persecution arose afresh
by the Pope and the Antichristian party; and they reckon it to be about a
thousand years.

But it is evident, that that is not the meaning. For the time of this Reign
here spoken of, must be after the Beast is destroyed: for in the 19 Chapter,
verse. 20. it is said, The Beast was taken, and cast into the lake: and then
follows in the 20 Chapter, their reigning with Christ a thousand years. And
likewise all the Vials mentioned in the Chapters before, were first to be
poured out upon him: and therefore it cannot be during the Popes reign. And
then again, it cannot be during that time neither, because it is said that the
devil is bound up, that he should deceive the nations no more: Now during the
reign of the Beast, Satan never deceived the nations more then then: so Chap.
13. 13. He deceives them that dwell on the earth. Never did he deceive men
more both with Idolatry and Superstition, never was there raised more Wars and
Persecutions against the Saints, then during the reign and time of Popery. The
Saints indeed have had a great deal of honor put upon them by the Papists, in
Canonizing of them, and the like; but alas, it was all but a false honor, it
is not the honor and privilege that the reigning with Christ a thousand years
gives them; neither would they have so rejoiced in it when Christ first took
upon him to be king; not rejoice, I say, in that glory and honor which the
Popish world gave them during those times of Popery; no, We shall reign on
earth, say they: this was it which was the ground of their rejoicing, and which
they had then in their eye. Therefore as this was not begun when these Saints
here in the 5 Chap. first spoke it; so neither shall it begin until the Beast
and the false Prophet be destroyed. You must first see the accomplishment of
those great things that are written in this Book concerning Antichrist and his
Kingdom, which will be the close of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and then follows that which you have in the 20 Chap. the 4, 5. and 6.
verse.

The next Question will be, What persons he speaks this of, when he says, We
shall reign on the Earth?

Clearly, of those that are redeemed unto God by the blood of the Lamb, Christ
Jesus, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation.

But the great Querie will be, whether they speak this of themselves,
personally, or whether they speak it of all the Saints, successively? that is,
not only we now, but all the Saints in many ages to come, shall be persecuted
and oppressed: as we were by Heathenish Rome; so they shall be under
Antichristian Rome; (for in Rome is found the blood of all the Saints;
therefore I do not so much fear any Protestant-persecution) yet in the end,
though we now by our blood lay the foundation, and do but sow to it; yet there
is a crop to come up one day of a Kingdom which Jesus Christ has undertaken to
bring into this world, which his Saints shall have.

You may very well interpret it so; and certainly for my part I take it to be
that which was their aim. And the language of the Scripture does import as
much. We shall not all die, (says Paul) but we shall be changed. Did Paul
think to live until the day of Judgment? No, yet he speaks in the person of
We, and the Christians then might have said the like; and yet those persons all
died. He means therefore, the whole Community and Fellowship of the Saints,
whom the Apostle Peter, in 1 Pet. 2. 9. calls a Generation, and a Nation: and
therefore now, as a Nation that knows that one day they shall prevail and have
a Kingdom, as the Jews think, (though they suppose it many years to come, and
do not think that they themselves shall enjoy it) yet speaking in the language
of their Nation and Generation, may say, We shall one day be the top of
Nations, and have these and these Privileges: that is, Not we that now live;
but all of this Nation, this Generation, this Kindred, as they are called also.
And thus it has a passable and a fair interpretation; We shall reign on earth.

So that the plain Doctrine or Observation is but this, That there is in the
end a Kingdom to come here for the Saints, that after all the Kingdoms of the
World have had their time and their date, by which the Saints have all along
been oppressed and injured, there is, even on earth, a Kingdom to be given unto
them, when all Nations shall be converted unto God, and the Saints in them be
the prevailing party in the World. The Scripture seems to run much this way.

The first man (that I find of an Englishman) that distinctly fell into this
Notion, was a man of much holiness and piety, Mr. Wood.
now with God. I Will tell you the occasion that led him into these thoughts, as
he himself (in a manuscript I have lying by me) expresses it. I went, says
he, to recollect all the promises that are in the whole Book of God made unto
the Saints, beginning at Genesis and so going along throughout all the old
Testament (not dreaming of any such notion as this is) and I found no check at
all in my thoughts, until I came to read some of the Prophecies in Isaiah,
which professedly speak of the times of the Gospel, and which speak such great,
high, and glorious things of spiritual enjoyments of God, with outward peace
and prosperity. As now to give you an instance or two, Isa. 2. from verse. 3,
and so on: In the last days the mountain of the Lords house shall be
established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills,
and all nations shall flow unto it: and they shall beat their swords into
plough-shares, etc. neither shall they learn war any more. The like you have in
Micah 4. the whole Chapter. So in Isa. 25. 6, 7, 8. when the vail shall be
taken from off the hearts of the Jews, (as Paul interprets it in 2 Cor. 13.) he
tells you of the peace and glory that shall be in that nation, and how the Lord
will wipe away tears from off all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall be
taken away from off all the earth; whereas before they should lie under all
sorts of reproaches over all the World. Likewise in Isa. 60. 9, 10, and so to
the end, you have promises of all sorts to this purpose, how that the gates of
the Church should be continually open, they should not be shut day nor night,
that men (says he) may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that
their kings may be brought: for the nation and kingdom that will not serve
thee, shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted. The sons also
of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee, and all they that
despised thee, shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and they
shall call thee, The city of the Lord, The Sion of the holy One of Israel.
Whereas thou has been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I
will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. Thou shall
also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breast of kings. For
brass I will bring gold and fortron I will bring silver, and for wood brass,
and for stones iron. Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
destruction within thy borders; but thou shall call thy walls, Salvation, and
thy gates, Praise. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, etc. Also in Isa.
65. 16, 17. He who blesses himself in the earth, shall bless himself in the
God of the earth, etc. for behold, I create new heavens and a new earth, and
the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. Behold, I create
Jerusalem a rejoicing and her people a joy: and the voice of weeping shall be
no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be no more an infant
of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days. And they shall build
houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of
them, etc. So in Zech. 14. 9. The Lord shall be King over all the earth: in
that day there shall be one Lord, and his Name one. I cannot stand to single
out those things in these Chapters and many others of the like kind, which are
most emphetical; you may do it when you read them. Now, says he, when I read
these promises (as likewise that in Dan. 7. that after all the four Monarchies,
(whereof the remainder of the fourth stands) shall be destroyed, the kingdom,
and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be
given to the people of the Saints of the most High.) When I found such
promises, ( says he,) as these are, I knew not what to think, I wondered at it,
and was amazed. Hereupon, he says, he read some Commentators, whom he found to
expound them all of Heaven and the glory thereof, set out in an allegorical
way: but yet this satisfied him not; for it seemed evident to him, that it was
to be understood of a Kingdom here on the Earth; for he perceived there was
mention made of sinners, and of men that die, and the like: and therefore
reading other interpretations, he found them apply it to Ordinances, and and
other Spiritual enjoyments of God, with abundance of outward peace and
prosperity. Hence therefore he concluded that there must necessarily be a time
in which these promises must be fulfilled and accomplished; for the Saints have
always in all ages been more oppressed under the Gospel, then ever they were
under the Law; they have prophesied in sackcloath, and have been the outcast,
and the reproach of all the Kingdoms, and are so accounted even to this very
day. Daniel you know was a Court-like Prophet; for he lived in the alteration
of those great Monarchies, the Assyrian to the Babylonian, and the Babylonian
to the Persian; and God did reveal himself accordingly to him; for you shall
find his prophecy spent most in describing the four Monarchies that should be
in the world; the description you shall find specially set down in the 7
Chapter, where having described the three first Monarchies, he comes at the 23
verse. to the fourth, the fourth Beast, which he says shall be the fourth
Kingdom upon Earth, which shall be diverse from all Kingdoms, and shall devour
the whole Earth, and shall tread it down and break it in pieces, as the Roman
Empire did, the Relics whereof remain in the Turk and Pope to this day. But
after all these Beasts were ended, I beheld (says he, verse. 11.) even till the
Beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given unto the burning flame. For
in Rev, 19. the Beast is taken, and so there is an end of him. And as for the
other Beasts, he says, They had their dominion taken away, yet their lives
were prolonged for a season. But in the end and conclusion of all, what says
he? I saw one like the Son of man, (verse. 13.) and there was given him
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages
should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass
away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. And verse. 27. The
kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven,
shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High. The text you see
is express, that the Kingdom here spoken of, is a Kingdom which the Saints
shall have after the four Monarchies are destroyed, which he says shall be a
kingdom, not in heaven, but, under the whole heaven, where there are People,
Nations and Languages, men, who shall continue in their several varieties,
which in Heaven they do not; for there is neither Tongue, nor Kindred, nor
Nation there.

Let me speak another thing to you. Discoursing once with a Papist, who
defended (as you know they do) the truth of their Religion, and the supremacy
of the Roman Church, he brought this Argument to me. Read ( says he) the
Prophets, you shall find some of them make mention of a Mountain that shall be
set upon the top of all the Mountains, to which all the people of God shall
resort in a conspicuous manner; that peace and outward prosperity shall attend
and accompany that Church or Mountain, the riches of the Nations shall be
brought into it, Kings shall bow down their heads unto it, and lick the dust of
their feet, etc. Where ( says he) were these and the like prophecies ever
fulfilled, if not in the Church of Rome?

And for my own part, I must acknowledge, that let any one read such prophecies
as these are, and give me an answer how or when they either are or can be
fulfilled, unless this be granted for a truth, That after all is done, there is
kingdom to be given unto the Saints upon the Earth.

When you come to deal with the Jews, you shall find, that they always knew
and expected, and do now know and expect, a kingdom to come for them in the
end. The Apostles themselves seemed to have such thoughts; for in Act. 1. 6, 7.
when Christ was about to ascend into Heaven, they asked him, Lord, will thou at
this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? Christ you see does not deny
that there was a kingdom to come for them, only he says, It is not for you to
know the times and the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power.
Plainly intimating, that there was a time and a season, which God had for it,
which he reserveth in his own power. And the Apostle Peter, when he comes to
deal with the Jews, and preach the Messiah to them, in Act. 3. knowing that
their great mistake lay in looking that the Messiah should even from the first
come to them as a glorious Monarch, and restore to them the kingdom, and not
come meek and lowly, as he did, riding upon an Ass, he deals with them
according to their own Principles, only removes their mistake: Repent ye
(says he, verse. 19.) and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refershing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall
send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you, whom the heaven must
receive, until the times of the restitution of all things (The very word which
the Disciples used in Acts 1. Will thou not restore, say they?) which God has
spoke by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began. You Jews,
says he, expect a restitution; but here is your mistake; this Jesus must first
be preached, and he must go into Heaven, and the Heaven must receive him, till
that time of restitution comes, and then he will at least manifest himself
unto you. He that wrote that little book called, The Voyage into the Levant, he
says, That he had often occasion to converse with the Jews, whom he generally
found to be in expectation of their Messiah; and when he told them of these
kind of notions that were up and down this Kingdom and other places of Europe,
concerning a Kingdom that God would give unto his Saints here upon the Earth,
after the calling of the Jews, and that their Messiah would manifest himself
unto them even according to their own expectations; he says, They were
infinitely taken with the hearing of it. It suiteth with all their Notions, and
with their Expectations, and with all the Interpretations the Rabbis have
given of those Scriptures.

And consider one thing more: All sorts, almost out of all quarters of the
world, though they run several ways, yet they fall all into this Notion. As
now for instance: Those that are for the Restoration of Churches to their first
purity, they conclude for this reigning for a thousand years, and that the
Saints shall have thrones given them, etc. There is a time coming, say they,
after Antichrist is down, when there will be a resurrection of Churches to
their first purity and glory, in which there shall be only Saints, without
mixture of others. And so they interpret that place in Rev. 20 5, 6. This is
the first resurrection: blessed and holy is he that has his part in the first
resurrection. And, say they, Until then, all Churches will be but as dead
things: the great resurrection is reserved till that time. Others that are for
the coming of Christ in Spirit, (as the language of some is) they say this
also, That toward the end of the World, Jesus Christ will break forth to his
people with a great deal of glory and splendour, so as never before. The very
Jesuits themselves have been so much convinced, that such things are to be in
the later days, that some of them have written a book of the fifth Monarchy;
only indeed they do apply and appropriate it unto themselves, and call that
kingdom which, they say, shall be in those days, Regnum Jesuiticum.

The scope I have in saying this, is to show you, that although men run several
ways in their explication and expectation of this time, the Jews going one
way, the Papists another, and those amongst our selves several ways; yet as it
is an Argument, and a strong one, That there is a God, and that the Notion of a
Deity is stamped in the Spirits of men, because all Nations have pitched upon
worshipping of some God, although their error has been to worship the false:
so the variety of ways that men have run, and the expectations that men are
in, of such a time coming as I speak of, it argues still for the substance,
that there is some such thing, although one mistake, and another mistakes, and
perhaps none can distinctly tell what is to come. This I am certain of, that
the Primitive Christians did abundantly comfort themselves with this Notion,
and the consideration of it. And here you see the Saints had it in their eye at
the very first, when Christ took the Government of the World upon him, as that
which should be the close of his Kingdom: We, say they shall reign on the
earth; there is a Kingdom reserved for our Generation; speaking (as I said) in
the language of the Communion of Saints.

And there is all the reason in the World for it, besides what I have mentioned
out of the Scriptures: for,

First, The Saints that have been oppressed here in this World, it is a righteous
thing with God to give that Generation rest, and that they should have their
turn after all Kingdoms are dissolved; that what Adam lost, should be restored
to them again.

Secondly, That all those promises which (my brethren) have had an
accomplishment but in an indirect way, as that which Christ, and which the
Psalms also mention, The meek shall inherit the earth: That all the prayers
that have been put up, as, That thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven:
That Abraham and his seed should be heirs of the world: That there shall be a
new heaven, and a new earth, in which righteousness dwells; which, says
Peter, we look for: and that promise, if you look in Isa. 65. I am sure you
will find to be made to men on earth; for he says plainly, They shall build
houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of
them, etc.

There are those that go yet further, and say, That though there is such a
Kingdom belonging to the Saints, yet they say withal, That the Saints that have
been before, they shall during that Kingdom rise again; so interpreting that
place in Revel. 20. according to the very letter: I saw the souls of them that
were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had
not worshipped the Beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon
their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years: but the rest of the dead lived not again till the thousand
years were finished. This is the first resurrection. Which resurrection that
shall thus usher in this reign, some interpret of a generation of Saints a
multitude of Converts that shall come with the same Sprit and Power that all
the Saints formerly beheaded, had; and so they are said to rise again in them,
as Elias is said to rise again from the dead in John Baptist, who came in the
Spirit and Power of Elias. But there are these reasons given to the contrary,
and that it must be meant of a true Resurrection, and of a Resurrection taken
in a proper sense: for,

First, It is said, That the souls of them that were beheaded, they lived; how?
by a resurrection; for he says, It is the first resurrection. Now, how do
souls rise? no way, but by having their bodies united to them. They are the
souls of men that have been killed, and killed by the sword: now their
Resurrection must be answerable to their death; it is made the reward of it.
Their natural lives were taken away, their Resurrection to life therefore, must
be taken in the same sense and proportion to the life which they lost. And then
again, observe, it is the very same souls, in which you shall find a great
deal of emphasis: for read the 6 Chap. verse. 9. etc. I saw, says he, the souls
of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
held, lying under the altar, crying with a loud voice, etc. They were the
Primitive Martyrs; for this was in the beginning of the book. Now here in the
20 Chapter he says, I saw those souls, or the souls of them that had been
slain, for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God: he uses the same
description; and he adds to them (for the 6 Chap. is meant of the Primitive
Christians, slain under heathenish Rome) those that had been slain under
Antichristian Rome; for he speaks of such as had purified themselves from
Antichrist, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his image, neither
had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands, and they (says
he) lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead
lived not again. No wicked men shall rise then; they are reserved until the day
of judgment.

But to what end is this?

First, That as these Saints do now govern the World invisibly (as I said
before;) so they may then do it visibly. And great must needs be the glory and
happiness of those times.

Secondly, That which the Angels do now invisibly, the Saints shall then do
visibly. The Angels now have this World subjected to them, and all the affairs
thereof; and the execution of the Decrees of God, are still said to be done by
them. But, says the Apostle, Heb. 2. 5. Unto the Angles, God has not put in
subjection the world to come, whereof we speak. And he does not speak of the
World to come after the day of judgment; for it is that Kingdom which Christ
shall have before he gives up all things unto the Father. This world here,
therefore, is subjected unto the Angels that do ministerially rule, and who do
work with the Spirits of men this way and that way for the good of the Church,
in opposition to Satan. But then all shall be done by the Saints in a visible
manner.

Thirdly, Hereby they are made conformable to the same state and condition
Jesus Christ was in: whilst he was in the World, he was mean, he was under all
sorts of oppression; he dies, his Soul goes to heaven; he rises again, and
after he was risen, he stays here below for many days, converseth with his
Disciples at times, instructs them in the things of the Kingdom of God,
appears, disappeareth, etc. And if you ask me, What will the life of men be,
thus risen? I ask, What was the life that Jesus Christ led during those forty
days before he did ascend? And if you object, that this will be a diminution
to their happiness; I answer, It was no diminishing of the happiness of Jesus
Christ. Assuredly, he enjoyed more blessedness being risen, and his Soul and
Body united, then when his Soul singly and alone was blessed; and yet, for
those forty days he was here upon the Earth. Think my brethren, of the day of
judgment, whenas Jesus Christ himself will come with all his Saints and
Angels, out of the place of Heaven into this visible World; and it will ask a
long time to judge the World, because he will judge it as a man, and lay open
the secrets of all hearts; and we may be sure that will be done in this visible
World. The Angels that come down from heaven to earth, do yet see the face of
God therefore it is no derogation to the happiness and blessedness of the
Saints.

And if you ask me. Whether during this time they shall eat and drink? I
answer, The children of the Resurrection neither marry nor give in marriage, or
do any such thing; but they are as the Angels of God. Christ after his
Resurrection lived not upon any such thing; no more shall the Saints, although
the number of them upon the earth shall be innumerable; for the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, and the Name of God and of Christ shall be
set up in the whole earth; and the greater part of the World shall be Saints.
And though those that shall then be found alive, may happily eat, and drink, and
build houses, etc. yet those that rise again, shall not.

I have, as briefly as I could, opened this thing to you, which here these
Primitive Christians, in the very beginning of the book, have in their eye.
Whether it be meant only of that generation of Saints, and of the Resurrection
in the 20 Chap. or only a Resurrection by way of succession, in comparison of
former times; or whether, yea or no, it shall be a true and proper
Resurrection, I leave undetermined: only this I say, That certainly there is
some great thing (after all the Kingdoms of the world have had their turns)
for the Saints to have, and that on earth, both by the promises in this book,
and by all the prophecies of all the Prophets which have been since the World
began. And therefore, as Peter says, Seeing we expect such things, what manner
of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness!

FINIS.

