THE MYSTERY OF DREAMS, Historically Discoursed; OR A TREATISE; Wherein is
clearly Discovered, The secret yet certain Good or Evil, the inconsidered and
yet assured Truth or Falsity, Virtue or Vanity, Misery or Mercy, of men's
differing DREAMS. Their Distinguishing Characters: The diverse Cases, Causes,
Concomitants, Consequences, Concerning men's inmost Thoughts while ASLEEP.

With several considerable Questions, Objections, and Answers contained
therein: And other profitable TRVTHS appertaining thereunto. Are from pertinent
TEXTS plainly and fully unfolded,

By Philip Goodwin Preacher of the Gospel at Watford in Hartfordshire.

Justum abinjusto non Somno sed Somnio discerni.

Aristot. Ethic. lib. 2. etc. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Francis Tyton at the
Three Daggers near St Dustans Church in Fleet Street. 165^.

Imprimatur.

December. 8. 1657. Edmund Calamy.

THE AUTHORS APOLOGY As To the present Matter, OR An Epistle Declaratory.
Acquainting the Christian Reader with the Useful things intended in the
TREATISE.
Courteous Reader,
I Crave thy favor, or at least to forbear thy censure, as concerning the
Subject Matter of this Book (which discoursing the HISTORY and MYSTERY of
DREAMS) some men may imagine useless, Si enim ignoremus quid sit info^^nium
quot and quae eorum causae and quae eorum genera. Quaestiones poni solent, quae
been explicari non poterunt. Zanch. T^m. 8. Tractat. de Divine.
judging both mine and other men's Study of this present Point to be pains to
no purpose, etc.

But be not discouraged ( dear Christian) from a diligent endeavor to get a
due understanding in the state of Dreams, for As this has been very
Commendable, So this may be still very profitable.


1. Commendable it has been in ancient times to attain knowledge in Dreams, as
may plainly and plentifully appear From Sacred Scriptures, and From other
Authors.


1. The Holy Scriptures do much commend two worthy Men for their wise
discernings in Dreams: As Joseph Patriarchae divi^uatur in tres classes --
Inter Patriarch as tertiae classis enumeratur. Joseph. Alsted. Chronol. Genesis
40. 12, 13. verse. Genesis 41. 15, 25, 26.
a Patriarch, And Daniel a Prophet.


1. The Patriarch Joseph, who not Ironically, but Deservedly might be called a
Captain-Dreamer* for he had not only an admirable Transact in imagining
Dreams, but a mavelous insight for the interpreting of Dreams. Some to
diminish the due praise of this precious Man in this Matter, have said, that
his skill in interpreting Phaarohs Dream, Genes. 4. was merely out of his
observation of the River N^lus, etc. But by some of late, the most Learned in
Divinity and Philosophy Interpretati^ s^mnii Pharonis de pimguibus and ma^r is
e Nilo as^^n^entibus Josephus non h^a^si^ ex consideratione natu^ae Nili.
Wendeli^ contemp. Phys^. ^e^t. 28. cap. 8.
, has this been fully confured. Paraeus and other approved Expositors keeping
up his praise, conclude he had not only an humane and low, but a more sublime
and Divine knowledge in Dreams.

2. The Prophet Daniel anno. 7. exilii Babilonici putatur interpretatus esse
somnium Nebubuchadneze^is. Vixit enim in captivitate Babilonica sub
Nebuchadne^^^e and successoribus ejus -- Alsted. Chro^^l^. Prophetarum. 154.
Daniel who lived in the time of the Babilonian captivity, and about the
seventh year thereof, was raised for his rare Dilucidation of Dreams. And
among other things herein, that the Scripture reports to his praise: That
express passage is much to be pondered, Chap. 1. Verse. 17. As for these four
Children, God gave them knowledge and skill in all Learning and Wisdom, and
Daniel had understanding in all Dreams and Visions.

Out of which saying we consider concerning Daniel, Lege Luther (...). comm. de
^o Theologi^^ and aliarum artium.
What is asserted of him with the rest, and What is ascribed to him above the
rest.


1. It Is said of Daniel and his Associates, Hananiah, Michael, and Azariah,
three captive Children of the Jews, They all had knowledge and skill in all
learning and wisdom. And as Theodoret upon the place well observes it is said,
God gave them this knowledge Non tantum Chaldaeorum institutio eos intelligentes
fecit; sed Gratia Divina dedit. Theod. in locum.


For as God instructs the Husbandman in the wise disposing of his Seed and Soil
Si ita eruditi and instructi sunt agricolae in rebus tam minimis, quid de
Doctoribus sentiendum est? Et quid, etc. Calvi^ in locum. Etiam hoc asserit
Aristo^cles. lib. 6. Ethic. cap. 7.
, Esa. 18. 26. So God much more does assist the Scholar in his Studies of
humane Arts and Sciences, by whose benediction knowledge herein is attained.
This was the common gift of God to Daniel and his other captive-Companions.

2. Daniel above his fellows is preferred, in that he had a special
understanding in all Dreams and Visions. For the compassing of which, no
question (as he was a learned man) he had much help from humane wisdom, with
which God had greatly endowed Daniel: So Ex hac scientia, and naturali, and
acquisita, and revelata, sequitur laus Dani^lis. 1. Naturalem scientiam
literarum disciplinarumque humaniorum non a piis negligi sed coli op^rtere. --
2. Etsi haec non tam Naturae beneficio c^mparatur a ^id^libus quam singulari
Dei gratia lucem mentibus ad res etiam naturales percipiendas. -- Jun.
Lectiones in Dan.
as a most Godly man, he had more used other religious means, as Meditation,
and Prayer and a more diligent Study of Divine Matters, in which God had raised
and increased his knowledge beyond others in all Dreams and Visions. And as
this was the praise of Daniel, so the same would make for the commendation of
any other men, as Junius upon the place in diverse Documents lays down.

2. See besides Scriptures, other Authors, who do much commend two sorts of men
in former times, for their useful knowledge of Dreams. As Philosophers And
Physicians.


1. The ancient Philosophers Cicero hac de re prolixe disputat. lib. 1. De
Divinat. De insomniis igitur dicam non quidem omnia quae ab Aristotele and
aliis praeclarissimis Philosophis copiose traduntur. Zanch. De Divinat.
, as Aristotle, Cicero, and several others of the greatest repute, this is
reported to their praise, they saw so much as enabled them to write largely and
learnedly of the Nature of Dreams* So Zanchy presents them praise worthy.

2. Those famous Physicians, as Galen Galenus lib. de praesagiis ex somniis Ex
interiori dispositione corporis ^ormatur motus in Phantasia -- homini in quo
abundant frigidi humores occurrunt in Somniis quod sit in aqua -- Et propter
hoc Medici di cunt esse intendendum Somniis ad cognoscendum interiores
dispositiones. -- Aquin. 22ae Quest. 95. Magir. in Physiol. suam. lib. 6. cap.
15. Zanch. Tractat. De Divination^.
* Hypocrates, they to their high praise, proved and improved their excellent
knowledge in Dreams, thereby discerning the Symptoms of several diseases, and
so perceived what proper Means to propose to their Patients* for their more
quick recovery. Aquinas and others, give out evident Instances of such
admirable advantages, by which was raised the ^ame of Physicians in former
times; And if it were laudable in them, to look into Dreams to learn out the
state of men's bodies, may it not be commendable in others, thereby to discover
the case of men's souls?

2. Profitable: this may plainly be proved by what Has been proposed, and May
be produced.


1. Proposed: much has been by godly In Somnis Deus consolatur Jacobum,
cohibet Abimelechum, admonet Labanem, ^ortatu^ Solomonem, etc. Lege Illyricum
clav. Scrip. Sac.
and learned men in latter times, though little in our English Language lies
extant, yet in Latin both Polemicall and Practical Discourses much of use in
this case is Discovered.

For Writings Polemicall, read Luther Vide prolixam and eruditam disputationem
de somniis and quid sit illis tribuendum. Luth. Ex t^mo in Genesin. cap. 40.
Luth. ^^^. com. ^ae classis cap. 22.
, who has large and learned Disputations and Dilucidations of Dreams,
discussing how they may be discriminated, and what to them may be appropriated.

For Practical Writings, read Polanus Polan. Syntag. Theol^. lib. 5. cap. 30.
De anim^.
and others; Such like, who in their learned Systemes of Divinity, have laid
down diverse useful Divisions and Determinations as referring to Dreame^*
besides what other Eminent Men have excellently done, as occasioned upon their
Commentaries of Scripture, all which might well have been forborne, had not
knowledge herein been a benefit to men, yea useful to the best of Saints.

2. Produced: much may be for the fruitful profit of all such persons by plain
perception, and due discerning of Dreams. Both to assist necessary Knowledge,
And to incite necessary practice.


And let me here take notice of Dreams in a double sense: As large and
extended Somniorum duo sunt genera necessario cognoscenda. -- 1. Quibus alii a
Deo fuerunt in structi. 2. Quibus alii a Diabolo destructi fuerunt.

, As strict and limited.


1. Dreams largely taken for all of all sorts, to endeavor their due
understanding is needful, that such knowledge may be promoted, and such
practice incited, as is (to be sure) exceeding necessary.

1. Knowledge necessary both herein and hereby, may be much for our benefit.

1. Knowledge in Dreams we have need, and may be much for our good Observe Our
Activity in them, and The Obscurity of them.


1. We Active: They Vnus idemque homo dormit and somniat; somnus and somnium
sunt actiones ejusdem. Vide Magir. Comment. in Phys. lib. 6.
are such motions as wherein we actually concur. Now as Christ said to his
Disciples of Christian duties, If ye know these things, happy are ye if you do
them: So may I say to Christians concerning Dreams, If ye do these things,
necessary it is you should know them.

2. They Obscure. Dreams go much in the dark, as they usually be in the dark
night, so of a dark nature: so veiled and covered, as they commonly require an
Interpreter. A Dream is a Somnium est figuris tectum and sine Interpret
intelligi non potest. August. de spiritu and anima cap. 5.
close covered Dish brought in by night for the Soul to feed on; And is it not
meet for a man, after to uncover the Dish, to see and know upon what Meat he
has eaten? that he may not like Isaac, abide beguiled with Kid for Venison,
Genesis 28, 32.

2. This Knowledge, viz. of Dreams as in a more general sense they are
considered, may educe a double profitable knowledge, viz.

Certain, and Conjecturall.
1. A certain Knowledge may hereby be brought in about the Reasonable soul of
man.

In its Positive Being, and In its Putative Working.
1. In dormiendo aliquis habet usum rationis quia saepe in somnis ratiocinatur
and praeeligit unum alteri consentiens vel dissentiens. Aquin. 22ae Quest. 154.
A^. 5.
The reasonable soul in its real Being, may hereby be readily known. It Is sure
in some Dreams men are merely sensitive, sensual, and brutish but let a man
Dream as a man, and a superior principle will soon appear.

3. The rational soul in its Thought-working, hereby comes to be discovered.
The Philosopher Vid. Aristot. lib. de Insom. cap. 2. and 3. and lib. de some.
and Vigil. cap. 3. and de Genesis any. cap. 1. de Hist. anim. cap. 10.
who disputes to what part or power of the soul Dreams appertain, though he
determines rather to the Sensitive than the Intellective, yet so as the soul is
therein set a work in a way of Imaginations and Cogitations* some of which may
transcend sense* Yea, the most sound do assert that oftentimes Et observandum
est quod sepe contingit ea i^ s^m^ nos videre quae run^uam suerunt in sensu
Paraeus. comment. in Genes.
that which has not place in the sensitive part, either antecedent or
concomitant, may yet be found in the working thoughts of a Dream. So that by
the Knowledge of Dreams, much of man's rational soul may be certainly known.

2. A Conjecturall knowledge a bout the serious concernments of man, or matters
wherein man may be much concerned. Though from Dreams so considered, a man may
make no certain Theses, or infallable conclusions, yet a man may gather
probabilities, and may give a great guess Ex iis somniis and si nihil certi
statuere p^ssumus conjectare tamen -- Qualia fuerant Syllae and Luculli somnia
-- Item qualia multa fuerunt quae apud Cicer. lib. 1. De Divi. leguntur --
Zanch. Tractat de Div.
. Men may imagine when awake, from many motions and suggestions in sleep, what
may be their advantages. I shall forbear Instances, which Learned Zanchy and
some others declare in the Case.

2. Such Knowledge may profit persons in point of practice:

By examining of Dreams that tend to act, and By determining to act beyond
Dreams.
1. Men are moved to examine Dreams that does dispose them to action. Dreams
may be Somnium Monicae ambiguum de filio Augustino -- Luther. Tom. 2. in
Genesin.
ambigious, and to deed them may be dangerous; Or on the other side* proceeding
from Dreams to deeds, may be a duty. And therefore though Dream-impressions
may make strong propensions, and cause Concedit Aristotales somnia sae^e esse
causas nostrarum actionum ut cum somno soluti ad ^ales nos actiones
accommod^mus quarum simulachris men's in somno percita suerit -- Paraeus Tem. in
Genes.
Inclinations to act, yet a man wise and well instructed, will weigh all in
Gods balance before, by suitable actings he seeks to fulfill the same.

2. Men are moved to determine, actings at other times, beyond all Dreams*
Some Dreams there are of waking men, yet sleeping sinners. About things of two
sorts:

Terrestrial and Secular, Caelestiall and Spiritual.
1. Nihil squidem differt a s^^ni vanitate r^rum praesenti^^ fi^ura, sive
^^st^s, ^^^e prosperae. etc. Ambros. de juga seculi. cap. 5.
Dreams about and upon the pleasures and honors of the world. Men's
promotions, raise such imaginations, as wherein their minds make Dreams* As a
Dream when one awaketh, so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall despise their
Image, Psalm. 3. 20. Comparat Propheta omnem mundi splend^rem som^io quo
ali^uando frust^a se quis oble^^at -- De rebus caducis somnians mag a concipit.
Mollerus upon the place concludes, That wicked men's earthly dignities, are
but as idle Dreams, their splended braveries, but lucid fantasies, etc. Thus
we find the Apostle expressing Agrippas pomp: He came (...) Act. 25. ^3. His
glittering glory was but as a Dreaming fantasy, vain and vanishing, though
much mind pleasing, etc.

2. Dreams upon and about better things. Luther observing some, says,
Somniant se habere singularem sanctitatem modestiam patientiam and Doctrinam --
Somniant se, etc. Luther. 5. ^classis. cap. 8. De ^anaticis.
They imagine spiritual Immunities, singular excellencies, that they have
mavelous abilities in ^ood for God, far those their Brethren, which be but
Dreams. Their apprehensions of present good, and expectations of good to come,
be but Dreams. Now a knowing ^hristian strives to be above a Dream, to rise
unto Realitie in Religion, that his hopes of Heavenly felicity, may be more
then an imaginary fancy, his apprehensions more then apparitions: that though
he Dreams in sleep, and sleeps in Dreams, yet awake, he may work and live
above Dreams, being in all things, serious, solid, and well settled.

2. Consider Dreams more strictly taken, viz. as Divided

Into Evil from Satan, And Good from God.
1. For evil Dreams, wherein the Devil has his industrious dealing for men's
monstrous defiling and deluding.

Such have been, and Such yet may be.
1. By such Diabolical delusions, have several in days past been seduced,
and drawn upon such actions, as have proved their destructions. Historians
report of that great P^rsian Lege Herodot. lib. 7. in Xerxe. De quo etiam
A^t^banus. Quoniam Daemonius instinctus est and Graecos clades quaedam (ut
videtur) missa Divinitus manet ego quoque caedo and sententiam muto -- Alsted.
Cronol. 294.
Prince Xerxes, how by a delusive Dream he was instigated to go into Greece
with his numerous Army, consisting of above 1000000 valiant men, where by a few
Greeks, he had a fearful foil.

1. Such Dreams may endure in our Days. Let not any think (says Luther) the
Diseas humiliter sapere sciens certo and verissime Sathanam non esse mortuum,
etc.
Devil is now dead, no nor yet asleep: As he that keeps Israel, so he that
hates Israel never slumbereth or sleeps. And while he hates, he is readiest
to hurt, and may occasion many harms by evil Dreams.

Yea, (says Luther) We are day and Semper sumus obscessi and circumfusi
undique multis milibus Daemonum qui evomunt contra^os totum infernum and maxim
exercitibus nos adoriuntur -- Luth. loc. Com. Quint. class. cap. 1. De Diab.
night beset with Millions of Devils, when we walk abroad, sit at our board,
lie on our bed, Legions of Devils are round about, ready to fling whole hell
into our hearts.

Now to know and believe our lyableness to such deluding and polluting Dreams,
as soon as others in preceding times Multis temporibus somniis falla^ibus
hohomines in magnos mittuntur errores, etc. Aug de cura pro mortuis. cap. 10.
, may much promote

Our needful Knowledge, and Our useful Practice.
1. Our Knowledge may be hereby furthered, both concerning Sin Peccatum in
sanctis non solum est sed agit, non solum vivit sed vigilat. Luth. loc. 40.
and Satan, our foes, and and the friends and fathers of filthy Dreams.

1. A necessary knowledge of sin, may be by this very Means,

More General, and More Special.
1. Sin in General, men may hereby discerning as concerning themselves, its
certain excellency, close adherency, continual Peccatum originale and si non
sit peccatum actuale est tamen peccatum a^tuosum Aqui.
activity, etc. What is said of man's soul, the same may be said of man's sin;
Age does Anima non dormiseit, non seneseit. Scalig. de subtle.
not enfeeble it, nor sleep surprise it, but it is always vigorous and vigilant,
even in the night time it puts forth in evil Dreams: So that by this we may
learn the condition of man's sin, and man's sinful condition. Did but a
sinful man observe himself, as he is in the time of sleep, and he might soon
see his soul through sin Docent Philosophi-justum somniare honesta and
tranquilla sceleratum in honesta and turbulenta in carnalibus and impiis somnus
est cogilationum mare, inauinationum fluctus -- Aristo. lib. 1. Ethic.
Plutarch. lib. 2. Nic^tas in orat. 3. Nazianz.
to be as the troubled Sea, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, Esa. 57. 20.

^. Sin in Special, that which some call peccat^m in delicijs, a man's
delightful and beloved sin, a man's most prevalent and praedominantsinne, to
which he is most prone, may hereby appear.

Concerning this are three things considerable.

1. That there is such a sin. 2. That this sin may be known. and 3. That
its knowledge may be by this Means.
1. That such a Principal and Prince* like sin certainly is, that Psalm. 18.
23. Ezekiel. 7. 16.
swayes the Scepter in man's soul, and sits chief in the heart: That says to
every other sin, as Pharaoh to Joseph; In the Throne will I Genesis 41. 40.
be greater then thou.

2. This chief-ruling sin in man, may be known. It Is true, this sin may most
subtly seek to conceal it self: and as is reported of the Persian Kings Apud
Persas. Persona Regis sub specie magestatis occuli tur. Just. lib. 1.
to be seldom seen in the day. During the day it may suspend its visible acts,
and not come into any open view.

3. In the night time, and in the midst of man's sleep may this sin arise and
run out in his Dreams. That Is a man's wel-beloved, which lies at night betwixt
his breasts, Cant. 1. 1^. That Is a man's Dalilah-lust, which leans upon his
lap in his sleep, Judge. 16. 19.

2. Much of Satan in his subtle designs may hereby come to be discovered.
Ignorance of the Devils artifice, is not fit for Christians. We are not
ignorant of his devices, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2. 11* [(...) Hanc artem
Satanaepluribus explicatam. Vide apud Augustinum libro. 30. contra Epistolam
Parmeniani. cap. primo and secundo.
] His thought* works, or the workings he has in his thoughts, whether men be
asleep or awake: Satan's subtle injections into the minds of men, as Tertullian
renders the Apostles word. It Is in the plural, signifiing Satan has several
of this sort. How diverse the Devil* devices are, Austin excellently opens,
having had experimental knowledge of many: And that good man Lege Augusti.
Confessi. lib. 10. cap. 30.
among others, does much bemoan what mischief he suffered from Satan in sinful
Dreams.

2. By such knowledge of evil Dreams, things practical are promoted,

For repenting of what is past, and For preventing of what may follow.
First, Of such evils past, men through this knowledge are provoked to repent,
to humble themselves for these night-sinnes, with which very few are affected,
and upon which scarce any reflect, unless with delight. Indeed, the Recordation
of Dreams have sadly distressed some of Gods Saints. What amazements of mind?
What terrible troubles of conscience have come upon some men by this means?
there be that can bear witness in the world. Some in their sleep have had a
supposed burden, dreaming such a load lay Ex somnio mentem Nebuchadnezaris
fuisse graviter affectam, sed gravtore somnio excussam fuisse recordationem
somnii. -- Jun. lectiones in Dan. Vt si quis somniet se ab aliquo premi. Quod
in somnium Ephialtes appellatur. Fit cum crassus humor in Thorace Vel cerebro
existens. -- Zanchius.
upon them, as though they strove they could not stir. And such there are,
who after sleep, and when awake, have sorely felt a real burden, being pressed
down with sorrow in the remembrance of their sinful Dreams.

Dream-sinnes the most are ignorant of, and so insensible under, and sorrowless
after. Though it is certain men's sinful ^usts have no allowance from Gods Law
in time of sleep. Perhaps some think of the Law of God; What Serbidious Jus
civil Scriptum est vigilantibus non dormitantibus, etc.
Scevola said of the Civil Law: It was not at all written to restrain sleepers
but wakers. But both waking and sleeping, man has his bounds set, which to
transgress is sin; even in a foolish thought, Prove* 24. 9. Of all which, a
right knowledge much helps repentance.

Secondly, Against such future Evils, hereby man is moved to arm himself, by
the use of Scripture, Meditation, and Prayer. Luther finding many Multi
fanatici spiritus me adorti sunt quorum alius* somnia alius visiones alius
revelationes jactabat. Sed respondi me non expetere ejusmodi -- and si
o^^erentur meiis non habiturum ^idem. -- Et ideo ardentibus votis precatus sum
ut daret mihi Deus certum sensum Scripturae -- Si enim verbum habeo s^io me non
facile f^ll^ aut errare pos^esed recta via ingredi -- Luth. loc. com. ^ae.
classis.
fan^tick spirits (as he terms them) who boa^^ing of their Dreams, sought to
seduce him: This ma^e me, (says he) earnestly pray to God, that he would give
me the true understanding of his holy Word, that I might never be drawn away by
such dangerous deviations in Dreams.

And did but men, indeed know the dangerous errors and evils of evil Dreams,
with holy fear and care would they draw out the day, and lie down at night,
lodging themselves in Christ, that Satan may not find them out. Necessary
Necessarium est verbum ruminare and orare sive cum surgimus sive cumbitum imus,
ne nos vacuos and imparatos hostis inve^iat. Luth. primae classis. cap. 23.
is it (says Luther) that whether we rise up, or lie down, we should pray and
ruminate upon the Word of God* that our enemy may never find us empty or
unprepared. And (says another Ille igitur proprie tranquillus est qui carnem
omni corruptionis labe purgavit, mentem supra creaturam omnem elevans, omnes
illi subjicit sensus and vultui Domini animam sistens, supra virium suarum
modum in Deum se semper extendens, etc. Climacus. Gradu. 26. etc. 29. Corn.
Lapid. com. in Prove. Sol. cap. 4. Aquin. 22ae. quest. 154. art. 5. page 316.
Siquidem ut equi jugales recta currere instructi non deserunt viam dormiente
auriga: Ita bruti affectus domiti nec in somnis facile recalcitant. Corn.
Lapid. com. in Pro. Auctor cat. Graes. cap. 3. v. 29.
Author) he that would secure himself from such deceiving Dreams, as are
Daemonum ludibria, must be daily subduing his sinful and sensitive part,
purging out present pollutions, and elevating his mind above creature-vanities,
striving beyond his own strength to setle his soul in the sight of God,
acquainting his soul with the good will of God, that therein he may go right
toward God, when his body lies asleep in his Bed.

Now a considerable Means to incite men to daily diligence in these good
duties, is to instruct them in the evil of Dreams; For who will so soon use
the Medicine, as he that best knows the Malady.

^. Good Dreams, whereof God is the Author Negat Aristotoles somnia unquam
(...) contra illud Homericum ex (...), etc.
, ought to be known: For

1. Such have been, and 2. Such may yet be.
1. Dreams Divine have formerly been, in the minds of men. Calvin Non dubito
quin multa somnia fuerint fabulosa -- Tamen satis constat quaedam somnia non
fictitia esse -- Sicut somnium calphurniae uxoris Julii Caesa^is quia antequam
occideretur -- ita illa somnia verat -- Idem dici potest de Medico Augusti qui
jusserat eum exire e tabernaculo suo quo die pugnatum fuit in pharsalia --
Statim capta fuerunt castra Augusti.
in his Commentaries upon Daniel, though he grants diverse Dreams have been so
falacious and frivolous, as did evidence much of the Devil; yet some Dreams
have been so ponderous and serious, as might signify something of God: And he
gives some ^nstances out of Ancient Authors, as the Dream of Julius Caesar's
Wife, admonishing her about her Husbands death: And the Dream of Augustus his
Physician, who thereupon commanded the Emp^rour in his bed, to be carried out
of his ^ent, and so escaped the cruel enemies hand. In such Dreams, we may
imagine some moving hand of Almighty God. Bu^ plain proofs we have from holy
Scripture of Gods undoubted hand in diverse Dreams: Gen 20. 3. Genesis ^0. 5* Gen
4. 7. Judge. 7. 13. ^ King. 3. 5. Dan. ^. ^. Dan. 7. 1. Math. 2. 19, etc.

2. Dreams Divine may yet remain. From God may come (yea shall come) good
Dreams in these latter times* And it shall come to pass in the last days, I
will pour out my Spirit -- and your Sons shall Dream Dreams -- Acts 2. ^7.
That excellent Expositor Paraeus Accipienda sunt somnia non solum metaphorice
de illustri patefactione Dei and Doctrina salutis sub regno Christi sed proprie
de Divinis somniis est dictum quae nunc sane negligenda non sunt.
in his Commentaries upon Genesis affirms in that place: Dreams are not only
to be taken in a Metaphorical sense, for those famous Patefactions under
Gospel Administrations; but also for Dreams properly so taken, wherein God,
under the Kingdom of Christ, may make known his merciful mind unto the sons
of men. [(...)] etc. Filij vestri somnia somniabunt. Your sons shall Dream
Dreams.

Memorable is that of B. Read the life and death of William Cowper B. of
Galloway in Scotland.
Cowper, who in the passages of his life reports a Dream he had from God,
guilding him to the place of his public Ministry most remarkeably: And that
the ever living Lord, who sleeps not, may thus in these latter times, warn
the Souls of his Servants, when their Bodies be a sleep, none ^ trust (says
he) will deny the same, etc.

It Is credibly told, of a Native Turk in London, lately Baptized into the
Christian Faith, how by a Dream he was thereunto much Lege Augustinum lib.
Conf. 8. cap. ult.
drawn. As Austin had his Tolle-Lege: So he is said to have his Surge Recipe,
whence without the receipt of the Baptismall Sacrament he could not be
satisfied. Others by such Dreams may be incited.

So that to seek a due understanding of Divine Dreams, is an undoubted Duty in
Gospeldaies: This will further

Profitable Knowledge, and Suitable Practice.
1. Requisite Knowledge may much be promoted by that Communion a good man may
thus have, both with God and himself, during the darkest seasons of the night.
My reins Renes interiora viscera -- occultissima denotant -- cor intelligit,
etc.
instruct me in the night seasons, (says David) Psalm. 16. 7. Even in the
seasons of the night, the most retired motions of David's mind, the most hidden
thoughts of his Nonnulli interpretantur quod nocturno tempore multa dedicisse
and proficisse Proph^ta in agnitione Dei in fide, etc. Mollerus in locum.
heart, did read him, as one calls it, a Curtein Lecture; by which he learned
much of himself toward God, and much of God toward himself; his Faith, his
Love, and such like Graces were so comfortably discovered, that he blessed God
for it. I will bless the Lord that has given me counsel; my reins also
instrust me in the night season. In the time of the night, when good men are
awake; yea, and when asleep also, by these secret ways, they may certainly
discern much concerning

The God of grace, and The grace of God.
1. Much of God may by this means be manifest, as not only the certainty of his
being, that he is, but the transcendancy of his being; what and how great he
is, in his power, prudence, providence, vigilance, omniscience, goodness, etc.
are even from these admirable actings evident. Aristotle that great Philosopher
Et quamquam Aristot^les libenter re^iceret omnem semsum Divinitat^s ut fuit
malig^us in hac part cum scilic^t ad captum ing^nii vellet D^i naturam ex^gere
ut omnem raperet a^ ac^u^e^ suum -- Negavit somnia esse Divina -- Concessit
tame^ D^vination^^ esse in qui^us^am somniis. Calv.
, that he might lift up humane Nature, and dash down all Notions of Deity,
denied any Dreams to be Divine; yet to some Dreams he would grant Divination,
which may soon seem a contradiction. A free concession to, and due cognition of
Divine Dreams, may draw out much of the manifold Knowledge of God.

2. Much of Gods sanctifying grace in men, may through this be known: That near
access, and close converse, that ready recourse, and refreshing intercourse
which certainly sometims is between a glorious God and a gracious soul, in time
of sleep, does testify much in man of the grace of God. This discovers Gods
grace in its true Impress, Progress, Efficiency, Proficiency. Plutarch Quomodo
quis suos in virtute profectus sentire possit inter alia signa dat somnium si
quis non turpia sed: honesta somniet.
sets down this as a manifest sign of man's stature in Virtue; that his Dreams
are not of filthy, but of honest things. So that as to necessary Knowledge,
there is good use of a due understanding of Divine Dreams.

2. As to the effectual furtherance of pious Practice, the same is also of
singular use.

This puts on to diverse good Duties, as relating to Dreams Divine:

For procuring and increasing them, and For improving and pursuing them.
1. To procure and increase good Dreams: A knowing Christian herein, becomes
diligent hereupon, and takes pains in Prayer, preparing all day for Gods
visits in the night. Psalm. 17. ^, 2, 3. Hear O Lord, and attend to my Prayer.
-- Thou have visited me in the night, thou have proved my heart, and shall find
nothing. That is (says Mollerus) Nocte me probasti sed non deprehend sti a^i
uam perfidiam u^fallaciam in me sed recte and sircere egi cum in caeteris tum
in hac causa.
nothing perfidious, fallacious, but as at other seasons, and in other cases,
so in this; my soul has sincerely complied with God, and readily met him in
the visits of the night: And for this purpose the Prophet was full of Prayer in
the day. Luther Semper rogasse Dominum ne mihi vel somnia vel visiones
mitteret, pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo ne vel visiones vel somnia mihi
mittat. Luther.
reports, that he on the other side, often prayed to God, that God would not
speak any thing to him in Dreams: And that he covenanted with God, that in
Dreams God would not send to him any of his mind, etc.

But thus might this good man do, upon a double occasion:

To oppose the ways of men, and To advance the Word of God.
1. To oppose the practice of Consule Lutherum 5ae class. cap. 8. De
H^reticorum and Fanaticorum versutia astu, virulentia violentia and calumniis
malitiaque memendabili, etc.
men, who in his days pretended diverse things from God in Dreams full of
fallacies and falsities; therein many were Deluders, and many deluded; with
which he was much affected, and often sore assaulted.

2. To advance the Praescripts of God in his written word, I am content (says
Luther) that I Contentus sum hoc dono, quod habeo Scripturam sanctam quae
abunde docet and suppeditat omnia quae. Sunt necessaria cum ad hanc tum ad
futurum vitam
have the holy Scripture, which teaches me so abundantly and evidently, that
herein I acquiesce. And to Gods settled Word (says Huic credo and acquiesco ac
certus sum me non p^s^e salli. Luth. Torn. 4. in Genesin.
he) while I adhere, I am certain not to be deceived, etc. But if they be
indeed Dreams from God, they suit unto his Word, and will not deceive us. And
therefore for such Dreams, we ought to pray, and to prepare good Matter for
them, to implore the Spirit poured out, to ponder Scripture; to hide Gods Word
in our hearts; to store up the Precepts and precious Promises thereof in our
remembering minds; and with the word to make meet Animadversions upon Gods
mavelous works; to hearken to God, and to walk with God while we are awake,
that he may the more meet us in out sleep. And why might not the minds of men
move and be moved in holy and heavenly, as well as in idle and foolish Dreams,
were diligence used, and duties discharged? I doubt not but diverse of Gods dear
Atque saepe per somnium me put^ esse in inferno and saepe in Caelo Luth.
Saints in these secret workings of their sanctified souls, have many sweet
caelestial sights, when the eyes of their bodies be close shut upon their
sleeping beds, and see not.

2. To improve and pursue such Dreams is a duty. As soon as we are up, to
begin good deeds in the day, that may occomplish the good God gave in the
night. It Is said of Jonah his Guord, that God made to spring in the night, That
when the morning arose, a worm smote the Guord, and it withered. When we have a
sweet Dream, and come out of a good sleep in the night, there is (says an
Author Este Daemonibus unus qui praecursor dicitur qui nos e bono somno
surgentes protinus excipit and nostrum cogitatum inquinare nititur -- Da Domine
primitias dici tuae -- Ab ipso matutino tempore cursum meum totius dici scio --
Cave ne pullulant vanae and inutiles cogitationes -- Si munda cord astiterimus
ante Deum -- Orantes occulum cordis nostri in ipsum dirig^re and adhuc videre
invisibilem mente non corpore -- Magnus ille Joannes Abbas apud Ruffinum in
vi^is Patr. cap. 1. haec suis dabat documenta.
) one among the evil Spirits that out-runnes the rest, and in the morning, as
soon as we awake, endeavors to dash good thoughts, to divert and to defile, to
prevent all pious practices and prosecutions, But much care is required in this
case: We ought not only to preserve, but to improve good Dreams, by a
practical putting forward of our selves in holy Duties, all the days of our
lives.

Now a right knowledge of these Dreams, may much incite to such pious
practices, and profit Gods people, both asleep and awake. Excuse me then,
Gentle Reader, for the attaining these Ends I have intended this Treatise, and
trust it may thereto be a good Means, through Gods Mercy. Amen, Amen.

December. 28. 1657. Ph. Goodwin.

A SYNOPSIS OR Compendium Of the Main Integrall Parts: OR A Table
Demonstratory* Proposing the Principal TEXTS and TRUTHS contained in this
TREATISE.
PART I. Of Men's Dreams more General.
TEXT I.
Psalm. 126. 1. We were like to men that Dream.
Contents.
1. Men's Dreams, how meetly they may be called Mysteries p. 2 2. Men the most
receptible Subjects of Dreams p. 4 3. Man's Reason variously acting in Dreams,
how in some less evident, and in some more excellent p. 5 4. Why so many
Dreams pass from men that are not sensibly discerned p. 6 5. How only in this
Life men are liable to Dreams in sleep p. 7 6. How after Death, though men may
be said to sleep, yet they Dream not p. 8 7. How men's Dreams are generally
discribed, and severally divided p. 10 8. What faculties of man's soul are in
Dreams principally employed p. 11 9. How in men's Dreams Things have no real
being, but are only imaginary p. 7. 10. How men's Dreams lie in their thoughts,
and how their thoughts are concerned in Dreams p. 11 11. Dreams natural and
supernatural how distinguished p. 13 12. How God and the Devil have their
certain hand in several Dreams p. 14 13. How the excellency of man's soul is
raised by Dreams, in what, and above whom p. 15 14. Persons concerned to seek
the knowledge of Dreams p. 18 15. Reasons declared why the knowledge of Dreams
is to be sought p. 21
PART II. Of False and Deluding Dreams.
TEXT. II.
Zach. 10. 2. And they told False Dreams.
Contents.
1. The Means producing false Dreams, how diverse p. 28 2. The diverse times in
which false Dreams have been produced p. 29 3. How those that deny Dreams
false are confuted p. 34 4. How false Dreams from true are discovered by their
causes p. 40 5. How also made manifest by their Effects p. 41 6. How false
Dreams from the Devil, and those from men's corruptions are Distinguished p. 42
7. How subtly Satan may suggest Scripture in his soul-deceiving Dreams p. 43
8. Man's perils of believing delusive Dreams, how many ways p. 44 9. Man's
proneness to be by Dreams deluded, how great p. 48 10. The Properties of the
Devil, fitting him to further false Dreams p. 49 11. The Evils of false
Dreams, how diverse and most dreadful p. 55 12. Whether the Devil can in
Dreams foretell things to come p. 62 13. Whether in our times there be any
danger of deluding Christians by false Dreams p. 70 14. The false Dreams of
two sorts that Christians must seek to prevent p. 79 15. The Means of two
sorts by which all false Dreams may be prevented. p. 74
PART III. Of Filthy and defiling Dreams.
TEXT III.
Jude 8. These filthy Dreamers defile the flesh.
Contents.
1. What those Dreamers are who do defile the flesh, expounded p. 92 2. What
that flesh is which these Dreamers do defile, explained p. 98 3. What that
defiling the flesh is here intended p. 99 4. Though Dreams defiling do delude,
yet how deluding and defiling Dreams do differ p. 87 5. Defiling Dreams in a
double sense considered p. 91 6. What a certain hand Satan several ways has
in Dreams that do defile p. 96 7. What of man by Dreams filthy is defiled p.
99 8. What men's defiling themselves by filthy Dreams does imply p. 104 9. How
much of men's misery defiling Dreams does comprize p. 107 10. How much Satan's
knowledge and diligence in men's silthy Dreams are discovered p. 110 11. What we
are to believe, De Incubis and Succubis (as relating to filthy Dreams)
declared p. 114 12. What we are to learn concerning God, men's defiling Dreams
considered p. 116 13. What duties men for the most part neglect for the
hinderance of filthy Dreams p. 118 14. How much many men sinfully do, whereby
Dreams filthy are furthered p. 119 15. How men, good and bad, are both subject
to defiling Dreams p. 121 16. How wicked men are the most proper subjects of
Dreams that do defile p. 122 17. Why Satan with such Dreams assaults the
servants of God p. 125 18. What harms filthy Dreams in sleeping men do
against things that are good p. 127 19. What harms th^se Dreams defiling do,
as toward things that are evil p. 129 20. What means ought to be used for
prevention of defiling Dreams p. 133 21. What duties are to be performed, when
such defiling Dreams have been prevented p. 144
PART IV. Of Idle and Vain Dreams.
TEXT IV.
Eccl. 5. 7. In the multitude of Dreams are diverse Vanities: but fear thou
God.
Contents.
1. How diverse Dreams are said to be Vain p. 154 2. How Vain Dreams are said
to be diverse p. 156 3. What a multitude of men have vain Dreams p. 158 4. What
a multitude of va Dreams are in some men p. 160 5. How it appears that vain
Dreams are evil, and certainly sinful p. 165 6. How vain Dreams are such
sins to which each man is subject p. 691 7. That against these sinful evils
of vain Dreams men may be defended p. 117 8. That means each man must use for
his defense against the evil of vain Dreams p. 174 9. How against the diverse
vanites in Dreams, there be diverse means meet to be used p. 176 10. How the
true fear of God is the best means to Antidote men's minds against vain Dreams
p. 179 11. What the fear of God is, and what it does, whereby from vain Dreams
Christians are secured p. 180 12. Arguments disswasive from the vanities of
Dreams prevailing without this fear of God p. 184 13. Arguments persuasive to
the fear of God, preventing Dreams of vanity p. 188 14. Adjuments or helps to
incite and preserve such a fear of God as is good against vain Dreams p. 192
15. Whether good men may not have vain Dreams, though they do fear God p. 195
PART V. Of Troublesome and Affrighting Dreams.
TEXT V.
Job 7. 14. Then thou Skarest me with Dreams.
Contents.
1. What were the Dreams wherewith God skared Job p. 200 2. What were the
Times when with Dreams Job was skared p. 203 3. What this skaring Job by
Dreams did contain p. 205 4. How evils, both of sin and punishment are the
ordinary matters of troublesome Dreams p. 201 5. How both God and the Devil
are usually movers in Dreams troublesome p. 202 6. How troubling Dreams from
God, and those from the Devil are differenced and discerned p. 204 7. How
Dreams that affright and trouble, may be very many in very good men p. 207 8.
Whether men very wicked, may not be very free from affrighting Dreams p. 216 9.
The sad effects of Dreams affrighting to men both awake and asleep p. 223 10.
The several Reasons why God affrights good men in time of their sleep p. 218
11. The diverse Causes why God in time of sleep, may affright men that are
wicked p. 219 12. That Divine discoveries of Gods glorious Majesty may make to
men in sleep, dismaying and affrighting Dreams p. 208 13. That Dreams
properly dismaying, and frequently affrighting, are the effects of Gods
appearing displeasure p. 221 14. Causes for which Skaring Dreams are let into
men, to be avoided and shunned p. 225 15. Courses by which Skaring Dreams may
be kept out from men, to be observed and used p. 230 16. Men's Duties, when with
Dreams dreadful, they are surprised and oppressed p. 233 17. Men's Duties,
when from dreadful Dreams they are secured and preserved p. 236 18. God
Mercies, how great to men in prevention of Dreams dismaying, manifested p. 242
PART VI. Of admonishing and Instructing Dreams, viz. from God.
TEXT VI.
Mat. 2. 12. And they being warned of God in a Dream, that they should not
return to Herod, departed into their own Country another way.
Contents.
1. Who the persons were to whom God thus appeared in a Dream described p. 248
2. What considerable Matter in this Dream from God to those Men was contained
p. 252 3. In what a remarkable manner these Men received this Dream set from
God, declared p. 255 4. What admirable Effects this Dream fom God diverse ways
produced p. 257 5. The diverse Ages of the world, through which Divine Dreams
have been into Men immitted p. 262 6. How far Divine Dreams in this latter
Age of the world, may yet be expected p. 268 7. How God, in discovery of his
mind by Dreams, has used diverse ways and Means p. 271 8. How Sanctified Men
are the most usual Subjects into which God sends good Dreams p. 275 9. How
into the minds of sinful Men, such Dreams are sometimes sent of God p. 277
10. Reasons why into wicked men's minds good Dreams have been from God formerly
transmitted p. 279 11. Reasons why into the minds of sanctified men, good
Dreams from God have been frequently conveyed p. 281 12. The Causes why good
Dreams from God should be by all earnestly desired p. 285 13. The Means how
from God good Dreams may to men be comfortably procured p. 294 14. The Reasons
why Dreams from God in good men are now found so few, plainly declared p. 311
15. How the least workings from God, in a way of good Dreams, ought not to be
despised p. 313 16. What of some Dreams we are not to regard, and yet wherein
good Dreams are to be observed p. 321 17. How far before good Dreams the
Light and Guidance of the Gospel is to be prefered p. 324 18. How false Visions
and Revelations from good Dreams are to be discovered p. 326 19. What heavenly
Joys in holy Dreams may certainly be obtained p. 328 20. How true Joys in
Divine Dreams, from false joys in delusive Dreams may be discerned p. 330 21.
Diverse Objections against this Discourse of Divine Dreams fully answered p.
306
JErem. 23. 32. Behold, I am against the Prophets that prophecy false Dreams,
says the Lord, and do tell them, causing my people to err by their lies, etc.

Judge. 7. 15. And it was so when Gideon heard the telling of the Dream, and the
interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and said to the host of Israel,
Arise, for the Lord is with us, etc.

Genesis 41. 15, 16. And Pharaoh said to Joseph, I have dreamed a Dream, and there
is none that can interpret it; I have heard say, that thou caust understand a
Dream to interpret it: And Joseph answered Pharaoh, it is not in me; God shall
give Pharaoh an answer of peace, etc.

Dan. 7. 1. In the first year of Beltashazar King of Babylon, Daniel had a
Dream, and Visions of his head upon his bed: Then he wrote down the Dream, and
told the sum of the matter.

Psalm. 4. 4. Stand in awe and sin not, commune with your own hearts upon your
beds, and be still.

Psalm. 63 7. I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate upon thee in the night
watches, etc.

GOOD READER,
FOr the rectifying of the Errata's in the main Body of the Book, I refer
thee to the end thereof, entreating thy courtesy.

In other additional parts, some other accidental faults thou may find,
which when thou meetest, correct with a patient Pen.

VIZ.

In the Postscript, For the Gospel of Gods great Name, Read The Glory of his
great Name. In the Epistle, for sins certain Excellency, Read its certain
Existency. Besides some other smaller mistakes, all which thou art desired with
Christian patience to pardon.

By P. G.
Jan. 20. 1657.
THE MYSTERY OF DREAMS Historically Discoursed,
1. Of Men's DREAMS more General.
PSALM. 126. 1. We were like to men that Dream. Iamblicus quis fuit, and quando
floruit -- Vide Alstedium in Thesauro Chronologiae de Philosophis. p. 466.

I Amblicus, a Learned Philosopher, writing a Book De Mysteriis, has
excellently Multa de somniis Iamblicus dixit, quae mihi videntur verba, non
Platonici Philosophi, sed Divinissimi Christiani, etc. Zanchins.
Discoursed of Dreams, as one kind of those occult things, wherein lies much
of a Mystery.

[ Mysterium] in Latin, as by Illyricus, Polanus, and other good Authors is
observed, may be fitly derived from a A Graeco verbo (...) deducitur unde
habent illa nomina (...) pro re secreta and acarna. Illyr. cl. Scrip. Res
occultae vel arcanae vocantur Mysteria Mysterium Graecis significat rei arcanae
signum Paraeus Com. in 1 Cor. cap. 2. and ve. 7. Polan. Sym. Theol. l. 5. c. 10.
Greek word, which well signifies a closed Secret. Mysteries or Secrets are
certainly considerable in Dreams. Daniel discoursing to King Nebuchadnezzer
about the Dream he had from God upon his Bed, says to him: He that reveals
secrets, etc. or Mysteries, as the Septuagint there renders it. These
Mystical and covered secrets. Somnium est figuris tectum and sine Scripturali
interpretatione intelligi non potest. August. Tom. 3. de spiritu and anima cap.
5. and cap. 25. Somnium etsi sit visum Divinitus dormienti ostensum, tamen ita
tectum and in volucris occultum ut sine interpretatione per spiritum Dei in
verbo non est intelligendum. Zanc. Miscel. Tom. 4. De somniis.
Austin, Zanchy, and some others considering, have concluded, they cannot be
well understood but by Gods Spirit speaking in the Word.

I shall therefore make use of Gods Word as a meet Means to a manifest
discovery of Dreames-Mystery. And for a due Introduction, this expression of
Gods people in the Prophet is prompt and proper.

We were like to men that Dream.

As touching the people of God in the present place, we may propose

Their Condition, and Their Comparison.
1. Their Condition or their comfortable case, they were brought out of
captivity by the Lords own hand. When the Lord turned the captivity of Zion.

2. Their Comparison, They compare Tanta est hujus miraculi and mysterii
magnitudo, ut nos initio redderet plane stupentes. Haec res adeo magna, arcana,
subitanea inusitata erat, ut somnian tes videremur. Mollerus in lo
or resemble themselves to Dreaming Men: We were like to men that Dream. That
is, in our Delivery there was such a Miracle and Mystery of Mercy (as Mollerus
interprets) we knew not what to make of it, but it made us admire; it came upon
us so secret and so sudden, that we were at a loss, and knew not which way to
look.

We were like to men that Dream.

Here is in this Likeness or Similitude observable,

The Persons, and The Action.
1. The Persons they liken themselves Hier. Zanch. Tracta. De Divinatione and
variis ejus speciebus.
to, are Men: We were like Men.

2. The Action, the Men they were like are considered in, is their Dreaming; We
were like to Men that Dream. Men we see, are most certainly such Persons as
Dreaming does concern; and Dreamings we see, are such Actions as most
singularly concern Men, We were like Men that Dream.

The full Discourse from the Text intended will consist of two considerable
parts,

Explicatory, and Zabarella. lib. de facultat. Animae. cap. 10, and 12.
Applicatory.
In the Explicatory part, what will be unfolded may refer

To Men as the Subjects of Dreams, and To Dreams as the Actings of Men.
Men who are the Sensible Subjects in which manifold Dreams are most usually
found, we may fitly unfold,

In their Rational part, and In their Vital estate.
1. In their part Rational and Intellectual. Ita nostri acceptum ab Apostolis
servare majores quod hydriae sunt figurata de Limo and faces corpora nostra in
medio hydriarum animae nostrae -- fervore spiritualis gratiae igniti -- Ambros.
de Spir. Sanct. lib. 1. and ca. 16.
To compound the person of every Man, like Gideons Soldier, he has his Body
as his Earthen Pitcher, and his Soul as his Lamp therein. His Body may be
sleeping, when yet his Soul as his Lamp is burning. Yea as there is the Soul in
a man, so there is Reason in the Soul, of which we may say, as it is said of the
virtuous Woman; Her candle goes not out by night. In the dark night into diverse
Dreams man is led by the light of this candle, it is the Soul of man endowed
with Reason, and it is Reason in man as the endowment of the Soul; in and by
which such Dreams are drawn out. Reason is rendrable in a double respect,

For the Rise and Principle of it, For the Use and Practice of it.
By Man's having the Principle of Reason, Ratio sumitur duobus modi^, 1. Pro vi
animae intellectuali -- 2. Pro virtute animae actuali -- Ille intelligens and
rationalis est, qui secundum rationem cogitat. Basil. sup. Prove. 1. Chrysostom. sup.
Mat. cap. 13. Hom. 31.
he becomes capable of, and is Disposeable to Dreaming.

But it is Man's having the Use of Reason, by which he actually Dreams. And
indeed it is Reason in the Use thereof, as the Ancients conclude, that causes a
Man to be accounted Rational, Intelligent, etc. Intelligent and Rational he
may surely be said, who even in his sleep has a ready Use of Reason.

The Sleeping Man has indeed some Dreams wherein Reason acts irregularly,
intricately, inconsistently, fluctuating and roving up and down, that things
hang (as we say) like ropes of sand, yet certain in such blurred Books some
Reason may be read, and some footsteps thereof found. But in diverse Dreams
it is more discernable, Ut cum in somniis quis metra comp^nit, locum aliquem
Scripturae considerat and intelligit, aliquod argumentum dissolvit, etc. quae
quidem sine operatione rationis vel intellectus fieri non possunt. Zanch.
Tract. de Divinat.
Reason acts more regularly, and manages matters more methodically, so that
sometimes Men may find as effectual use of Reason in their sleep as when wide
awake.

Whence this may remain a Maxim Homo qua animalis somniando dormit and qua
rationalis, dormiendo somniat. Somnium non semper sed saepius fit vi partis
intellectivae and cum operatione rationis -- Hier. Zanch. de Divinatione per
insomnia. Tract. Hominibus nonnullis nulla somnia in somnis objiciuntur,
Aristot. lib. de somno, and 4. de hist. anim. c. 10.
among us,

That Man as an Animal creature in Dreaming sleeps: And man as a Rational
creature in sleeping Dreams.
Dreams are applicable to Man as Man and so to every Man. Though the the
Philosopher affirms, that some men meet with no such motions of their minds in
sleep, but sleep without any Dreams of any way or kind. But common
experience may much confute. True, some men may not animadvert, discern or
retain in their memories such movings of their minds, yet that does not
evidence that they are not. Many a Dream may possibly pass from a person that
he perceives not, through a twofold cause:

Its Swiftness, and His Slowness.
1. The Dream is swift and goes away with a quick foot, or as upon the wing
rather. The wicked shall fly away as a Dream, Job 20. 8. The Ancients Anti qui
somnium. Deum fingebant volatilem and alitem, etc. Bold.
hence phancied, that a Dream had wings like a Bird of the air. It may be so
considered, because of it is celerity and sudden passage through which it is not
perceived.

2. The Man is slow, dull and heavy about reflect acts. Often even in a man's
waking-time, the mind works, yet it is work is not minded. A man does not think
what he thinks: no marvel then if in sleeping-time the mind looks little back
upon its own business, but much overlooks its own work, so that much is done
that is not seen, much in Dreams transacted that is not observed. However man
remains the subject of Dreams.

2. Man in the condition of this life Postquam de somno dictum est agitur de
somniis, quia fiunt in somno: and non nisi dormientibus adveniunt. Magir.
Physio. li. 6. ca. 14* etc. Satis est nos novisse quod sit somnus in quo fit
insomnium, and sine quo insomnium esse non potest. Zanch. de Divi.
is likewise considerable as of Dreams the most suitable subject, The season we
know of Dreams is during the time of sleep: now the time of sleep is in the
time of this life; after this term of life there is no true sleep

Either to Soul Or Body.
1. The Soul sleeps not, though so Alsted. Chronol. Haeres. 28. page 380.
some Heretics have asserted; viz. That separated Souls are cast into a dead
sleep, not to be awakened till the time the general Resurrection: but such
heterodoxe Doctrine has long since been beaten down by standing Truth, plain
Scriptures determining two dwelling Duae habitationes sunt, una in igne
aeterno, altera in regno aeterno. Aug. de verbis Apostoli, Sermon. 18. Post
exitum a corpore statim justorum animae in Paradisum ab Angelis ducuntur.
Justin. Martyr. quaest. 75.
places;

The Paradise of Heaven, and The Prison of Hell.
Into one of which all Souls (says Austin) as soon as severed from their
Bodies, are carried by Angels or Devils to dwell in everlasting weal or woe,
and indeed the very Scriptures themselves say so much: See Dan. 12. 2. Matthew.
25. 46. Joh. 5. 29. Luke 23. 43. Luke 16. 21, 22. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 3. 19.
Rev. 20. 13, etc.

2. The Body sleeps not in any Physical or Philosophical sense. The Body
bereaved of the Soul, and lying dead in the Grave, is said to be as asleep in
the Vid. Lorin. in Acts 7. 55.
bed, Hence burying places have been called sleeping places: but this is only
Sleep in a Tropicall and Metaphorical sense. There be no Dreams in this
sleep, neither do these men thus asleep Anima absolvitur, corpus resolvitur,
quae absolvitur gaudet, quod resolvitur nihil sentit. Ambr. de bono mortis.
Jacet dormientis corpus ut m^rtui, etc. Cice. de divin. lib. 1. etc. Dormire
per metaphoram Mori significat, quia somnus est mortis imago. Illyr. cla.
Script. Ex hoc loco non colligitur animas corpore solutas carere omni sensu:
sed non in alio seculo sentire, sicut in ha^ vita. Vide Moller. in loc.
ever dream. Dreaming is during the time that the reasonable Soul resides and
abides in the living Body. The Body of man in sleep, as a Heathen observes, it
lies as if it were fallen down by death, but the Soul is so active therein, as
evidences the life thereof. And Dreaming it is one of those life-evidencing
acts. Though sleep be a plain Image of death, yet Dreams in sleep are a clear
Index of life. Men while alive are the Centers of Dreams, and Dreams are the
signs of men alive. There is no remembrance of thee in death, says David to
God, Psalm. 6. 5. That is, A man indeed dead, has no commemorative thoughts of
God or any other object, to wit in that way or after that manner like to men
alive in the world, as Mollerus well interprets.

It Is living men who do commemorate, meditate, excogitate matters in their
minds both awake and asleep. Even sleeping their minds are in motion which we
call Dreams.

This casts me upon the next thing to be noted, viz.

Secondly, The Actings or Dreams actually considered in themselves what they
are found to be, are discernable by.

Their general Descriptions, and Their general Divisions. Conciliat.
Philosoph. Goclenii De Natura Some. nii.

1. Dreams in a more general way and according to their common Nature
considered, may be thus described.

Dreams are the agitations, the egressions or Sallyings out of the Soul in
thoughts of the mind, while the Body lies bound by sleep in the bed. A Dream
indefinitely and at large is the transacting of the reasonable Soul in the
sleeping Body, through the coassisting help of those admirable Faculties.

Somnium est quaedam imago in cerebro obversans quam phantasia a memoria
eductam agitat Phil. l. de anima Movet phantasia in somniis inspiciendo
praesentia: movet memoria respiciendo, praeterita.
The Fantasy, and The Memory.
Both which Faculties are found most active in the season of sleep; For in
sleep the outward Senses as Hearing, Seeing, etc. being bound from their
organicall and extrinsecall exercises and ordinary conveyances. The inward
Senses and Powers of the Soul as the Fantasy and Memory, are at the more
liberty and freedom from such external attendances, and so being at better
leisure, they within themselves fall to reflectings, Somnium est phantasma quod
a phantasia per sanguinem ad cor delatum a sensu communi in somno recipitur*
Zanch. Tra. de Divinat.
to new forming and erecting new frames of things that are vented in Dreams.
The Fantasy and the Memory are the Souls working* Shops wherein strange
things be wrought, when the Soul (as I may say) goes not abroad, but stays at
home and works within it self, strange things it does which be drawn out in
dreams. So we see how Dreams be in general described.

Secondly, In general, Dreams may be variously divided.

As into their Parts. And into their Sorts. Somniorum quot sunt genera. Zanch.
ibid.

1. The Parts that commonly constitute a Dream whereof it is compounded and of
which it is compacted or made up, are mainly these two things.

An Apparition to the Thoughts. And a Dilation of the Thoughts.
1. In a Dream there is somewhat appears Dan. 4. 10. Nemo dormiens solemn
intuetur, etc. quae putat se videre, figmenta sunt. Augustine. de civ. Dei. l.
10. cap. 18.
to the thoughts. A dreaming Man (says Austin) he thinks he sees the Sun,
though the Sun he sees not. As there may appear some things to our eyes, as
Armies in the air, fighting-men, and flying-Horses which are no realities, only
apparitions. So to a man in a Dream, such things and persons appear but they
are no realities, only fictions in his fancy. Philo observes, that some awake
Qui vigilant quantum ad incertam perceptionem attinet, nihil a dormientibus
differunt seipsos fallendo dum se putant rerum naturas clare perspi^^r^, etc.
Philo. de Joseph.
are like to men asleep, while they think they perceive such things, do but
deceive themselves, taking the signs of things, for the natures of things, mere
Shadows for Substance. In a Dream are thoughts of things, not the things
thought.

Secondly, In a Dream the thoughts dilate, expand, or spread themselves upon
things that so appear. Therein is not only an Intension, but an Extension of
the mind, the Imaginations are not only set on, but drawn out, doubling them
over and over. Daniel tells Nebuchadnezzar as touching his Dream, As for thee
O King thoughts came into thy mind upon thy Bed, what should come to pass
hereafter. [Thoughts] in the plural. Theodoret expounding the place Cogitab^s
an esses victurus s^mper, cogitab^s an vero humanae naturae lege moriturus
statim. Th^od. in Dan.
adds, Thou did think whether thou should always live, thou did think
whether thou should soon die, thy thoughts thereof did beat about this way and
that. Thus in a Dream, thoughts as they have their Representation so their
Expatiation: as a manifestation to, so a multiplication of the Thoughts; Quale
fuerit somnium non exprinnt, nisi effectu quod in eo multa passa, multis
territa fuit. Paraeu^ in locum.
Thoughts many in one Dream I have suffered (says Pilats Wife) [ many things
in a Dream. [Many things] that is, many thoughts have pressed in and oppressed
my mind. Her Dream was about one and the same Person, but therein she had many
thoughts about that Man and Matter. We see then Dreams are the thought-works of
the waking mind, in the sleeping-man.

2. See the sorts of Dreams that be especially these two.

Some Natural, and Naturalia som^^a quando ^iant and quomodo dividantur. Vide
Zanch. de Divi. Tractat. Aquinas 22ae Quaest. 95. Art. 6
Some Supernatural.
1. Natural Dreams are such thoughts in sleep as the mind emits or sends out
by its own intrinsecall power, the proper Product of man's own head and heart.
To a man's personal case and condition* they are so suitable, that we may be
certain they proceed from the same principle.

2. Supernatural Dreams are such Aristot. de Div. ex insom. cap. 1.
thoughts in sleep as are immitted or sent into the mind through some
extrinsecall principle, And though they come primarily Causae somniorum aliae
sunt extrinsecae, aliae intrinsecae. Zanch. Tract. de Div.
from a principle without, yet the mind concurres with what is occasionally
cast in and becomes conformably active thereupon. Now these Dreams ab extra,
they are of a double Kind, as coming from a double and deeply differing Cause.

Diabolical, and (...). Polan. Syntag. Theol. lib. 5. cap. 30.
Theological.
Bad Dreams wherein the Devil works, and

Good Dreams wherein God speaks.

Ita Plato. li. 1. de Legibus, Test. Clemens Alexandrinus stromatum, lib. 5.
and Danaeus.
The Manichees and Marcionits took up an opinion (as reputed out of Plato) that
there were two co-eternall Principles the one Good and the other Evil, saying
that all good workings toward men were from the good Principle. And all evil
workings men ward were from the evil Principle. As they managed the Aug. lib.
de Haeres. cap. 46.
Matter they were in a gross error as Austin and others evidence.

However this is a Truth, there are two supreme Principles.

One Good, namely God, and

Another Evil, to wit the Devil.

From God are all good works toward men and from the Devil are all Mala non
proveniunt a Deo, quia bonus est nec bona a diab^lo quia malus est. Vid. Aug.
li. 4. contra Julia.
evil workings men-ward both awake and asleep. And the Truth of both which may
appear in point of Dreams that be both good and evil Works. Good Dreams are
Gods good workings in men's sleepings. And bad Dreams be the evil workings of
the Devil in sleeping men.

And thus is finished the words of the Text in their Explicatory part, wherein
men have been unfolded as referring to Dreams, and Dreams have been unfolded
as referring to men. We were like to men that Dream. I pass to the Applicatory
part wherein will be endeavors to promote.

Man in his Dignity, and The Duty of Man.
1. This may set up man in his Dignity, Dum corpus vigilat, videt audit -- Deus
ideo a corpore humano vigilante similitudinem in se trahat -- Corporis
excellentiam demonstrat. Greg. Moral* lib. 32. Sect. 13.
and exalt his Soul in its surpassing Excellency.

Above the Body in himself, and Above the Spirit of Beasts.
1. Above man's body. The Body of man is very beautiful as in its Being, so it
may be admirable in its Workings; to wit, while man is awak: but when asleep
then men's Bodies are like David's Dum animal dormit, exteriores sensus ita sunt
ligati ut nihil sentiunt, oculus non videat, aures non audiant. Hier. Zanc.
Tact de Divin. Laborare dicitur homo non tam corporis quam animae respectu quia
anima est laborans, quando corpus quiescit, and laborando, anima magis laborat
quam corpus. Cornel. a Lap. Com. Prove.
Idols, Psalm. 115. 5, 6, 7. They have mouths but they speak not, eyes have
they but they see not, they have ears but they hear not, Noses have they but
they smell not, hands have they but they handle not; feet have they but they
walk not. A sleeping Man, suppose his body rises out of his bed, yet it is like
Lazarus rising out of his grave, John 11. 44. And he came forth bound hand and
foot with grave-cloaths, and his face bound about with a Napkin. All parts of
the body are bound by sleep from their ordinary orderly acts. But still the
soul is at liberty, no fetters of sleep be found upon any of its faculties, but
it is free apt and able to act and transact several things in considerable
Dreams.

When the body is most still and lying at rest in the bed, the soul is most
stirring and laborious in business, and this its ever waking activity, is its
admirable excellency, honor and dignity.

2. Above the spirit of Bruits. Bruits if in sleep they do dream, yet it is in
a way low and like themselves.

Men in Dreams transcend, being Inter homines miracula sunt, majus autem
miraculum est ipse homo. Aug. de Civ. Dei. li. 10. ca. 12. Qua homines sumus,
cum dormimus, somniamus mirabilia. Zanch. de poten. animae. li. 2. ca. 3.
These. 1. Homines plus quam caeteras animantes somniare dicendum: 1. Quiailli
magna ex part ^enuiores halitus in cerebrum mittunt. 2. Et ad operandum
promp^^^res and acutiores internos sensus habent. Aristot. de Hist. Animal. l.
4. c: 10.
above Bruits, in these acts most admirable: Among men there is no such
mavelous Miracle as Man himself, says Austin. The very Body of Man is a
Miracle mavelous, but much more his Soul. I am fearfully and wonderfully
made, mavelous are thy work^; and that my soul knows right well, says David,
Psalm. 139. 14. He that is such a work of wonder, may well be a wonderworker.
Take him not only when awake, but even in his sleep, his nightworks are
wonderful: His very Dreams are filled with marvels: even they are such as
render Man rare, and may with admiration raise him into the highest rank of
visible creatures. It Is true, this redounds to his blemish, this reflects upon
man with the greater shame when herein he sins, as will hereafter be seen:
However this is his honor; Man in Dreams is able to manage that good no other
creatures can. The Philosopher who grants, that as Men, so Bruits may dream,
yet determins; that Men in Dreamings as they are more frequent, so more
excellent, to such acts more prompt and therein more acute.

The Soul of Man excels as concering Dreams in a double Act,

Direct, and Reflect.
1. Direct: The Soul of man in Dreams can move forward and mount upward beyond
the abilities of any beast: Who knows the spirit of a man Si enim connexa
corpori extra corpus vitam agit: corpore in lectulo cubante ac velut in morte
quiescente ipsa naturam corporis transilit. Athanas. cont. Gentes.
that goes upward, and the spirit of a beast that goes downward to the earth,
Eccles. 3. 21. True it is of the Soul of Man, not only in the time of death and
separation from the Body, but in the time of sleep and its operation in the
Body, it runs out, rises up and reaches to imagine matters not within the
compass of other creatures.

2. Reflect: The Soul of Man in Dreams can turn backward and look over its own
motions and imaginations, so as to think what it does think. One illustrates
this: Si cut in sphaerae ludo unus jacit; alter vero refert pilam tamdiuque
eleganter ludus producitur qua^diu inter utriusque manus jacta and reciprocata
pila non excidit, etc. Chrysostom. Orat. 8.
At Tennis there must be two hands, one to smite the Ball forward, and another
to beat it backward, or the play cease: but the Soul of man can do both these
with its own Hands, it can send out thoughts from it self, and cast thoughts
back again upon it self, and that in the time of man's sleep: this other
sleeping creatures cannot. A Communicavit Deus creaturis eas capacitates quas
conditio creaturae ferebat, etc. Damas.
School Doctor says well, That God has communicated to creatures such
capacities as their kind will carry, etc. The condition and case of other
creatures is not able to bear such abilities, activities when they are best
awake, as man may when he is asleep: so that we may well conclude, That Man is
the most excellent Elegans animal est homo, donec fuerit homo, etc. Clemens
Alex. Strom. 8.
creature while he is a Man, and as a Man manages the motions of his own mind.

Yea that which yet further raises man's Soul in its Rational part is, that even
in Dreams it can imagine those matters that upon the sensitive part never made
impressions. Does not the Philosopher seem to contradict himself Aristot. lib.
2. Ethi^orum.
that says, Homo est maxim intellectus: and yet, Nihil est in intellectu quod
non prius fuit in sensu: How can the intellect or understanding transcend, if
it can proceed no further than as set forward by sense? But sure even in sleep
the intellectual part can conceive of things that never were in the Senses,
which sets out its singular excellency and surpassing dignity.

2. This may set man upon his duty, diligently to see and consider himself as
concerning Dreams:

For their good carriage in him, And his good knowledge of them.
1. The right carriage of Dreams, that by Dreames-miscarriage he may not
disparage and dishonor himself. Nemo recte animum suum honorat nisi qui
fu^atis vitiis justitiam colit. Plato in Stob. Ser. 41.
'Twas a high saying of a Heathen, That no man does keep up the honor and
dignity of his Soul, as is due, but he that draws in Righteousness and drives
away Vice. Indeed he that in the nightime leaves his Soul to the neglects of
God, and prostitutes the same to the service of the Devil in vain and vicious
Dreams, does debase it deeply; and he that ascends in Soul by Heavenly
Dreams, does advance it highly.

2. The true knowledge of Dreams to endeavor is man's duty: (Indeed this might
be fit to go before, for to a right carriage a good knowledge is requisite.)

And touching this two things observe;

1. Who are to seek the knowledge hereof: and

2. Why the knowledge hereof is to be sought.

1. See the Persons who are to seek the knowledge of Dreams:

They are, All generally, And, Some specially.
1. It concerns all to seek such knowledge, Nescientia est simplex carentia
scientiae. -- Ignorantia est n^scientia eorum que quis scire debet. Aquin. 22^.
Qu^st. 189 A^t. ^, etc. Ut n^sc^m te, ut noscam me Domine. Aug. Con^ess. li 3.
Sunt non nulli qui toto vit^ spatio non somniarunt, quibus tamen cum eis
processu aetatis somnium accidisset, habitus corporis vel in mortem vel in
aegritudinem fuit mutatus. Arist. de Hist. Anim. l. 4. c. 10.
for ignorance herein may soon be a sin. The Schools observe, That though
simple nescience is no sin, to wit, The bare want of the knowledge of what we
be not bound to know: but yet ignorance of what we ought to know is ever a
sin. Now every man ought to know both God and himself, not only in their
Beings, but in their Workings. God and man may have great works in Dreams, and
therefore these ought by all to be known: All may be operant in them, and
therefore none should he ignorant of them. What man is there that may not be
drawn to work in this way of Dreams? The Philosopher affirms, that some men
through a long space of their lives, lie down and dream not; and then in the
process of their age, some dream happens that presages death, sickness, or
some sad event which yet few need to dread, because with the most men Dreams
are a common case, and therefore their knowledge is of general use.

2. It concerns some especially, to seek of Dreams a due knowledge: viz. such
whose Dreams be

More Usitate, More Passionate, and More Intricate.
1. Those men with whom Dreams are more Usitate and accustomed: some men do
almost as ordinarily dream as sleep; and should not such know Dreams? they
who are most frequent in them, should be most intelligent of them.

2. Such men whose Dreams are Passionate: they fall upon them with an
oppressive power; as Pilates wife, who in her Dream sorely suffered, Matthew.
27. 19. Multa passa sum propter ^um -- ut scilicet a compassione quae erat ad
uxorem, -- desidior fieret vir circa occasionem Christi. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom.
87. Tom. 2. and Tom. 9. Vide.
Chrysostom concludes, Though Pilate was stupid about the state of Christ, yet
his wife had such a Dream, as made impressions and moved compassions in
Christ's innocent case. Thus with some sometimes it comes to pass, by Dreams
they are much wounded, warmed, awakened; affected, afflicted, inflamed,
enforced: su^e such are to seek into a serious knowledge of Dreams.

3. Those men whose Dreams are more Intricate and obscurate; Some Man while
his Body is asleep, a dark veil seems to cover the face of his Soul, so that it
cannot see it self, nor what it transacts: Things seem to be ponderous, yet are
ambiguous: they seem to in^inuate light, yet be accompanied with darkness; in
them are such depths as Piorum est orare and laborare quando de rebus magnis in
somno ^^nentur ut Deus quid velit clarius o^tendit. Paraeus Com. in Genes. ca.
41. v. 32*
occasion doubts and many demurres in the mind: such men have more cause to
inquire into the clear knowledge of Dreams.

2. See some Reasons that may incite all sorts of men to seek this knowledge,
and principally to press some men to prosecute this knowledge.

Ponder therefore,

1. The Difficulty of it. 2. The Possibility to it. 3. The Equity for it. 4.
The Excellency in it. And 5. The Commodity by it.
1. Difficulty: Hard it is to attain the knowledge of Dreams, because

The Soul is secret that conceives them, and Satan is subtle to conceal them.
1. The Soul herein has secret works, Cypria. de cardin. operibus Christi.
Quomodo conditorem terrae comprehendes? animam habes cujus facultates enumerare
non potes. Cyril. Cateches. 6.
and indeed works in the Soul are secret. I am patient though I cannot
understand (says Cyprian) several of Gods works in the world, for my own Soul
has such works whereof I am ignorant. How can thou comprehend the
excellency* of God above thee? thy own Soul within thee has faculties and
footsteps thou hardly find out, says Cyril.

2. Satan to conceal these Soulworks is subtle: he would not have men discern
the good of such Dreams as are from God, nor the evil of such Dreams as from
himself proceed.

2. Possibility: Men may attain true knowledge in these Soul-secrets, having
those lights that lead thereunto: As

The light of Nature, and The light of Scripture.
1. Nature-light led many learned Philosophers to write much of Dreams: to
find out all the faculties and abilities of the Soul, they sought out much, as
Tertullian relates: and why may not Tertul. de Anima. cap. 1.
we who have

2. Scripture Light that is better: We have (...), a more sure word, as a light
that shines in a dark place. What is done in the dark this brings to light,
lays open and makes known.

3. Equity: It Is fit men should know things done in them, such things as they
are not only receptive of, but operative in, as in the case of Dreams. In such
things does not God observe us? Thou Psalm. 139. 2, 3, 4, 11, 12.
know my down-lying and up-rising, and understandest my thoughts afar off.
Thou compassest my bed and art acquainted with all my ways. The darkness
hides not from thee.

4. Excellency: The rarity of this knowledge it is found in few. To understand
Dreams, how exceedingly did Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar seek the same? how were
helpers herein honored, as Joseph and Daniel, for their interpreting Genesis 41.
1, 2, 15, 16. Dan. 2. 3, 48, 49.
and making Dreams known.

5. Commodity: Hereby a man may know much of God, of Satan and of himself:
hereby a man may know much of the vanity of the world, the venom and villainy
of Sin, the excellency and activity of Grace, which probably has most
prevalency in him, and principal power over him, etc.

I shall therefore endeavor to set forth the several sorts of Dreams,
whether they come from God or from the Devil. Dreams drawn in by the Devil, I
shall first consider whether they be more false, or more foul.

II. Of False and Deluding DREAMS.
ZACH. 10. 2. And they told false Dreams.
THese few words do affirm a fond Somnia qui a Diabolo immittuntur sunt
duplicia, (...). 1. Ethnicorum, 2. Enthusiastarum, Doctores mendaces apud
varios vocantur (...), i. Pseudoprophetae propter similitudinem cum veri^
prophetis -- tamen Satanae lenones and lenociniis suis multos a Deo seducentes.
Calv. Com. in Deuteronomy. 13. Aret. in ca. 4. ep. 1. Johan.
Report in which we may fitly observe,

1. The Matter reported, and 2. The Men reporters.
The Matter the report is made of, does not concern any of the certain and
solid truths of God, but deceitful fancies, false Dreams.

The Men the report is made by, be not the approved Prophets of the true God,
but friends to false gods, false Teachers. And they told false Dreams.

That I may fix some serious discourse upon Dreams false, I shall at present
propose,

1. The Means of their Production, and 2. The Times of their Traduction.
1. The Means producting, or the procreating causes of false Dreams, they be
base brats brought forth between,

Satan's sleights, and Soul-deceits.
1. The sleights of Satan through which false Dreams be produced. The Devil
what is he? says Austin, He is Quid est Diabolus? Angelus a Deo separatus, a
sem^tipso decept^^, alios decipiens, author fallaciae, pater mendacii, radix
malitiae, caput scelerum, etc. Aug. in Vigil. Not. Dom. Ser. 4.
a fallen Angel, who first deceived himself, and ever after seeks to deceive
others, the author of ugly lies, the father of foul falsehoods, etc. though with
fair faces, and under truth-pretences, etc. This is he who subtly sends in
several Dreams, seemingly true yet certainly false.

2. The deceits of men's hearts and souls side with Satan, to set out and send
forth false Dreams. The false Prophets God reproved, because they delivered
deluding Doctrines and lying Dreams, as certain Truths proceeding from God,
when they were but the deceit^ of their own hearts, Jer. 14. 14. Ezekiel. 13. 2,
3. If we go no further than to the Dreams we find in the Text, the Devil no
doubt was the begetting-Father, an evil mind the conceiving-Mother, and the
mouths of deceiving men were as the helping-Midwives to bring forth these
false-births. And they told false Dreams.

2. The Times of traducting or passing over of these evil Dreams from one
person to another, from one age to another, is evident. What dealings have been
between the Devil and diverse in Dreams of delusion, Authors Multis temporibus
somniis fallacibus, homines in magnos mittuntur errores, etc. Aug. de cura pro
mortuis. cap. 10.
both Divine and Humane make mention;

Both before Christ's coming, And after the coming of Christ.
First, Before Christ came, such Dreaming-thoughts in the minds of diverse men
were mightily promoted,

Among Jews, And Gentiles.
1. Among the Jews, there were several Propheta non damnat exteras Gentes, sed
castigat Judaeos quia relicto Dei verbo sese contu^erint ad somnia and simula^^
^a. Calvin.
men into whose minds Satan suggested such false Dreams, as we find in the
Books both of Moses and the Prophets: Deuteronomy. 13. 2, 3. Jer. 23. 25. Dreams were
then one of those ways by which God did usually communicate his mind to men,
Numb. 12. 6. 1 Samuel 28. 15. In imitation of which the Devil in those days did
manage much of his business in Dreams. And diverse were deluded with the wiles
of the Devil, pretending the will of God.

2. Among the Gentiles were multitudes Solet Demon in suispseudo-Prophetis and
aliis impiis impostoribus, -- Somnia excitare ut olim inter Gentes, etc. Zanch.
Tract. de Divi. Sybillae non Dei Prophetae, sed organa Satanae. Aug. in Expos.
ad Romans
whose imaginations in this same way were sadly deceived. Unto the ten Sybills
of Greece, the Devil in Dreams and Trances did convey very strange things, as
Justin Martyr and Lactantius relate. And of the like sort were other Ethnic
Oracles of old: for when men in matters of doubt did consult with them to be
resolved, they were to offer their gift upon the Altar of Apollo, and then to
lie down and sleep besides the same Altar, and in a Dream to receive an
answer, as is evidenced by Vide Niceph. li. 8. ca. 35.
Authors several.

Secondly, Since Christ came, with such Satanicall suggestions, in
Dreamdelusions, have several been deceived:

Some that wholly opposed Christ, and Some that in part professed Christ.
1. Some disclaiming Christ and cleaving to Heathenish gods, have had such
delusive Dreams: Thus some answers Sub Traiano deficiunt Ethnica Oracula, Ann^
Christi 101. Alsted. Chr. mon. Romanae. p. 119. (...)
were received from the old Oracles until Traians time, that was an hundred
years after Christ, as Alstedius and others that have written the Chronology
of Times assert.

2. Such as in some sense have owned Christ and Gospel Truths, yet have been
miserably misled by lying Dreams:

Some in the Apostles times, and Some since the times of the Apostles.
1. When the Apostles lived, were (...), and c. v. 9, and 11.
some deluded. Yea not only in themselves seduced, but through such
imaginations were some made monstrous Seducers. See Simon Magus that great
Impostor of the people in Samaria, mentioned Acts 8. 11. A long time he had
bewitched them with his Sorceries. Bewitched: The Greek word (...), signifies,
he carried them out of themselves as in ecstasies, casting them into trances,
causing them to lie as in strange sleeps, and to communicate mavelous matters
to them as in Dreams.

Eusebius reports, that he had his (...), his Dream-deluding-Devils, Devils
that in Dreams he received delusions from, and by whom he deluded others in
their Dreams. This Simon, A nomine honestissimo dissidet. Simon vocatur, hoc
est auditor, scilicet Dei, ^um factus sit auditor Satanae, etc. Aret. in loc.
as one observes, did not answer the Etymology of his Name, for he was no
hearer of God, or the voice of Truth, but he hearkened to the Devil and his
lying-language, and others listening to and learning of him were deluded.

Justin Martyr who was one of the City of Samaria where this Simon Magus did so
much mischief, reports him much in this matter, and so do many other Similia
de eo refert, Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 13. Eccles. Hist. ex Justino and Irenaeo vitam
illius describens. De eo etiam copiose scripsit Epiphan. lib. 1. Sect. 2. quem
consule. Polido. lib. 8. cap. 4. and alii.
Authors, setting him forth in such sinful subtilties through which he drew
many Disciples to himself.

2. Since the Apostles died, in Dreams have diverse been seduced, as they who
write the Histories and give the Haeresiography of later times relate. The
Manichees, Familists and others, from such Dreaming delusions first received
their rotten opinions. Those prodigious preachings and practices of the
boisterous Anabaptists in Germany, their first original was drawn from
deluding-Dreams. Muncer, Rotman, Phifer, Knipperdoling, John of Leiden, and
others, that were the principal Persons, peremptorily said; That God appeared
to them by his Angel in Potest Demon homines per insomnia seducere -- Hujus
generis fuerunt somnia Anabaptistarum Monasteriensium qui somniis ad quaevis
flagitia and nefanda scelera monstrosissimasque opiniones incitati fuerunt --
quorum falsitatem somniorum acerbos eventus declaravit -- Zanch. Tract. de
Divinat.
the Night, and plainly revealed great and Glorious Things to them in Dreams,
etc. Gastius, Hortensius, Melancthon and other Authors, make mention into what
multitudes they grew, and what mischiefs they did, not only in words
(condemning Luthers Doctrine; as dull, cold, and carnal, crying down Zwinglius
for Infant baptism, as Babilonish and abominable: But by force of Arms,
plundering the most Noble Houses, and opposing the most Protestant Princes,
etc. So that Suevia, Franconia, the Higher and the Lower Germany was all in an
uproare for diverse years, beginning their Troubles about the year 1522: and not
any end or quiet till about 1540; as Gastio in his Book printed at Basil (in
the year 1544,) does fully set forth.

The Improvement of what is thus presented and asserted, is considerable and
applicable in a double way:

1. For Confuting of Others, and 2. For Profiting our Selves.
First, From the Premises we may fully confute the opinion of those Persons who
deny the Falsehood of Dreams.

Some Positively and in the whole, Some Respectively and in part.
1. Some have wholly denied that Dubium non est quin Diaboli astutia and
machinatione talia saepe hominibus objiciantur. Magir. Philos.
falsehood affirmed in Dreams. Two sorts of former Philosophers we ^inde
erring in this Point:

Some in an Excess, and Others in a Defect.
1. Some have so exceeded and run out so far, as to affirm all Dreams to
be fallacious and frivolous, without any Truth or certainty: So Xenophanes, Ita
cynici omnes ineo and Cicero. Zanch. Tract. de Divin.
Caliphonius, Epicurus and his Disciples, that there were any Dreams at all,
whereof either God or Nature could be the cause; but how causeless and
groundless this opinion was, will hereafter by proofs of Scripture plainly
appear.

2. Some have fallen so short, as to assert no Dreams to be Deceitful and
vain, but all True, as Protogoras with other Stoics stiffly maintained. Consule
Clem. Alexandrin. Stromat. li. 1. Nulla somnia evacuabant, etc. Tertul. de
Anima. ca. 46. Dr. Willet in Danielem, ca. 1* and 2. Quest. 44.
The Telmisenses, as Tertullian reports, were much of the same mind. But how
much such were mistaken likewise, some worthy Men have made manifest, and the
same shall be my further endeavor to demonstrate: That among Dreams some may
be found false.

Secondly, Some among Men may be seen who deny this in part: to wit, as toward
themselves no Dreams are false.

Suppose, say some, that in former ages, and other places of the world, some
Men have been misled by such Delusions: yet Christians of this English-Nation,
and in this Gospel-season, have no such Deceits, no false Dreams. Whereas come
we never so close to our own Times and Homes, why may not false Dreams be
found?

Dreams of Deep Deceit proceeding from Satan observe,

1. Such have been actual in some. 2. Such may be actual in others.
1. In some of us we may be sure Deceitful Dreams have actually been.

Both in times more remote, And in later times.
1. In times remote: Some Dreams have Pestis haec non tantum Germaniam sed
Italiam and Gallia^ jamdudum pervagata est and non olim solum, sed nune etiam
renascenti apud Anglos Ecclesiae Christi plurimum negotii dedit, etc. Bulling.
li. 6. advers. Anabapt.
been of this sort, as Seed sown by Satan's hand on English ground, though it
has not so sprung up as to spread the Land. When that foresaid fire flamed in
Germany, some sparks thereof flew over into England as well as other parts, as
Bullinger reports. Some Men were of such persuasions, delusions, opinions,
though wanting number and power they did not publicly appear.

2. In later times Men have had here at home many a mistaking Dream: Dreams
drawn in by the Devil, which they have taken as tendered to them by the hand of
a Holy God. Concerning,

What God would do for them, and What they should do for God.
1. Dreams declaring how God would advance them, raise them, use them, and
make them high for his honor; promoting persons of the same Principles, to
great possessions, transactions; setting them upon bold presumptions, proud
predictions, as have appeared from some in their printed Pamphlets.

2. Dreams declaring how God did advise them, counsel them, command them what
ways to forbear, and which ways to bend themselves. So some have of late
years deserted our public Assemblies, into separated companies, as being
warned of God in Dreams so to do. The last Instance I heard related, was of a
Woman in a neighboring Town, who dreamed that God one night said to her, Come
out Isa. 52. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Rev. 18. 4. Vera interpretatio ad vitandam
idololatriam, etc. Aret. in loc.
from among them, and be ye separate, etc. She awaked, fell asleep again and
heard the same from God; so that, said she, the Dream was doubled, to show the
certainty. In obedience to which, she ever after forsook all public
Ordinances, though many years after she did not live. Her own Sister, who
received this same from her mouth, is yet alive to witness it.

2. In others, false and deceitful Dreams may actually be; considering,

Their Hearts Corruption, and Satan's Temptation.
1. Corruption of Heart is naturally equal in all. The Philosopher says of
Anima tota est in toto, and tota in qualibet part --
the Reasonable Soul, That it is wholly in the whole Body, and whole in every
part, though not to every purpose. But of Original Sin it may be said; It Is
whole in every Person to every purpose: and did not God prevent, it would so
appear. No transgression so great, or delusion so gross but thereto this would
entice.

2. Satan's Temptations tend hereto: The Devil in Dreams has deluded diverse in
days past; and do not we think that this old Serpent grows simple, and that
through age the Devil doats, enfeebled in his parts, powers and Non mirum est
si Satan vary varios illudat, etc. omnibus errorumcapturis -- obnoxii sunt qui
Dei verbo lucente non reguntur.
policies? Nay rather, long experience has raised his subtilties into greater
activities. ' It Is no wonder (says a good Expositor) the Devil now adays
seduces diverse sorts in diverse ways; it is rather a wonder that all his ways
of delusions do not take upon all those persons who leave the light of Gods
good Word, to be led by their own foolish fancies. Alas how few are serious
with God? how many make a mere Dream of Religion? that it might be just with
God in such Dreams of Religion, to leave them to Dreams of Delusion.

Secondly, For the further profiting of our selves, all that I shall say
concerning such false deceitful Dreams, shall be,

To make a Discovery of them, and To help a Delivery from them.
First, To discover and find out false Dreams: This is indeed difficult,
through Satan's designs and Man's heart-deceits. Animalia quaedam, ne inveniri
possint vestigia sua circa cubile suum confundunt, Seneca. Ep. 68.
Seneca reports the property of some wild Beasts, who especially about their
Dens and sleeping places seek to obscure the tracts and prints of their feet,
that followed they be not found out. Sin and Satan much seek to hide their
footsteps, those walks and works they have in the Heads and Duas portas
divisit somnii, corneam veritatis eburneam fallaciae. Respicere est enim
inquiunt per cornu ebur autem caecum est, etc. Homerus Idem Virgil. 6. Aeneid.
Hearts of sleeping Men. Peter Martyr in his Common places, reports out of
Heathen Writers, that they were wont to appoint to Dreams two doors: The one
a door of Horn which was the door of Truth; the other a door of Yvory which was
the door of Deceit: for Horn say they may be looked through, and Truth is easy
to be looked into; but Yvory is thick and dark: so deceit and falsehood is
hardly descried. Dreams of Truth that proceed from God are sooner seen; but
Dreams of falsehood that fall in from Satan, are not so discoverable, though
to be discovered desirable.

To understand and discern such Dreams, whose Author is the Devil, may be a
lesson worth our learning. I would to God (says Austin) I could Aug. Epist.
100. ad Evodium.
clear the difference, between Dreams drawn in by the Devil to seduce and
deceive me, and those brought in of God to incite and save me. As the Magicians
of Egypt, in the day did diverse things in the eyes of Men, like to the workings
of Moses that man of God: so Satan in the night, may draw diverse things
Prudenter considerandum and diligenter distingue^dum esse an Deus in somniis
certe loquatur, an vero homines fallaciter se jactent pro ejus servis, etc.
Calv. in Jerem.
into the minds of Men, like to the workings of God himself. Yet though there
be an appearing resemblance, there is a positive difference between Dreams from
the Devil as a transformed Angel of Light, and Dreams from God the only true
Father of Lights, which we may infallibly find out, by a serious observing on
both sides:

Their concommitant Causes, and Their consequent Effects.
First, To discover them in their Causes, it is meet to meditate, Gerson. lib.
de distinctione verarum and falsarum visionum.


The Matter for their Substance, and The Manner of their Conveyance.
1. The Matter about which they be wrought up, is deeply different: such
Dreams as are undoubted of God be made up of things,

Highly eminent in the sight of God, and Wholly consonant to the Word of God.
Whereas the best Dreams that proceed Lege Bucerum in Epist. ad Romans cap. 13.
Tertullian. adversus Marcion. lib. 1. and 4.
from Satan, be about matters of no such eminency in the one, nor any such
consonancy to the other. For sometimes such Dreams are filled with foolish and
frivolous, vain and ridiculous things, and at all times they are opposite and
repugnant, either in whole or in part, to the pure and precious Word of God.
The Prophet that has a Dream, let him tell a Dream, and he that has my
Word, let him speak my Word faithfully; for what is the chaff to the wheat?
says the Lord, Jer. 23. v. 28. Gods Word is wheat without chaff, the Prophets
Dream is chaff without wheat, or if therein be any wheat, there is much chaff
therewith. That Satan may the sooner sell off and make the quicker markets of
his chaff, he may mingle therewith some good wheat of Gods Word: The Satanas
transfigurat se sicut Angelus lucis and de Scripturis divinis laqueum parat,
utitur hisce testimoniis non ut doceat sed ut fallat. Ambros. in Lucam. li. 4.
de Tentat. Christi. Aquin. 2a. 2ae. Quaest. 172. and Art. 6.
Devil in his Dreamedelusions, may suggest some Scriptureexpressions: In such
pieces of Sugar, he makes men swallow the Pills of his poisonous errors. The
Devil that he may the better lay his Babes in men's bosoms, he dresses them up
in Scripture-cloathes: Hence men hug mere fancies, embracing false Dreams for
infallible Truths. True Dreams that be indeed from God, they throughout agree
with Gods word, their whole matter is of worth and good weight in Gods balance,
pure, ponderous and precious, substantial, solid and serious.

Secondly, The Manner after which they are wrought in, is also differing.
Dreams from the Devil they come in a man

As more Hasty, So more Hidden.
In these Dreamings the Devils drivings are like to the drivings of Jehu,
furious and fierce, thoughts throng in and thrust out with violence and force,
so that thereby reason is often darkened, Diabolus est furi^sus Dominus, si semel
te comprehend erit, nec die nec nocte te requiescere sinet, etc. Ambros. de
fuga seculi. cap. 4. Nusquam residentis animi volutatio, etc. Seneca lib. de
Tranquillitate. Quando divinitus mi^tuntur somnia, nos sumus quasi non dormimus
imo advertimus clarius quam consueverimus vigilantes ideo in hujusmodi somniis
ponitur vaticinium. Iamblicus.
brain distempered and powers disturbed, footsteps so frequently confused,
that little is orderly discerned. Thoughts be in the mind like Rebekahs twins
in her womb, struggling together: but they do not like them come forth, one
holding the heel of another; but be full of inconsistencies, lubricities,
slippery, severed and unsettled, rushings in and rollings about, Reason so
roving from one thing to another, that the mind makes miserable nonsense.
Much of this might be manifested from that Dream of Eliphas, Job 4. 11, 12,
16, 17, verses. which Dream is judged to be but an illusion of the Devil, to
strengthen the hands of Eliphas, in vexing and troubling Job.

On the other side, Dreams from God, they come in a manner

As more Moderate, So more Manifest.
Divine Dreams make a more orderly entrance, and leave a more legible Impress:
Thoughts herein as adhering Sciendum est somnia divina ab aliis somniis multum
differ quia insculptam habet certitudinis notam and clar^us obsignantur ut
minime ambigua sit eorum veritas. Bulling. in Mat.
one to another, so declaring one of another. As bringing in things more
leisurely, so making of things more intelligible, more evident and easy to be
understood. If some things at first seem intricate, yet the longer the mind
dilates thereon, the more it understands therein, and the more it apprehends of
Gods mind thereby.

Secondly, Dreams are discovered by their differing effects: Those that come
forth from God, they wonderfully work a Man

To advance Gods Truth, and To abase himself.
1. Truth hereby is brought much more to advance, and thereof to set a far
higher price. The Truths of Gods Word are made more precious to his mind by
this means. Such a man is most likely to speak in Luthers language, The least
title of divine Truth is Unam apex veritatis, plus valet quam coelum and terra.
Luther.
more worth than Heaven and earth.

2. Self, hereby he is brought to abase. A divine Dream drives out pride, and
proves a good Antidote against pride-poison. Both these blessed effects may be
found from that of Elihu, Job 33. 15, 16, 17. God speaks once, yea twice --
In a Dream and Vision of the Night -- Then he opens the ears of men, and Seals
their Instruction: That is, Then divine Truths take deep Impressions, and come
to high estimations, etc. That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide
pride from man. This is Gods end in sending such a Dream.

To hide pride.] The passage implies Primi hominis peccatum primum superbia
fuit, qua quoddam spirituale bonum supra mensuram suae conditionis appetivit,
etc. Tho. Aquin. 22ae. Quest. 162. Art. 1, and 2.
man's proneness pride-ward. Pride is that posture that man has least reason
for, yet most propension to. Pride is that Sin (as Aquinas well cleers it)
that first took the heart of the first Man, so that ever since, of all evils
every man's eye is most apt upon this. Now God to hide this Sin out of man's
sight, sends sometimes such Dreams as draws his eyes another way, he sees that
in God and in himself, as pulls down and puts out pride. Musculus well
observes, That Dreams from Heaven bring such a light into man's heart, and
leave such dints thereupon, as makes him more humble, awful, dreading God and
denying himself. Whereas delusions in Dreams drawn in by the Devil, do Lege
Hier. Zanch. in Tractat. de Divinat. per Furorem. Ma^ta discrimina inter
vati^inia divina and Diabolica observatione digna.
deeply dispose men's minds,

To Corrupt Conceptions, and To Proud Presumptions.
Such Dreams lay Leaven in man's heart, that sowres and poisons his Principles,
that he is the more prone to erroneous opinions: They leave levity and
lightness upon the mind, that makes man apt to mount upwards in high thoughts
of himself. They prophecy salse Dreams, and by their lightness cause my
people to err, says the Lord, Jer. 23. 32. Through the mischief of these
Dreams, men are made light, vain and vapouring, venting their own apprehensions
and imaginations with high ostentations, admirations and commendations of
themselves. Thus Simon Magus a man (as before mentioned) much in these Dreams,
whereupon he gave out that himself was some Great ONE, Acts 8. 9. A while he
pretended, that by Dreams and other immediate ways was Gods will in wonders
to him revealed; but after (as Justin Martyr and Epiphanius reports) he
blasphemously boasted that himself was God, and accordingly near Rome erected
Justinus Mart. refert in 2. Apolog. hunc Simonem sub. Glaudio Caesare Romae
meruisse statuam inter duos pontes Tyberis cum hac inscriptione, Simoni Deo
sancto. Et in Dialogo cum Triphone refert se Caesarem monuisse hunc Simonem
Samaritanos seducere adeo ut Deum esse dicant. Aug. lib. 38. quest. 79. lib. 3.
de Trinit. ca. 7. Theodor. quaest. 8. in Exodus Philo. li. de vita Mosis.
a Statue with this Inscription; To Simon the holy God. Yea and the same
Authors set out, how the Samaritans who were deluded by the same means, would
boldly say, This Simon to be God. These were the proud fruits of false Dreams.
Such effects do plainly point out their Father.

Furthermore such differences as the Learned lay down between true Miracles and
false, are useful in this case.

True Miracles (say they) are discerned, in that they directly tend

To glorify God, and To edify Men.
False Miracles pretend hereto, but they fetch such a compass about, and take
in such things by their way, as whereby God is not really glorified, nor Men
spiritually edified.

Thus true Dreams in a direct line lead to the glorification of God in the
good of men, and to the edification of men, in the matters of God. But false
Dreams, their drift is, to draw the Souls of men aside to such acts as are
dishonorable to God, disagreeing to his Word, and disadvantagious toward men's
eternal good.

This may suffice for a discovery of false Dreams.

Now to help forward our delivery from false Dreams, I shall endeavor to lay
down

Motives to Decline them, and Means for to Escape them.
1. Motives that may incite to seek safety from such deceiving Dreams; may
appear by pondering Pontanus Catal. Haeret. Guy-de-Bres. li. 1. cont.
Anabaptist.


The Perils of them, and And the Evils in them.
The perils of false Dreams, or Dreams of deceit, may be seen by observing
man subject to Deceits,

From what Cause, At what Time.
1. The Causes from whence upon Man Deceits may soon take place, and he become
a creature quickly by Deceits misled; proceeds

From the properties of Deceivers, and His proneness to be Deceived.
1. Deceivers have such properties as cause and increase the peril of pitiful
Deceits upon the Soul of Man:

The Devil and the World we grant are great Deceivers, now let us but seriously
observe

Their Diversity, Their Unity, Their Sedulity, And Subtilty.
1. Their Diversity: These deceivers Diversa sunt Daemonum gemera -- regnum and
politiam inter se habent. Luth. loc. com. 5ae. Classis. cap. 1.
are diverse in their nature and number. There are, says Luther, diverse kinds
of Devils, and they have their diverse ways and wiles to work on their seducing
designs: They be various and numerous: what else means that, Mar. 5. 9. My Name
is Legion, for we are many.

2. Their Unity: These deceivers are associate: The Devils have no divided
Kingdom, they do not love to cross one another, but all accord in one to
mislead man: In their forgeries and falsehoods they are confederate.

3. Their Sedulity: These deceivers are diligent, and in bewitching works
unwearied, ever walking up and down, Job 2. 2.

4. Their Subtilty: These Deceivers though full of power, yet most act by
Policy. I believe (says Luther) Credo eum posse una hora. Luth. ibid.
the Devil has so much power, as he could in one hour overthrow all men on
earth; yet his envious activity appears most in his policy. As one said of
Theodorus, that his main art lay in (...), etc. Arist.
making of witty Epithetes: so may we say of Satan, That his chief strength
lies in framing subtle deceits. This is he who dispatches out his spirits, men
subtle to deceive; this is he who sends out his Books as baits, by which many
are cunningly caught, with the venom of which so many persons are poisoned. As
in Ceiland, they say a Snake lies under every leaf; so may we say of several
Books now abroad, Serpentine poison may be found in every line: These lay
matter for delusive Dreams.

2. No marvel men are prone to be misled by Dreams of delusion, for in all
kinds and cases are they apt to be deceived,

Through gross Ignorance, and Through Self-confidence.
1. Men's ignorance is gross, which makes men's minds to be like dark shops, in
which the Devil best puts off bad wares. Many men who to knowledge Seal and illa
ignorantia, quae non est eorum qui scire volunt, sed little qui scire nesciunt
neminem si excusat ut sempiterno igne non ardeat, etc. Aug. de gra. and Lib.
arb. cap. 3.
pretend high, yet are ignorant of Principles; who say they see, yet like blind
Sampson cannot find the Pillars of Gods house, Judge. 16. 26. That ignorance
which exposes men to the destruction of Hell, no doubt disposes them to
delusions on earth. That ignorance which makes men to oppose God in the ways
of his Truth, does dispose men to the lies of the Devil, and all the deceits of
sin.

2. Men's Confidence is commonly abundant, of their own abilities: They conceive
themselves secure from the deceivings of Satan and delusions of sin. As it is
said of Jerusalem, Lam. 4. 12. Men imagined no enemy could enter within the
gates of that City. Thus some suppose themselves so strong, that no error can
enter within the gates of their souls: other men may be seduced, but there is
no danger of them. As the Donatists cried down Austin for a deceiver,
Donatistae Augustinum -- animarum seductorem public and privatim conclamabant.
Possidonius.
but would not believe themselves deceived. Men's pride of their parts makes
them prone to deceits: Yea vain man would be wise, though he be like a wild Ass
colt, Job 11. 12.

Vain man,] Hollow and empty man that thinks, in him he has all, yet has
nothing at all in him.

Would be wise,] That is, does imagine himself the only wise man in the world.
Tune solus sapis, was Luthers question often to himself? An humble man is ready
to say, I know not how to believe my own knowledge; I distrust Dissido oculis
meis and identidem interrogo an legerim an viderim? etc. Plin. Paneg.
my own eyes, mine own ears, mine own apprehensions, etc. But ordinarily, men
are ignorant of their ignorance, conceited of their knowledge, which makes them
exceedingly subject to Satan's deceits. No creature so apt to deceive others as
man, therefore God may let him alone even to deceive himself: The heart of man
is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, Jer. 17. 10. and
therefore no marvel to find man full of deceits, and forward to be deceived.

2. Consider the Time at which man's danger is of deceiving: viz.

At all times generally, But at some times specially.
There is no time, as there is no place, but this danger endures. A man cannot
walk in his fields, sit at his table, lie upon his bed, but he may soon be
deceived, and so for time; Time is divided into Dies and no^ perpetuitatem
significat. Aug. Sermon. 11. de Tempore. Satan it a perpetuo impugnat utrumque,
and puritatem Doctrinae, and integritatem Vitae, etc. Luth. loc. com. 5ae.
partis. cap. 1. de Diabolo.
Day and Night, now both night and day may men fall into falsehoods. Luther
observes, that through Satan's incessant subtilties, man is at all seasons
subject to a double deception,

In the Principles of Faith, and In the Practices of Life,
Not only in the Practices of Life, but in the very Principles of Faith, man
is perpetually prone to be depraved, seduced and deceived day and night.

1. In the day time: The cleerest day cannot free man from the foulest mistake,
nor can the brightest light secure him from the danger of the deepest deceit.

2. In the night time does this danger undoubtedly endure,

Much when awake, Most when asleep.
1. In time when awake, O what false things may a man fancy! The waking body
may lie still in the bed, but the working mind walk abroad, imagining a
multitude of matters of mere mistakes, and monstrous deceits full of sin.

2. In time of sleep men may be in more hazard of sinful delusions than in
their waking-seasons. When men are awake, they may escape mistakes through the
help of their hearing, seeing, and those outward senses then assisting, which
in sleep lie bound and do not benefit them, or better inform them. In sleep
Satan can assault the Men's peracute perspiciens alienos errores, tarda est ad
proprios cognoscendos defectus. Basil. Hexam. Hom. 9.
heart, and mislead the mind, and be less observed. The mind even of waking
man, that looks out with an acute eye upon others errors, yet is ever slow,
much more in sleep, to take notice of its own defaults through Satan's deceits:
so that man's sleep-time is to Satan's designs very advantageous. When Dalilah
had got Sampson asleep, then she binds his hands, shaves his head, bereaves him
of his beauties and abilities, Judge. 16. 19. So the time of man's sleep is a
suitable season for Satan's enticing temptations, and his turning men aside by
dreaming delusions. And so having seen the several perils of false Dreams,

2. Let us see the several evils of Dreams found to be false;

Whence they appear, and What they really are.
Fearful evils of false Dreams do plainly and plentifully appear,

From infallible Scriptures, and Vid. Aug. de Civit. Dei. li. 18. ca. 18.
From credible Writers.
The evils that evidently out of these appear, are of two sorts,

Evils of Sin, and Evils of Punishment.
The Sins of some men through such Dreams have been dreadful;

Against God, and Against their Neighbor.
Against God: Through such deceiving Dreams men's sins have been exceeding
great, as have been seen several ways:

Remotely in his Vicegerents, and In his Immediate Concernments.
1. Against God in his Vicegerents Vide Marlorat in locum.
some have been sinfully set, through the deceit of Dreams. Likewise these
delusive Dreams (so some read that of the Apostle, Jude 8.) despise Dominion
and speak evil of Dignities. This has been the sequel and sad effect of some
men misled by deluding Dreams, to cry down Magistracy, yea to rise up against
Magistrates, opposing and gainsaying all good manners of Governments and
Governors, whereby they Est bellum gerere cum Deo, dedecore afficere quod ipse
honoravit, and quod a Deo extollitur pedibus conculcare; nec vero breviore
compendio mundi ruinam moliri and latro ciniorum litiam summa in ubique
introducere possent quam cum gladii potestatem abrogari volunt. Calv. Instruct.
advers. Anab.
fight against God, blemishing what God has beautified, and abolishing what
God has ratified: Yea and as Calvin in the case further observes; Hereby men
waxing bold and wresting the Sword out of the Magistrates hand, they have taken
the readiest way to ruin States, Empires and Kingdoms, and at this door to
introduce all licentious liberties of the most egregious impieties that can
possibly appear against God.

2. God himself in his most immediate concernments, has been hereby boldly
assaulted and highly affronted: such deceitful Dreamers,

Covering their Lies with the Truths of God, and Fathering their Lies upon the
God of Truth.
1. False Dreamers have covered their naked brats with Bible-leaves,
interpreting sound Scriptures for the introducting of rotten errors, and
perverting Gods solid sayings for the supporting of Satan's subtle designs;
setting their wits awork when awake, to make good their sinful conceits in
sleep.

2. Such Dreamers have fathered Lege Bulling. advers. Anabap. li. 1. ca. 2.
their loud lies upon the Lord himself, Jer. 23. I have heard (says the Lord)
what the Prophets said that prophecy lies in my Name, saying, I have dreamed,
I have dreamed, ver. 25. To prophecy lies is bad, but to prophecy lies in
Gods Name is worse. Behold says the Lord, Omnes fere Interpretes verbum
Hebraicum accipiunt pro dulce reddere vel linguam mollificare, ita ut sermo
eorum melle dulcior -- vel significat efferre in sublime
they use their tongues and say, He says, ver. 31. Calvin gives the various
interpretations of the Hebrew word: They used their tongues: That is, they
smoothed their tongues, or they sweetened their tongues with sugared expressions
and honey words: They lift up their tongues and speak high, with loud and lofty
words, boasting of Gods mind made manifest to them in admiring Dreams.
Against God such monstrous evils in other ages have been evident, yea found
frequent, as fruits of false Dreams.

2. Against their Neigbours through such Dreams of Deceit have several sadly
sinned: to wit,

Against their Souls, and Against their Bodies.
1. Against the Souls of their Neighbors, endeavoring to draw them to
dreadful evils;

As to forsake the Ways of God, Yea to forget the Name of God.
1. The ways and prescribed paths of God, such have sought to make others
like themselves forsake, seeking not only by subtle means to turn, but by
boisterous and violent means, to thrust men from the good ways of God: And
that Prophet or dreamer of Dreams, who has spoken to turn you away from the
Lord your God, and to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God has
commanded, etc. Deuteronomy. 13. 6.

2. The Name of the Great God they have sought to make good men forget: Indeed
to bring Gods people utterly to forget Gods Name they never could according as
they did think: They think to cause my people to forget my Name, by their
Dreams which they tell every Duae pestes diligenter cavendae sunt in Ecclesia,
una pestis nota ubi homines ad foedas superstitiones trahuntur. Altera pestis
occultior and ideo magis periculosa cum homines sub specie veritatis in errores
per insidias a cultu Dei abducuntur. Calvin.
man to his neighbor, Jer. 23. 27. Yet such men by such means have sometimes
so far prevailed, as to make Gods professing people to fall into foul errors.
They prophecy false Dreams, and cause my people to err by their lies, ver.
33.

To err.] The Septuagint expresses it by a word that signifies to wander as
the Planets. Those false dreaming Prophets caused the people of the Lord to be
like wandering Stars, running into irregular ways from the strait way of
truth and holiness.

2. Against their Neighbors Bodies Quos fallaciis non possunt decipere,
gladiis clamant feriendos, etc. Pontanus, de Anabap.
and temporal being, have some been sinfully drawn through the deceit of
Dreams: so bitterly bent, as that those whom they could not deceive by their
falsities, they would destroy by their cruelties: Hence has been butcheries
and bloodsheds of blessed Saints. And here I cannot but make fresh mention of
Muncer the Anabaptist and his transported party in Germany, of whom Sleiden and
others beforenamed report: They were led into such slaying deeds by their lying
Dreams. They gave out (who were the chief among them) that Certissime vobis
confirmo. Deus enim qui mentiri aut fallere non potest; coram, mihi in somniis
victoriam promisit and jussit ut ad hunc modum rem aggrediar, etc. Verba
Munceri Militibus ^uis. Sleid. com. cit. li. 5.
God declared himself and the secrets of his heart to them in their sleep; and
that his will was, that all wicked Princes and people should be slain, that so
the Saints alone might live and rule the world, etc. This poisonous principle
being suc'kt in and received, they first fell to secret murders and cruel
massacres, and afterward to open wars and bloody battles, in which many good
Protestants lost their precious lives, to accomplish their hellish lies, and
please their pernicious lusts. Be it considered how such sins have been the
sad sequels of deceiving Dreams.

Secondly, Let us consider deceiving Dreams in their sad punishments: False
Dreams (as their poenall effects) have been frequently found

Not to produce, what they did propose, and What they did not propose, to
produce.
1. They may not produce what they seem to present, they may not attain whereto
they pretend. Tertullian treating of Dreams in general, says thus; Behold
therein a Fencer but without weapons, Conspice gladiatorem sed sine armis;
pugnatur certatur, sed vac^a jactatio; multa fieri videntur, quae non
faciuntur. Actu ^iunt, effectu vero non ^iunt, etc. Ter^. li. de anima. ca. 45.
behold fighting but never a blow given, many motions but nothing done, among
many things seemingly presented nothing really effected, etc. This is most
certain in such Dreams as we are now dealing with, not only at the time of
present appearance, there is no positive performance, but there may be no
following effects when men are awake that suit to such conceptions in sleep. We
read of certain Witches, to whom Est quaedam operatio Daemonum in Ministerio
praescientiae, quae variis modis ab his qui se Daemonibus mancipaverunt nunc
per sorts nunc per somnia, etc. Origin in Periarchon. Hom. 16. in Numeros.
in the night time the Devil did bring (to their thinking) good pieces of gold,
but in the daytime when they went to make use thereof, all proved but withered
leaves. Thus witnesses Remigius, in his book De Daemonalatria, who was a Judge
in Lorreighne, under whom diverse of those seduced creatures suffered. So may
Satan set golden matters before the minds of Dreaming men, which yet afterward
in waking-time may wither and prove no such matter: So that of such Dreams a
man is made ashamed when he sees his raised expectations sink. Disappointment
is a very great punishment.

Quest. May not the Devil in Dreams foretell such things as may in time come to
pass?

Answ. To satisfy in this matter, some things may be said*

By way of Concession, and By way of Negation.
First, Concession.] We grant it is Aquinds, 2a. 2ae. Quaest. 171. Art. 4.
possible that Satan may foresee some things in such cases, which in Dreams
as well as other ways he may communicate to the minds of men. They who have
read any thing of the Oracles of old, have found how the Devil in days past
did assist presages of strange things to come. Plutarch reports in the Lege
Ciceronem li. 2. de Divinatione de Alexandro Magno and de Ptolomaeo. Exemplum
illustre somnii diabotici est apud Herodot. lib. 7. in Xerxe. Quem illusiones
nocturnae mali Daemonis instigabant ad bellum Graecis movendum. Aug. de Genesis ad
lit. li. 12. ca. 19.
life of Alexander, how that great Conqueror was from such causes ^^couraged
in his encounters: Particularly the Historian tells, how before Alexander made
war with Darius King of Persia, he was thus by the Oracle assured of his
success: Go on Alexander, thou shall be a conqueror: Upon this he invades
Asia, subdues Darius in battle, translates the Empire from Persia to Greece,
doing great things as the Oracle had said. And though Oracles as of old are
ceased, yet Satan has several ways and means by which he can interpose
himself, and propose future things to the fantasies of men both awake and
asleep. He may impart what he foreknows, and to assist his prescience, or help
his foreknowledg, he has very great advantages:

By Reflection, and By Inspection.
1. By reflecting and looking back upon what has been done in days past. The
Devil knows that Scripture: The thing that has been, it is; that which shall
be, and that which is done, is that which shall be done, and there is no new
thing under the Sun, Eccl. 1. 9.

2. By inspecting or looking into Chrysostom. oper. imperf. in Ma. Hom. 19.
Cassiodorus in prolog. sup. Psalm. c. 1.
several present things:

As
What God has Proposed, How men are Disposed, and What himself is resolved.
1. What God has proposed in his Word: The Devil is well acquainted with
Scripture-prophesies, what revolutions of things God has said shall be in the
latter times, etc.

2. How men are disposed in the world: whether their proud, presumptuous and
ambitious principles are prompt and bent in each age and place, etc.

3. What himself is set upon, and resolves to do his full endeavor in,
purposed to bend all his abilities to bring such a business about, if by any
means and way, etc. Satan observing Somnia duplicia, (...). Sunt haec somnia
quae praesagiunt.
such things within himself and others, marking the affections of persons, the
affairs of Nations, etc. he learns much and can see far, and may tell a great
way off, things that may come to pass, even positive accomplishments of things
in Dreams suggested. Luther Diabolus est exercitatus and instructus insinitis
exemplis gubernationis divinae; novit item voluntates, studia, consilia hominum
-- callidissimus est and omnes deliberationes Regum sapientum, Jureconsul^orum
Theologorum -- exactissime tenet. Luth. loc. com. 5ae. Classis. cap. 1. de
Diabol.
discoursing of the prescience, experience and subtle insights of Satan,
says; That he has learned to look into the gubernations of God, the counsels
and consultations of all sorts of men, thereby promoting his knowledge.

Secondly, Negation.] Satan with all his subtilties and assistances cannot so
foresee, as in Dreams to foretell things.

viz.
1. Not Solely, Non Damonis sed solius Dei est futura a seipso and in seipsis
cognoscere. Aquinas 1 a. Q. 57. Art. 3. Aquin. 22ae. Quaest. 95 Potest Demon
futura multa praenoscere and alicui impio per insomnia revelare. Test. Vale.
Max. li. 1. ca. 5. August. li. de Divin. Daemo^um. ca. 3, and 5.
2. Not Wholly, 3. Not Clearly, 4. Not Surely.
1. Not Solely: That is, not he himself alone, but as he has help from some
others, as from God, his Word and Works: God intending to suffer Satan in such
transactions, yea purposing to employ him as an Instrument, in executing his
judgments, and inflicting punishments upon families, persons and Nations, may
let him know aforehand what things shall be done: and the Devil finding fit
Instruments for him, may by such Dreams draw them in: thereby reporting to
them what was imparted to him.

2. Not wholly: Though in part, by Dreams Satan may signify something that
concerns some Signal business about to come; yet for the Series and successive
proceedings of things he is at a loss and can say little: Many things do
intervene that he did not discern and so could not forewarn.

3. Not clearly: The Devil about his predictions goes much in the dark,
carrying things in the clouds. Dreams Ventura praedicere non demonstrare, etc.
Bucerus in Romans cap. 12. Beda in ca. ^. Lucae. li. 2.
are intricate, not only because he is fraudulent, but also because he is
ignorant. The Devil indeed knows what he desires, and resolves to endeavor,
but knows not what he shall effect, or what God will suffer.

4. Not Surely: The Devil in Dreams may come with confidence, yet a miserable
mistake may be found in the consequence. In Dreams the Devil may Potest
praedicere Diabolus certum non ^erto.
foretell a certain thing to come to pass, yet cannot foretell it shall come
to pass certainly. Perhaps the Devils design is, not to have the thing
certainly done; but only to deceive with a Dream. Perhaps sometimes things he
desires may so fall out, by which Satan seeks to make men desert the sure word
of God, and to give credit to deceitful Dreams, and Dreams of deceit, in
which he is upon no certainty or assured success. In this case of foretelling
future things by Dreams, Aristotle well states it: A blind man (says he) in
shooting arrows, one may hit the Aristot. lib. de Divinat. per ins^mnia.
mark, but the most miss. If some things so dreamed do happen, yet more merely
vanish: Most of the Devils-Dreams do not produce what they did propose, which
proves a part of their punishment.

2. Such Dreams they produce as a further part of their punishment, such sad
Events as they proposed not. Notable Jactatis magnum ac^men and magnam
perspicaciam spiritus, ego autem detegam vestrum opprobrium, omnes vos videbunt
vacuos caelestis Doctrinae.
is that place of the Prophet for the proof of both: Micha. 3. 6, 7. The Seers
shall be ashamed, and the Diviners confounded; yea they shall cover their lips,
for there is no answer of God. That is, they shall be confounded when they find
no such effects to follow as they formerly fancied, nor things to be fulfilled
as they foretold. Night shall be unto them that they shall not have a vision,
it shall be dark and they shall not divine, etc. That is, they who have had
their nights of sinning, their Dreams and deeds of darkness which now shall
cease: and on the other side, they shall have such a night of suffering and
sore punishment as they never expected, such darkness of dismal miseries as
they never imagined, dreadful judgments they never dreamed of, etc. As Joseph
dreamed of his preferment, but never dreamed of his imprisonment: so it is
common for sinful men, to dream of their rising, but never dream of their
fall, as if such a day would never follow. Thou shall surely fall in the day,
and the Prophet shall fall Noctu corrui^ Propheta. Intelligit Prophetas non
veros sed falsos qui nocturnis ementitis ora^alis populum ^eddebant securum,
etc. Paraeus in locum.
with thee in the night, Hos. 3. 5. They who have had their night-sinnes shall
have their day-falls. Those lying Dreams the Devil lays for a foundation in
the night, men may thereon raise a rare building, but a day will dawne when God
will fling it down, so as not a stone to be left upon a stone. Astonishing
punishments will surely be to such

Both from God, And from Men.
1. God will engage himself against Men promoting false Dreams: Behold I am
against them that prophecy false Dreams, says the Lord, Jer. 23. 32. Now as
when God is for any, he shows it by vouchsafing of his favors; so Emm^n^el est
verbum dul^iss^m: sed Michael quando ^o^^ra nos est ^^rr^^ilissimum verbum.
when God is against any, it appears by inflicting of his judgments. As God
with us is the greatest mercy; so a man needs no greater misery than God
against him,

It Is Hell in Hell.

2. Men sometimes are engaged of God against such bold Dreamers: God draws
them out as Instruments to inflict his judgments. Men commonly Ma^hinantur
frauds imo ita inte^ti sunt dolis f^bricandis ut t^mpore nocturn^ student and
interdiu efficient quae noctu agit^runt secum, etc.
are so taken with enticing Dreams, that what they conceit in the night they
attempt in the day though it be to their woe: Woe to them that devise iniquity
and imagine evil upon their beds, when the morning is light they practice it,
because it comes in the power of their hands, Mich. 2. 1. This is incident to
Quod valde volumus facile credimus.
Men, any thing tending toward that they earnest^y desire they easily believe,
and what they easily believe they earnestly pursue. Hence some have undertaken
strange attempts, out of a strange belief of their deluding Dreams, whereby
they have brought the hands both of God and men against them. See we what has
been said and done against such Dreamers, Deuteronomy. 13. Hae cogitationes quum
peccatores i^ animum indu^erunt certatim ad omne reliq^um peccati genus ruunt.
Basil.
5. And that Prophet or dreamer of Dreams shall be put to death, because he
has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, etc. Thou shall not
conceal him: Thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and after
the hand of all the people, ver. 10. Those mischievous men mentioned in
Germany, were so transported with their Dreams, and so violent in their bloody
ways, that no power of Gods Word would win them; they were more bent upon
Battles than Bibles, and more minded murders and massacres than Scriptures; so
that at length, like Sampsons Foxes, they perished in the fire themselves
Gastius de Anabaptist. Exord. li. 1. 150000. fuerunt trucidati.
kindled; and Goliah-like, were slain by the Sword themselves drew. The
Protestant Princes in pitched fields, for their own defense were forced to
fight them, whereby many thousands of them fell.

Object. What is all this to us? men among us in our times are not misled by
such lying Dreams, as tend to violence.

Answ. 1. Such Dreams may have taken men's minds, though it be not yet time to
tell them, or by deeds to declare them, until there be power to effect;
policy does use to conceal.

2. With such Dreams the minds of men may be taken, who can say how soon.
Those multitudes which in other Vae, vae, vae eorum stupori qui prodigiosa
nostris temporibus portenta non exhorrescunt, etc. Calvinus of Servetus.
matters are now so lamentably misted while awake, may soon be deceived when
asleep: God may punish their waking-errors with a belief of sleepinglies. Those
parties of Muncer praecited, first began with opposing opinions in point of
Baptism against the public Magistracy and Ministry; and after encouraged with
delusive Dreams, they proceeded to such pernicious practices as proved their
ruin. Yea it is memorable and most remarkable amongst that sort of men, the
Dreams with which for a while they seduced diverse, did condemn all ways of
force Solet Demon in suis pseud oprophetis. and aliis impiis Impostoribus
somnia excitare ut olim inter Gentes. Multa talia somnia nostro etiam tempore
multis impiis praesertim Anabaptistis and Baptistis a Satana missa. Hier.
Zanch. Tract. de Divinat.
and violence, and did commend only spiritual means to manage the pretended
mind of God. One Melchior Hophman a Skinner or Glover in Swedland, reported
that God in a Dream had to him revealed, that Strasburg in Germany was
appointed to be the New Jerusalem, the Holy City; and that himself and some
others should repair thither, and from thence have a Heavenly call to be
Apostles, and to preach the Gospel to all the World, and so in a short time to
subdue millions to Christ Postea oritur Propheta novus aurifex, is, convocata
multitudine commemorat patris caelestis hoc esse insomniis mandatum ut armatis
hominibus imperium totius orbis terrarum Joannes Leidensis obtineat, Templa
diripiunt aedificia incendunt -- magno numero libri deportati flamma fuerunt
absumpti, and haec etiam mandata divinitus accepisse dicebat idem Propheta.
by their ministry through the power of the Spirit, without any outward force
or use of arms, by which means very many were misled. Yet mark: not long after,
one John Tuscoverer a Goldsmith of Warendorp published his Dream, That it was
the will of the Heavenly Father, all the present public persons in the
Magistracy and Ministry, as oppressors, should by power forceably be removed,
and that John of Leyden should be the King of the whole world, and for that
purpose all of them ought presently to appear in their Arms; which accordingly
they did by thousands, who in their hostilities used many acts of cruelties,
not only breaking down Churches, burning Christian Books and buildings, but
barbarously imbruing their hands in the blood of diverse. O the monstrous and
miserable delusions of many multitudes in former days through lying Dreams,
so as several parts of the earth and times of the world were filled with
violence; and why may not such Dreams with such dreadful effects, be found in
following times? 'Twas the expression of an eminent Expositor upon that place
of the Prophet, Jeremy 23. 25. I have heard says the Lord what lies they
prophecy in my Name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed. The Et qui^
videmus huic malo semper obnoxiam fuisse Ecclesiam, non est quod hodie turbemur
si idem accidat quod novum non est.
Church of God (says he) has ever been obnoxious to men misled in this manner,
and therefore we should not think it strange nor be much troubled, if at this
day several such are seen. Even we our selves already see several in strange
opinions and practices strongly transported, God knows what we or others after
us shall see: It Is meet we use the best means we may to prevent all false
Dreams.

Now the means meet to be observed are of two sorts;

Some Negative, Some Positive.
Negative; Proposing what we are not to do; and

Positive, Reporting what is fit to be done.

1. Things that men must not do who would secure themselves from deceitful
Dreams; as namely;

Not harbor fit Matter for them, and Not hearken to the Promoters of them.
1. Matter for such Dreams men must not harbor: The Devil could never do so
much upon the minds of men either sleeping or waking, but that he finds fit
matter therein to work upon: He there perceives a (...), a seed-plot of all
sin, there is (...) a general tendancy or bent in the soul to sins of all
sorts. Satan sees men's sinful propensions and provisions, how the wood and the
Altar is ready, and so he brings the Sacrifice.: He puts in the ciens, but the
stock grows upon man's own ground. When Satan sends in his suggestion, and it
meets with a heart full of corruption, strange things are wrought both day and
night. As Satan, so Sin never slumbers nor sleeps, but when man's body is at
rest, they be both awake and at work in wicked Dreams. Caus^^ corrup^elarum
non illecebri^ -- sed in cordibus haben^^s -- and vitio^i^^s nostra est men's
nostra. Salvian de Gubern. Dei. lib. 6.
The way to interrupt the Devils work is, to bereave him of what he cannot work
without: Not to nourish or cherish the deceits of sin, least thereby men
furnish and establish the designs of Satan.

2. To men promoting false Dreams do not hearken: Thou shall not hearken to
that Prophet or dreamer of Dreams, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. Thou shall not consent unto
him, nor hearken unto him, ver. 8.

Not consent.] This concerns the inward Diaboli decipientis calliditas and
hominis consentientis voluntas, etc. August. de peccat. origi. li. 2. c. 37.
mind, the yeeldings of which gives great advantage unto Dreams of deceit, and
to seducers of all sorts. Satan himself could not have such success in his
deceiving wiles, but through men's consenting wills. Thou shall not consent.

Nor hearken.] This forbids the opening of the outward ear. By the door of the
ear enemies often get into the house of the heart, and make wild work within.
Thou shall not consent nor hearken: Thou shall not hearken that thou may not
consent. By hearing seducers set out Alloquitur hic totum populum, quia
nonnulli erant qui sub specie and color Prophetici spiritus vaticini^
proferent. Et alii erant qui maxim appetunt and invitant. Calvin. in loc.
their Dreams, how soon have some consented and been deceived? Jer. 29. 8.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel, Let not your Prophets nor your
Diviners in the midst of you deceive you, nor hearken to your Dreams which ye
cause to be dreamed.

Your Dreams.] They were the Prophets Dreams, they conceived them and recited
them, yet they were the peoples Dreams, in that they received them and
encouraged them. Diodate upon the place observes, that these people were so
bent upon bewitching Dreams, that they gave their false Prophets bribes to
bring them, large rewards for lying reports; or at least they so flattered
those who found them Dreams, that they made many to be dreamed. But says the
Lord, Let not such Dreamers deceive you, nor hearken, etc. The best way to stop
errors, is to stop ears, not to hear them; and the best way to hinder deceits,
is not to hearken to deceivers: Deceivers are Concinnarunt menda^ia. Vatablus.
the Devils Brokers, that trim up his old rotten rags, and sell them off for
new clothes. They make fine their falsehoods, as the phrase is, using many
brave words to put off their bad wares. But do not hearken.

1. Observe what we must do toward freedom from false Dreams; viz.

Love the Truth of God, and Fear the God of Truth.
1. Love to the truth of God, is a good defense against all false ways, false
Doctrines, false Dreams. O let us Ama^t veritatem lucentem splen^entem and
^derunt veritatem calentem, urent^m, redarguent^m. Aug. conf. li. 10. ca. 22.
Quia Anabaptistae ^ ve^ietate Evangelii avertunt aures, ideo Deus mitti^ illis
Doctores non qui ulc^ra sanarent sermonibus suis sed qui s^mniis suis
fallacibus scabiem scalperent, Gastius de exord. Anabap. pa. 495.
love Truth, all Truth, not only shining Truth, but burning Truth. Some (says
Austin) they love Truth that beams Light, but not Truth which brings heat, etc.
Truth that is most warning, is best arming, and best defends from all
falsehoods: The want of this love to Truth, lays men naked to believe lies. They
received not the Truth in the love thereof. For this cause God gave them up to
strong delusions to believe a lie, 2 These. 2. 11.

2. Fear toward the God of Truth, this is a good Antidote against* Satan's
poison, preventing the vanities of deluding Dreams. In the multitude of
Dreams there be diverse vanities, but fear thou God, Eccl. 5. 7. Tertullian
tells of some unsound heads, who that they might the better introduce their
seducing Doctrines, they denied that God was to be feared: Which wicked Error
that Worthy Writer does fully confute; Vbi Deus non timetur, ibi non est: and
ubi Deus non est, nec veritas ulla est, etc. Tertul. de praesi. advers. haere^.
c. 43.
concluding, That where God is not feared, there is no Truth well fenced. But
men laying all open to erroneous conceits and deceits, their hearts as houses
are soon filled with falsehoods, when the true fear of God is gone from the
door. Such a fear of God as brings forth obedience to all Gods commands, is an
excellent means against all Dreamedeceits and deceivers, as is manifest by that
of* Moses in Deuteronomy. 13. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of
Dreams -- Ye shall walk after the Lord your God and fear him, and keep all his
Commandments, etc. Men who so fear God, as with all care to keep to all the
Commandments of God, become most safe from the deceivings of Satan. But as
those who are wholly fearless, casting off all care toward all Gods
Commandments; so those who fear God but in part, having a care only toward
some Commandments of God, but in others In paradiso mandavit Deus Adae ut
custodiret mandata sed fortasse non mandaverat custodire omnia, ideo deceptus a
Serpente putans quod si in part aliqua recederet a mandatis non, etc. Ambros.
Sermon. 1. in Psalm. 67.
remain remiss, all such Satan may soon deceive. God appointed Adam in Paradise
(says Ambrose) to keep his Commandments, but perhaps not expressing his
exactness in keeping all, he thought he might swerve from some, and so by the
Serpent was soon deceived.

So that the safest course to secure our souls from Satan's Deceits in delusive
Dreams, is to fear God, and with the utmost care we can, to keep unto Gods
whole commanding-word; for the want of which diverse have been deceived by Satan
in deluding Dreams: and how soon may we in the same case miscarry, and through
Satan's subtilties in our sleep mistake. As in the nightime Laban deluded
Jacob, bringing to his bed blear-eyed Leah for beautiful Rachel; so in the
night the Devil has deceived diverse, bringing to them in sleep ugly lies for
lovely Truths. And let us not think the Devil is grown idle or simple, but is
as subtle and sedulous, night and day industrious in all delusive ways, that
thereby he may

Hold up the falling Seat of the Beast, and Hold down the Rising Throne of
Christ.
False Dreams driven on by the Devil to this double end, are of two sorts;

Some in sleeping Men, and Some in Men awake.
These latter many fall under that are yet free from the former; and the former
those are in danger of who are misled by the latter: False Dreams found in
many waking men are manifest:

As wrong opinions in themselves, And high presumptions of themselves.
1. Men within themselves have many opinions that be but mere false Dreams,
viz. That God sees no sin in his servants. That Christ having satisfied Gods
Justice, sin shall never be punished. Christ having wrought man's
Righteousness, good works are needless to be done. If God has appointed men to
life, they need use no means. Men may do evil that good may come thereby.
Impulses of Spirit, and successes of Providence, are more to be minded than
Rules of Scripture, etc.

These are False Dreams.

2. Some of themselves have such presumptions as are assuredly but deceiving
Dreams; and these do either concern

Sin, or Grace.
1. Concerning Sin: We may see several sorts presuming,

Some that they are free from it, and Others that they shall do well in it.
1. Many imagine themselves to be free from sin, which is a Soul-deceiving Omnis
habens peccatum sanctus non est: etsi nullus sanctus vacuus est peccato. Aug.
de Eccles. dogmat.
Dream. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and there is no
truth in us, 1 John 1. 8. yet so several say that they have no sin

Original, or Actual.
Original sin they be born without: That sin is a blow never given to
their nature, a blot that never fell on their faces, a moth that never took
their garments. As for the sin of Adam, the sin of Parents, remote or
immediate, they say as the Highpriests touching the Treason of Judas, What is
that to us?

2. Actual sin they live without: Their tongues can speak apace and not
stammer, their feet can run swift and not stumble, they can act body and soul
Si nos non filii, qua front dicimus, Pater noster qui es in coelis? and si nos
non peccatores, quare deprecamur, Dimitte nobis debita nostra? Aug. de verb.
Apostol. Sermon. 29.
without sin; their lives are as strait lines without bending,; their works
be as Books that have no Errataes; they are set into such an estate, wherein
not only they do not sin, but wherein they cannot sin:

These are false Dreams.

2. Several there be who persist in sin, yet conceive they shall do well:
Either they do diverse good things, and they shall satisfy for the bad; their
good works shall recompense and answer for their evil deeds, or otherwise they
have power and purpose to repent of sin hereafter* or else they plead God is
merciful, and Christ died for sinners: Or they think because God in his
greatness is so high, that he takes no particular notice of man's miscarriages
here below: Or they conceive, because God is silent, he is such a one as
themselves; or they have seen several proceed in sin, whom God has
prospered and favored, and so they expect the same: or they have excuses,
evasions, distinctions, through which they pass with men, and doubt not but to
do with God the same, with several such like conceits.

These are false Dreams.

2. As concerning Grace, several unsanctified men imagine,

They are increased in it, and They shall be Crowned for it.
1. In Grace they think they have large encreasings: Men who are miserably
empty of what ever is savingly Rev. 3. 17. Dicis dives sum] De jactantia opum
spiritualium recte intelligitur. Hypocritae se justos esse and Dei gratia
egregie sanctos nec peccatorum venia coram Deo egere arbitrantur. Paraeus in
locum.
good, yet confidently conclude, that in respect of spiritual good things,
they have not only the reality thereof, but be rich therein: I am rich and
increased in goods and lack nothing, said the Laodicean Church as she lay in a
deluding Dream, upon mistake of her spiritual estate, Rev. 3. 17.

2. Upon their grants of Grace they expect Crowns of Glory, having high hopes
of Heavenly-happiness: They lay such weight upon their religious works, as to
look for glorious rewards, wondrous privileges, rich inheritances; great
things for them a coming, not only in Heaven, but even on Earth a temporal
Kingdom, a terrestrial Paradise; all present Powers pulled down, themselves
set up, possessing seats of Honor, places of pleasure, unknown freedoms,
felicities:

These are false Dreams.

These Dreams of waking men be doors to sleeping Dreams; and how soon may men
fall from one false Dream to another: the best course then to keep out any, is
to keep off all.

To conclude in this case; I shall only call to a double duty;

Of Prayer, And Praise.
1. Prayer to God, that night and day he would be our firm defense against all
false Dreams; that God would not suffer Satan to deceive us, nor leave us to
believe his lies: That still the Lord would deliver us, and not let us be led
into such temptations; nor let such temptations overtake us to turn us aside.

2. Praise to God who has hitherto freed us from false Dreams, keeping us
clear from Satan's deceits and subtle sleights. O what a mighty mercy has Non
omnes Satan suis fallaciis and mendaciis involver^ aut opprimere potest gratiis
De^ agere debemus. Vid. Calv. in locum.
God manifested, in preventing of and preserving us from the dangerous
delusions of lying Dreams. 2 Thessalonians. 2. We see how the Apostle expressing the
sad punishment of some, Who receiving not the Truth in the love of it, God gave
them up to strong delusions to believe a lie, ver. 11. He proceeds to pondering
the privilege of others, and so breaks out: But we are bound brethren, beloved
of the Lord, to give thanks always to God for you, because God has chosen you
to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth, ver.
13. High honor is indeed due to the Divine Majesty for this mavelous mercy,
and therefore unto him be all glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
III. Of Filthy and Defiling DREAMS.
JUDE Ver. 8. Likewise notwithstanding these filthy Dreamers also defile the
flesh.
AT the entrance of this undertaken Treatise touching sinful Dreams, we
divided such into these two sorts;

Some Deluding, and Some Defiling.
Now that no man may mistake, take Hoc uno artificio somniorum constat,
Ethnicos olim multipli^iter fuisse delusos and maculatos and in impuritate
obfirmatos. Magir. in Physol. lib. 6. c. 15.
that division with this concession: to wit, We grant that deluding Dreams do
defile, and that defiling Dreams do delude; but though on both sides they have
the same ill influence, yet between them there is an undoubted difference.
Dreams closely deluding enter more into man's Intellectual part, corrupting
his judgment, and perverting him in his opinions. Dreams grossly defiling, do
more seize on man's Sensitive part, polluting his affections with fleshly
impressions; whereupon such Dreams may well be handled distinctly. Having
therefore done discourse about those false deluding Dreams wherein the Devil
has an industrious hand: I now enter another discourse about filthy and
defiling Dreams, for the effecting of which Satan is found with some very
sedulous. And for this purpose I have enterprized this pertinent passage of the
precious Apostle Jude; Likewise these filthy Dreamers notwithstanding defile
the flesh.

The present words are two ways considerable,

In their Dependence, and In their Substance.
1. For their dependence as they refer to somewhat foregoing. We may find in
the verse before, mention made of the miserable and sensual Sodomites, as
expressly reporting,

Their ways of Sin, and Gods ways of Punishment.
1. Their ways of Sin, against God and amongst themselves, were exceeding
sinful: They gave themselves over to filthiness, and went after strange flesh,
ver. 7.

2. Gods ways of Punishment upon them were woeful, strange and astonishing:
they burnt out against God with fire fetched from Hell, and God burnt Gehenna
de caelo. Salvian. de Guber. Dei. lib. 1.
up them with a fire flung from Heaven, as Salvian observes: which fire was but
a figure of that infernal fire into which they were eternally cast. They are
set forth for an ensample, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, ver. 7.

After this he instantly adds, ver. 8. Likewise notwithstanding these filthy
Dreamers also defile the flesh. The Sodomites sad and sinful case so premised,
here is the sin of another sort proposed,

Both as Assimilated, And as Aggravated.
1. Assimilated, or as resembling the sin of the Sodomites: They were filthy
sinners in flesh-defilements: Likewise these filthy Dreamers defile the flesh.

2. Aggravated, or as transcending the sin of the Sodomites. What fearful
sinners the Sodomites were, not only the Scriptures, but Josephus and Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 1.
other Writers report. They were in a fleshly way such foul offenders, as God
fearfully punished them with fire eternal: yet these were not afraid for all
that, but followed their filthy lusts, though those Sodomites suffered for
their foul and fleshly sins, yet these were not warned, restrained, bounded;
but broke out (notwithstanding) into their filthy defilements: Likewise
notwithstanding these filthy Dreamers defile the flesh. This concerns the
Coherence.

2. The Substance or the words considered as in themselves, their principal
parts are two:

The Subject, and The Predicate.
First, For the Subject or persons here spoken of, they are said to be Dreamers
of some filthy sort: Those filthy Dreamers.

Secondly, The Predicate, or what is spoken of these persons; their
fleshdefiling is affirmed: These filthy Dreamers defile the flesh.

Concerning the Subject-Persons which here the holy Apostle proposes [ filthy
Dreamers] we shall enquire,

What the Dreamers were, and What their filthiness was.
The Dreamers here meant are of a Hi somniantes earnem maculant non ui^ modo
sed vary prout varios excogitabant libidinum modos, etc. Estius in loc.
sinful sort, which more generally considered, are such who while asleep have
foul imaginations that fill their minds. Now as there be two sorts of sleepers
that Dream; so there be two sorts of bad Dreamers in sleep:

Some so Metaphorically, and Some Physically so.
1. Metaphorically: so all in their sinful estate are said to be asleep, and
in their sleep to have sinful Dreams. Natures-time is nightime, and in the
time of this night-darkness men have their night-Dreames:

As some false and foolish, So some foul and filthy.
False and foolish Dreams about worldly matters: Their inward thought is,
their houses shall endure for ever, and their dwelling places to all
generations, Psalm. 49. 11. These be foolish Dreamers. ^aetatur stultus in
fructibus ipsa nocte moriturus and cui vita jam deerat victus abundantiam
somniat. Cypr. de Orat. Domini.
Such another Dreamer was he Luke 12. 17. And he thought within himself, what
shall I do? for I want room to lay my fruits. I will pull down my barns and
build greater: I will say to my soul, Thou have goods laid up for many years,
take thine ease. But God soon awaked him out of his Dream, with a Thou fool,
this night thy soul shall be required of thee, etc.

Foul and filthy Dreams about wicked matters, and for satisfaction of sinful
lusts: Such Dreamers are evident, Exodus 15. 9. And the enemy said within
himself, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, and my lust
shall be satisfied, etc. And we read of some such Dreamer, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. He
blesses himself in his heart saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the
imagination of mine own mind, and add drunkenness to thirst. These are Dreams
and Dreamers found in a figurative sense, and for such the greatest part of
ancient Writers did usually interpret the Text.

2. In a Physical sense, for such as are in their natural sleep, and therein
properly Dreamers. The Dreamers here meant, were of some singular sort, and
therefore not to be taken in a common and promiscuous sense. All sinners are
Dreamers: but the Dreamers the Apostle here points at, were such as some
sinful men are not, so much the demonstrative Pronoun imports [(...)] These,
these Dreamers* Others sleep as these do, but in sleep these Dream as others
do not: These Dreamers. This additionall word [ isti] intimates they were no
ordinary Dreamers, but such Dreamers they were, as when their sleeping bodies
upon their beds were at real rest, their waking minds in a most wicked way
were hard at work. Thus some former Writers did unfold this place of the
Apostle, as Estius and others report, and thus several of our later Divines
interpret the Text, as noting Gaign^eus putat Apostolum hoc loco alludere ad
illusiones and nocturnas pollutiones, etc.
[ nocturnall pollutions] through filthy workings of men's minds in the time of
their night-sleepes, as in their Annotations we see.

2. To discover these Dreamers as referring to their filthiness [ filthy
Dreamers,] though the Greek copies commonly want the word [ filthy,] yet it is
supposed, and well supplied by our English translations; Their affirmed
defiling property, proves the persons of these Dreamers to be filthy: were
they Hi somniatores ad impuritatem projecti sunt, uno ad omnem turpitudinem se
prostituunt. Calv. in loc.
not filthy, they could not defile; they do defile, therefore they be filthy.

For the more unfolding the infolded filthiness of these Dreamers, observe
several things:

Some as from former Expositors, and Some as further Expounding.
1. Former Expositors have read the present words in a double way;

Some Passively, and Some Actively.
Passively: As if herein only others were Actors and themselves rather
Sufferers, so Vatablus, Erasmus, Aretius render the word, translating it in
their Latin language after a differing phrase, [(...)] that is,

1. Delusi in somniis; Men bewitched, beguiled, befooled, besotted in Dreams,
imaginations that be mere Lege Aug. Marlorat. in locum.
seductions, sinful conceptions, certain illusions.

2. Demersi in somniis; Men drowned in filthy Dreams as in puddle water, or
sticking as in deep dirt, overwhelmed as in mud and mire, plunged into pits of
pollutions.

3. Devicti in somniis; Vanquished and subdued by Dreams; Men whom the Devil
as a conqueror having taken in their night-quarters, are by him carried away
captive.

Actively: As if not so much others were Actors, as themselves rather movers
herein and workers hereof, so Paraeus, Piscator, Calvin and other Commentators
Videtur istud participium adjectum ad amplificandum libidinem istorum ut quae
sese in illis etiam dormientibus exerat. Piscat. in locum.
carry the meaning of the Apostle, expressing it by a Participle that imports a
present act of the Dreamers part, rendering the word [(...),] somniantes, or in
somniando, or inter somniandum, etc. all intimate, men themselves acting in and
affecting of these filthy Dreams. The Devil set aside, they are Dreamers
filthy, and filthy in Dreaming.

2. These Dreamers filthiness I shall yet further unfold;

As referring to Sin, and As referring to Satan.
Filthiness as referring to Sin is twofold.

The filthiness of Sin, and The Sin of filthiness.
1. Filthiness of Sin: This is in general applicable to all sin, all sin
having this common name to be called filthiness, and all such filthiness of
what sin soever, may be acted over in the thoughts of man's mind; and that
not only during the day and when he is awake, but also in the night time as
Somniando cogitat, and cogitando ruminat and ruminando delectatur. Aug. concio.
3. in Psalm. 36.
he lies asleep, his mind may be moving and roving upon, delighting and
solacing himself in thoughts of Luxury, Gluttony, Avarice, Envy, Pride,
Prodigality, etc.

2. The Sin of filthiness: Or that particular sin of uncleanness strictly
so called. This is a deep ditch or puddlepit, into which a man may be miserably
plunged by the mere imaginations of his mind, Matthew. 5. 28. As a man that has
no body with him, when abroad, may at midday be an adulterer in the adulterous
thoughts of his heart: so a man that has no body with him in his bed, may in
the sleeping time of the night, be adulterously naught by the filthy Dreams of
his mind: and commonly those filthinesses that a man's mind is fixed upon in
the day when awake, will visit him in the night, find him out and fasten upon
him in his sleep.

2. As referring to Satan that filthy Non dicitur Diabolo ut damnetur quia
adulterium commisisti, etc. Aug. l. de Discip. Christi. c. l. Justin Mart. ad
qu. 24. orth^dox. Aug. li. 18. de Civ. Dei. ca. 18.
and unclean spirit, who has no little hand in such loathsome Dreams. The
Devil indeed not having a body himself, cannot commit bodily filthine^s, but he
can conform himself so to the fantasy; as to further this mental filthiness
in and with others. Very strange things (as to appearance) men may do by the
power of Satan, so several Sorcerers have exceeded, as Justin Martyr, Austin
and Others report things very strange. And may not Satan by himself immediately
manage mavelous matters, causing shapes and forms to appear of all kinds of
creatures, as to man's ocular part or his eye without: Pliny, Philostratus and
Plin. li. 35. cap. 11. Philostrat. li. 4. Val. Max. li. 1. ca. ult. de
simulachris.
others, give several instances herein: So to man's imaginary power interpose
himself, causing things and persons to appear to the putative faculty effecting
these filthy Dreams. He that came in Samuels Robe in the Serpents form, yea
transforming himself as an Angel of Light to men awake, may not he come in
other ways and manners to men asleep? He that can appear as a roaring Lion, to
affright a waking Christian; cannot he present himself as an enticing Damsel,
to affect a sleeping man, and to effect these filthy Dreams? We read of the
rich man in the Parable, He thought within himself saying, What Quid faciam?
interrogantis vox est, and quem put as interrogabat iste. Erat in illo
Diabolus, and ille, etc. Chrysolog. Sermon. 104.
shall I do, etc. It Is the voice of one asking a question: And who (says a good
Author) do you think he did ask? Though really no body was by, yet the Devil
being in him, could soon make him conceit some body with him. As a man in his
ordinary Dreams imagins he has his friends about him conferring together; so
in filthy Dreams man imagins his mates about him and consorts with him: And
thus filthiness not fit to be named is nourished. So we see the first Phrase
unfolded [ filthy Dreamers,] these are the Subject-Persons of the Apostles
speech.

2. The Predicate, What is spoken of these Persons; viz. [They defile the
flesh.] And herein we are to unfold,

What is the flesh that is defiled? and What is that defiling of the flesh?
1. The flesh defiled, or the flesh they do defile, is taken in a twofold
sense,

Either as referring to others, Or as reflecting upon themselves.
1. Flesh as to others referring: So Epiphan. in haeresi ^nosticorum. ^ecumen.
in Commentariis suis.
Epiphanius and Oecumenius seem to carry the sense, as if some others were
concerned in this Dream-defilement: And they may take up some cause to color
such an Interpretation of flesh from the verse preceding that concerns the
Sodomites, who in their filthy ways are said (...), etc. Others flesh they
filthily followed after defiling one another: and these are said to resemble
them; Likewise these filthy Dreamers defile the flesh. But the aspect of the
similitude may be upon the act defiling, rather then upon the object defiled.
Or if the object be considered in a general sense, flesh on all sides was
surely defiled: These defiled the flesh and so did the Sodomites; the Sodomites
defiled the flesh and so did these: But that these Dreamers did defile, carnem
alteram seu alienam, I conceive is a mere mistake. Clemens Non aliud somniant
quam spurcas libidines, and impuras cupiditates imaginationibus su^. lib. 3.
Stromatum.
Alexandrinus excellently and confidently, besides the greatest part of others
the best Expositors, interpret these filthy Dreamers to be Mental sinners, men
sinful by imaginations and thoughts, the evil of which do not directly reach
to the wronging and defiling of others: We may be harmed by men's outward words
and deeds, but yet receive no real prejudice by their inward thoughts. ' It Is
sure (says Austin) Res vera, ille vivit, tu tamen homicida, illa casta, tu
tamen adulter. Aug. de verb. Dom. 42, and 43.
thou may be a murderer yet the man alive, thou may be an adulterer yet the
woman chaste, etc. because while these things are only in thoughts, a man's
neighbor is never the worse. Men's mischievous and adulterous thoughts when
awake, work no immediate ill to others, much less such thoughts in men asleep.
Flesh as referring to others is not defiled by filthy dreamers.

2. Reflecting on themselves, flesh defiled is two ways taken;

Either as more limited, Or as more enlarged.
1. Limited and more strictly, the flesh they defile is their own bodies, so
runs the most Orthodox Commentators Ita Beza Major. Au^. A^et. Pise. Paraeus,
etc. I^o and Estius in locum.
in a united current; carnem maculant, i. e. corpus suum polluunt; they pollute
their own bodies. The flesh may more immediately mean the body, the body being
most properly the fleshie part: And in filthy Dreams the bodies of men may be
actually concerned and so certainly defiled

2. Enlarged and more fully, the flesh they defile is the whole man both body
and soul. Defilement in Dreams does not fasten upon the body barely, but
setles upon the soul also. And this adds much to the mischief of such filthy
Dreams, that the soul or mind, man's most precious part is by this means
polluted. And undoubtedly if these Quid immundius qua^ ment^m qu^ nihil homini
preti^sius datum, turpibus com^a^ulare criminibus? Amb.
Dreams do defile men's bodies, their hearts and minds pass not free from
defilement; for sin which defiles one does defile both: body and soul must
needs receive the same defilement,

From their close connection, and From sins strong contagion.
1. Their connection, union and mutual dependence in being and working, does
assure their reciprocal sympathy in each others harms, and joint partaking of
each others sufferings.

2. Sins contagion is such as concludes this: The poisonous power, the
venomous and vicious quality of sin is such as cause the same. Sin is such
a Gangrene, as seizing upon one part soon corrupts the whole: As the sins of
the soul bubble up and break out in the body, so the sins of the body soak
and sink down into the soul; so that in filthy Dreams both body and soul are
defiled.

Quest. If the whole man be defiled, why then is only flesh named?

Answ. In this matter most fitly may flesh bear the name, for

From the flesh all this comes, and Through this all becomes flesh.
1. From the flesh it comes, that men have such filthy Dreams as does defile
them: Flesh is the fountain, the causa Aquin. 3a. pars. Quaest. 54. Art. 3. 1.
sine quanon. The Devil could never fasten filthy defiling thoughts upon men
asleep or awake, were it not for flesh he finds in them. Hence all Satan's
temptations toward Christ, were only by proposing things outward, not
impressing any inward evil. The Prince Quomodo in illo invenit nihil? in
ubertate sapientiae, integritate justitiae, etc. Christus non vacuus sed
Diabolus caecus, qui nescit nisi sua cernere. Ambr. de fuga saeculi. ca. 4.
of this world comes (says Christ of the Devil) and finds nothing in me.
Nothing! (says Ambrose) O Lord in thee are treasures of wisdom, in thee is the
holy Ghost above measure; in thee is the fullness of the Godhead bodily, etc.
Ai, but the Devil could find nothing to fit his work, no flesh in him out of
which he could cause one bad motion in his mind sleeping or waking, neither by
night or day. The Devil indeed when he comes to men, finds flesh in Caro sicut
est fons vit iositatis invita, ita est radix and origo omnivm pravarum
cogitationum in cord. Chen* nit. Harm. Evang.
them. All men are not in the flesh; but in them all have flesh, out of which
the Devil setches filthy thoughts, and draws forth defiling Dreams. The flesh
is the first root and chief spring, out of which proceeds these puddlestreames,
etc.

2. By such filthy Dreams the whole Qui secundum corporis appetentiam vivit
caro est, etiam anima caro est. Amb. Sic dediti sunt carni de si nihil aliud
quamcarnem se esse reputarent.
man is made flesh: hereby he is even as nothing but flesh, flesh. Isa. 31. 3.
it is said of the Egyptians, Their horses are flesh and not spirit. So of such
men may it be said, Their hearts are flesh, and not spirit. To have a heart of
flesh may be a mighty mercy, but to have a fleshly heart, or a heart that is
but flesh, is a manifest misery: (...): the mind of the flesh, is the Apostles
phrase, Col. 2* 18. Man's mind by fleshly defilings, as it becomes filthy, so
it becomes fleshly. As the Devil is in himself of a spiritual Diabolus etsa
sit spiritus, agit tamen opera carnis. Aug* de Civitat. Dei. lib. 14.
nature, yet (says Austin) he does the deeds of the flesh, etc. so man's mind
that is of a spiritual being, yet in filthy Dreaming it has a fleshly
working, and as it were works it self into flesh, being comprised in that flesh
which is defiled. These filthy Dreamers defile the flesh.

2. What this flesh-defiling means, is manifest by marking

What it Supposes, and What it Compriseth.
This defiling supposes concerning such Dreams,

That within they are sins, and That they are sins from within.
1. Sins they are as within themselves Aquin. 12ae. Quaest. 86. Art. 1.
considered, in that they certainly defile; for as there is no sin but
defiles, so there is no defilement but by sin. As whatever is sin defiles,
so whatever defiles is sin. Poverty, imprisonment, punishments and the most
fearful afflictions that can befall a man do not defile a man, only sin.

2. Sins they are from within, for Externa peccata sunt majoris infamiae. Sed
peccata interna sunt majoris maculae and reatus. Aquin. Solicitor nullos esse
putare Deos. Ovid.
such sins do most immediately and monstrously defile, as we find Matthew. 15.
19. Out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, these
are the things that defile a man. There be men that imagine no sin in any
thoughts, but that thoughts and imaginations are free: whereas freedom for
imaginations is but an imaginary freedom. Sure there is no freedom for sin,
evil thoughts whether in men awake or asleep are sins, as is proved by their
defiling property. There be men who may grant some thoughts to be sins, as
thoughts of Atheism, Blasphemy, and the like, when men are awake; but thoughts
of adultery, fornication, when men are asleep and in their Dreams, are no
sins with them; whereas sins surely they are, as their defiling implies.

2. This defiling of the flesh is found to comprize

The parts of Sin, and The effects of Sin.
The parts of sin are comprised in the defiling of these Dreams,

As an aversion from God, And a conversion to Satan.
1. God, herein men turn from, who is real goodness and raised excellence,
rare in Majesty and rich in mercy: now man becomes unclean when he thus
declines: When ever (says Austin) the Anima quae fornicata est a Deo, casta
esse non potest, etc. Aug. advers. Julia. lib. 4.
heart goes a whoring from God, how can it be clean? As departure causes
defiling, so defiling implies departure.

2. Satan, men herein turn to, betaking themselves to his enticing forgeries,
and hugging his shadows, and bowing down to his Images, embracing the
representations he tenders. Satan makes a sinful man's bed, his nest in which
he lays most loathsome eggs, which yet the sinner sits over, adding his own
warmth to brood and bring them forth, this his defiling act infolds.

2. The effects of sin are found infolded herein:

As somewhat privative, And somewhat positive.
1. Privative, or a further depriving themselves of primitive amability and
beauty: Thus man is made more remote from his first purity, glory, excellency
and immaculate innocence.

2. Positive, or a further imprinting of deeper deformity and greater impurity
through the pollution of Dreams. The Schoolmen discoursing of sin, do still
^eat of two things, macula and reatus, In quolibet peccato sunt s^il. macula
culpae and reatus poen^. Aquinas 3 par. Q^^st. 22. art. 3.
filth and guilt: The former is the blackness of sin that takes away man's
luster, the latter is the bondage of sin that takes away man's liberty; hereby
he is bound over to death and Hell; both follows upon filthy Dreams: for
whatever casts under filth, brings under guilt. Every sin as it stains a man
and leaves him under blots: so it stabs a man and leaves him in his blood.
Filthy Dreams that defile, though these effects are secret and unseen, yet
that makes them never the less but the worse: The outward sins of waking men
lay blots and blows upon them in the eye of the world, but these inward sins of
sleeping men lay blows and blots Psalm. 139. 2, 3. Matthew. 6. 6.
upon them in the sight of God who sees in secret. Sinful Dreams leave black
blots, they be as deep stamps and dirty steps of the Devils foul feet. Which
foul defilings are further helped forward by filthy Dreamers themselves. These
filthy Dreamers also defile the flesh.

And now having walked through these words in their Explication, I come to some
Application from the words in a double way. To wit;

Of Instruction, and Of Admonition.
1. Instruction: These filthy defiling Dreams considered, several lessons
many men may learn, that do certainly concern

Themselves within, and Others without.
1. Men as within themselves reflecting, may find much of their spiritual
misery from these fleshly Dreams; of which they may be

Both Receptive, And Productive.
1. Of such Dreams to be receptive is sad: For a man to be as a noisome sink
into which gathers all such filthy mud: to be as the Devils center in which he
makes his black lines to meet. Eum nec Christianum esse nec Judae^^, nec
paganum, sed colluviem quandam impi^tatis, impuritatis. Di^itur de Constanti^^.
Copronymo. Cent.
For a man's bed and head to be Satan's stage, upon which he brings strange
disguised persons to play their parts, whereupon follows such effects as do
defile both head and bed. Lev. 15. 26. Deuteronomy. 23. 10, 11. For a man's head and
heart to be the Devils dung-cart, into which both day and night he throws his
dirt and filth, the case of no creature is herein like man's: beasts, swine and
poisonous Toads, are not receptacles of such stinking dreggs, as filthy Dreams.

2. Of such Dreams to be productive is yet much worse, when of such sinful
thoughts in sleep Satan may be an assistant, but man's own evil heart herein the
chief agent, and hereof the author: Genesis 6. 5. God saw that the whole
imaginations Ma^aru^ cog^tati^num Diabolus potest esse adjutor, non autem earum
auctor. Chemnit. Harm. Evan. in Matthew. 15. 19.
of the thoughts of man's heart were only evil continually. It Is not the
imaginations and thoughts in man's heart, quasi ex alio, but the imaginations
and thoughts of man's heart, quasi ex seipso, were only evil [ continually]
col-haiom, the whole day; which being taken in a natural sense, does comprise
the night as a part thereof: Day and night, man's whole time continually, the
imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart are some way evil. It may be they do
not always amount to such monstrous wickedness as the text intends, but when
hitherto they proceed, such sinful Dreams are the products of man's own evil
heart, which is always evil, but may be worst in the night. In the day, by
reading, hearing, seeing; by means of others company, counsel, examples,
exercises; others good words and works, a wicked man may have many good
thoughts moving in his mind: but in the sleeping time of the night, when he
has no such helps, his thoughts may be most notoriously naught. Plutarch
reports of a River that runs bright and sweet in the morning, and so remains
the day, but it begins to run black and bitter in the evening, and so all
night: with men many times that wickedness which breaks out in the day, was
formed and framed in the night. The Prophet reports of some, whose hearts be
like a Bakers oven, that is heated and made ready in the night, and in the
morning burns as a flaming fire, Hos. 7. 6. But suppose it proceeds no further
then filthy Dreams in the night, yet therein a man may see his heart miserably
naught: when a man has not only a filthy Dream, but Note.
is a Dreamer, in this filthiness found not only actual but usual, it
manifests much misery; such self-pollution being a sad condition: And sadly may
such a one say of his sin, as David did of his sorrow; My sore ran in the
night and ceased not, Psalm. 77. 2.

2. As concerning Satan, hereby a man may discern,

His Knowledge, and His Diligence.
1. The Devils knowledge by this appears to be great, and that he is intimately
acquainted with man's case,

Both for Body, Daemones vigent acumine scientiae, multa cognoscunt ex
subtilitate naturae, multa de hominibus ex observatione, etc. Aquin. 1a. Qu.
64. Art. 1, and 2, 3.
And for Soul.
1. The state of man's body, he much understands how that is disposed, the parts
thereof inclined through its natural constitution, accidental occasions,
assiduall transactions, contracted imperfections; what propensities,
lubricities, imbecillities have seized upon man, and under which he suffers. He
knows which way nature, even in corporeal parts is prone to put out it self;
and so in flinging the bowl he observes the biass, beating man upon his own
ground, and bringing him to much misery.

2. Satan sees much into the state of man's soul. Though the soul as concerning
its immanent and immediate acts of the principal powers is so locked up, as the
Devil by a direct intuition cannot look therein, or have knowledge thereof, yet
he can gather much in an arguitive way, he can make such animadversions of
matters without, as to discover much within. Man's understanding makes its
parelii or likenesses and resemblances, and these the fancy being near hand
takes in, observes and imitates; and while this is at work the Devil may get
the key of this shop, go in, and view the Images that are framed there to set
forward his sinful design: though the Devil cannot create or frame in the
fancy any new corporeal species, yet he can discern such similitudes and
shadows of things as are there already framed; he can call them up, and
accordingly conform himself, and so fetch forth a suitable draught of Dreams.
Unto filthy apprehensions he can cause filthy apparitions, and pitifully puddle
a man in polluting Dreams.

2. The Devils diligence is discernable therein to be also great, through that
filthiness which he sets forward in the night, and those defilements he fastens
upon man in his sleep. We read of Edward the first, who being wounded Humano
cord^ antiquus h^stis venenum insundit. Greg. M^r* li. 5. ca. 31.
with a poisoned knife, the Lady Elnor his wife while he lay asleep, sucked out
the poison to preserve his life. But the Devil, that Abaddon Apollyon, that he
may destroy, while men lie asleep, he casts in poison, and so pollutes and
defiles: he seeks in sleep to slay, by conveying venomous and vicious Dreams.
He comes like the Harlot, Prove. 7. 9. In the black and dark night saying, Let
us take our fill of love -- Poor man follows straight way as a fool to the
correction of the stocks, as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a Bird to the
snare. The Devil knows he may be interrupted in the day, and therefore will not
lose the night time. It Is true of Satan which is said of Gideon; What he could
not do by day, that he did by night, Judge. 6. 27. Jericho which could not be
conquered by day, yet was taken by the ambushments laid, and assaults made in
the night, Josh. 8. 6, 7. Satan L^ge Lutheruni loc. 49. Quintae Classis de
superstitionibus, variis fascinis ac praestigii^ diabolicis.
is sedulous in his sinful assaults upon men:

As in every Place, So at every time.
1. No place is free: He meets man at the Church, and at his chamber, and is
busy about him both at his board and at his bed.

2. No time is free: If at any time held from sinful employment, it seems as
his punishment: Stops in his temptations are his vexations: he accounts
restraining his destroying. Art thou come Nos destruere est a nobis potestatem
auferre quam in homines habemus ad tentandum eos. Theoph. in Evan. Marci.
to destroy us? say the devils to Christ when they were cast out of man, Mark
1. What is this (says Theophylact) to destroy us? this is to restrain his
temptations from man. At all times he loves liberty herein,

Yet then he is most stirring When man is most still.
At such times when man moves least, then the Devil moves most:

As when idle in the day, And when asleep in the night.
1. Idle in the day: It has been ever Non est aliqua cogitatio tam turpis tam
abominabilis mala, and execranda quam non inveniat otiositas. Gers. de modo
habendi se cont. malas immiss.
observed, when the Devil finds a man idle, he fills him with his foulest
temptations, cogitations; then he immits imaginations the worst and most wicked.

2. Asleep in the night: O that is a notable time for his temptations to take:
now a sinful man lies fit for Conatur Satan dormie^tium corpora impu^^s
somni^s polluere, ut ejus foeditatis etiam animos ex pergiscentium quodommodo
participes faciat. Magir. in Phisiol. li. 6. ca. 15.
his motions. Indeed day and night the Devils diligence is great: As he
observes men disposed in the day: so he suits his motions at night: And if as
the Prince of darkness he can command the night, he looks as Lucifer to carry
the day.

I shall conclude what relates to Satan, only observing that of Luther; Quod
ad Incubos and Succubos Daem^nes attinet, non nego s^d credo ^osse ^^eri ^l
Demon sit vel Succubus vel In^ubus.
who speaking his judgment de Incubis and Succubis, says; That it is not to be
denied, but certainly to be believed, that Satan can ludificari in lecto, etc.
and may, permitted of God, take upon him such species forms and shapes, and so
subtly he may convey himself in Audi^i multos recitantes sua ipsorum exempla.
Ac Augustinus quooque dicit idem se audivisse a ^ide dignus hominibus quibus
c^actus sit credere. Gratum enim Stanae est, si ludisicari nos in h^^^c modum
sum^ta specie vel juvenis, vel mulier culae possit. Potest ludificar i homines
proph^n^s and sine Dei timore viventes, ut cum Demon in lecto sit* existimet
adole^cens se habere puellam, aut puella adolescentein.
time of sleep, as to make the fantasies of sinful men imagine most sordid
matters; and so (says Luther) Austin and other men of good repute do assert the
same, viz. That Satan so cunningly can in such wicked ways and manners deceive
the senses of sleeping men, as to fall under most defiling Dreams.

This, who will doubt, that well considers Tanta est astutia and poteutia
Sathamae ludificandi sensus; and quid ^nirum? cum per vitrum f^at mutatio
sensus and color^s. Ita potest ludificari oculos and aures ut putes te videre
and andire aliquid, quod mon est. Satan maxima subtilitate illudit mentibus
and intellectibus, faciliora and leviora sunt apud Diabolum quibus carneos
sensus and phanta^i^s illudit, imfimas parts homines; Facilius est ludificari
sensus and actus, quem haec*natura habet crassissimum.
(says he) how it is certain Satan can deceive even waking men in other sorts
and parts? viz.

More External and Corporeal, and More Internal and Intellectual.
1. Parts more corporeal, as the more outward senses, the eyes and the ears of
men (even when awake) Satan may subtly make them imagine they hear such sounds
and see such sights as indeed they do not.

2. Parts incorporeall and intellectual, Quod de monstrosis partubus Daemonum
dicitur, aliqu^s vidi a Dia^olo puto desormatos, ^en ^^^^m a Dia^^l^ generat^s
esse semto. Luth. ex Tomo in Genesin 1. and ex Tomo 4. and l^^. commun. Quintae
Classis cap. 6. and cap. 40* de superst. Diab.
even such as lie more inward and upward, the superior powers of the soul, as
the understanding and reason, even in men's waking-time Satan can also deceive,
etc. So that we may soon believe the lower and inferior faculties, the
sensitive, carnal and more gross parts, may in delusive Dreams be polluted.
Thus Luther.

Lastly, In relation to God, a man may learn very much;

Both from these Dreams toward him, And from himself toward these Dreams.
Several things that concern God are considerable hence;

As the Might of his Power, And the Mercy of his Patience.
1. Much of Gods power appears as respecting such Dreams;

In pardoning things that be so bad, and In preventing things they be no worse.
1. Great is Gods pardoning power, Magna est misericordiae potentia; Deus enim
pollicetur se omnia peccata and omnia in peccatis remissurum, etc. Lactant. li.
6.
else were it not possible that such pollutions should have their remissions as
yet is manifest they may, in that upon repentance God promises pardon to sins
of all sorts and sizes: Isa. 55. 7. Jer. 31. 34. Jam. 5. 15. 1 John 1. 9. After
this black sin, God may give a white stone, Rev. 2. 17.

2. Gods preventing power how mighty, is manifest, in bounding the Devil, in
limiting lusts, and not letting this Leprosy spread; keeping it wholly off in
some, and causing a comfortable cure in others. Our Savior expressed a work of
wonderful power in healing the woman diseased with a running issue of blood
twelve years, Matthew. 9. 20.

2. Exceeding much of Gods mavelous patience may appear, as respecting such
Dreams and filthy Dreamers; Commonly such men may find, that concerning such
Dreams they do

Much disposing to them, and Nothing opposing against them.
1. Dispose themselves much to them they do, as deeply provoking of God,
pleasing their lusts, and displeasing the Lord. Young years often paddle and
puddle themselves in such pits, watering the Devils plants, and being wanton in
evil on the earth, Jam. 5. 5. nourishing their hearts in Jam. 5. 5. Enutrire
corda, significat sibi indulgere non modo ad naturae satietatem, sed ad
cogitationum cupiditatem, etc. delectationem, etc.
naughtiness, and nourishing naughtiness in their hearts; looking on such
objects, hearing such stories, reading Pamphlets, with pampering diet as
dispose.

2. Oppose themselves against such Dreams they do not, for which
nonperformance they are found offensive Lege Lutherum loc. de libidinibus
quintae Classis. cap. 66.
to God. yet God is patient though provoked, in that these Dreamers do nothing

Before for preventing, or After in repenting.
1. Before.] Nothing they are found doing to prevent such Dreams:

Either in Watching, Or in Prayer.
1. Watch they do not. A good Christian indeed sets his soul to watch while his
body sleeps. Like the Prophet, Isa. 21. 8. who cried, a Lion my Lord, I stand
continually upon the watchtower in the day time, and I am set in my ward whole
nights. But with these no Lion is feared, no night-warding or watching
performed; their whole man lies asleep, when these night-fires fearfully burn
and break out.

2. Pray they do not. Indeed a godly man cries upon this account against such a
sleep of sin, as David against the sleep of death: Consider and hear me O
Lord my God, lighten my eyes lest that I sleep the sleep of death, and mine
enemies say I have prevailed against him, Psalm. 13. 3. That the Devil
prevailing may not triumph, such a one rather desires to sleep in the dust of
the earth, than in the lusts of his heart: And desires (while he lives) that
rather than the Lord should suffer him to sleep so sining, he would keep him
awake without sleep. But no such matter with these men, by any prayer to God in
point of prevention.

2. After.] Nothing they do in the duty of repentance. Though such ought like
David, to wash their bed, and water their couch with tears; and like Jeremiah,
De talibus quoque cogitationibus venia petenda est, pectus percutiendum, and
dicendum, Dimitte nobis debita nostra. Aug. de Trin. lib. 12.
to pray, Oh that my head were full of water, and eyes fountains of tears, to
weep day and night, etc. These nightnaughty-thoughts should make such men
strike their breasts, and beg Gods applying of healing plasters. But to lie
and live under such sin with the neglects of all this, expresses the
wickedness of man, and yet the patience of God: God patient in forbearing his
blows. As God might strike men dead by day in their evil deeds; so by night in
the midst of their naughty Dreams. O dreadful, yet due! Diodate upon Isa. 21.
3, 4. observes, how Babylons ruin should be in the night, and surprise them in
their sleep, awaking, but with frights in their fall. Is not this a sin of
sad deserts? Calvin upon Micah 2. Si tempus nocturnum datum sit ad quietem,
certe cessa^dum est ab omni pravitate, qui vires quiet nocturna reficit, debet
etiam, etc.
1. aggravates night-naughtiness; that that time God gives man for rest from
the lawful works of his calling, he should sure rest from the unlawful works
of sinning. That time God gives man to refresh himself, he should not spend to
defile himself, etc. These filthy Dreamers defile the flesh.

I have done with the Instruction: I come now to the Admonition: wherein note,

The Men it is to, and The Matter it is of.
The Men that be concerned herein, and

The Matter to be considered hereupon.

1. For the Men that this monitory Peccatum in sanctis non solum est, sed agit,
nec solum vivit sed vigilat. Luth. loc. 40. de reliquiis pe^catorum in sanctis.
discourse will concern; are all such as lie liable to these evil Dreams: of
which there are two sorts;

1. Carnal men who are not at all sanctified, and 2. Sanctified men so far
as they are carnal.
Sinful and unsanctified men are the primary, principal, and the most proper
subjects of such dreaming-thoughts, as are so filthy and defiling. For

1. They are full of Matter for such Dreams. 2. They are free as Movers in
such Dreams.
1. For Matter to make such Dreams of, they are full: Let but the Devil come
into the shop of their fantasy, and there he may find all tools fit for his
work. A carnal heart is fitly compared to Tophet, Isa. 30. 32. It Is deep
(...), etc. Nazian.
and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the Devil blows up the
flame, and it burns at midnight by abominable Dreams. As that stinking mud of
sin which lies in the soul of an unsanctified man, often times the Devil draws
it out at his mouth by foul and filthy words when he is awake: so sometimes he
draws that dirty puddle all up into his mind, by black and beastly thoughts
when he is asleep. As at times God acts up the graces of the Spirit by sweet
and holy Dreams, and rare representations in the night of most blessed
matters, to the minds of converted men; so the Devil in the nighttime, often acts
up the lusts of the flesh by base and wicked Dreams, and wretched
representations to the minds of men unconverted, of matters not meet to be
mentioned. The Devil need not bring any thing with him, only improve the evil
that is already, unto the forming of most filthy Dreams.

2. As movers to meet such Dreams these men are free: Their minds are active
in sin, and sin active in their minds at all seasons. They sleep in sin,
but sin does not sleep in them; yea though in sin they certainly sleep, yet
to sin their souls are always awake. They are ready to co-work with Satan in
sinful Dreams; so that such things are not only dreamed in them, but they
are the dreamers of them. The Devil does not cause such Dreams without their
concurrence, but their corrupt hearts can cause such Dreams without the
concurrence of the Devil. There is a sea of sin in their souls may foam and
boil when no wind blows; and when winds of temptations are strong, and the
Devil does powerfully promote in the minds of men such Dreams of sin, they
may blame themselves.

For he comes thus to work, because they invite him in the day.

And he thus works when he comes, because they assist him in the night.

2. Gods Saints in sleep are subject to such sinful thoughts. As they have
Sobriis castis and religiosis viris tetra obscoena and plena impuritatis somnia
saepe contingunt. Magir. in Phisio. li. 6. ca. 15.
good Dreams from Gods concurrence with the work of grace by which they are
sanctified; so they may have bad Dreams as from the Devils compliance with
those principles of corruption that remain unmortified. Peter lying in a
trance, Acts 10. saw a sheet in which (according to the Law) were beasts both
clean and unclean, and all coming down from Heaven. A Christian in his sleep
may indeed have diverse Dreams, wherein (even according to the Gospel) the
thoughts of his heart are some clean and some unclean, but yet the clean only
come from Heaven, and the unclean from Hell; of which, not God but the devil is
the undoubted author. We here observe,

2. That there are no persons Satan seeks more to make them sinful, then Gods
Saints.

2. That there are no seasons when Satan seeks more to make them sinful, then
in nights.

1. The Saints of God Satan most solicits them to sin. He well knows,

They from Sin do most oppose him, and They by Sin do most displease God.
1. Good men when they sleep from sin and hold close to the service of God,
they supplant Satan's throne, their prayers are as great guns and batter the
Devils buildings; and hence he endeavors to draw them off from all such
service, unto sin against God.

2. Good men when they fall to sin they most offend God: Their miscarriages
most grieve the Spirit of Grace, and as daggers cut deepest into the heart of
our dearest Lord: hence also are the Devils endeavors to draw such to sin.

2. The season of the night is a chief time when the tempter suggests sin
into such as they sleep;

Because he is cunning, and Because he is cowardly.
1. The Devil is cunning, and therefore Vt faciat aliquando dormientibus, quod
non potest vigilantibus. Aug. Sermon. de Temp.
comes in the night: When the servants of God are asleep in their beds, he
surprises them by putting sinful thoughts in their minds. 'Twas once Gods
question to Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job? God has not a servant
but Satan considers him; as how, so when; as by what means, so at what times
his temptations will take best. In the day the Devil knows good men are more
observant of him, vigilant over him, that by unclean thoughts to carry them
aside, he sees small hope. When their bodies are asleep, their minds are not
so well watching, nor their thoughts so resolvedly resisting, but Satan makes
advantage of the season to give his assaults success. Some Qui hujusmodi pisces
pis^antur de nocte eos invadunt in tenebris. Aquinas.
report, that cunning Fishers when they would catch the Whale, Leviathan, or
such great Fishes in the sea, they set to it in the nightime, when the
creatures cannot see who invades them, nor how to evade them. Thus the Devil
when he would fain so fish as to catch these choice pieces the precious Saints
of God, he subtly sets upon them in the night, as his fittest time wherein to
tempt and take them.

2. The Devil is a coward: In the day he dares not oftentimes so assault Gods
Saints, when he sees them up in their armor, and so waits till night. As there
be wild beasts, in the night they range abroad for their prey, who are afraid
to creep out of their dens in the day time, Psalm. 104. 20. There be Thieves
that venture not upon men that meet them in the day, but are bold to break
houses in the night, and bind them they find asleep in their beds, Job 24. 15,
16. Such a one is Satan. The Saints of God when they are awake, are more ready
to the battle, and then the Devil as a base beaten enemy is not so forward to
fight them, but he sets upon these soldiers of Christ when they are asleep in
their quarters.

These things premised, it is manifest, that as carnal men are the subjects of,
so Christian men are subject to these sinful Dreams, and therefore men of all
sorts are concerned in the ensuing discourse.

2. The matter whereof this monitory discourse will further consist touching
such Dreams, is,

1. Some Persuasions against them, and 2. Some Directions about them.
Persuasions moving against them, are from the prejudices of them, in respect
of things both

Good, and Evil.
First, For the prejudice these Dreams do us toward things good: It Is in regard
both of the

Good they draw us from, and of the Good they draw from us.
1. Such Dreams (or sinful thoughts in sleep) they take our minds off from
those good watchings and workings as suit to our sleeping times. In the time of
sleep, though a man's outward senses are bound, and as servants they cease their
ordinary business abroad, yet the inward powers of fantasy and memory are
then most free and best at liberty for their proper employments; now the soul
being of God furnished with such faculties and abilities, it is sad when the
Devil seduces them, and by sinful dreamings diverts and pollutes them. As God
has created the soul at all times fit for good work, so God has appointed
good work for the soul at all times, to wit, meditation upon his Law day and
night, Josh. 1. 8. Now sinful Dreams draw us off from this In collationibus
Patrum legitur de quodam, qui semper in diebus festis, Somniando pollutionem
nocturnam patiebatur hoc Diabolo procurante ut impediretur a sacra communione,
etc. Aquin. 22ae. Quaest. 154 Art. 5.
duty.

2. Such Dreams they do not only take our minds off from good, but take good
out of our minds. We have not the benefit and comfort of the Word of God and
Spirit of God at such times to our thoughts: they are as it were taken from us
in respect of the stops hereby to their present exercise. As when Saul was
asleep in the trench, David took from his very bolster his spear and a cruse of
water, 1 Samuel 26. 12. Thus Satan in the night when we are asleep in our beds,
by bad Dreams gets away our spear and our water, the Word of God that should
defend us, and the Spirit of God that should refresh us: Thus of good things
are we lamentably left.

2. The prejudice these Dreams do us toward things evil: This in regard of

The evil of Sin they draw us unto, and also The evil of Punishment they draw
upon us.
The sin of such Dreams is against

The Commands of God, and The Mercies of God.
1. There be Commands which hereby we transgress: God requires that not only
the soul but the body be set free from all ways of defilement: Let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. That every one
of you should know how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor, 1 These. 4.
4. Not only the soul which is in the vessel of the body, but the body which is
the vessel of the soul, must be kept clean from soil. We must hate that
whereby the garment of the flesh is spotted, as we must hate the garment
spotted of the flesh, Jude 23. therefore not defile the flesh with Dreams.

2. There be Mercies which hereby we abuse: To have beds to sleep on, and to
have sleep upon our beds is a double mercy. Let us mark that expression of our
Savior, Matthew. 8. 20. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air nests,
but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head. It may seem Christ had not
here any settled bed to sleep upon. It Is evident Job had his bed, but thereon he
could not sleep. Weary some nights are appointed to me; when I lie down I say
when shall I arise and the night be gone, I am full of tossings to and fro unto
the dawning of the day, Job 7. 3, 4. Now to have with our beds to sleep on,
sleep upon our beds, are benefits too big to be abused, by the interpose of
such prejudicial Dreams.

The punishment for such Dreams is

Present, and Future.
The punishments present in this world are,

Debility of Body, and Perplexity of Soul.
1. Hereby the body is weakened, nature wasted, corporeal parts as defiled, so
enfeebled. These Dreams do to the sinner as Dalilah to Sampson, they bereave
him of his strength, and leave him in a languishing estate: If life be
prolonged, pains are enlarged, aches with age increased, especially if such
filthy Dreams be frequent. (Beside the evil that may run and reach unto
posterity.)

2. Hereby the Soul is wounded: The Devil hereupon makes great advantage in
life and death to dismay the mind. Of such offenses he does accuse in a Noli
pecc^re nam etsi nox est, Deus videt, Angeli circa cubile astant, Diabolus
accusabit, conscientia, testabitur infernus cruciabit, etc.
double Court; The Court of Heaven, the Court of Conscience. We read Rev. 12.
10. The accuser of our brethren is cast down, who accuses them before God day
and night. As the Devil does accuse in the day and night seasons, so he does
accuse of the day and-night sins. He accuses in the night for sinful deeds
in the day, and he accuses in the day of sinful Dreams in the night. It Is sad
when Satan keeps assizes in our souls, and actually arraignes, endites and
condemns, for such dealings as he has had with us in a way of wicked Dreams.

2. The punishment future in the world to come (without the prevention of
divine mercy) is everlasting misery. Such Dreams draw to ruin: That which
has a defiling power is of a destroying nature. And if such Dreams be sin,
The wages of every sin is death, Romans 6. 23. History reports of Sucton. cap.
33.
Nero (that monster of men,) that among the many ways he sought his Mother
Agrippinas death, one was in the night when she lay asleep in her bed, to kill
her with the fall of a heavy beam, which was therefore made loose in the roof
of the room. It Is our death and utter undoing the Devil our deadly adversary
aims at, when he lets fall these filthy Dreams while we lie by night asleep in
our beds. And as it is that which he desires, so it is that which we deserve and
must sustain, except Gods purging and pardoning grace prevents. Amen.

Thus much for disswasions, now for Directions.

These guide us to diverse duties about such Dreams: and they are

Either Antecedent, Or Consequent.
Duties antecedent are such as serve to prevent these Dreams. And they

Either look outward upon others, Or they look inward upon our selves.
Duties which we are to discharge toward others, are Ex operatione Daemonis
commoventur phantasmata dormientis ad maculandum, and hoc promovetur hominis
negligentia praeparandi vel expectandi se contra Daemonis illusiones unde in
sero cantatur. Hostem nostrum comprime, ne polluantur corpora. Aquin. 22ae.
Quaest. 154. Art. 5.


Expectation of Satan, and Supplication to God.
1. The Devil is to be expected to do his endeavors to draw in such Dreams:

Because he is ever malicious, Because he is ever treacherous.
The Devils malice is such, as makes him to do what mischief he may against
both good and bad, both day and night. History writes of a River that passes
through some parts of America, that not being fed by any spring, but caused by
snow which the Sun melts down the mountains, it runs strong in the day, but
has no stream in the night. It Is not so with Satan, such springs of malice
and mischief remains in him, that the streams of his temptations run strong by
night as well as by day: he has his nightworks and his night-walks for our
perpetual prejudice.

2. Satan's treachery is such, as we can never be secure: He may be as it were
bound up in the day, and break loose in the night. History makes mention of one
Cleomenes a Lacedemonian King, who making war against the Argives, he took
truce with them for seven days, and in the third night while they lay secure
and asleep in their tents, he broke in upon them and slew them with the edg of
the sword; saying, His truce was for days, and not for nights. Of such
treacherous dealings the Devil is full, a truce with him is not to be trusted;
if he be quiet in the day, he may be coming in the night. He being a fiend of
darkness as they are deeds of darkness he is most busy about; so they are
times of darkness he is most busy in: times both of spiritual and natural
darkness that best suit his designs, so that he may soonest be suspected by
night. Now because he loves to come unlookt for, provision may be a good
prevention.

2. God is to be entreated. Prayer to God is a principal means to keep off the
Devil in such Dreams; because

It engages the presence of God with us, and It accomplishes the promise of God
to us.
Upon Prayer God affords his presence with us: this sets the Devil at a
distance from us. The Wolf (says Austin) comes to the sheepfold by night,
purposing to prey upon the poor Lambs when they lie asleep; but he finds the
sheephard awake and walking about the fold, which forces him back without
shedding blood. Thus the Devil he designs to assault by night, but God being
about our beds he is beaten back: He begins Aug. de verb. Apo. Ser. 21. Lupus
venit ad ovile ovinm quaerit invadere, jugulare, devorare. Pastores vigilant,
nihil aufert, etc.
to suggest but cannot go on, God being by. Esth. 7. 8. Haman being fallen upon
the bed where Esther was, the King said, Will he force the Queen also before me
in the house? When Satan falls as it were upon the bed, God says, Will he force
my servant before my face? then he flies.

Upon Prayer God fulfills his promise to us. Isa. 27. 1. we find the Devil
compared to a piercing and crooked Serpent, creeping into Gods vineyard to do
it harm; Ai but says God of his vineyard, I the Lord do keep it, lest any hurt
it; I will keep it night and day. In the night the Devil comes, but he cannot
catch because God keeps; nor harm because God helps: God has promised his
Angels to defend his Saints, to encamp about them; which may principally imply
night-protection. Psalm. 34. 7. In the day we are more upon our march, in the
night, then we lie still, and then the Angel of the Lord encamps round about. A
guard of Angels can keep off a legion of Devils. In this respect we may say of
the bed of Gods servants as Cant. 3. 7. 8. Behold his bed which is Solomon's,
threescore valiant men are about it all Optimus dormientium custos, certissima
navigantium salus, tutissimum viatoribus s^utum. Greg. Nyss.
holding swords; such night-safeguards Prayer procures. Prayer (says One) as in
the day time it is the travelers trustiest guide, the soldiers safest shield;
so in the night time it is the sailors surest safety, and the sleepers best
keeper. Prayer, as Non Leonis rugitus bestias sic fugat, ac justi oration
Daemones, si loquitur solum devolant. Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in Act. Apost.
it ought to be the key of the morning, so the lock of the night: as in the
morning we should not open into the world without Prayer, so in the evening we
should by prayer shut up our selves in God, that the Devil in bad Dreams may
not come near us by night. As the roaring of the Lion (says Chrysostom) makes
the evening wolves to run, so the prayer of faithful men makes night-Devils
to slay.

Duties which we are to discharge toward our selves, are

Sinne-mortification, and Serious consideration.
1. We must be much in mortifying of sin, that Satan may have less suitable
matter to make sinful Dreams out of. Sin

It encourages the Devil for to come, and It accompanies the Devil when he is
come.
1. Satan would never so boldly come about such works, but that he knows he
shall find fuel s^^ for his fire. Hence he does usually make h^^ suggestions
to match our corruptions. As Nature draws out common Dreams according to the
constitution of the body; so does the Devil unclean Dreams, according to the
corruption of the heart.

2. Satan could never so freely go on in his work, but that he finds somewhat
in us that does befriend his filthy designs: He meets with that in our hearts
that gives him the hand for his help: Though he be a spirit, yet by the lusts
Diabolus e^si sit spiritus agitat tamen in operibus ^arnis. Aug. de Civit. D^i.
lib. 14.
of the flesh, he can exceedingly set forward such ways of defilements, and
thereby fulfill his infernal contrivements. The way to disinable Satan, is to
subdue sin; and the best way to beat him back, is to beat that down, by a
perpetual battle. Lycurgus made a Law among the Lacedaemonians, that they
should never fight with one enemy often: but sin is an enemy we must often
encounter or never conquer: now Satan in the night will get victory over us, if
we when awake get not victory over sin. Sin is destroyed

By deep humiliations, and By close applications.
1. Deep humblings will destroy sin: Repentance is a Plow, which if it cuts
deep will rend up sin by the roots. A ready way to put sin to death, is to
drown it in the deep waters of godly sorrow, as Pharaohs host in the red sea.

2. Such close applying as is by faith Confige ergo clavis spirituaalibus, etc.
affige carnes patibulo crucis dominicae, ut libertatem vagandi cupiditas
voluptatum cruci affixa non habeat. Amb. in Psalm. 119.
causes sins death: To apply the Word of God and the blood of Christ, breaks
the strength, and draws out the life of sin, with Scripture-nails driven home
by the hand of faith, to make fast the body of this flesh to the Cross of
Christ, that it move not hand nor foot, in word, work or thought, but dies by
the power of Christ's death.

2. To resist such sinful Dreams, we must be much in considering seriously

The Excellency of Soul and Body, and The certainty of Death and Judgment.
1. A settled considering how excellent man is in soul: Hence Bernard thus
breaks out, O anima insignita Dei imagine, decorata similitudine, redempta
Christi sanguine dispensata fide dotata spiritu, etc.
O my soul created after the Image of God, redeemed with the blood of Christ,
adorned with the graces of the Spirit, capable of the happiness of Heaven, etc.
what have thou to do with the Quid ti^i cum carne? Quid ti^i cum Diabolo? Bern.
lib. Mod.
flesh? what have thou to do night or day with the Devil? yea the body of man
is a brave and beautiful piece, if we observe

The Composition of it, and The Comparisons from it. How God has made it, and
How God does use it.
The beauty of the body as it comes out of the hand of God, we may gather from
Eccles. 12. 3, 4, 5. And as it falls into the hand of God again it abounds in
beauty; God makes it to be

A Temple, and A Sample.
1 Cor. 6. 19. Know ye not that your body is Corpus uniuscujus^^* vestru^
templum est spiritus sa^^^^ ideoque nullo modo polluendum. Aug. lib. de bono
viduitatis cap. 6. Item Aug. contra Maxim. lib. 1. col. 689. Templa non sunt
sordibus polluenda quia Deo sancto consecrata, sed corpora nostra sunt Dei
Templa and ideo pura semper sunt servanda. Paraeus Com. in 1 Cor. Quod a
corpore humano in se similitudinem trahat Deus, etc. Greg. Mor. lib. 32. Sect.
13.
the Temple of the holy Ghost? And it is as a sample or pattern; the Church of
God (the most glorious thing in the world) is resembled by the body of man: yea
God borrowes similitudes from man's body to express Himself, ascribing to
Himself an Eye, a Mouth, a Hand, etc. God thus has honored the body. This
pondered may prove a means to preserve our souls and bodies from
sinne-defilements.

2. A settled considering how sure yea near death and judgment-day draws:
meditate much of deaths approach. Thoughts of sin may bring on death, but
thoughts of death will keep off sin both asleep and awake: thus die daily.
Let us also fix in our minds the meditation of the day, when the Lord shall
come in the clouds to judgment. We have heard of that saying of St. Jerome,
Whether I eat or drink, whether I wake or sleep, me thinks I hear that voice,
Arise Bern. de interno do^no. ca. 33.
ye dead and come to judgment. Hence he had no room for a bad Dream. Bernard
on the other side sadly of himself complains: Alas what do I mean! I eat, I
drink, I play, I sleep, as if I had gone beyond death, and passed over the day
of judgment. We are in danger to be sadly sinning when we are securely
sleeping: Such considerations will (well settled) prevent secure sleep, and so
arm against evil Dreams: these will set the Non peccabis somnia^do, si
vigilabis dormiendo. Aug. de verb. Dom.
soul upon its watchtower; and while its vigilant it will not be peccant. Thus
much may suffice for antecedent duties.

The duties subsequent concern such sinful Dreams in a double case;

In case we are not free from them, and In case from them we are free.
If by such Dreams we have been defiled, our duty is,

Both to bewail the sin that has been with us in the night;

And to beware we no way increase the sin in the day.

1. We must take to heart such night Aug. Conf. lib. 10. cap. 30.
miscarriages. Augustine in his confessions hereof makes sad complaints; and so
have others of Gods dear Saints. Lament we must,

That the sin has been in us, and That we have been in the sin.
That such a defiling sin has fallen upon us must be our grief: that while
we slept, the enemy in our field has sown such tares. As that Mother comes
with her complaint to Solomon, 1 King. 3. 20. While thine handmaid slept, this
woman came and laid her dead child in my bosom. So let a man make his moan to
God: O Lord, while thy servant slept, Satan came and laid this wicked Dream in
my mind. But then that we have fallen in with such a sin is matter of more
mourning: our corruptions have clapped in with Satan's temptations, our minds
have been complying, our wills consenting, fleshly desires raised, carnal
delights pleased; O that, that is most bitterly to be bewailed!

2. We must take heed we do not in the day make the sin much worse

By mental recalling of it, and By actual committing of it.
1. Pleasingly to recall it in our minds will augment the sin. It Is
abominable for a man to communicate what communion he has had with the Devil
in the night, as a Christian remembers what sweet communion his soul has had
with God in the night. Psalm. 77. 6. says that holy man, I call to remembrance
my songs in the night. That Is very good; but for a carnal man to call to
remembrance his sins in the night, and to solace himself when awake with the
renewed thoughts of what he had in his sleep, is a sin exceeding sinful.

2. Actually to fulfill it in deeds is very dangerous. It Is that the Devil
indeed drives at, to draw us to do when we are awake, what we dreamt in our
sleep. For good things Satan is satisfied we should rest in the apparition and
show thereof, and some slight imaginations thereupon, to have no more but
Dreams of grace and holiness, Dreams of glory and happiness: but he is not
content that men should take up with imaginary supposals of sin and some bare
thoughts thereupon, but he would have them to bring forth the further fruits
thereof: To have more then Dreams of sin and wickedness, of lasciviousness
and wantonness, more then Dreams of adultery, f^rnication and uncleanness.
That which men think when they are asleep, the Devil would have them act when
they are awake.

If by such filthy Dreams we have not been defiled, our duty is,

To be thankful that God kept us in the night, and To be careful in keeping
to God in the day.
In giving thanks to God we have been so kept. We must be

Early thankful, and Gladly thankful.
1. We must not delay our thankfullness. Before the body be out of the bed, let
the heart be up with God: yea let body and soul rise and render the Lord
praise. As Noah, as soon as he was come safe out of the Ark, Genesis 8. built an
Altar and offered burnt offerings to God. And the Lord smelled a sweet savor,
etc. So as soon as ever we get safe off our beds, offer upon the Altar Christ,
burnt-offerings of fervent praises unto God the Lord.

2. We must with joy enlarge our thankfullness. In the morning when we
apprehend what hazards our houses have escaped from fire or thieves in the
night, with great rejoicing we give glory to God; when our selves have been
delivered from the danger of these night-pollutions, to God with great joy what
glory ought we to give? It Is God that has kept Satan and our sinful souls
asunder. The Devil is like the Harlot that goes abroad in the dark and black
night, soliciting to bed-abominations, Prove. 7. 9, 10. And how often would he
prevail, did not God prevent? When the Egyptians pursued the Israelites, God by
a cloud and a pillar of fire, was about his peoples camp, that Pharaohs host
could not come near them all the night, Exodus 14. 20. Thus God is about our
beds, and keeps Satan he cannot come near us all the night: O with what
gladness of heart ought we to glorify Gods holy Name!

2. Care is required that we all the day keep close to God, least we be worse
awake then when we were asleep: shall we not stick to that God in the day, who
stuck to us in the night? Let our day-care appear to be great

By an exact shunning of every sin, and By an exact doing of every service.
First, We must be very vigilant to avoid day-sinnes, that the Lord may not
leave us the night coming, who the night past preserved us: Let not sinful
thoughts come in and carry us away when awake, least after we sin in our
sleep, who before slept without sin. An Ancient Writer upon the Hosius. cap.
66. in De^al.
ten Commandments says, That Idolatrous Images first crept into the Church
when the Pastors thereof were asleep, being idle and carelessly secure not
foreseeing the evil. Thus when we fall into careless security (bodies awake,
but souls asleep at noonday) defiling imaginations and wicked thoughts wind
into our hearts, that may work us much ill the next night. In the daytime let
us see we turn not aside by sinful thoughts: Thoughts according as they Toties
ante Deum peccando labimur quoties a recto itinere intimae cogitationis pede
claudicamus. Greg. in cap. 34. Iobi. Extimesco magis occulta peccata quae clam
agito quam manifesta quae palam perpetro. Bern. Nequissimi hostis est illa
prima caliditas and ars doli plena animos nostros malis cogitationibus
delectare, etc. Aug.
commonly run out in the day, so they break forth in the night: O let us look
to these heart-sleeps, and walk as evenly all day in thoughts as ever we can!
Let not us by evil thoughts make halts in our hearts, least we go lame all our
lives, and day and night from God go awry. Let a holy fear keep us watching
against heart-wickedness, and to fly back from all secret sins which Gods
best Saints do most fear, and whereof every day we are in the deepest danger.
The Devil we may be sure has not a deeper design, then to set us incessantly
upon soul-sinfullness, for thereby he can the sooner soil us and foul us with
fleshly-lusts, seducing from sinful thoughts in the day, to filthy acts in the
night: from imaginations of evil, awake to evil imaginations in sleep.

Secondly, We must be sedulous in the service of God. Night-mercies engage to
day-duties: God who caused our deliverance when we were asleep, calls for our
obedience when we are awake: Let us never be negligent toward him who has
been vigilant over us: Let us do Gods work before we Eccles. 11. 6. Psalm. 5. 3.
sleep, that we may not do the Devils work when we sleep. In the morning as
soon as we awake let us up and be doing something for God, and resolve again to
serve God before we sleep, and resolve not to sleep till God be served. Surely
I will not come into the Tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed. I will
not give sleep to my eyes, nor slumber to my eyelids, until I find out a
place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob, Psalm. 132. 3, 4,
5. Every day a double care becomes Christians, in this case of keeping clean
from the filth of Dreams:

To get far from the Devil, and To draw near to God.
1. Far from the Devil: Prove. 6. 4, 5. Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor
slumber to thine eyelids: Till thou deliver thy self as a Roe from the hand of
the hunter, and as a bird from the snare of the fouler. He that is snared in
the day, gets not loose in the night.

2. Near to God in the day, and God will be near us in the night; so near, as
that nothing do come in between God and our souls except Christ alone, which
will be our best course to keep all clear in this case, that with filthy
Dreams we do not defile our selves.

Amen, Amen.
IV. Of Idle and Vain DREAMS.
ECCLES. 5. 7. In the multitude of Dreams are diverse vanities, but fear thou
God.
BEing about bad Dreams, wherein man's sin and Satan have their subtle work:

Some be more bad and less usual, and Others be less bad and more common.
And having finished the former, to wit, Dreams notoriously false, filthy and
vile; I come to discourse the latter, to wit, Dreams ridiculously foolish,
idle and vain: of which we find a multitude: In the multitude of Dreams there
be diverse vanities, but fear thou God.

This whole Book of Ecclesiastes, being as an excellent Sermon preached by
repenting Solomon* concerning the worlds vanity; an Author eminent among Hugo
de S. Victore. Natione Saxo, professione Carthusianus Parisiensis. Multa
scripsit and floruit. 1130 An. post Chr. Vbi putatis men's erat hujus hominis
quum haec diceret vanitas vanissima. Homo erat sed supra hominem erat. Nisi
hominem excederet, omnia esse vanitates non videret.
the Schoolmen; from thence draws a double inference, as referring

To this man in special, and To each man in general.
1. Toward this man, to wit, Solomon, in that he saw all the world vanity, he
sure was above the vanities of the world: He was (says he) a man, and yet he
did exceed a man, for all those things that commonly men admire as the only
excellencies, seemed to his view but very vanities.

2. Toward each man this conclusion is made, that he is a maker of vanity, and
that the motions of his hand, head or heart, are but mere vanities. For (says
he Si secundum aliquid vanum est quod Deus creavit, quomodo non multo magis
vanum est quod hom^ ^ingit, si imaginarium est quod fecit suprema Essentia. Si
transitorium est quod fecit aeternus, etc. Hugo de S. Victore in Eccles. Hom. 1.
) if in some respect such things are vanities as were formed and fashioned by
the hands of God, sure such things then are very vanities, as are fained and
fancied in the hearts of men.

No marvel if men's head and heartactings are but idle Ideas, no wonder if the
whole frame and Figment, all the imaginations and thoughts of men's minds are
mere vanities: considered

Whether awake, Or asleep.
What myriads and multitudes of most vain vanities are imagined and made in the
minds of men, in times of sleep, the Text present plainly and positively
reports: In the multitude of Dreams are diverse vanities, but fear thou God.

This single sentence of Solomon's consists of two considerable parts,

A Proposal, and An Imposall.
1. That which the Preacher proposes, is man in his sleeping fancies that are
not fit. Philo observes, that man Is qui fictus est homo differt ab eo quem
Deus fecit, Deus enim, etc. Philo. lib. 2. Legis Allegoriarum. Nihil in rebus
humanis, nihil in homine ipso praeter umbram sine mora volantem, etc. Philo in
libro quod Deus sit immutabilis.
was made of God such a real rational creature, as what he imagins, should be
solid and substantial, but man by sin has made himself such a fained
fiction, that what things he imagins are but fictions fained, empty shows, and
fleeing shadows: his vain and vanishing shadows day and night are great. But as
it is well observed of the Sun, that it causes the longest shadows when
evening comes and it is going down: so when man is in his nightime and laid
down Vid. Aug. in Psalm. 91. 1.
to sleep, then he draws shadows long and great, then his thoughts move most
idly, then are his Dreams variously vain. In the multitude of Dreams are
diverse vanities.

2. That which the Preacher imposes is, that ever-awaking fear of God which is
fit for man: For man this fear is so fit, as without the same he has nothing
solid, but is full of vanity, framing vanities, fancying and conceiting such
things in sleep, as are but the shadows of the night; yea man does not Ita non
timens conspectum Divinum non est homo sed hominis umbra, etc. Cajetanus in
Eccles. cap. 8.
only make night-shadows in his sleep, but whether asleep or awake, without
this divine fear he is but a shadow: Yea the want of this fear does not only
make man to be shadow-like, but even God himself is made like a shadow without
this fear. Men in whose hearts this fear is not found, in them Deity falls and
vanity prevails: But this fear so Primus in orb Deos fecit timor. Salust.
rowses man, yea it so raises and realizes God, as it advances Deity and
prevents vanity: In the multitude of Dreams be diverse vanities, but fear thou
God.

Concerning some Dreams, that which Solomon in this saying sets down is double,

Their Malady, and Their Remedy.
1. The malady or evil of those Dreams which here he drives at and draws out,
is discernably visible

In their vanity, and In their multitude.
The vanity of these Dreams, is very visible, in

The plurality of their number, and The diversity of their nature.
1. Their number is plural [ vanities:] If we observe what vanity is in the
singular number, we may soon conceive what it is in the plural. Vanity, as
various Scriptures and very good Authors interpret the word, take thus:

1. Vanity for vacuity, an emptiness of Vanum significat vacuum concavum nullam
habens soliditatem, veritatem, utilitatem, etc. Illiricus clav. Scrip. Ita.
Gellius Noct. Attic. lib. 18. cap. 4.
any true and solid good, as a hollow vessel that has nothing therein but a
mere sound, Hose. 10. 1. Such a thing is a vain man or man of vanity.

2. Vanity for falsity or a lie; Lying vanities. Jonah 3. v. 8. when something
appears what it is not, or is not what it appears, but proves a plain
imposture, This is vanity.

3. Vanity for levity, a thing so light that has neither weight nor worth.
They are lighter then vanity, Psalm. 62. 9.

4. Vanity for inutility, or what is profitless: Vain things that will not
profit. 1 Samuel 12. 21. Things frivolous and Vanitas est Nomen sine Re. Erasmus.
fruitless are idle and vain. The Jews use to call the seventh year, The idle
year; for then the earth seemed to be covered with vanity and sterility, the
ground lay fallow, they did neither sow or reap. When men's hands and hearts are
idle from their business, or idle in their business, that no benefit is brought
in thereby, This is vanity. That which vanishes as a meteor in the air, is
like a Bullatas nugas utpote similes vento plenis, etc. Pers. Sat. 5.
vapor from the earth, or like a bubble upon the water, only full of wind,
or that passes like a puff of breath from the mouth, This is vanity. Such
vanities are in the ordinary actings and usual movings of many men's minds,
especially in sleeping time. O what loose, lame, light leaps, does the heart
then take, skipping up and down to no end! What fond, false, foolish steps does
the feet of the soul make, when the body lies still on the bed. Ambrose
compares Somnus est hic vivendi usus in qu^ diversae commutationum vic^s quasi
ebriae and nihil solidum sed vacuae rerum species dispersae, etc. Ambrosius in
Epist. ca. 3. and Epist. 19.
the space, case and use of many a man's life, to a sleep full of vain Dreams:
In which (says he) are diverse, and as it were, drunken changes of things,
nothing solid or serious, nothing fixed or firm, but empty shadows of things
scattered, that dispersing pass away. So we see in what sense Dreams are said
to be vanities.

Secondly, See we the diversity of these Dreams, or these vanities considered
as they are said to be diverse [Divers vanities.]

1. Diverse for their matter: The matter about which sometimes the minds of
sleeping men move, is vain in it self: sometimes the matter in it self is
solid, yet the mind moves vainly thereupon.

2. Diverse for their measure: The Verum est simplex and vanum multiplex.
measure or degree of vanity which men draw out in Dreams may be more or less.
Look into one Dream and there is something of vanity: observe another and it
may be said, vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

3* Diverse for their manner: The Varieta^ est vana, and vanitas varia.
manner or way how vanity may work is wonderful. Dreams of vanity*may be
various, not only in their kind and cause, but in their carriage and course,
as cast into several moulds, and coming out in differing methods.

4. Diverse for their meaning: Such idle conceits may have several designs.
Oft-times such vain motions the mind sends out, as childrens arrows that are
shot at random and directed to no mark. At other times the very drifts of these
Dreams are vain, their intentionall tendency is to vanity.

2. Observe the evil of such Dreams in which are diverse vanities, as may be
further evidenced in their multitude. In the multitude of Dreams, etc.

For the unfolding of this, two things it is fit to affirm,

1. That multitude does not make Dreams to be evil or vain. 2. That Dreams
may yet be made more vain and evil through multitude.
Mere multitude does not make the vanity or evil of Dreams; nor are Dreams
therefore evil and vain because of multitude.

For Dreams may be thus evil where multitude is not, and Multitude may be, yet
the Dreams not evil.
1. Multitude may not be, yet the Dream not good but evil: yea in a single
Dream there may be much evil couched and caused, through the close concurrence
of diverse vanities.

2. Multitude may be, yet the Dream not evil but good. The door of the mind
may be so close shut all the night, as to exclude vanity, that vanity is not
able to enter. I remember how Tertullian apologizes for Christians, When Cum
boni cum probi coeunt cum casti congregantur non est factio dicenda, sed curia,
etc. Tert. Apol. adv. Gentes, cap. 39. number. 520.
(says he) good men, honest men, many of them meet in a place, it is not to be
condemned for evil, or to be called a faction, etc. So when good motions, when
holy thoughts, many meet in a heart, they are not therefore naught, because
their number is great, whether it be by day or by night. It Is vanity and not
multitude that makes Dreams evil.

2. Dreams that for their vanity are evil through multitude, are made more
evil. As when things are good, the more the better; so when things are evil,
the more the worse: This greatens and aggravates the evil of vain Dreams, when
of them there is a multitude. Multitude augments the malady, and the Multitudo
peccantium auget peccatum.
malady of vain Dreams is made more dangerous by the means of such a multitude.

Now multitude is a word which the Wise man might well prefix to Dreams of
vanity, for a double cause:

Because men that have vain Dreams are a multitude, and Because a multitude of
men's Dreams are vain.
First, A multitude of men have vain Dreams. O what vain and foolish fancies
flee up and down in very many men's minds, not only in the day, but at all
hours in the night. Bernard does 1. Sunt cogitationes otiosae and ad rem non
pertinentes, etc. 2. Sunt violent^ cogitationes and fortius adhaerentes. 3.
Sunt cogitationes faetidae and immundae, etc.

distinguish men's thoughts into three sorts: 1. Are thoughts or imaginations,
vain, idle, roving and impertinent. 2. Are thoughts or imaginations, violent,
strong and immoderate. 3. Are thoughts or imaginations, vile, foul, and
fearful, unclean.


The first kind he compares to thin clay, that sooner slips off and cleaves
not: The second to tough clay, that sticks fast: The last to loathsome and
stinking mire and mud that cleaves close. Now a multitude of men, the feet of
whose souls do not stick in the foul mire, yet are found in the soft clay:
Though they come not to the last and worst sort of ^ordid and vile motions, yet
they are in the first sort of silly and vain imaginations: Day and night though
they hatch not Cokatrice eggs, yet they weave Spiders webbs both awake and
asleep. Isa. 59. 5. Vain Dreams.

Secondly, A multitude of Dreams De nocturnis and de quotidianis
obs^aenitatibus loquamur quas tales ac i^numeras legiones Daemonum
excogitaverunt, etc. Salv. de Guber. Dei. li. 6.
in men are vain. In the nightime filthy Dreams, ^oul imaginations may fall
on men's minds, but that is more seldom, when yet Dreams vain and
imaginations foolish are found frequent. The Devil in lustful thoughts came
like a stranger at night, to David's heart, as Peter Martyr observes from
Nathans Parable, 2 Samuel 12. 4. At night came in a traveller to the rich man. He
spared of his own flock to dress for the wayfaring man that was come in to him,
etc. Unclean cogitations came in as a way faring man at night, yet this was not
ordinary. Filthy motions that come not in all the day, may turn in at night and
take men asleep, but this not usual, when yet vain thoughts for a long time
together in men may take up their lodging. How long shall vain thoughts lodge in
thee, Jer. 4. 14? Lodging properly imports a place of night-abode. Vain
thoughts that are going and coming, coming and going in the day, have in men's
minds their constant lodgings at night. Then they generate, procreate,
increase and multiply, then they grow into great multitudes. Multitude
Multitudo van^ and vanorum multitudo post multas vanita^es festina^t. Noli
numerare, noli imitare. Aug. in Psa. 39.
commonly goes on the evil hand, and the most usual evils are commonly found
in multitudes, which also makes them more evil. To vanity in Dreams may well
be joined multitude, for vanity fills many of our Dreams, yea most of our
Dreams are filled with vanity. And as for their vanity-sake they are evil, so
for their multitude-sake they are more evil. In the multitude of Dreams are
diverse vanities.

And thus we have the malady opened.

Secondly, See the Remedy or the medicinable course for the cure of this common
disease, to heal and help against Dreams of diverse vanities.

1. This is Expressed, 2. This is Applied.
Expressed in the Substance of it, and Applied to the Subject of it. Vbi timor
Dei non est, ibi omne malum. Vide Luth. loc. x. de usu legis Theologico. Semper
timere Deum debemus quia peccatum semper cubat in foribus, vanitas in cordibus.
Luth. loc. 1 2. 5ae. classis.

The substance of the Remedy, is the true fear of God: But fear God.

The subject of the Remedy, is every individual or particular man [ Thou:] But
fear thou God.

Herein manifestly meets both man and God: God and man both meeting in this
commanded Fear.

God as the Person feared of man, and Man as the Person fearing of God.
No person so fit to be fearing of God as man, and No person so fit to be
feared of man as God.
It Is Gods due to be feared of man, and It Is man's duty to be fearing of God.
1. Gods due is this fear from man. Psalm. 76. Thou, even thou O Lord art to be
feared. verse. 11. Take away fear and take away God. Hence Learned Zanchius
(...) derivatur a verbo (...), mutantur (...) into (...). Zanch. de Natura Dei.
would have the Greek word [(...)] to be derived (...). signifying such as
disclaim fear do deny God, and who ever will own God must acknowledge his fear:
This fear is a firm pillar, upholding the Throne of God in the hearts of men.
New imaginations would wax so wanton and wild, as to overthrow Gods throne in
the world, were it not for this fear.

2. Man's duty is fear toward God, Eccles. 12. 13. Fear God and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. This is (...) the whole man,
the whole of man. Such a duty is this fear of God, as all men, and all man must
be engaged therein. He that casts Time Deum and mandata ejus serva, hoc est
omnis homo: ergo absque hoc nihil est homo. Bern.
off the duty of fear, casts off the condition of man. Without this fear, as
God he seems nothing toward man, so man he cease (says Bernard) and is
nothing toward God.

He, who has none of this fear, both denies the Lord to be God, and himself
to be man: or at least he leaves himself languishing, and as a dying man in a
malady, denying the medicine: The medicine or curing remedy of man in his
maladies is this fear of God: This fear of God is a (...), an universal salve
for soul-sores. The sores in the Text are several, the disease diverse, the
malady lies in a multitude. Diverse vanities in a multitude of Dreams: yet this
one potion well took up, this one plaster well laid on, delivers, recovers and
causes a cure. This fear of God is an excellent Antidote against the entering
venom of various vanities in those diverse Dreams which men may have in
multitudes. In the multitude of Multa somnia nihil aliud sunt quam vanae
quaedam nostrarum affectio^^, c^gita^io^u^, etc. V^nbrae and imagines in
phantasia relictae, hae autem nihil futurum significant, sed in praesenti vanam
mentem demonstrant. Zanch. Tract. de Divin.
Dreams are diverse vanities, but fear thou God.

The words thus far unfolded, two Points come to be concluded.

1. That the vanities of Dreams are evils, every man ought to use means for
their preventing, and his own preserving.

2. That the best means a man can use for his soul-preserving and a sure
preventing the vanity of Dreams, is by his true and due fearing of God. In the
multitude of Dreams are diverse vanities, but fear thou God.

For the more full improving the first Point that reflects upon the malady, to
wit, The vanities of Dreams: I shall assert four things I conceive
considerable:

1. That they are such motions as are certainly evils. 2. That they are such
evils, as to which each man is subject. 3. That against the evil of these, men
may be defended. 4. That for a defense against these evils, each man must use
means
First, That Dreams of diverse vanities are undoubtedly evil.

The evil of such Dreams is discoverable in a double way;

Negatively, and Positively.
Negatively:] These Dreams they are not good, therefore evil. There are Vid.
Polan. Syntag. Theol. li. 6. ca. 38. and Amesi. li. 3. de conscien. ca. 18. de
Adiap.
no Adiaphora, or middle matters in the motions of men's minds: In every matter
the mind of man imagins, is either some commanded good, or some forbidden
evil. A great Expositor well distinguishes between the actings of man,
external and internal: The extrinsecall acts (says he) may be Actus e^terior
secundum se nec bonus nec malus: Actus inteterior sive elicitus, sive imperatus
semper vel bonus vel malus. Externus actus propter connexionem cum actu interno
bonus aut malus est. Tostatus. Quaest. 29. in Exodus
in themselves neither good nor evil: but acts intrinsecall are always evil if
not good. The influence of the inward acts upon the outward, causes some
goodness or evilness to be always therein: And therefore the inward acts
themselves are certainly either good or evil, and evil if not good. All the
actings of the soul in the fancy, whether man be awake or asleep, if they be
not verily good, they are certainly evil. Those imaginations that are not good
in the day, must needs be evil in the night: Vain thoughts in the waking-day
are naught, and therefore in the sleeping-night they are not good but evil,
then also Dreams of vanity be verily evil.

Positively.] These vain Dreams do plainly appear to be evil, by observing,

Whence they arise, and What they comprise.
1. They arise and proceed from such a principle as is evil and not good, and
therefore are not good but evil. Vain Dreams we cannot say they come from the
God of Grace, or from the Grace of God: but we may say they proceed from sin
and Satan, from that remaining vanity that is in men's hearts and minds. What
is good is from God, and what is from God Boni si quid habeo a Deo sumpsi. Mali
multum habeo non a Deo sed a meipso. Aug. Epist. 52. Bo^a mea non sunt mea: sed
mala mea, mea sunt, and quia mea ideo mala. Hugo Card.
is good: but what is not from God, but from a man's own evil heart is evil.
From a man's heart proceed such vanities as vent themselves in diverse Dreams,
that are therefore evil.

2. They comprise those things that prove them evil.

Dreams vain they contain, Omissions and Transgressions.

Omissions.] There is in them a neglecting of that good which God has much
apted man to, and enabled him for, by giving him an active soul that never
sleeps, but being always awake, may be the readier for any good work.

Transgressions.] There is in them a O quam malum cogitationibus ineptis
alienari and capi cum a Domino deviaris quasi sit aliquid quod magis debeas die
and nocte cogitare. Cyprian. de Orat. Dom.
swerving from Gods express precept* and the proper practice of a pious man, to
meditate in the Law of the Lord both day and night, Psalm. 1. 3.

As God has given man a meet Organ, his inward mind, night and day to be
thinking with; so God has given a man a meet Object, his holy Law, day and
night to be thinking on. But now vain Dreams take the mind off from Gods Law,
and in the retired time of the night turn it aside, etc. This is evil. The Lord
does not allow man's mind the least time to be idle and vain therefore when it
is vain and idle, that is evil. Are vain thoughts evil, and are not vain
Dreams? Are vain words and works evil, and are not vain Dreams? In vain
Dreamings there be vain thinkings, and in vain thinkings there be Cogitatio est
cordis agitatio.
vain actings, and the vain speakings of the retired soul with it self. Deuteronomy.
15. 9. Beware there be not a thought in thy evil heart, (...), so the
Septuagint read it: Beware that there be not a secret word within thy heart,
the Toties ante Deum peccando labimur, quoties a recto itinere intimae
cogitationis pede claudicamus. Greg. in cap. 34. Iobi.
evil whereof is hid. In Dreams of vanities there may be much evil hidden,
evil secret yet certain: The soul by thinking speaks vanity secretly to it
self, though no man besides sees or hears: In vain Dreaming there is foolish
thinking: Now the thought of foolishness is sin, Prove. 24. 9. In vain
Dreaming there is the souls idle talking. Now of every idle word a man must
give an account, Matthew. 12. 12. To conclude this. If Dreams of vanity were not
an evil disease, what need this prescribed remedy, viz. The fear of God? By the
fear of the Lord men depart from evil, Prove. 16. 6. There is an evil with
certainty in Dreams of vanity.

Secondly, That these Dreams are such evils to which each man is subject, and
with which any man may be much assaulted.

These Dreams whose vanities are diverse, be common to men from a twofold cause;

The temptation of Satan, and The corruption of Reason.
1. Satan hereto tempts. As some entice away children in the day, by bringing
them idle bables and toys to play with; so Satan subtly draws away men's
minds in the night, by sending in foolish fancies and vain Dreams to please
them. As Aaron made Israel naked, stripped them of their ornaments, set up
before them a golden Calf, which they were so pleased with, that they played
about it; so Satan makes men vain, by bereaving them of their right minds and
rich endowments, by representing such forms and foolish fictions, Apud latinos
vocabulum [ Vani] idem sonat ac falsum, mendacium ideo Diabolus qui fallax and
mendax est vanitates amat, procreat.
as about which their hearts dance, their thoughts take delight. Satan himself
is knowing, but would have men ignorant; himself is doing, but would have men
idle; himself is subtle and serious in considering men, Job 2. 3. but he would
have men to be foolish, slight and vain, wild, wanton and dallying with
ridiculous deeds and Dreams, not considering any thing serious.

2. Reason herein is corrupt. Men do Ratio est intellectus actio qua reale a
vano, verum a falso, utile a nox^o, honestum a turpi intus disquirimus ac
discernimus. Illyricus clav. Scri
not discern between truth and falsity, virtue and vanity, but take trees for
men, an Image for God, a shadow for the substance; and so are soon misled, lost
and wildered in the night. Natural reason, like Abraham's Ram, is so
entangled in the briars of sin, that it is soon taken and sacrificed to
vanity. Reason in man's soul is like a dim candle in a dark lanthorn, no
marvel if in the nightime the steps of the mind stumble, and the fancy
falls into Dreams of diverse vanities.

Yea reason is so erroneous, ignorant and corrupt, that for these foolish
Dreams, man is frequently found, with a mind

Ready to receive them, and Ad omnes vanitates men's prompta and pro^livis etsi
cum ad meliora men's enititur, quasi contra ictum fluminis conatur, etc. Greg.
Romans Mor. li. 11. c. 28.
Prone to produce them.
1. To receive them ready. Melting wax is not more apt to take the stamp of the
Seal, than man's mind is inclineable to the impressions of vanity.

2. To produce them prone. It Is observed that soon after Adam was vitiated with
sin, he had vanity for his Son, viz. Abel, whose Name so notes. Abel or
vanity is the proper progeny of sinful man. Now no way so soon may sinful
man's vanity vent it self, as in absurd Dreams, or by idle imaginations, in
sleep, etc.

Thirdly, That against the evil of vain Dreams, men by good means may find
much defense.

For a freeing, escape, avoidance and prevention of vanities in Dreams,

God can do enough, and Man may do much.
1. God can and does keep off diverse. By nature all men in their minds are
equally corrupt. It Is an epidemicall disease to all alike incident, what the
Apostle asserts of some; They become vain, (...), in their imaginations. By
nature (says One) all are of Omnis sanguis concolor. Petrarcha.
the same color, and were it not for Gods discoloring grace, it would in all
so appear: Vanity would be alike visible and vigorous, as in all sorts of
persons, so at all sorts of seasons, viz. day and night. And as in all times,
so in all ways would vanity vent it self: No Dreams so vain, but would be in
Plures sunt gratiae privativae quam positivae. Aquin^s.
all equal, did not God evidently difference men by his preventing mercies
which are many, yea say some in number the most. Such are the sufficiencies of
mercies to prevent vain Dreams: what Dreams so vain, but mercy to prevent is
sufficient.

2. Man may do a great deal against such Dreams: consider

Both wherein, And whereby.
1. Wherein: Man by the use of means may much hinder vain Dreams,

In their frequency, and In their permanency.
1. Dreams may not be so frequent and abounding in their diversity and
multitude, through means that men may use, they may much prevent these foolish
fancies, that like Ignes fatui, do Ignis fatuus est fumus crassior in imo aere
per Antiperist^sin nocturni frigoris accensus, etc. Magir. Philos. ca. 2. lib.
4.
in the nightime much mislead the mind.

2. Such Dreams may not be so permanent, constant and abiding, not so long and
lasting, so thoroughly and durably drawn out, as in many persons for the most
part they be.

Secondly, Whereby: or by what course may Christians keep off the vanities of
Dreams, that if they enter the door, they may not dwell in the house. Of this
more fully hereafter: yet something for present we may ponder, proving Dreams
to be hinderable, viz.

By diligence in the day, and By vigilance in the night.
1. Day-diligence: Dreams that cannot be kept off when they do come, may yet
before they come. By a present opposing the visits of vain thoughts when awake,
we may much hinder them in sleep. As breeding-birds where they sit at night,
they commonly build their nests in the day: In the day did we break the nests
of these flying birds, they would not so readily roost with us at night.

2. Night-vigilance: That is when Corpus cubando dormit and anima vigilando
surgit, agit somnus siquidem e corpore est a^que in corpore operatur. Aug de
Immort. Animae. ca. 14.
the body is asleep, let the soul not only be waking but watching, so as not to
let them in, or at least not to allow them a common lodging. In the receipt of
such Dreams, even the soul is in some sense asleep, or if it be awake, it does
not watch: The keeping up a good watch, is a good means to keep out Dreams
evil.

Fourthly, To use all good means to keep out these evil Dreams, is every
Christians duty.

The duty of a Christian lies more inward than outward; not so much in
hand-work as in heart-work, in heartwatching and diligent heart-keeping. Keep
thy heart with all diligence, Prove. 4. 23. (...) cum omni custodia, with all
keeping keep; or, prae omni custodia, above all keeping keep thy heart: the
Original will well bear both.

The words do plainly and peremptorily impose a personal, perpetual,
universal and principal care for heartkeeping.

1. Personal: Every single man must take care for the well-keeping his own
heart: Keep thy heart.

2. Perpetual: Now and ever the heart must be carefully kept. Keeping, keep
thy heart.

3. Universal: Every man must keep his heart with all kinds of keeping. With
all keeping keep thy heart.

4. Principal: Though a man must with care keep other things, yet his heart
must be kept above all, Above all keeping keep thy heart. Each man must and
ought to keep his own heart, his soul in all its faculties, before all things,
through all times, from all evils, Vide Bernard. lib. Meditat. cap. 9.
and therefore from these night-evils of vain Dreams. Those praecited words of
Solomon, some read them, Above all watchings watch thy heart: now properly
watching is a night-work against night-enemies and evils. These evils are
enemies that assault the Soul in the night season, against which a double watch
is not too much: To guard and safeguard the whole soul against vain Dreams;
Diligence is a Duty.

For they will else be hurtful toward men, And men else will be faultfull
toward themselves.
1. Hurt will be to men by vain Nox a nocendo, quia in nocte nocemur.
Dreams not prevented. That which is evil will do no good; what is evil in the
cause will be evil in the effects: The effects of vain Dreams may do much harm
if not hindered. This appears

By what they oppose, and How they dispose.
1. They may oppose the immission and introduction of Dreams divine, they may
interrupt the minds operation in serious Dreams. Why might not the mind at
the same time be solid and serious as well as idle and vain, if some impediment
were not put by their interpose?

2. They may dispose the heart, open the door of the house and let in worse
evils then themselves: Hence Dreams Hae cogitationes quum peccatores in animum
induxerunt ad reliqua peccatorum genera ruunt. Basil. Hom. quoth. Deus non est
author malorum.
vain and foolish may make way for Dreams vile and filthy. A common Inn that
admits of idle persons, may lodge the worst of guests: yea Dreams of vanity in
the nightime, may incline to deeds of vanity in the dayseason.

2. Fault will be to men if they use no means to prevent vain Dreams. Toward
vain Dreams men may be faulty:

By an efficiency, and By a deficiency.
An efficiency by doing what may further them;

A deficiency by not doing what may hinder them.

Yea that which men do not seek to Qui non vetat quando potest, jubet: and qui
non prohibet, juvat.
hinder, they may be said to further: As he is said to command an evil that
does not forbid it; so he may be said to set forward such vanities, who is not
sedulous to intercept them: That which is a man's duty to perform, is his sin
to neglect. To take care to keep all evil out of the heart, and to keep the
heart off from all evil, it is the duty of man to use means. His fault it may
not be that such evils enter; but it is his fault when means he does not use
against their entrance. See what the Church confesses as her fault, Cant. 1. 9.
Mine own vineyard have I not kept. All sorts of vanities they hurt man's
choicest vines, and wrong his inward vineyard which he ought to keep, and must
use means to preserve.

Thus have I passed through the parts of the first Point. I proceed

Secondly, That the best means to prevent the vanities of Dreams, is by a
personal fearing of God. But fear thou God.

This Point will also afford us four considerable par^s.

1. That fear is a fitting affection to prevent Dream-vanities. 2. That God is
the proper object for such preventing fear. 3. That this preventing fear must
be found in every person. 4. That each person must abide active in this fear
for prevention.
First, That to prevent the vanities of Dreams, fear is an affection fit.

To all vanities this opens a door to be without fear. The Apostle speaks of
some, Jude 12* who are found feasting Timeas ne non timeas. Bern. Epist. 87.
Hoc ipsum veh^menter timere debes quia nihil times. Aug. de Temp. 214.
themselves without fear. Such there be, who buy and sell without fear, eat and
sleep without fear: no marvel if multitudes of various vanities fill their
fancies: ' It Is a fearful matter to be a fearless man.

All fear we grant is not fit, yea some fear to prevent evils and resist
enemies is unfit. That we should serve him in righteo^sness and holiness
without fear, Luke 1. 74. As in Paradise there was a forbidden fruit; so in a
Christian there is Sine timore inimici, sed cum timore Domini. Gorran.
a forbidden fear.

There is a Desponding fear, and There is a Defending fear.
1. There is a fear that strikes a man down, enfeebles him and makes him faint
and fall, this is not fit.

2. There is a fear that stirs a man up and sets him to seek his own safety,
to be valiant and vigorous in his own defense, and this fear is fit. This fear
(...). Aristot. Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 6*
as it expects evil against a man, so it excites man against the evil: it is as
the Sentinel that is ever awake, gives the whole soul an alarm, and cries arm,
arm at midnight. [ Fear.]

Secondly, That fear which prevents the vanities of Dreams, must make God its
object: it is a fear that must reflect upon God. That fear which is defensive,
and proves preservative against evil of all sorts, it must be found effectual
for two things,

To unite the Heart, and To stablish the Heart.
1. Fear must unite and make the heart one, for the heart while it is divided,
scattered and severed asunder, any evil easily enters, it lies open to all
vanities, iniquities and sins.

2. Fear must stablish and make the heart firm, for while the heart is
unstable, straggling, wandering and wavering, it is quickly carried away and
turned aside to sinful vanities. Now fear will never effect these things, but
as it referres to God; it is the fear of God that unites and makes the heart
one: Unite my heart to fear thy Name, Psalm. 86. 11. or as the Septuagint reads
it, (...), etc. Make my Hi^ timor Dei est animae anchora per quem corda n^stra
fluctuant^a firmiter stabiliuntur, etc. Greg. Moral. lib. 6.
heart one in thy fear. It Is the fear of God that establishes the heart, that
it does not start or depart from God: I will put my fear in their hearts, and
they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 40. One well compares this fear in the
soul to the Anchor of a Ship, that where it is well fastened in God, it holds
head and heart firm, that the wind of vanity prevails not. It makes a man in
his motions sober and serious, whereas other fear, says a good Author, causes
a kind of drunkenness that fills a Est timor hic ma^us, quaedam ebri^t^^
umbras finge^s and ab umbris fugiens. Basil. Ser. 2. de Jejunio.
man's heart and head with foolish fancies. So then to prevent these vanities [
Fear God.]

Thirdly, That this fear by which such vanities are prevented, must be found in
every person.

As every man Godward must have a faith of his own, so a fear of his own: It Is
not another man's fear of God, no more then another man's faith in God will do me
good. As every man must have his faith, to possess what is good for himself; so
every man must have his fear, to oppose what is evil against himself. This
evil-opposing-fear every man has

A capacity for it, and A necessity of it.
A capacity every man has in his soul Facta est anima rationalis capa^ Domine
majestatis tuae, ut a te solo and nullo alio possit impleri. Aug. Solilo. cap.
30.
to receive such a fear: That soul which is capable of the God of fear, is it
not capable of the fear of God?

2. A necessity every man has, such a fear in his soul to receive. Whoever
has the malady, needs the remedy: It Is not another man's taking of physic will
cure my sickness; nor another man's fearing of God will heal my heart of vanity.
To prevent the vanities of Dreams every man must himself fear God. [ But fear
thou God.]

Fourthly, That in this fear of God that preven's the vanities of Dreams, men
must remain active.

This part plainly imposes, as referring to this fear,

The Duration, and The Actuation thereof.
1. During must this fear be both day and night. It Is observable, Solomon for a
certain cure of heart-evils, requires the constancy of this religious fear*
Prove. 23. 17. Let not thy heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the
Lord all the day long. The night is included in the day, when in this fear men
must endure, that would help their hearts against envy or any other evils: To
lie down and rise up in this fear, to wake and sleep in this fear, etc.

2. Acting this fear must be in men, and men acting in the fear of God. This
fear must not barely be in them as a passion, or upon them as an oppression.
Genesis 35. 5. The fear of God (is said to be) on the Cities round about. The fear
of Timor est duplex, filialis and servilis, timor filialis suos habet actus,
scil. revereri Deum. Aquinas 11ae. Quaest. 67. 12ae. Q. 67. 22ae. Q. 7. Q. 22.
God must not be set upon men as their burden; but men must be set upon the
fear of God as their business: not only the imprinting and implanting of fear
in the habit thereof, but the employing and improving this fear in the actings
thereof; this will arm the heart against all evil. It must be fear in its
activity that fences the mind against Dreamevanity.

Vanity to advance it self is active, and Others are active to advance vanity.
1. Active is vanity for its own advancement. Original corruption is of
Peccatum natural in nobis, etsi non sit actuale, est actuosum, etc. Aquinas
12ae. Quaest. 82.
an active motion to promote it self all manner of ways, amongst which this is
one, in Dreams of vanity: these are as running streams from that spring, and
as sprouting branches from that root.

2. Others are active for the advancement Nequissimi hostis est illa vel prima
calliditas and ars doli plena otiosos animos vanis cogitationibus fatigare, etc.
vancement of vanity. Satan herein is subtle and sedulous, it is a prime and
principal project of his to promote vanity, to fill the mind with foolish
fancies, idle thoughts, and fond conceits. So active then ought men to be by
this fear of God, to defend off Dreams of vanities that else may arise in
multitudes. In the multitude of Dreams are diverse vanities, but fear thou God.

Thus having done with the Doctrinall part, all that shall pass in the
Applicatory part, I shall reduce to a double head;

A disswasive from Dreams of vanity, and A persuasive unto the fearing of God.
From Dreams of vanity, I shall endeavor to dissuade, by affirming four
things;

1. They are Displeasing, 2. They are Disprofiting, 3. They are discomforting,
4. They are Dishonouring.
1. Displeasing are vain Dreams to a holy God and men truly good. As
Idol-Images made by man's hand are forbidden of God; so Idol-Images made in man's
mind are offensive to God. Ezekiel. 8. 12. Son of man, have thou seen what the
Ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of
his Imagery: or in the secret of their imaginations, as some render it? Men not
Lavater. Calvin.
only in the lightsome day, but in the dark night, not only in the chamber of
their house, but in the chamber of their hearts, have such imaginations of
vanity, that are like Images of Idolatry, displeasing to God: And a man godly
is Godlike, displeased with himself, when he finds his heart framing such
Images of Non enim erat apud eum imago non vanit^^ sed veritas, non effigies
ignava sed solida forma justitiae. Beata anima quae est instar dom^^ Jacobi in
qua nulla simula^ra nulla effigies vanitat^^. Amb. de fuga se cul^. cap. 5.
vanity. Ambrose speaking of Laban searching the Tents of Jacob, and yet not
finding his Images, say*s thus, Laban found them not, for though they were
there as hidden of Rachell, yet they were things hated of Jacob: And O blessed
soul (says he) that is as Jacobs Tent, in which is never found any allowed
Image, or approved representation of vanity. Though sometimes Satan may send in
such by his subtilty, yet it is with secret dislikes and soul-dissents.

Secondly, Disprofiting are without doubt vain Dreams: Dreams of vanity the
mind is busy in, but has no benefit by. Tertullian calls Dreams, Tertull.
de Anim^. cap. 45.
the idle things of the busy soul. The soul of man as it may be idle in
business, so busy in idleness. The soul properly indeed in idle Dreamings
cogitates much and negotiates nothing: nothing to purpose, nothing for profit,
and so all is vain. Almonds (says One) men A^ygdal^ di^untur inanes non in
quibus nihil est, sed quibus id quod inest est inutile, etc. Clem. Alex.
Stromatum. lib. 7.
account empty and naught, not in which there is nothing found, but in which
that which is found is of no profit: So men's imaginations are said to be vain,
when though there be many movings therein yet no advantage thereby. By idle
Dreams the soul is as a sieve of vanity, in which nothing is left but what is
branny and bootless. Yea as they bring in nothing of benefit, so they keep out
what might prove for man's profit: and indeed what a man gains not in, he
loses by: A man is the worse for that by which he is not the better.

Thirdly, Discomforting may men find Dreams of vanity: Vain Dreams are as
Drone-Bees that fly out, but bring in no honey, yea that honey in the hive
Prove. 19. 15. Isa. 29. 8.
they find, they feed upon and devour. In Dreams vain there may seem somewhat
pleasing for present, but after disappointments produce more pain than peace.
As a hungry man dreameth and behold he eats, but he awaketh and his soul is
empty; or as a thirsty man dreameth and behold he drinks, but he awaketh and
his soul is faint. That Dum studiorum sublimium vigore men's nostra non
constringitur vanitatis infimae fame sauciatur.
cannot solace and comfort which does not satisfy and content; but in vain
Dreams is nothing solid to satisfy, and so the soul is left comfortless, yea
in a suffering case. That cannot cause delight to the soul, which bereaves the
soul of sweet liberty: O how fast is a man bound upon his bed with these cords
of vanity, so that his soul cannot get loose, Isa. 5. 18.

Fourthly, Dishonouring Dreams of vanity, strip the soul of its dignity.
Scaliger observes, that there be three things that do distinguish a man from,
and dignifie him above all creatures about him, viz. Reason, Speech, and Hands.
Greg. Past. Cu. Scaliger Exer. cit. 256.
Reason is the first and chief, and that wherein he may and ought most to
excel: A man may much debase himself by the idle words of his mouth, and vain
works of his hands, but nothing renders a man so base as the abuse of his
Reason in foolish fancies. 'Twas the dishonor of the Emperor Domitian, that
he spent great part of his time in catching of flies; and Artaxerxes in making
box hafts for knives. And does not this redound to man's dishonor, to spend day
and night to pass away his time sleeping and waking in a multitude of idle
imaginations made up of mere vanities? In such vanities to employ the mind, is
to turn a golden mill to grind chaff: These poor things disparage man's
precious soul, principled to higher acts and ends. And O how vain a thing is
man, if O quam vana res est homo, nisi supra vana se erexerit. Senec. Quaest.
Nature. li. 1. Disce homo ubi grandis, ubi pretiosus sis, virtus te gloriosum
facit, sed vanitas te vilem demonstrat. Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
above vain things he lifts not himself, said Heathen Seneca. Virtue makes a
man glorious, but by vanity even a man's soul is rendered vile, said a Christian
Author. Such things considered, may dissuade, as from other sorts of vanities,
so from vanity of this sort, to wit, vain Dreams.

2. Let us consider such things as may persuade unto the true fear of God.
Against Dreams of vanity this fear has a double power,

Abstractive, and Attractive.
Abstractive, Drawing off from what may cause them: and Attractive, drawing on
to what may cure them.

1. Things that may cause such Sciendum est quod somniorum cau^a duplex
exterior and interior, etc. Aquin. 22^. Quaest. 95. Art. 6.
Dreams, from which the fear of God draws, are evils of a double kind,

External, and Internal.
1. There be evils external, that may become the causes of vain Dreams, as
the viewing of vain and idle objects, the hearing of vain and idle discourse,
the conversing with vain and idle persons, these may probably make such
impressions upon the mind of wakingman, as may move vain imaginations in his
sleeping-time. Now the fear of God is a good means to remove a man from these
evils: He that has in his heart the true fear of God, will turn away his ears
from hearing, and his eyes from beholding vanity. Psalm. 119. 37. He will not
sit with vain Discamus sanctam superbiam and sciamus nos esse vanis hominibus
meliores. Hieron.
persons. Psalm. 26. 4. Much less in his life will he himself walk after vanity,
Job 31. 5. Of such men as have not this fear of God the Prophet speaks, They
walk after vanity, and they are become vain, Jer. 2. 5. No marvel if men every
way become very vain, who walk after vanity, who walk in a loose liberty,
having no fear of God to give them limits. A good man walks at liberty, but the
fear of God draws him back that he breaks not beyond Bible-bounds. Psalm. 119.
45. I will walk at liberty, BEDDACAH, at large, for I seek thy Precepts. The
precepts of God in his largest walks, were still the bounds of his steps, so
that he did not vainly ramble or run out day or night.

2. There be evils Internal, that may become the causes of vain Dreams, and
these are drawn to a double head:

Primary and principal, Secondary and consequentiall.
The primary first and chief cause of vanity in Dreams, is love to vanity,
which is a common evil to every son of man. O ye sons of men, how long will
ye love vanity? Psalm. 4. 3. If I were (says Chrysostom) the fittest Honores
Divitiae virtutes non sunt sed vanitates, quid vana ista miraris, quid ad ista
quae abjectissima sunt inhias? in coelum animum intend. Chrysostom. Hom. 11.
man in the world to preach, and had all the world as one Congregation before
me, and had the highest mountain for my Pulpit, from whence upon all I had a
Prospect; and if I had a voice of brass as the Trumpet of the Archangel, that
all might hear on every side, the Text I would preach of, should be that of the
Psalmist; O ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanities? Vanity is that to
which all the sons of men are long and large in their love; no marvel if
their Dreams lie therein, when their love is thereon. Now the fear of God
draws off this love; He loves vanity least that fears God most.

The secondary and things that follow this love to vanity, as vigorous
occasions of vain Dreams, are other inclinations, * Primus Psalmus unde scit.
Beatitud^^nem periisse inde recuperat. In consilio abiit Adam, id est, in
Serpentis and mulieris Et nunc Adam noster, id est consensus noster beatus
erit, si non abierit in consilio Serpentis and mulieris, id est, in consilio
carnis and Diaboli aut si abierit non ibi stet aut si steterit non sedeat aut
si, etc. Arnob.
motions and affections in the effects thereof. From love to vanity comes
consents to vanity, desires of vanity, delights in vanity, etc. The mind that
loves vanity, leans to it, lives in it, and is loath to be out either day or
night. An old Writer well improves those words of the Prophet, Psalm. 1. 1, 2.
Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in
the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful. But his delight
is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and night.
Because Adam (says he) walked in the counsel of the wicked, namely of the
Woman and the Serpent, and so for a vanity lost his felicity. Therefore must we
beware our Adam, that is our Reason, our Consent, etc. do not walk in the
counsel of the Woman and the Serpent, that is of the flesh and the Devil
drawing to vanity: Or if toward it they entice us to walk, yet let us not
stand, or if stand, let us not sit down therein in the day, lest therein we lie
down at night; but remember our selves, how day and night we ought to meditate
in the Law of the Lord. Now there is nothing like to this fear of the Lord, to
draw back our consent to such as advance vanity to keep us from walking,
standing, sitting, and lying down in vanity, and so day and night neglect the
Law of the Lord, and our due meditation therein.

2. Toward things that may cure vain Dreams, consider our duty upon which by
this fear we are drawn in a double way: To wit,

Of opposing and suppressing, and Of purposing and practicing.
1. We are to oppose and suppress all the present sproutings of vanity. That
which we let sprout when awake, may spread when asleep. One well observes,
Origin.
that as under the Law, so under the Gospel are sacrifices to be slain: In
stead of a Ram, we must kill our angry passions, in stead of a Goat our
unclean affections, and in stead of flying Fowls our vain imaginations. We
should endeavor to be the death of that vanity which fills our fancies: There
should be some principle in us stirred up and carried out as Cain to kill this
Abel.

[ Habel] It Is the word which the Wise man in his Ecclesiastes does ordinarily
use to intimate vanity. The killing of this Abel-vanity is an act of virtue,
A^ibros. de Cain and Abel, li* 1. ca. 3, and 6. li. 2. ca. 9.
and the greatest valor: The fear of the Lord will much help hereto. Hence a
man hates vain thoughts, and so, soon subdues thoughts of vanity, Psalm. 119.
113. That will not disturb when asleep, which we destroy when awake.

2. We must purpose and practice such other pious duties as conduce to this
end, and they are of a double kind.

Some direct to God, and Some reflect on our selves.
1. Toward God we ought to do much in prayer and praise: In prayer we are to
supplicate God for pardon of Dreame-vanities, and for prevention of the
vanities of Dreams. In praises we are to elevate and congratulate God, that we
have had no more vain Dreams, and that our Dreams have been no more vain.

2. Toward our selves: Let us see unto those two things;

To use Reason in ways most sober, and To think on matters most serious.
1. In sober ways to use our Reason: Ratio recta est lumine Spiritus directa,
etc. Lips. de Constant.
And that reason may be of the better use, it must be principled with Grace
enlightened with the Spirit of sanctifying knowledge. One well compares Ratio
est lumen animae solari similimum, etc. Philo de congress. quaerend. ^rudition.
gratia, etc.
Reason in man to the Sun in the Heavens, which if it has not light enough
to rule well in the day, no marvel if it mislead the mind in the night, and
lets worldly vanity, as the Moon bear sway.

2. On serious matters to set our thoughts most seriously. Some men's minds are
trifling in things serious, and serious in trifles. It Is one of the highest
points of prudence and the praise of a man, to suit his mind to the matters, Da
mihi hominem qui transitoria transitory, qui aeterna desiderio ampleciitur
aeterno and prout res est cogitat and talem audacter pronuncio sapientem. Bern.
sup. cant. Sermon. 50.
and to let his thoughts be like to the things that he thinks upon: On hateful
things to have hating thoughts, on lovely things to have loving thoughts, on
transitory things to have transient thoughts, on durable things to have
enduring thoughts, etc. Let a man learn to delight his thoughts on the most
delightful things, and to let the best things have the best of his thoughts:
Let us thus accustom the thoughts of our minds while awake, and they will not
work so vainly in sleep. Now the true fear of God is incentive to, yea
comprehensive of all this good which makes for the prevention of vain Dreams.

Quest. Have not men fearing God and doing good, Dreams of diverse vanities?
Homini enim optimo mortalem vitam adhuc agenti non potest contingere ut dimoto
ac discusso omni nubilo phantasi^rum, etc. August. de consen Evang.


Answ. Vain and foolish Dreams may be found in a man fearing God and minding
good, but yet of such it may be said,

He is not so actual in them, and They are not so usual in him.
1. Such Dreams he is not so actual in as others, his heart does not so
delight therein or dilate thereon, his mind does not so mount up to meet vanity
in these night-visits. It Is set down as the singular character of a godly man,
He has not lift up his soul to vanity, Psalm. 24. 4. Vanity may fall upon his
soul, but his soul does not lift up it self to vanity.

2. Such Dreams are not so usual in him as in others: Others, the Dreams
they have most common and more constant, (...), vocat non simplices
cogitationes, sed prudentissimos animae discursus esse vanos h. e. irritos,
etc. Paraeus in locum.
are idle and vain: Vain are not only the ordinary, but the exquisite thoughts
of natural men, that are excellent in gifts: The Lord knows the thoughts of
the wise that they are vain, 1 Cor. 3. 20. If in their wakeing-time their
thoughts are vain, how vain then sure in their sleep? Men fearing God vain
Dreams may befall them, but they be not so frequent, they do not so multiply.
Indeed Dreams vain might in good men be found fewer, did they draw out, and
act up the fear of God as is fit. David a man much in the fear of the Lord, in
stead of vain and foolish fancies, and to arm against idle and ridiculous
Dreams, I have remembered thy Name O Lord in the night, Psalm. 119. 55. The
Apostles counsel to Christians is exceeding observable; Let us not sleep as do
others, 1 These. 5. 6. Good Christians ought, as in other things to differ from
others, so in their sleep: Others so sleep as therein they have a multitude of
Dreams of diverse vanities, but let our bodies sleep, the fear of God
possessing our souls. In the multitude of Dreams are diverse vanities, but fear
thou God.

V. Of Troublesome and Affrighting DREAMS.
JOB 7. 14. Then thou skarest me with Dreams.
HAving done discourse upon Dreams, wherein the Devil without doubt has the
most immediate hand: I come now to discover such Dreams whereof Aristotelis
rations contra somnia divina refelluntur. Vid. Parcum com. in Genesis ca. 41. pa.
409, 410, etc.
God without question is the most considerable cause, and these we may observe
of two sorts:

Dismaying and Admonishing. Affrighting and Instructing.
Dreams of dismaying fears Job affirms he found from God; Then thou skarest me
with Dreams.

Job in this sentence sets forth his sad condition concerning things that did
sore afflict his soul and much move his fear.

His fear is found to be great, as referring to four several heads:

1. The Manner it was in, 2. The Matter it was with, 3. The Person it was from,
4. The Season it was at.
1. The Manner after which his fear is set forth to be great, we find expressed
by his being skared. Skaring does intimate not only a real fear, but a raised
fear, or fear extreme, extended See Mr Caryl in his most excellent Exposition
upon Job.
and terrible, dejecting and prostrating fear, fear which flung Jobs mind as
flat as his body, bowing that also down upon his bed, as some give the
signification of the word. The Hebrew word we may English in a differing way,
according as it is in Latin translated variously, as such may see who consult
Expositors.

Thou skarest me.] Take it as laid forth in a fourfold phrase;

1. Contristas me.] Thou make me exceeding sorry, thou causest seas of
sorrows to gather within my soul, several Timor est tristitia non
essentialiter sed ration eobjecti tristantis si* sit praeseas. Aquin. 12ae.
Quaest. 41. 4, 3.
soul-sadding objects thou representest to my mind at once.

2. Consternas me.] Thou do astonish me: Thou make many fearful things
together, and together thou set them as about my bed to look me stern in
the face.

3. Conturbas me.] Thou troublest me: Thou make many amazing thoughts to meet
within my mind at midnight. Perturbing thoughts thrust into my soul, like waves
in the troubled sea.

4. Conteris me.] Thou splittest me Conterere plus est quam frangere significat
in minutissimas parts concutere. Illyric. clav. Script. 174.
asunder and cut'st me in shivers, I am not barely broken but beaten in pieces,
and as corn in a mill ground to powder: He was as it were put into convulsion
fits, and the powers of his soul pulled awry; he was wracked upon his bed,
distorted, distracted, torn and tormented in mind; yea a terrible trembling
took hold on his whole man. This for the Manner.

2. The Matter with which Jobs fear was greatned, are said to be Dreams; Thou
skarest me with Dreams.

The Dreams wherewith this godly man was skared, are considerable,

In their Nature, and In their Number.
1. The Nature of these Dreams are Timor non est virtus Theologica, quia non
habet Deum pro principali objecto sicut amor sed malum. Aquin. 22ae. Quaest. 19.
evil* evil being the proper object of fear. Hence the Schoolmen determine, That
fear is not like love, a Theological virtue, because God is not the principal
object thereof, but evil. A twofold evil they also evidence,

Sinful, and Poenall.
Or evils of Sinning, And evils of Suffering.
1. Sinful evils, or evils of sin, which are of all evils the worst, and by
the best men most feared. Sinful Dreams Jobs soul might possibly be assaulted
with. If in his sleep were any Homo Somniando c^gitans de peccatis carnalibus
semper movetur cum aliqua affectione vel concupiscentiae vel horroris, etc.
Aquinas 22ae. Quaest. 154. Art. 5.
such sinful proposals, they sure soon made him to shrink and shake with fear,
having in his heart, as hatred against them so horror about them: such Dreams
did undoubtedly skare if they came.

Object. If these skaring Dreams should be sinful, How then could God be
their causer?

Answ. Suppose the Devil was the cause of the Dreams, yet God the cause of the
fear: The Dreams dreaded from the Devil, yet the dreading of the Dreams
through God and his grace: Where the grace of God is not, sinful Dreams are
pleasing, not perplexing: and might Satan have his mind, such Dreams should
please good men with delight, and not possess them with fear: from God it is,
that sin as defiling is Timor duplex naturalis de malo corporis corruptivo
and supernaturalis de malo animae contaminavo. Aquin. 12ae. Quaest. 41. Art. 3,
5.
affrighting. It Is from the nature of man to fear death that corrupts the body,
but it is from the grace of God to fear sin that pollutes the soul.

2. Suffering evils, or evils more purely poenall and painful, and these evil
things most properly proceed from God, and with such evil Dreams God did most
probably afflict Job. Job God might dismay in his Dreams with representations
of sin, not to sin: Sins past God might make to appear: What he had done
awake, God might cause him to see in his sleep with soulamazements. But
respects to sin laid aside, the Lord in sleep might arrest Job as a Judge.
Though toward evils of sin, it is not fit for God to act any thing, he being
the purest essence in Heaven, yet it is meet for God to act about matters of
pain, he being the supreme Judge of the earth. God is so good, that he is not
the least actor of sin: but God is so great, as he is the chief inflicter of
pain: and though pain Non solum culpa sed poena est malum, etsa minus habet
rationem mali, etc. Aquinas 1a Qu. 48. 22ae. Qu. 9.
be inflicted of God who is good, yet in it self it is evil: and though pain to
be sure is a less evil than sin, yet still it is evil. Sin is an evil that
disturbs Gods quiet in Heaven; and pain is an evil that opposes man's peace and
rest upon earth. How was Job interrupted in his rest, and broken in his peace
through painful and dolorous Dreams, the dread of which, evidences them evil
in their nature.

2. In their Number considered it seems they were many; not Dream, but Dreams
in the plural: manifold Dreams and Dreams about manifold matters that might
amaze him, diverse and differing Dreams for degrees and kinds wherewith Job
was skared: Dreams of fear, that like flames of fire flashed fast in his face:
Dreams of terrors, that like troops of Soldiers upon him thrusting thick in
his sleep: Dreams of horror, that like billows of water broke into his chamber
and overflowed his bed, that he lay as drowned therein, enduring many dolorous
thoughts. Many things may a man suffer from one single Dream, but how many
things be suffered, when sad Dreams be multiplied? this was Jobs case being
skared with Dreams.

3. The Person from or by whom Job was skared, was God himself, Thou skarest
me. Had these Dreams Ephesians. 6. 16.
been barely the Devils-darts, or as burning brands flung into his bed only by
Satan's hellish-hand, his heart would not have been so shaked with fear: but Job
6. 4.
finding God to have his hand therein, and to be the cause thereof, this, this
increased his skare: Thou skarest me. As if he had said; O Lord thou who in the
day of my prosperity wast to me a Paradise of pleasure, causing thy joy to
shine as a bright Sun into my soul, thou did comfort, ravish me and refresh
me often, yet now thou makst me all aghast. Thou who in the night of my adversity,
I hoped would have sent into my heart soul-sweet helps from Heaven, would
have set up clear candles of comfort about my bed: Thou not only leavest me in
the dark, but skarest me with Dreams. For skares and fears to be from the
Devil or this wicked world, were no wonder; but for a good man to be frighted
of God, that God will not let him sleep without skaring, this is strange and
astonishing: Judge. 9. 15. Numb. 21. 9. Rev. 21. 23.
For fire to come out of the bramble is no such marvel, but for fire to come
out of the Vine; for the brazen Serpent to become a stinging Serpent, and for
him to wound that should heal, to skare that should comfort: for the Lord who
uses to be to his servants as a Lamb, to be like a Lion, and to roar upon them
in their sleep, this is strange indeed. Luther has some such saying; If all
the men in the world were mustered Nihil est tentatio vel universi mundi and
totius inserni in unum conflata ad eam qua Deus unus homini contratrarius
ponitur, etc. Lutherus.
as Soldiers, and all the Devils in Hell gathered as their Commanders, and
were upon their march against a good man, this would not so much dismay him as
one God against him. Nothing so perplexes a pious man as the appearance of Gods
displeasure, suppose with Dreams of this God-skaring Job. Thou skarest me with
Dreams.

4. Observe the season when with Dreams was Job thus skared: to wit,

When he found no comfort awake, and When he looked for comfort in sleep.
1. When awake he had no comfort, but such painful dolor, as not only deeply
distressed him all the day, but wherewith he was wearied whole nights having no
sleep. Wearisome nights are appointed to me. When I lie down, I say when shall
I arise and the night be gone? I am full of tossings to and fro to the dawning
of the day, ver. 3, 4.

2. Asleep he could have no quiet: Though sometimes after days of dismal
distress, he looked at night for peaceable repose, but even then were his hopes
disappointed: Skaring Dreams came into his mind when he expected comfortable
sleep in his bed. When I said, my bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my
complaint; Then thou skarest me with Dreams, etc. Commonly good men then find
it worst from God, when they expect most from the creature, and from the
creature find least when they look for most. Scaliger Scaliger. Exerci^. 18.
27, 28.
tells of a tree, from which when a man departs, ramos pandit, it spreads the
boughs; but when a man comes to it, ramos constringit, it shrinks up the
leaves: This is the usual carriage of the creature; when men are from it, it
seems to spread it self into wide promises; but when they approach near it, it
shrinks up it self from any good performances. Thus Jobs bed served him, when
his expectations toward it were most raised in the day, then his perturbations
upon it most increased in the night; his bed was so filled with thorns he could
lie at no ease, even then when he looked for the largest and sweetest rest.
When I sai, dmy bed shall comfort me, then thou skarest me with Dreams.

The further discourse of these skaring Dreams, will consist of a double part,

Explicatory, and Applicatory.
In the Explicatory part I shall unfold as referring to Dreams that affright,
four things:

1. The Matter they may be of, 2. The Movers they may be from, Ex somnio
Nebuchadnezeris mentem ejus fuisse quidem graviter affectam. Jun. lectiones in
Danielem.
3. The Persons they may be to, and 4. The Reasons they may be for.
First, The Matters about which Dreams may be made amazing, are of two sorts:

Matters of Gods Majesty, and Matters of Man's Misery.
1. The Majesty abiding in God, may Incutiunt sacra quendam horrorem.
be so represented in sleep, as to make Dreams terrible. Genesis 15. 12. And when
the Sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abraham, and lo an horror of
great darkness was upon him. Diodat observes, Excellens sensibile destruit
sensorium.
that such a Majesty of Gods presence did appear to Abraham, as set horror upon
his heart in his sleep, the excess light of Gods glory darkened his mind.
Daniel also was thus in sleep made afraid, Chap. 10. 9. As the transplendent
brightness of the Sun dazles the eye and makes it trickle down water; so the
surpassing excellency of Gods Majesty, dismayes the mind, and makes it tremble
with fear. The Israelites God is not like the Israelitescloud, that had a dark
side as well as a bright. In God is no darkness, but all such abundant
brightness abides in God, N^n dantur purae tenebrae in m^ndo: Sed lu^ pura
datur in Deo.
which when it breaks out, makes man afraid especially when the manifestations
thereof are made in his sleep.

2. Sad miseries coming upon men may in sleep be so represented as to make
Dreams dreadful. Dreadful Dreams men may have out of miseries appearing and
approaching.

To others more remote, and To themselves more immediate.
1. Dreams men may have amazing that concern miseries making have upon others.
Thus Daniel had dreadful Dreams and visions about the Desolations of
Jerusalem and the Jews, and their bloody persecutions by the Tyranny of
Antiochus and others, Dan. 7. 1, 2, 3, 15. Paraeus tells of a Terrible Dream he
had, April. 1618. Methought Vide Heidelbergam totam oc^ult^ in^e^dio undiqua
^u^ ^umigantem, etc. Philip. ^ar in vi^a Da^^dis ^a^^i oper^^^s ej^s prae^ixa.
(says he) I saw all Heidelberg on a thick Smoke, but the Princes palace all
on a light fire. This fell out soon after when the Romish enemy entered with
fire and sword, himself indeed before that Fatal blow, was in mercy removed to
celestial bliss.

2. Dreams men may have amazing about miseries that concern themselves and
their Seed, their Families and Posterities. Read Dan. 4. 5, 6, etc. A Dream
(says Nebuchadnezzar) that made me afraid, my thoughts upon my bed, and the
visions of my head troubled me. I saw a Tree, the Boughs strong, the Leaves
fair, the height great, and behold one from Heaven came and cried, Hew down
the Tree, cut off the Branches, etc. This pressed hard upon him and his House.
That place, Genesis 15. 12. That reports the great horror which fell upon Horror
ingens in cutitur dormienti. Forte significat horrendos eventus quos passurus
erat Abraham and posteri ejus passuri.
Abraham's heart in his sleep. Pareus says it might signify such sad Events,
as afterward himself and his Seed suffered.

Secondly, The Maker of, or the mover in and about such dismaying Dreams, we
are concerning, all to consider God himself.

Either as Single. Or as Supreme.
1. Sometimes hereto God moves Single, Solitary, or himself alone. There are
some Dreams which though they fall with fear, we may be sure they Solely
proceed from God, their matter and their meaning is good; but Dreams whose
drift is dread, whose Scope is Skaring, whose Intention is affliction even such
Dreams are Darts shot from Heaven to shake the Heart. Man's Body being a sleep
on his bed, God awakens his Conscience, causes a light that affrights, or
rather a darkness that dismayes. Darkness is most fi^ to move fear. That fear
may fall in, God deals in a double darkness. To the Natural darkness of the
Night he adds a Spiritual darkness drawn over the face of man's Soul. One well
observes. That in the beginning God said, Let there be Dicit Deus fiat lux and
facta est, sed non dicit fiant tenebrae and factae sunt, tenebras ordinavit,
non creavit. August. in Psalm. 8.
Light, and there was Light, but said not, Let there be darkness, darkness he
ordered, not ordained, etc. But herein God as he orders ordinary darkness, so
he ordaines another darkness setting the Soul into Dreams of dreadful fear.
This is Gods doing. I form Light and I create darkness, I make peace and I
cause evil, I the Lord do all these things, Isa. 45. 7.

2. At all Times in affrighting Dreams God is Supreme. Suppose Satan as
concerning such Dreams has some subordinate hand, yet whatever herein he
actually does

Is through Man's Furtherance, And through Gods Sufferance.
1. Man furthers him and affords him what fits his designs, some suitable
matter of sin and sorrow prompt for his purpose. As by the filth of Sin that
Satan finds in the Soul he sets forward defiling Dreams; so by the Guilt of Sin
in the Conscience, Satan is assisted to bring forth affrighting Dreams. Or
Dreams dreadful, the Devil draws out of Some sorrows, dark Non demon est
qui fortasse maerorem movet sed m^ror potius vir^s doemoni administrat and
malas cogitationes sus^itat Chrysostom. de providentia, lib. 2.
and black in men's minds. Chrysostom observes, that Satan does not so often
administer sad matter to harm the Soul, as the Soul by administering sad matter
does help Satan: When Satan cannnot constrain Man's mind to himself, yet he
cannot conform himself to the mind of man, and accordingly draw forth Dreams
filthy or fearful. It has been a great Question with some long Quest.
sin^ viz. Whether the Devil can rai^ tormes, Tempests, and Thunders, in the
Heavens? And the best Authors Answ.
conclude the Negative according to the Canon of an Orthodox Counsel, That
Siquis credat quod Diabolus tonitr^a, fulgura, tempestates sua authoritate
facit, sicut Priscillianus docet anathemasit. Council. Bracarens. 1. cap. 8.
if any should believe the Devil could by his own power raise Thunders, etc.
Let him be accursed. They grant that he may as Gods Instrument Collect, Direct,
and Transport winds and storms, as water and fire, to one point, and against
some Place, or Personas he did against Job, yet not of these be the original
Author, so mind Troubles as Thunders, and Dreams as Storms in the Heart, Satan
as Gods Instrument may manage them, not make them. Or at least,

2. God suffers him, else herein he could not act any thing. God can in Dreams
dismay men's minds without Satan concurring, but Satan cannot come at Men's minds
to dismay them without God permitting. A good writer observes, That when Satan
did any Nisi extra Deum Diabolus fuisset, contra Iobum nihil fuisset moliturus.
Didymus in caten. 8.
thing against Job, it is said, he went out from the presence of the Lord,
having gone first in, to get leave: Leave he must have or he cannot molest by
the least troubles some thought. For the troubling men's thoughts and amazing
their minds, the Devil has a double desire,

That God would let him do, what he can, and That God himself would do what he
cannot.
1. Satan desires God would suffer him to go as far as he can, and that he may
use the utmost power he has to oppose man's peace, and that he may astonish man
day and night without restraint.

2. Satan's desire is, thatwherein his power comes short, God would engage, and
what he cannot reach, that God would strike; and when God does strike, the
Devil gives his blow, and so makes man's fears more fearful, and his Dreams
more dreadful. As there be mixed Temptations to Sin wherein Satan joins with
man against God, so there be mixed perturbations of Soul, wherein Satan joins
with God against man. As when man is up to offend God, Satan sets in to make
his sin the worser: So when God is up to afflict man, the Devil runs in to
make his sorrow the greater. The Devils first desire is to draw men into
Dreams of comfort, and to beguile them with the Images of a false peace, in
which (as Plus metuend us est inimicus cum latenter obrepit, cum per pacis
imaginem fallens occultis accessibus serpit unde illi nomen serpentis Cypria.
de symp. praeta.
Cyprian observes) he is most to be feared, yet he also much desires to
distract men with Dreams of terror, and with his shrill Trumpet to give them
loud allarms in the dead time of the Night; Yet still in these Night-feares God
has the greatest hand. Thou skarest me.

Thirdly, The Persons on whom God causes such skares to come, viz.

Both wicked, and Satan hoc dies noctesque satagit ut nos ponat in
perturbationem ut semper cogit^mus a^ Judicio Dei Luth. Loc. 17. 2. ae classes.
Godly Men.
1. Wicked Men are the primary and principal Subjects of such dismaying
Dreams. By Dreams Terrible, God overturnes them in the Night. Job 34. 25. In
the Night they meet with a double misery.

Hinderance from Sleep, and Horror in Sleep.
1. From Sleep they are hindered. Their Excitat eum cupiditas torque e invidia
steri i tas proventuum infaecund a perturbat solic. tat abundantia, etc. Ne
ipse quidem Deus e ^m d^rmir^ permittit. Ambres.
heads lie as upon a pillow of thorns which way soever they turn, they take
no rest. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, but the abundance of the rich
will not suffer him to sleep, Eccles. 5. 12. Not the abundance of his goods,
but the abundance of his Guilt wherewith his goods are gotten, together with
the cares through which they are kept. In sleep they have horrors Anxietates
animi eos pungentes tanquam aculei etc. Lyranus.
as Hornets humming in their ears and stinging of their Hearts. The cursed
Cananites God threatens to send Hornets among them, Exodus 23. 28. which Austin
and others expound to be perplexities Mu^tum miser est qui nec illud tempus
quod naturaliter quieti datum est quietum habere potest Hugo de Sanct. Vict. in
Ec. Ho. 12.
of mind, that Day and Night should amaze them. Most miserable wicked Men,
toiled in the Day and troubled in the Night, not having that time quiet which
is naturally given for quietness.

Object. Wicked Men for the most part have quiet Sleep in the Night without any
affrighting Dreams, or Dreams of vexations.

Answ. 1. They may thus be vexed in the Night, though they Vapor in the Day.
Seneca has some such saying as this; Men lie who say they think there is
Mentiuntur qui dicunt se non sentire esse deum nam and si tibi affirmant
interdiu, noctu tamen and sibi* dubitant.
no God, for though in the day when they are awake they talk high; yet in the
dark Night and during Sleep they have their dismaying doubts. In the Night men
have such Dreams of a certain Deity as draws in sad perplexities, which yet in
the day they tread down.

2. They have Dreams of affrighting matter though with that matter in Dreams
they are not affrighted. That Sin is matter of affrighting which they Dream
of with delight. See the drunkards Dream, Prove. 23. 35. We find the Dream of
Pharaohs Baker, Genesis 40. 5. It figured forth his Death, yet therein we do not
read him dismayed. But such dismaying Dreams are the most proper portion of
wicked men.

2. Godly men may have troublesome Dreams as we see in Jobs case. Austin
Contra Dei hasce afflictiones and multi forms doemonum incursus quis suae
innocentiae fidit, etc. August. de civi. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 22. Totam noctem in
somnem duxerim, ipsa cordis mei penetralia concepta maestitia occupavit, etc.
Basil. Epist. 1. 86. ad Bosphor. Episcop.
has a considerable saying. Against these afflictions from God and incursions
of the Devil, who can think his innocence shall defend him when often children
are so vexed in their Dreams as they shriek and cry out. Into such an
afflicted case may Gods Saints be cast, as troublesome thoughts may keep them
from Sleep, and in Sleep their thoughts may be troubled; Their minds may be
amazed, and their hearts sore wounded as with arrows from Heaven.

Fourthly, The reasons for why God affrights in Dreams, refer to Men.

Both Good, And Bad.
1. Good Men, God upon them may set loose such Dreams of fear,

To Correct Evil, and To promote Good.
1. For the correcting of some Sin which they have committed, or whereto they
are inclined. An affrighting Dream is Sins black shadow. Sin that flatters
them by Day, frights them at Night. For that which has been pleasing awake,
they are perplexed in sleep.

2. For the promoting of Soule-good, some-sleep troubles may come,

To provoke them to Prayer, and To prepare them for Peace.
1. In order to prayer, Dreams may be drawn in dreadful. That good man Pareus
upon his terrible Dream relating to the desolation of Heydelberg O Deus
clementissime or^ averte omen sinistrum and serva Sareptam tuam a vastatione
hostium intus and foris.
broke out into prayer, and after when awaked breathed out earnest desires to
God for preventing that dismal Doom.

2. In Order to peace, God may make Dreams to perplex.

As to settle Soul-peace the surer, And to raise it the higher.
1. That such peace may have the surer setlement, God affrights them with
Night-sorrowes to establish their Day-comforts: upon such shakes in the boughs,
Spiritual Joy grows more strong in the roots.

2. That such Joy and peace may be set at the higher price; they may the more
esteem the light of sweet comforts when they come out of the dark of the
Night-sorrows. One reports of the Procopius Archiepis^. spalatin. Concio in
Romans 12. 13. page 13.
people near the Pole where the Night is many months long, as soon as there
is any appearance of the Sun they deck themselves brave and get to the
mountains leaping and singing, Behold the Sun, the Sun.

2. Sinful men God may dismay with Vnde malignus hostis conturbat ^t interimat
inde misericors Deus hoc erudiat u^ vivat. Gregor. moral. lib. 2. Per diem
vexatur laboribus per noctem agitatur timoribus, August. in Psalm. 50.
Dreams,

As a meaning of Mercy, or As a warning of Justice.
1. In Mercy, to rouse and awaken Conscience to consider their misery through
sin, that therein they cannot sleep quietly. A Dream gives them such a check
as to Jonah, What meanest thou O sleeper, arise and call upon thy God; or such
a blow on the Soul, as Peter's on the side; Arise up quickly, haste out of this
prison.

2. In Justice, to assure them sad punishments do approach, that shall oppress
them for ever. Now so miserable as not a night quiet, but much worse is coming
that will crush them in Hell. These things thus unfolded as referring to
fearful Dreams in their Explicatory part,

Secondly, I proceed to their applicatory part, in which I shall speak only to
such Dreams as are afflictive, evil and painful, and wherein Gods
displeasure may appear: where I shall propose Duties of two sorts,

Some antecedent, and Some consequent.
1. Things antecedent that concern our escape of such skaring Dreams.
Consider;

The Causes why, and The courses how.
1. The causes why from such Dreams we should labor deliverance, are,

The good they oppose, and The evil they produce.
Dreadful Dreams they do undoubtedly with power oppose.

Peace possessed, and Ease expected.
1. Present Peace they oppose: Dash out Candles of comfort, rout lawful
delights, they put a period to Saints present prosperous estate. Time was when
Job lay upon his bed and Gods candle shined over his head, he went through the
darkness of the night, by the Lords light. O that I were as in months past
(says he) when his Candle shined upon my head, and by his Light I went through
darkness, Job 29. 3. Now Job is upon his bed and the Candle out, he goes
through the darkness of the Night and his Soul sees no Light. Visions he has,
but they are terrifying and all his Dreams skaring. Not only men but great
men mounted in the height of Honor, have been brought down by Dreams of
terror, Dan. 4. 4, 5. I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in my house and flourishing
in my Palace, I saw a Dream that made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my
bed, and the visions of my head troubled me. When he was as a tall tree whose
boughs were strong, Leaves fair, fruit much, etc. he beheld in his sleep one
coming down from Heaven, and thought he heard him say, Cut down the tree,
break the branches, shake the Leaves, scatter the fruit, etc. This filled him
with fear, so that all the comforts of his Court could not quiet him.

2. That future ease which men expect, such Dreams present. When night comes,
men lie down and look for rest. Jacob in his travells when the Sun was set and
Night overtooke him, though he was abroad in the open fields, and had only a
pillow of stones, yet he slept sweetly and Dreamt comfortably, Genesis 28. 11.
Three things when they meet do much help comfortable and quiet sleep viz.

The silence of the Night, The safety of the House, The advantage of a Bed.
Job had all these. In the Night time he had his House to be in, and his Bed to
lie on, so that he looked for rest but found no refreshment, In stead of being
eased he was amazed, In stead of quiet sleeps he had skaring Dreams. He
expected the benefit of his Bed, and comfort of his Couch, but his bed was his
rack and his couch his torment, whence comes the complaints of the Text. All
the comforts that a man has in hand, or in hope, may be dashed by a dreadful
Dream.

2. For the evils that such Dreams may produce, they are either,

Of Sin, or Of Misery.
1. Through a terrible Dream a man Somnia fallaci ludunt temeraria nocte and
pavidas mentes falsae timere jubent. Propertius, lib. 3. Eleg. 4.
may fall into following sins, distempered passions, ill expressions; yea some
men they have set about very sinful actions awake, from those sad impressions
they have received in their sleep. I have read of a man, who Dreaming he had
lost his money, awaked in a fright and immediately went and murdered himself.
It seems Job had some desperate thoughts against himself in the day, through
those dismaying things whereof he Dreamt in the Night. Thou skarest me with
Dreams and terrifiest me with visions, so that my Soul chooses strangling,
and death rather then life. Hyppocrates a learned Physician reports, that some
of his patients possessed with these night-perplexities, plunged themselves
into deep pits in the day, and diverse ways attempted their deaths.

2. Through terrible Dreams a man may fall into much following misery. Hence
some have been bereaved of the use of reason and smitten with madness. Diodate
and other Scripture-Interpreters note, that Nebuchadnezzar after his dreadful
Dream, Dan. 4. soon fell into a sad disease called Lycanthropie, wherein he
lost all manner of humane understanding, forsook the society of men, became
brutish, fierce, and wild like a Beast, living in the fields for the space of
seven years. The distemperatures that were upon his Dreams, and the terrors
upon the Interpretation thereof did dispose him thereunto. Hence some men have
been as it were in hell, while they have Polidor. Virgil. Ang. hysto. lib. 25.
been on earth. History reports, of Richard the third, the Night before he was
slain in Bosworth field, he had a most terrible dream, wherein he thought all
the Devils in hell pulled, and haled him, in hideous and ugly shapes; the fixed
fears of which, helped his fall upon the following Day.

These things may be as cogent causes, to keep off what we can, such skaring
Dreams.

2. For Courses adjuvant whereby such Dreams may be kept off: They consist,
Sic enim est comparata men's nostra ut quae interdiu cupidus vidit, appetit,
timuit, horum simulachra noctu dum ab externis sensibus est, avocata somniand^
videat vel videre se putat. Zanch. Tractat. de Divinat.


Of Caut^^ns, and Of Counsels.
There be,
Evil things against which we must be vigilant, and Good things about which we
must be diligent.
Would we sleep free from affrighting Dreams.

There be some things we must beware we have not, There be other things we must
beware we do not.
Take heed we have not our hearts possessed,

With covetous Desires, With carnal Delights.
1. Desires covetous may cause the Lord to let loose unquiet Dreams. Thus God
makes the world to be as an Engine, to torment men's minds at midnight. It Is a
punishment upon a worldly Man, what Solomon mentions, Eccles. 2. 23. All his
days are sorrows, and his travel grief, yea his heart takes not rest in the
Night. In the Night his body may take some sleep, (...), etc. Clemens Alexand.
Paedagog. lib. 2. c. 5.
but his heart takes no rest; that lies as upon a Pillow stuffed with thorns
through perplexing Dreams. It Is said of the Nightingale, that in the
Night-season, he sets himself with a thorn at his breast, that, when he is
asleep, may prick and prompt him to awake and sweetly sing. A covetous Man his
worldly care commonly in the Night sets a thorn at his breast, whence are many
sad sighs in his sleep, and groans that argue grief.

2. Delights carnal cause God to let fall afflicting-Dreames. In the Day Men
lay in their fuel, and kindle a fire of fleshly contents, their lustful
pleasures are as sparks in the light of which they walk, but when Night comes,
the hand of the Lord lays them down in sorrow. Isa. 50. 11. The Lord lets loose
the Devil by Dreams to dismay their minds. We read, Judge. 4. How Jael gave
Sisera milk and butter when he was awake, but struck him with a nail and hammer
when he lay asleep; So Satan, while Men are awake, tickles them with sinful
pleasures, and when they are asleep, torments their minds with dismaying
Dreams; that perplexes in the Night, which pleases in the Day.

Again, Would not we have God to skare us with Dreams; let us take heed,

That we do nothing against clear Lege Luther. loc. 42. 3 e classis de
pavoribus Conscientiae.
light, and That we do nothing against Gods Saints.
1. Against the Light of Knowledge, let us not act any thing: Hence comes
Conscience to be startled with astonishing Dreams: that is a sad Instance of
Francis Spira, who was not only a learned Lawyer, but a very knowing
Christian, yet revolting to the Romish Religion, he fell into such a despairing
condition, that he was filled with the horrors of Hell, not only in his
wakefull times, but in his sleeping Dreams. Alas (says he to some that came
to comfort him) no sooner in the Night can I snatch a little sleep, but I see
therein, the Devils come flecking into my chamber, and gathering all about my
bed, and terrifying me with dismal noises: These were the sorrowful Sequels
of his several sins against Knowledge and Conscience.

2. Against the people of God let us not act any thing; Some that have been
enemies to Gods servants, God has sorely afflicted with affrighting Dreams:
cruelties and tyrannes have turned some under these torments. Charles the ninth
of France after his cruel Massacre could hardly sleep, and when he did, he was
haunted with hideous fears; Oh the loud peales that Protestant blood have rung
in the ears of sleeping Men. Apollodorus the tyrant dreamt that he was flead by
the Scythians, and boiled in a seething Cauldron, and that his own ^lutarch de
sea Dei vindicta. (...), etc.
heart should say to him; I am the cause of this thy fearful torments. Oh let
us flee these things, all tendences thereunto, and what may border thereupon,
that no Dreams may dismay us. Si sapientia fide -- Probe muniti fuerimus neque
domi sedentes metu concutiemur neque dormientes phantasmatis turbabimu^. cap.
in Prove. cap. 3. ver. 24.


The Positive Means which we are to observe for prevention of perplexing
Dreams:

Some are in respect of our Faith, and Others are in respect of our Life.
In relation to Faith, we should labor,

To raise up our minds to God, and To rest under the wings of God.
1. By Faith let us lift up our selves to God, so may we be above such Dreams:
As in the air, the highest region is most free from tempestuous storms, so in
the earth, the heavenliest mind is best freed from troublesome Dreams: It Is
written of the Egyptians, by reason they live in low fenns where they are much
vexed with Gnats; they use at Night to go up into high Towers, and Herodotus.
l. 2.
those creatures not flying so high, they are free from their disturbing
stings: Whilst we live below, let us when Night comes, by the feet of Faith and
Hope go up to God our high tower, that we may escape the stings of disturbing
Dreams.

2. By Faith let us lay our selves upon God, reposing our selves under his safe
wings, so may we be free from these Night-feares: Though it has another sense,
it may be of some use, which the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 91. 4, 5. He shall cover
thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust: Thou shall not be
afraid for the terror by Night: Little Chickens sleep under the wings of the
Hen, and no harm can molest them; so if we sleep under the wings of Gods
Promises, no Dream shall distract us. Thus let us use our Faith.

In relation to life, let us labor, Lege Luther. loc. 42. 3ae. clas. de
Antidotis tentationum.


To live holily, and To live cheerfully.
1. Let us lead a holy life, that the Lord may not skare us with Dreams.

By putting away all iniquity, and By the positive practice of piety.
Job makes his moan, that God skared him with Dreams; Zophar gives him good
counsel for his cure: If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thy hands
toward God: If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not
wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacles; Then shall thou lie down, and none shall
make thee afraid. Job. 11. 13, 14. 19. We must go in Gods ways with a firm
foot, and take strait steps, not stumble in the Day, if we would not startle in
the Night. Prove. 3* 23, 24. Thou shall walk in thy way safely, and thy foot
shall not stumble; when thou lie down thoushalt not be afraid, yea thou shall
lie down and thy sleep shall be sweet.

2. Let us lead a cheerful life evermore rejoicing in the Lord, that we may be
delivered from these perturbing Dreams, the more light of comfort we have*
when awake, the less darkness of terror we shall have when we sleep: the more
spiritual joy in the Day, the more peaceable sleep in the Night.

The Light of a wellquieted Conscience, and Help much herein. The Light of Gods
loving Countenance, Help much herein.
Lord lift thou up the Light of thy countenance, says David; Thou have put
gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their corn and wine and oil
increased: I will both lay me down in peace and sleep, for thou Lord only
make me to rest in safety. Psalm. 4. 6, 7, 8. [ Peace and Sleep] In the sleep
of his body, he had the peace of his mind. Much care is required to compass
such comfortable quiet and peaceable sleep, and at least to fence off affrights
from the Devil in Dreams: shall the Devil be industrious by these to deter,
and not we be industrious from these to be secure? It Is reported of Scorpions
(Serpents so Scorpion (...).
called from their scattering and casting their poison Night and Day, up and
down) how they link together to molest sleeping-Men, one will stick fast to the
roof or wall of the House, a second to him, a third to the second, and so make
a chain till they reach the party asleep. The last stings and returns, and so
every one goes back in his order. This Eglinus upon the Revelation relates;
Vide Eglinum in Ap^cal.
the same may fitly be affirmed of the Devils those infernal spirits in their
monstiou^ molestings of some sleeping-Men: Now the course some have taken to*
lie quiet, and sleep free from the stings of Scorpions, may be of use in this
case.

Aelian relates, how in Lybia and other like parts, Men sleep in their boots,
they Ocreatos dormire solere, etc.
set their beds from the wall, and place the feet of their beds in pots of
water, lying up in the highest Rooms to rest without such molests. In this
manner it is meet for Men against these designs of Satan, to sleep in their
spiritual armor, to set their minds off from the earth, not to lay their
hearts too near the walls of the world, to set the feet of their souls in the
waters of godly sorrow for sin, to lie up in the Galleries of high
Meditations and sweet Contemplations of God, which may arm against these
Evils, and procure the contrary Good.

Thus we see what are Requisites Antecedent.

2. The Subsequent things that serve for a Conclusion are upon a double
Supposition.

Suppose with such Dreams we are oppressed, Suppose from such Dreams we are
preserved.
If God does skare us with Dreams, our duty is,

To find the true sense of them, and To make the right use of them.
That we may learn their lesson, care is required,

In making Prayer to God, and In asking Counsel of Men.
1. Inquire of God, we see; 2 Samuel 21. 1. That when the Lord afflicted Israel
with years of famine, David enquired of the Lord the cause; and the Lord
answered, it is for Saul, etc. So when the Lord afflicts us with Nights of
fears, and Dreams of terror, we should seek of God the cause, what particular
sin has most incensed God against us: God skared Job with Dreams, Job cries
to God, saying, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. Job. 10. 2.

2. Consult with Men, so did Nebuchadnezer when a Dream had made him afraid,
and thoughts upon his bed had troubled him: He entreats Daniel to tell him the
interpretation thereof: All the wise Men (says the King to the Prophet) are not
able to make it known, but thou art able, for the Spirit of the holy God is in
thee, declare it therefore. Dan. 4. 9, 19.

The practical Use we are to make of dismaying Dreams is,

To cease Sin, and To do Good.
1. Strive all that we can to get clear of sin, so did Job; God skaring with
Peccatum homini vigilanti est inimicus blandiens, and somnianti est Scorpio
pungens.
Dreams, he cries to God, saying, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee O
thou preserver of Men? why do not thou pardon my trangression, and take away
my iniquity! Job. 7. 20, 21. The design of God in some such Dreams is to sever
Men and their sins: God speaks once, yea twice, yet men perceive it not: In a
Dream in a vision of the Night, when deep sleep falls upon men in slumbrings
upon the bed, then he opens the ears of Men and seals their instruction,
that he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from Man, and keep
back his soul from the pit. Job. 33. 14, 15, 16, 17.

2. We must set upon such things as are good, when Nebuchadnezer had had his
troublesome Dream, the Prophet thus applies himself, O King, let my counsel
now be acceptable to thee, break off thy sins by righteousness, and thy
iniquities by showing mercy, it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity. Dan.
4. 27. Let us upon such Dreams do what we can for the profit of our selves and
others: Eliphaz (one of Jobs friends) speaks of a Dream himself had: In
thoughts from the visions of the Night, when deep sleep falls upon Men, fear
came upon me, and trembling which made all my bones to shake, etc. Job 4. 12,
13, 14, 15. Though some conceive it was a delusive Dream, yet it may appear to
be a Dream divine, because it did suggest that which was to abase man and
advance God; ver. 17. Shall mortal Man be more just then God, shall a Man be
more pure than his Maker? Eliphaz did endeavor to improve this Dream for
Job's profit, concluding thereupon his discourse, with these words; Hear it and
know it for thy good, Job 5. 27.

Lastly. If we have peaceable sleep from Dreams disturbing,

The Mercy of God is to be prized, and The God of the Mercy is to be praised.
Gods Mercy is much to be confessed, if we consider

The malice of the Devil to draw such Dreams into all Men, and The misery of
some Men into whom such Dreams are drawn.
1. The Devil is malicious, and desires so to assault all the souls of Men:
Satan himself is in continual torment, having no rest Day nor Night, when he is
not in Hell, he has Hill in him; and could he compass it, we should never be
quiet; he would in the Day dismay us, and in the Night ^^noy us, and not suffer
us to sleep one hour free from affrighting Dreams: therefore God herein does
not only refrain himself, but also restrains the Devil, beats him back and
binds him up, who otherwise would fly about, and as a scritch-Owl clap his
wings at our chamber windows, crying over our beds and heads in the Night to
break our rest: God does not only himself forbear by Dreams to distress us,
but keeps off our adversary that he cannot by skaring Dreams distract us; O
mavelous Mercy! that is a sweet promise, Zech. 2. 5. I says the Lord will be
unto her a wall of fire round about: It Is an allusion to some Countries where
abundance of wild beasts are, shepherds and travelers who would secure
themselves and their flocks, make fire round about their lodgings at Night: The
Lord is as a wall of fire round about our Night-lodgings, the Devil dares not
approach to interrupt our rest: who would not admire this Mercy! Observe;

2. Some Men are so miserable who suffer under soul-skaring-Dreames, As that

When they are asleep, with fear they awake, And when they are awake, they fear
to sleep.
1. From sleep with fear they come: Many a Man has met with those amazements
in his bed, that have made him rise and run from place to place and yet found
no rest. Austin lively lays out such a lamentable Creature; He flies from his
Fugiet ab agro ad civitatem a public^ ad d^mum, a domo in cubicul. Aug. in
Psalm. 45. tom. 8. fol. 286.
bedchamber into the house, from his house into the city, from the city* into
the field, but his enemy follows: he flies back from the field to the city,
from the city to his house, in his house up to his bedchamber, but his enemy
finds him, and his skared conscience cries upon him: Some after sleep are
sweetly refreshed, but all his sleep is imbittered, he comes from his bed as
one out of Hell; soul and body as those two possessed coming out of the Tombs,
Mat. 8. 28.

2. To sleep with fear they go: As in the morning they rise up with terror, so
with trembling they lie down at Miseriis corporis miseriis cordis, miseriis dum
dormit, miseriis dum vigilat. etc. Bernard. de Consid. lib. 2. prope finem. In
nocte dies desideratur in die, nox quaeritur nulla requie a perturbationibus.
etc. Ambr. de bono mortis. cap. 3.
Night, upon many a man is that made true: The Lord shall give thee a trembling
heart, failing of eyes and sorrow of mind, thy life shall hang in doubt, and
thou shall fear Day and Night; In the morning thou shall say would God it were
even, and at even thou shall say would God it were morning, for the fear of thy
heart wherewith thou shall fear, and the sight of thine eyes which thou shall
see. Deu. 28. 65, 66, 67. Some that have been terrified with Visions and skared
with Dreams have been afraid to think of the Night before it came, and amazed
to remember the bed while yet abroad, but when evening is, the sinner sighs;
This Night must I make my bed in Hell: oh what a mercy then is this, and worthy
to be prized, our peaceable rest!

As we have the Mercy let God have the Glory.

Quiet sleep is the Gift of God, and It is the Love of God to give sleep quiet.
1. It Is Gods Gift when we have it, quiet sleep does revive nature as the dew
or small rain does refresh the grass; Now as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 14. 22.
Are there any of the gods of the heathen can cause rain, or can the heavens
give showers? So it may be said: Are there any of the creatures in earth or
heaven that can give sleep? That God which gives showers of rain must give
hours of rest; peaceable repose is Gods peculiar Gift.

2. It Is Gods Love when we gives it. Psalm. 127. 2. For so he gives his beloved
sleep; that is sleep with quietness: yea the Hebrew word [ Shena] for sleep,
being with [ Aleph] a quiet or resting letter, otherwise then is usual, it
signifies the greater quietness in time of sleep: And whereas some apply the
place only to Solomon who was called [ Jedidiah] the beloved of the Lord; to
whom God (...).
gave sleep: The Septuagint turn the Hebrew word plurally, so God gives his
beloved ones sleep: His Saints in general God gives quiet sleep as a token of
his love, yea in the times of their greatest peril: Thus Peter in prison when
he was bound with chains beset with soldiers and to die the next day, yet see
how fast he was found asleep; Act. 12. 6, 7. The same Night Peter was sleeping,
and behold the Angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the
prison, yet Peter slept, till the Angel smote him on the side and raised him
up: so God gives his beloved sleep, and let his beloved give him the honor,
and the rather, because*

Herein God answers our Prayer, Herein God fullfils his Promise.
Is it not our Prayer that God would prevent affrighting, and afford refreshing
sleep? and is it not Gods answer when in sleep he does sustain us? I cried
(says David) unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy Hill,
I laid me down and slep^, for the Lord sustained me, Psalm. 3. 4* 5.

Is it not Gods Promise to vouchsafe sleep free from frights? Thou shall lie
down and shall not be afraid, yea thou shall lie down and thy sleep shall be
sweet. Prove. 3. 24. Hence Gods servants while they are in the wilderness and
woods of this world, they sleep safely, and Devils as wild beasts can do them
no harm, Ezekiel. 34. 25. Have we through Gods blessing this benefit, let us
abundantly give praise and live praise unto God hereupon.

Yea large praise belongs to the Lord for quiet sleep from Men of all sorts;

Whether sinful, Or sanctified.
1. Sinful Men are much engaged to God for his common providence, that
allows them as the mercies of the Board in refreshing food, so the mercies of
the Bed in preserving sleep: upon the want of which nourishment nature would be
Grande pro^ecto in vobis do^um Naturae requies est quae si minus suas exequatur
parts quod reliquum habet Natura totum turbabitur, etc. Be^n. super Cant.
Sermon. 84.
weakened and wasted, disturbed and destroyed, and the wheels of the whole man
put out of order.

Indeed it is a wonder they can sleep quietly, miseries being many, present and
approaching; poor wretches under Gods wrath a sad sentence of death, damned
already, every day in danger of a dreadful arrest for desperate Debts* they
are not able to pay: they lie on their beds as Damocles sat in his chamber, a
naked sword hangs over their heads: The stone crying out of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber answering it: Sin lies at the door, the Devil dwells
in the house, hell fire ready to burn them in their beds, yet they sleep: It Is
security in them, yet clemency in God that does not let loose affrighting
Devils in skaring Dreams.

2. Sanctified Men are much engaged to God for his special providence in their
peaceable sleeps, considering the deep dangers they may imagine themselves in
on every side, from desperate enemies of all sorts;

Both Devils, and Wicked Men.
1. Devils that wait Day and Night to do them harm; did not God set His Angels
to keep corpse-du-guard, and to encamp about their beds, how often would the
Devil beat up their quarters and surprise them with terrors? But through God,

He cannot affright, as he attempts, He cannot effect, as he affrights.
1. Affright he cannot so often as he attempts; he cannot cast in so many terrors
as he makes trials: What Pliny Cauda semper in ictu est nulloque momento
meditari cessat ne quando occasioni desit. Plin. l. 11. c. 25. lib. 8. cap. 29.
reports of the Scorpion is true of Satan, he is continually putting out his
sting, when yet often he cannot reach the souls of Gods Saints, so as to fasten
one fear.

2. Effect he cannot so often as he affrights; he skares them with that in the
Night which he cannot accomplish in the Day; when he strikes them with Dreams,
he would strike them with death; they should thoroughly feel the evils they
fear; he cannot by rending inflict, though he does by roaring affright.

Indeed the Devil (says Bernard) is a Est quidem leo rugiens, sed gratias ago
magno illi Leoni de Tribu Judae, ^^gire potest, seri^n potest etc ^ern. in Psalm
Qui habitat, etc. Ser. 13.
roaring Lion, but I thank the great Lion of the Tribe of Judah, he roares but
he cannot rend; but how much thanks is due to the Lord, who sometimes so stops
this Lions mouth that he can neither rend nor roar, not being able with the
least fear to molest good Men.

2. Wicked Men may occasion Saints skares and fears, and did not God prevent
thoughts of their monstrous malice, their cursed and cruel wrath, rage and
fury would cause affrighting Dreams. Some of the Papists report of their St
Dominick the Father of the Dominicans, how when his Mother was with child of
him, she dreamed that she brought forth a wolf Lege ^^ ^^m^i^ H^ae. Ovid epist.
Paridis and ^el^nae.
with a firebrand in his mouth, and such a manner of person he afterward
proved: Wicked Men are like wolves with firebrarnds in their mouths, or like
Lions breathing fire against the best of men. My soul is among Lions, I lie
among them that are set on fire, etc. Psalm 57. 4. And would not such a lodging
bring in skaring Dreams, but that against them God is good, through whose
kindness we sleep secure: Lord how are they increased that trouble me, many are
they that rise up against me; I laid me down and slept for the Lord sustained
me, Psalm. 3. 1, 2.

Yea, Devils and men set aside, do not we to such Dreams dispose our selves?
opening the door to fears in sleep by needless fears when we are awake: even
awake we often trouble our minds with mere imaginary matters, which might make
our minds to imagine strange things in sleep: how justly might God punish us
with Night-sorrows, for not regarding our day-comforts* The Eternal God would
(says In cubiculo tuo obscuras tibi lucem. Radiare tibi vult Deus Aeternus,
sed ^ubilum facis tibi, etc. Aug. in Psalm. 91.
Austin) shine as a bright Sun into thy soul, and thou darkenest all with
Clouds of thine own creating, thou hangest thy bedchamber with blacks, and
when thou might be secure, thou troublest thine own head and heart with
cares and fears: How good is God who does not leave us in our sleeping-times
to troublesome Dreams! That Dreame-dismayments do not amaze our minds, it is
mercy, To God be glory for ever and ever,

Amen.
VI. Of Profitable and Instructing DREAMS.
Matthew. 2. 12. And they being warned of God in a Dream that they should not
return to Herod, departed into their own Country another way.
IN the former having finished Saepe e somniis discamus Dei, (...), etc.
Paraeus in Genesis 21.
what referrs to Dreams wherein God afflicts. I proceed to such Dreams
whereby God instructs. For an Instance of this sort we may observe the Dream in
the Text. And they being warned of God in a Dream that they should not return
to Herod, they departed into their own Country another way.

Concerning this Dream as here the Holy Evangelist sets forth, Four things are
considerable. De hisce Magis lege, Theophi. lib. in Math. chrysostom. in open.
imperfect. Hom. 11. Cicero de divinat. P^in. lib. 20. Ambr. lib. 1. officio.
cap 28.


1. The Subjects of it, 2. The Substance of it, 3. The Receipts of it, and 4.
The Effects of it.
1. For the Subjects or the men into whose minds God sent this Dream: I shall
only demonstrate them by three remarkable Things; Magi viri docti etsi barbari
patria and domo relicta and longam viam con^^cerunt, and cum ^enissent nulto
metu a^^rarunt, etc. Chrysostom. Hom* 24. in 1 Cor. cap. 10.


1. The Knowledge they h^d, 2. The Voyage they made, and 3. The Homage they did.
1. Knowledge they had. Hence they were called Wise men: In the days of Herod
the King, behold there came wise men, ver. 1. Their wisdom, understanding, or
knowledge is three ways discoverable!

1. By the Measure of it, 2. By the Matter of it, and 3. By the Means of it.
1. The Measure of their Knowledge and Wisdom was great, which gained them this
name of Wise Men. [ Magi] it is as Pareus reports a Persian word importing Magi
apud Persic^s viri ^runt primariae authoritatis obrerum peritiam: qui consiliis
regum praeessent, etc. Pareus. Cyprian Sermon. de* Baptismo. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in
Matthew. 2.
men so expert in prudence as they were prompt and fit to be chief Counselors
unto Kings, and out of which for their wisdome-sake some were chosen to be
Kings, and such were these wise men in the account of Cyprian and several
others.

2. The Matter of their Knowledge was good. Not only had they Humane Learning
in the sciences of the World, as in Mathematical and Astronomicall Knowledge;
so Calvin concludes they did excel; but also some Apud Gentes erat liber
Trismegisti cui titulus (...). August. lib. 5. cap. 3. de Haeriesibus. Cyril.
l. 8. contr. Jul. Clenn. Alex. l. 5. Strom.
Learning in matters Divine, endowed with some Metaphysicall and Theological
Knowledge as relating to God and Christ his Son to come into the World. Wise
men among the Gentiles had some such knowledge as concerned Christ; So Cyrill
and several assert.

3. The means of their knowledge as to this part of principles appertaining to
(...). Vide August. de Doct. Chr. l. 2. c. 28. and de civit. Dei. l. 8. c. 11
de cognit. verae vitae, c. 37.
God and Christ his Son to be sent into the World. They might acquire much by
their industrious reading, and diligent studying such helps as they had of
ancient Prophesies, as Plato did by the Books of Moses, or God might inspire
this, irradiating their minds with such divine Beams, as Balaam that Gentile
Prophet, God made him see much concerning Christ, Numb. 14.

2. Concerning the voyage which these wise men made (manifesting some knowledge
of Christ they had) as may more appear if we ponder,

The reach of it, The rise to it, and The reason for it.
1. The reach of their voyage or the extent of their journey, it was from the
Eastern parts as Persia, to the land of Judaea, and therein to Jerusalem the
Iter unius anni inter deeemdiebus peregerunt, puer ad quem properaverunt potuit
eos in tam brevitem poris spatio ad se adducere, ver. 2. August.
Metropolis thereof: Wise men came from the East to Jerusalem, Ver. 1. How long
a Way this was, and yet in how short a space they dispatched it, let others
report.

2. The rise to their voyage or what first set them forth, was the sight of a
Star. We have seen his Star in the East, Ver. 2. [ His Starre*] A star
made by him, says Fulgentius, or a star that did point to him. Chrysostom
reports, it appeared in the likeness of a little Child leading them to look
after Puer natus novam stellam fabricavit. Fulgent. Sermon. de Epip. Chrysostom.
hom. 2. in Mat. 2. Agente hoc ^ine dubio in eorum cordibus non esset obscurum
quod oculis erat ostensum. Leo. Sermon. de Epip.
Christ the Babe born. To this likely was another light added by the Holy Ghost
in their Hearts.

3. The Reason for the voyage or cause why they undertook such a journey was
to worship Christ, And we are come to worship Him, Ver. 2. Interpreters
determine they meant not so much a civill-Worship to Christ as an Earthly-King
but rather a religious Worship to Christ as a Heavenly God.

3, The Homage they after actually Non civili tantum reverentia sed religiosa
prorsus adoratione eos se an te Christum prostravisse. Pareus i^ locum.
did to Christ does evidence so much. When they came to Bethlehem and found the
Babe borne, they fell down and worshipped him; presenting Gifts, gold,
frankincence and myrrh, ver. 11. If we look into their worship we may see,

The manner expressed, and The matter presented. Puerum quem viderunt hominem,
agnoverunt redemptorem and quem dixerunt regem Iudaeorum erat creator
Angelorum, etc. Fulgent. Sermon. de Epip ha^

1. The manner after which they worshipped Christ is expressed to be by
Prostration or falling down upon their faces, they fell down and worshipped him.
Evidencing as Authors observe their low apprehensions of themselves and their
high estimations of Christ as the Creator of Angels, etc.

2. The matter with which they presented Christ in this worship was Gold,
frankincense, and myrrh. Manifesting they more minded him as an Eternal God,
then as a mortal man. As a man subject to mortality they only offered, myrrh.
As God to govern Adorant corporibus, honorant muneribus, v^nerantur officiis,
oculis hominem vident and Deum obsequiis confitentur. August. Sermon. 1. in Epiph.
Heaven and Earth, they offered two things for one, viz. Gold and Frankincense:
Thus giving a clear evidence, as of Condition, so of their own conversion; who
are therefore called, The first fruits of the Gentiles, or the first born
children of Christ.

These were the subjects or persons to whom God appeared in a Dream. And they
being warned of God in a Dream.

2. The Substance or the matter the Dream contained. It was to forbid their
going back from Bethlehem to Herod Cum Herodes dolum art sua ita instruxisset
ut Magi nihil mali suspicarentur, sed secure illa nocte dormirent redituri ad
praesentissimum periculum.
the King at Jerusalem, That they should not return to Herod. Herod had
appointed their return to him, and they had intended their return to Herod.
Yea, as Chemnitius notes, that very night before their intended return, when
they were secure in their sleep, not suspecting any peril on Herod's part, God
brought in this prohibitting Dream to draw them back. To Herod they must nor
return, suppose for a threefold cause,

His Jelousie, His Hypocrisy, His Cruelty.
1. Herod was full of Jelousie: He had many misgiving thoughts upon the wise
men's first enquiry, saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews. When
Herod heard these words he was troubled. O how suspicious and solicitous he
was, lest this enquired for King should un-King Non ita corona caput circundat
sicut animam solicitudo. Chrysostom. Hom. 66. ad populum Antio.
him. It Is with Kings common (says Chrysostom) for cares to sit more close to
their Hearts, then their crowns to their Heads. But especially if by any ill
course they have come to their crowns (as was the case of Herod) this
increases their cares and fears. This filled Herod's heart with disturbing
doubts and troublesome thoughts. Now seeing he was so troubled at the wise men's
question; God will not have them to go back to bring him a positive report.

2. Herod was full of Hypocrisy. Hypocrisy Quia hypocritae boni videri volunt
sed non esse and mali esse volunt sed non apparere. Bernar. Sermon. 66. in Cantic.
is an evil most abhorred of God. Because Hypocrites (says Bernard) they will
be bad, yet will not seem to be so, they will not be good, yet so they will
seem to be. Thus this Hypocrite Herod, he was false and perfidious yet would
not appear to be so. He was not pious or religious, yet would pretend
thereunto. He privily calls the wise men. Sent them to Bethlehem, saying,
Search forth the young Child, and having found him bring me word, I may come,
and worship him also. But God would not have them to carry him the truth, who
sent them out of mere Deceit.

3. Herod was full of Cruelty, A man Josephus Antiq. 426. Macrobius Saturnal.
lib. 2. ca. 4.
of blood, a man who had imbrued his hands in the blood of his near Relations.
Historians report how he had killed Hi^canus* Nicanor, his Brothers, murdered
Mariamne his Wife, slain Alexander, Aristobulus and others of his own sons;
which made Augustus Caesar tauntingly to say, It Is better to be Melius est esse
Herodis porcum quam puerum. Ba^onlus.
Herod's swine then his Son. Who would not such a cruel man have mischiefed
that came cross in his way? The wise men had they come back and declared the
certainty of Christ's birth at Bethlehem. De saevitia Herodis Lege Eusebi. lib.
cap. 9. and Niceph. l. 1. e. 14.
Such an unpleasing message might have made immediate mischiefs. Because God
would not thus expose innocent persons, he came by night in a Dream and
admonished these men, to Herod by no means to return. They were warned of God
in a Dream they should not return to Herod.

3. Their Receipt of the Dream is considerable according as several
Interpreters translate the words, Being warned of God in a Dream. As God gave
the warning: so they took the warning, What God revealed they believed, the
Author of the Dream they did not suspect, the matter of the Dream they did
not reject; what God said, they assented to it, receiving of it,

As an Oracle, As an Order, As an answer, and As an Evidence.
1. They received it as a Divine Oracle. Oraculo divino instructi. So Erasmus
reads it. But some of our late Writers dislike the phrase, and would not have
the word ( Oracle) used, because so commonly abused by the Ancient Ethnicks, it
becomes not Christians.

2. They received it as an Order, as an express mandate or positive command to
guide their course and require their care. Arcana Declaratione jussi. (...),
etc. Just. ad Triphon. (...).
So Beza renders the words of a Greek Author. This Dream they observed as
Gods secret charge.

3. They received it as a Divine answer. Responso accepto in somnis, says
Aquinas, and Chemnitius well notes that the Greek word is so deducted as does
aptly signify an answer. Now an answer does prae-suppose a desire. The desire
that might occasion to these men this answer from God in a Dream, might
proceed,

Either from their Savior, Or from Themselves.
1. From Christ their Savior some desire might possibly pass. He who was a
little Babe on Earth was also the Son of God in Heaven, who might present to
his Father such a desire as concerned the safety of his servants, that they
might not suffer for his sake, but that they who came so far to serve him
might be preserved from Herod, thereupon this Dream they might receive, as an
answer to such a desire.

2. From themselves might such a desire proceed. Indeed there is no prayer on
these men's part expressed; Sicut moses tacitus clamabat, sic isti pio af^ectu
interrogabant, quid divina juberet voluntas, Hieron. in Locum. Tom. 9. Aquin. ^
But as Jerome observes of Moses, that though he was silent, yet he is said to
pray, Exodus 14. 15. viz. In the secrets of his Heart: So in the secret desires
of their hearts might these men present a prayer to God for guidance, and to
their prayer made when awake they received an answer in sleep.

4. They received this Dream as a Divine evidence, testifying to them what
they were not aware of; Divinitus admoniti in somnio, says Piscator; God did
in a Dream admonish them of matters not before manifest;

As Herod's ill meaning against them, And Gods good meaning toward them,
They minded this monitory Dream, as intimating man meant them mischief but God
meant them mercy: They entertained the tidings hereof as a token of Herod's ill
intentions against them, but Gods good intendments toward them: They were
warned of God in a Dream, they should not return to Herod.

4. The effects or what followed upon this Dream, in general set down, They
departed into their own country another way. To what was revealed in their
sleep they yielded ready obedience, when awake, all objections laid aside. They
desputed not the precept of Herod to engage their return or the power of Christ
to defend them from harm. They might have reasoned (says Chrysostom) If the
Babe be great, what need such a Si magnus est puer hic, quae necessitas fugae
and occultae recessionis, hoc est ver^ fidei non quaerere causas eorum quae
praecipiuntur. Chrysostom. Hom. 8. in Math.
^light? But God in a Dream had declared his will, and obey they would. To
Herod they would not go, but to their Country away they went. They departed to
their Country another way.

The consequences hereof are considerable as further effects of this Heavenly
Dream referring to four several Heads.

To Herod, To Christ, To themselves, and To other men.
1. Herod's hand was hereby restrained and his heart revealed; his bloody
purposes were broken and brought to light. What ever he said, his Secret design
was, saevire non servire, to worry not to worship that innocent Lamb. And as
commonly it is with Tyrants when their craft takes not place, their cruelty
appears. Thus Herod (Gods Dream diverting the wise men) his policy failed, and
then in a rage he fell upon the innocent Infants, slaughtering all to Ideo
misit and interfecit omnes parvulos ut unum inveniret in omnibus. Chryso. Hom.
2. in Mat. 2.
find out one, as Chrysostom observes upon ver. 16.

2. Christ was hereby preserved, Babe and Mother delivered. This Dream to the
wise men for their removal made way for another to Joseph; Christus enim totam
causam nostrae salutis ^cciderat si separvulum permisisset occidi.
The Lord appeared to Joseph in a Dream saying, arise, take the young Child
and his Mother and flee into Egypt. Chrysostom marketh the order of the words;
it is not take the Mother and her Child; but take the Child and his Mother,
thereby showing the chief danger was upon the Child. But as a good Author has
it, lest in this fall of the Child man's salvation should sink, God by Dreams
preserves him.

3. The wise men much advantaged themselves by observing this Dream,

Preventing their evil, and Promoting their good.
1. Evils they prevented both of sinning and suffering. Had they concealed
Christ to Herod, or complied with Herod against Christ, so had they sinned. Had
they dealt downright and revealed Christ to Herod as certainly born, this had
brought suffering.

2. Good they promoted: In going Immutatio vi^ emendatio vitae, Eusebius. Emisen.
Hom. de Epiph. Ita Fulgentius Sermon. de *Epiphan. in fine.
from Herod home, they went from the Devil to God. They betook themselves to
another way of life, leading to Heaven their own country as Christians. So
Eusebius and other Authors open the words. They departed to their own Country
another way.

4. By following this Dream were differing effects to diverse,

As Judgment to the Jews, And Mercy to the Gentiles.
1. To the Jews was Judgment. Dicit autem per al ^m viam reversi sunt in r^m
suam, ^ia in^idelitati (...) n^n e^m.
God sent the wise men another way, not suffering them (says Musculus) to
carry any further message that might draw the Jews from their incredulity, who
were so much troubled at the first tidings of Christ's Nativity, ver. 3.

2. To the Gentiles was mercy by this Cum reversi fuissent, manserunt egregie
colentes Deum and public praedicantes Christum, multos erudirunt.
means. By the wise men's return to their country they came to hear of Christ,
etc. Chrysostom concludes, that in their own Country they became public
Preachers of Christ, so as many by their Ministry were converted to the
Christian Faith. Chemnitius concurrs with Chrysostom and is much of the same
mind: So were many Magi reversi sine dubio inchoat^ agnitione profecerunt and
alios ad ea^ addu^erunt.
sweet mercies the sequells of that Celestial Dream. They being warned of God
in a Dream that they should not return unto Herod, they departed to their own
Country another way. But to pass from his particular Dream in the text, and
to treat of Dreams more generally considered as being solidly good, are
certainly given in of God. And as in the former evil Dreams we found the
malice of the Devil, and the mystery of iniquity, so in these good Dreams
drawn out, we may much manifest the mercy of God and the mystery of godliness.
The following discourse of such Dreams will consist of a double part,

Explicatory, and Applicatory.
The Explicatory part of these Dreams will refer to four things;

The times they have been at, Permulti Philosophi nobiscum fatentur variis
temporibus somnia a Deo immitti and divinationem dari per insomnia, viz.
Antipater, Iamblicus, Democritus, Cratippus Cleanthes Pythagoras, possidonius,
Plato, socrates, Zeno. etc.
The ways they have been in, The persons they have been to, and The reasons
they have been for.
First, The times at which God has graciously given many good Dreams.

Are more remote, Or more immediate.
1. The times more remote when God in good Dreams gave out his mind,

As before the Prophets time, And in the time of the Prophets.
1. Before the Prophets times God came in Dreams. I shall not here Vid.
August. de civita. Dei. lib. ult. cap. ult. vincentius lib. 3. cap. 72. Lyra in
psalm. Nazian 2. orat. 47. in Julian. Aquin. 2da. 2a. Qu. 147.
observe with some the several successive ages of the World, reporting the
particular steps of times before the express Prophets were: Neither shall I
dispute with others too curiously, the order, place and pre-eminence of the
Prophets, who was first and chief. Moses is determined among the most. But
before the times of Moses or any of the Prophets in the old Testament or any
Ante legem latam visiones fuerunt patribus and somniis edocti fuerunt. ^
promulgations of the Law of God, God in Dreams declared his mind, as Calvin
concludes.

2. In the times of the Prophets, God did by Dreams declare much of his
merciful mind to men. As by the Prophets, God spoke to the people, so by
Dreams God spoke to the Prophets. If there be a Prophet among you, I would
make my self known to him in a vision, and I will speak to him in a Dream,
Numb. 12. 6. To the ancient Prophets God made himself known by visions when
they were awake, and spoke by Dreams when they were asleep, Duplex
communicationis modus quo Deus patefacit vigilantibus visionem, dormientibus
Somnium.
so Junius expounds the place. Isidorus in libro Etymolog, sets down seven
several ways by which God spoke in the Holy Prophets, expressing Dreams as a
prime and principal manner in which God was wont to reveal August. Super Genesis
ad Literam. 1. per sensus exteriores, etc. 2. per species imaginarias. 3. per
species intelligibiles.
his will and to speak his mind; yea those two ways of visions and Dreams,
were the most usual Modes after which God spoke to the Patriarchs and
Prophets of old. And to this purpose that place of the Apostle is pertinent;
God who in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets,
Hebr. 1. 1. The Greek text has two considerable words, (...). The one
signifying how God gave out his mind in diverse measures, and the other in
diverse manners. As the measures were diverse, God spoke sometimes less and
sometimes more of matters Divine; so Deus loqui patribus in veteri Ecclesia per
visiones vel in somnia; Ita Aretius in locum varia fuisse genera quibus
illuminati prophetae scilicet per somnia, etc. Estius in locum.
the manners were diverse; sometimes God spoke in one form and sometimes in
another form. The whole tide of Interpreters both Protestant and Popish upon
that place so run, as to report Dreams to be a frequent form or mannner of
Gods speaking in the text intended. Thus God spoke [ In times past to the
Fathers] that is, To David, Moses, Abraham, after the flood, To Noah, Enoch,
Adam before the flood, as Paraeus expounds it. Even to the beginning of the
world this was one of Gods ways. Thus God spoke [ by the Prophets] that is,
the Prophets gave out when awake, what they received from God in their sleep.
In sleep God revealed Divine truths to them which they taught to others in
their wakeing times and seasons.

2. Observe seasons and times more immediate and nearer to us,

As in the Apostles times, And since the times of the Apostles.
1. We find, in the Apostles times were Heavenly Dreams. May we not say that
sometimes in Dreams God spoke to the Apostles, when to them it is plain God
appeared in visions. As the Apostle Peter, when God would have him go and
preach the Gospel to the Gentiles for their conversion to the Christian Faith,
he fell into a trance, and saw Heaven opened and a certain vessel descending,
etc. Acts 10. 10, 11, etc. And when God would have the Apostle Paul to go
preach the Gospel to the Macedonian people, a vision appeared to Paul in the
night. There stood a man of Macedonia and prayed him saying, come over to
Macedonia and help us, Acts 16. 9. We may imagine 'twas a Dream in his sleep
it being a vision in the night. Though visions in the day, were when men were
awake, yet visions in the night were ordinary in sleep. Thus Eliphaz. In
thoughts from the visions of the night when deep sleep falls on men, Job 4.
13. so Dan. 2. 19. To the same may suit that place of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.
1, 2. I will come to visions and revelations In hoc raptu anima Pauli non erat
a corpore separata, sed men's Pauli ita caelestia vidett ut esset a sensibus
corporeis alienata. Aquin 22. Q. 175. Art. and 6. August. lib. de Genesis ad lit.
cap. 3. and lib. depeccat Orig. cap. 23.
of the Lord: Whether in the body I cannot tell, or whether out of the body I
cannot tell, God knows. His soul was so set awork in sublime converses with
God, his body was as it were laid by, it might lie asleep having little to do.
His visions were not to the ocular part of his body, but to the intellectual
part of his mind. His bodily eyes might be shut, the eye of his understanding
was open. Yea to his visions he adds revelations, which Theophylact and others
distinguish. The result Conjungit Apolus visiones and revelationes quia quae
vidit perfect intellexit. Estius in Loc. Carthus.
of all may be this: That as he saw by his understanding, so he did understand
what he saw; his intellect was so acting, though his bodily senses were bound.
So that Apostle in Patmos, when he received those celestial revelations, the
vision he had (as a learned writer observes) was Interna, Imaginaria and
Intellectualis. His mind was in motion, his body lay as asleep, he is said to
be in the spirit. Not supposing as if he were Non quod esset absque corpore,
sed quia nihil pe^ corpus, vidit, audivit, sensit, etc. Haymo.
wholly out of the body, but because by his body he saw nothing, heard nothing,
felt nothing, in such a sense no deep sleep could make him more Bodyless then
now he was, yet to his mind great mysteries were manifest, yea, to his Heart
was Heaven open.

2. Since the Apostles God sometimes sent in Dreams of deep concernment as
various and very good Authors evidence. Jerome affirms that Philo Hyeronim.
lib. de Viris illustribus.
Judaeus a famous man that flourished in the Emperor Caligulas time, some 40
years since Christ, that he wrote five Books of Dreams immitted of God. And
Cyprian who lived under the Emperor Valerian about 260 years since Christ,
reports, that in his time several things were made known by Dreams,
redounding much to the glory of God and the good of his Church. So Augustine
who was found famous in Africa between 4 and 500 years since Christ, wrote
much relating to Dreams Divine, and so it might be easily drawn down. Visions
that use to be co-temporary with Dreams have been in these latter times.
Enlarge I might easily out of Ecclesiastical History, take only one instance.
At a time there was in Antioch such a terrible earthquake as many houses fell
flat, the people possessed with fear forsook the City, and withdrawing from
their dwellings, one had a vision, that he saw a man coming to him, who bade
him write upon every house, Christ is with us, stay here; Christus nobiscum,
hic manete.
which accordingly upon houses standing was written and so were preserved.

Object. God we grant in former times spoke by visions and Dreams, but in
these last days he speaks by his Son, Heb. 1.

Answ. As in former times when God spoke by Dreams and Visions, God then spoke
also by his Son, though not so apparently: so in these last days when God
speaks by his Son, he may also speak by visions and Dreams, though not so
frequently. By the preaching of the Gospel is Gods usual speech and ordinary
course, requiring men's chiefest care; yet from God may come Dreams in the
latter times It Is a promise first reported by the Prophet Joel, 2. 28. and
after repeated in the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 2. ver. 17. That in the last
days young men should see visions, and old men should dream Dreams. A sound
Expositor upon the place observes, That to young Hic somnia tribuuntur senibus
quia puriores sunt affectibus. Juvenum insomnia ex affectibus plurima trahunt
ut exodi^ amore ira humorum redundantia: quibus affectibus senes minus sunt
subjecti visiones quia judicio and sensuum vigore maxim pollent, etc. Aretius.
men who may be more quick and clear in their apprehensions it is attributed,
they shall see visions: yet though they are named others are not denied: And to
old men who may be more calm and clean in their affections, it is appropriate,
They shall dream Dreams. Yet though they are expressed other men are not
excluded. Great Articles of Faith concerning Christ incarnate have been
signified by Dreams. To Joseph, Mat. 1. 20, 21. was Christ in the truth of his
two Natures by a Dream clearly declared; The Lord appeared to him in a Dream
saying, Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take to thee Mary thy wife, for
she shall bring forth a Son: that opened his humane Nature. Thou shall call
his name Jesus, for he shall save his People from their sins: that evidenced
Christ's divine Nature; for he that saves from sin must be God as well as Man.
Let this suffice for the times whereat God has given out Dreams.

Secondly. See we the Ways of God in these secret works of sacred Dreams.
Dreams, God has sent into men's minds;

Some as with a vision, and Some as with a voice.
1. With visions representing somethings under similitudes as to the eye.
Macrobius facit quinque somniorum species 1. (...), 2. (...) 3. (...), 4.
(...), and 5. (...). lib. 1. cap. 3. and cap. 41. de Somn.
In this way was Pharaohs Dreams wherein God admonished him of seven years
famine in Egypt. And Pharaoh said to Joseph, I saw in a Dream and behold seven
ears came up in one stalk full and good. And behold seven ears I saw come up
after them withered and blasted, and these devoured the seven good ears. And I
saw in a Dream seven kine fat and well favored; And I saw seven other kine
poor and lean that did eat up the fat, Genesis 41. 17, 18, 19, 20, verses.

2. With a voice, God not representing any thing as visible to the eye, but
only speaking so, as somewhat seems audible to the ear. This was Gods way in
Abimelechs Dreams about the business of Sarah. God came to Abimelech in a
Dream by night and said unto him, behold thou art a dead man, Genesis 20. 3. And
God said unto him in a Dream, yea, I know thou did this in the integrity of
thy heart, ver. 6. God did not herein use any similitudes.

Again God in the way of Dreams has gone with steps;

More swift, or More slow.
The making of Dreams lies in the moving of thoughts. Now thoughts, their
motions are with expeditions. Luther when he would set out the Agility of the
bodies of Saints after the resurrection, says, They shall move as swift in the
Heavens, as thoughts in the heart. Yet the hearts and minds of some men in
these notions are more flow, dull and heavy then others. And so Gods workings
upon all are not with the same celerity, because they follow not fully the
activity of the Agent, but Quodlibet recipitur ad modum recipientis.
according as is the capacity and receptibility of the Subject. God in works of
mercy, nescit tarda molimina. He would pass with all speed; but men's hearts
move heavy, and hence thoughts in some both awake and asleep are more slow. In
all Dreams God does not keep the same space; nor does he pass so sudden with
some as with others, but much varieth his goings, so that some herein have
found him easier to follow and others harder to trace.

Again, God in this way and work of holy Dreams,

Has made use of Instruments, Or has done all himself.
1. Instruments God has sometimes made use of, transmitting Dreams into men's
minds by the ministry of Angels. When Herod was dead, behold an Angel of the
Lord appeared in a Dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, arise, Mat. 2. 20. God
sends Angels from Heaven in the night and sets them about men's Beds when
asleep; as to prevent Satan in Dreams that be bad, so to convey himself in
Dreams very good. By bad Dreams would Devils break in, but are beat off by
Angels. An Hystorian tells, that when Gainas sent a great multitude in the
night to burn the Emperors Palace at Constantinople: Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 6.
a multitude of Angels met them in the form of armed men, which forced them
with fear to fly back. When Satan by night with a sinful fire brought from
Hell would set men's souls on a flame; Angels bring a blessed fire from Heaven,
that burns and heats men's hearts in holy Dreams. As God has sent Angels to
watch over some asleep, for their protection: so to work in some asleep, for
their instruction. God has appointed his Angels to carry his Psalm. 34. 7. Heb.
1. 14.
mind down to some on earth, while their bodies have been asleep in their beds:
as he has employed his Angels Luke 16. 22, 23.
to carry the souls of some up into Heaven, when their bodies have fallen
asleep by death.

2. Sometimes God has thus wrought himself alone, no Angel administering.
Nullus de janitoribus respondit quia omnes te-^ nuerat somnus licet pueri tui
Domine dormiant, tu tamen non dermis qui custodis Israel August. in Ser. de
tempore.
Austin observes upon that Parable of our Savior, Luke 11. Which of you shall
go to his friend when it is midnight saying, send me three loaves. He from
within shall answer, Trouble me not, the door is shut, my Children in bed, I
cannot rise; Yet because of his importunity he will arise and give him. Here we
see (says he) how, when the whole family was asleep, yet the master of the
house was awake and at midnight gave out bread to his friend, etc. Thus when to
men-ward Angels are as if they were asleep, yet toward them God is awake and
in the night-times gives out good Dreams, as several Scriptures beside the
text testify.

Thirdly, The persons unto whom good Dreams God has given, viz,

Both Sanctified, And Sinful.
1. Into men sanctified God has sent such Dreams, as to Samuel when but a
child about the business of Eli, 1 Samuel 3. So to Solomon about the
concernments of his Kingdom, 1 Kin. 3. O what a comfortable conference passed
betwixt God and him in a Dream* The Lord appeared to Solomon in a Dream by
night, saying, ask what I shall give thee, and Solomon said, give thy servant
an understanding heart to judge thy people and to discern betwixt good and bad.
And the speech pleased the Lord, and God said to Solomon, behold I have given
thee a wise and understanding heart. And Solomon awoke and behold it was a
Dream, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. And indeed holy and good men are for such
Dreams most meet,

Having fit matter for them, and Being free movers in them.
1. Matter fit for such Dreams; God finds in holy hearts the habits of
Heavenly graces, such supernatural principles disposing them to receive
further impressions from God. We may see in our selves, when our hearts are
well inclined, how quickly do we close with (...), etc. Nazianz.
any good motion, how readily do we receive, sleeping or waking, any gracious
suggestion? When a good fire is found in our wood, the breath of the blessed
spirit soon blows up such flames even by night in good Dreams. A gracious
heart is a fit stock for such graftings; God takes pleasure to put in such
Ciences with his own hand from Heaven. A good soul is a fit soil for such seed.

2. The minds of sanctified men move freely so as actually to concur with
what comes from God. In sleep their bodily senses are bound, but their
Christianus, cum ocul^s dormit, cord vigilat. Cypri. de orati. Domini.
graces are free; so far as they are found flesh, they are sleepie; but so
far as they are spirit, they are vigilant and wakefull. The spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weak, Mat. 26. 41. I sleep, but my heart waketh,
says the Church, Cant. 5. 2. Her Heart being awake she soon heard his knock,
Mat. 25. We find, while the Bridegroom stayed the virgins slumbered and slept,
the wise Vid. Salmeron. Tract. Octa. de par. december Virg.
slumbered, and the foolish slept, say some; but concede they all slept, yet
the wise were in part awake, whence they quickly heard the cry at midnight.
Behold the Bridegroom comes. Then they being ready went in with him, ver. Si
dormituri sumus quomodo vigilamus etiam cum ^orpore dormimus cord vigilamus.
Aug. de. verb. Do. Ser. 22.
10. Let the Lord come at midnight, good men are ready to meet his motions.

2. Bad men have had Dreams from God, as Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar named are
notable instances, yet such Dreams

God has more rarely immitted, and They have more hardly admitted.
1. Good Dreams into bad men brought seldom. Amongst good men such matters
have been found more frequent. Joseph Jacobs son had so many Dreams sent in
of God, above his brethren-that they scoffingly called him the captain Dreamer,
Genesis 37. 19. (...). Somniorum Architectus.
Sinful men they do so often resist good motions, when they are awake, that God
seldom visits them, when they are asleep. They are so much against God in the
day, that God is but little with them in the night

2. Dreams good, men bad do Somnium illud oblatum uxori Pilati non a Diabolo
immissum fuisse tanquam volente mortem Christi impedire per quem ipse
conterendus esset, sed a bono Angelo revocaute Pilatum ab injusta condemnatione
iusti hominis. Ambros. in Lucam.
hardly embrace. sinful souls have been afflicted when such were injected,
therein no way active but passive, as appears in Pilates wives Dream, which
Dream was not of the Devil to hinder Christ's death (as some have asserted)
considering himself should be thereby destroyed, but the Dream was Divine to
withdraw Pilate from his sentence, or to aggravate his sin; O says she, Have
thou nothing to do against that just man; for I have suffered many things in a
Dream, because of him! In such Dreams sinful men are merely passive, when
others are active; Dreams that have entered into gracious hearts with pleasure
and delight, have come into carnal hearts with trouble and pain; they have
taken such impressions, as oppressions.

Now lastly, The reasons for which good Dreams have been given in of God,

Why to natural and sinful men, Solet Deus somnia immittere viris piis, ut in
Scripturis patet, and aliquando impiis ut somnium Pharaonis probat Zanch.
tractat. De Divinat. p. in Some.
Why to regenerate and sanctified men.
First, Into the minds of sinful men God has sent in such Dreams,

In relation unto others, and In relation unto themselves.
1. It Is certain God has sometimes come unto bad men by Dreams for others
sakes,

To restrain them from doing evil against others, To incline them toward
others to do them good.
When Laban pursued Jacob, and purposed at least to plunder him of all he had,
Genesis 31. 24. God came to Laban the Syrian by night in a Dream saying, Take
heed thou speak not to Jacob either good or evil. This so bound up Laban that
when he overtook Jacob, he did him no hurt, but showed kindness to him, made a
covenant of peace with him, and departed from him* blessing him and his, ver.
55. It Is written of Alexander (the Jews having denied him Josephus l. 11.
August de civ. Dei, lib. 8.
some help) he was so enraged against them, that he resolved to ruin them, and
accordingly with his conquering Army going against Jerusalem, Jaddus the High
Priest hearing thereof, put on his Priestly attire, met him in the way, whom
when Alexander saw he fell off his Horse, and offered him peace, telling his
Nobles, that God in a Dream had shewe'd him the same Man so attired the Night
before, and so he departed with some expressions of bravery and bounty in
obedience to that vision.

2. It Is sure God has also come to Men bad, by Dreams for their own sakes,

To prevent their sinnesull evil, and To promote their saving good.
When Abimelech King of Gerar had sent and took Sarah, (who was reported to him
to be Abraham's sister) into his house, God admonished him by Night in a Dream
to forbear to take her to wife, and to restore her unto Abraham, whose wife she
was, Genesis 20. 2, 3, 6, 7. Thus did the King escape that sad sin of Adultery;
And thus has God sought the salvation Opus providentiae Dei, non ut solveretur
Christus, sed ut servaretur uxor.
of the souls of some. That Dream which Pilate's wife had, the intent of it
was not to deliver Christ from the death of the Cross, for that was according
to the determinate Counsel of God, but as Theophlyact conceives, it was to
save the woman's soul from everlasting death: not so much for the clearing of
Christ, while he was at the bar, as for the converting of the woman, whose
case was bad.

Secondly, Into the minds of sanctified Men, God has sent in Dreams,

In reference unto others, and In reference unto themselves.
God into good Men has given Dreams for others advantage, thereby,

As to admonish others of evil where of they were in danger,

So to establish others in good wherein they did waver.

God has caused Dreams in the minds of his Sants, that they might warn
others of danger. It Is reported of Beza, that in the Night having dreamt that
Geneva was sadly surprised, he pressed the Governors in the morning
immediately to search, whereupon a desperate plot against the place was
discovered, the peril prevented and the people preserved. Yea and also,

1. God has brought Dreams into the minds of his Saints, that they might
help others in doubts. Mr Philpot Book of Martyrs, Vol. 3. page 606. col. 2.
Such as scruple this point, read that Letter.
the Martyr having over night received a Letter from his fellow-Prisoner,
wherein he desires his Judgment concerning the baptism of Infants, made this
return; Before (says he in his Letter back) I show you, what for it I have
learned from Gods holy Word, and the practice of the purest Churches, I cannot
but declare, how the same Night musing upon your Letter I fell asleep, and had
such a Vision and Dream, (which he relates and concludes) This Dream I take
to be the working of Gods Spirit, that I might the better content your request,
as he wrought in Peter to satisfy Cornelius, Acts 5. 10.

2. God has made good Men to receive such Dreams for their own advantage;

As to prepare them for evil which they were to sustain. So to assure them of
Good which they were to obtain.
1. God by Dreams has signified to his Saints what afflictions they should
suffer, that so they might the better prepare. History reports of Policarpus,
who in Smyrna suffered martyrdom Eusebius lib. 4. cap. 13.
under Antonius the Emperor about a hundred seventy years after Christ, that
three days before he fell into his enemies hands, sleeping upon his bed, he
dreamt, that the bolster whereon his head lay, was all on a flame, and the
other bed-cloaths burning about him; whereupon when he awoke, he told his
friends, God had declared that he must be burnt quick for Christ (for which he
much fitted himself) and so it soon fell out.

2. God by Dreams has signified to his Saints, what mercies they should
receive, that so he might strengthen their faith and also quicken their
obedience. Thus Jacob in his journey lying down upon a stone to sleep, Genesis 28.
11, 12, 13. He Dreamed and behold a ladder set upon the earth and the top
reached up to Heaven, and behold the Angels of God ascending and descending on
it. And behold the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham
thy Father and the God of Isaac, the land whereon thou lie, to thee will I
give it and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and in
thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. Behold I am with thee
and will keep thee in all places, whither thou go, and will bring thee again
to this land, and will not leave thee, till I have done what I have said.

The Application to our selves concerning such Dreams now follow;

This referres to a twofold case,

In case we have them not, and In case we have them.
Be we without these Dreams? then let us observe,

The grounds why we should desire them, and The means how we may procure them.
Such Dreams from God are to be desired.

Because of the excellency that is in them, and Because of the commodity that
is by them.
These Dreams are in themselves excellent: because through them

The Soul in sleeping-time is highly Employed, and Sleeping-time by the soul
is rarely Corpore dormiente anima in somnis somniando agit. Hypo. de insomniis.
Improved.
1. The employment of Men's souls in such Dreams is high and holy. Man's soul
we must observe, it sleeps not as the body does, for, as it lives when the body
dies: so it wakes when the body sleeps: It Is an Argument some bring to prove
the Immortality of the soul, Ne in somnium quidem anima cum corpore quomodo
inveritate^ mortis cadet, uqae inimaginem ejus ruit. Tert. de resur. carnis.
that it does not die, as the body does, because it is not subject so much, as
to the similitude or shadow of death; viz. sleep, as the body is; Now if not
the soul of a man, much less does the soul of a Saint sleep: If the rational
soul be waking and working, much more does the regenerate soul wake and work,
when the body is bound by sleep: And as the soul of a sinful Man is by bad
Dreams set a work in an abominable and wicked way: so the sanctified soul is
in good Dreams set a work after an admirable and worthy way: we may say of the
soul sanctified as it is said of the good Corpore in lectulo cubante ac velut in
morte quiescente ipsa anima corporis naturam transilit, etc. Athan. Cont. Gent.
house-wife, Prove. 31. 18. She perceives her merchandise is good and her candle
goes not out by Night, she seeks wool and flax and works willingly with her
hands, she is like the Merchants ships, she brings her food from afar, she
rises also while it is Night, and makes ready meat for her household, and
prepares a portion for her Maidens, etc. As while the drowzie Disciples were
fast asleep, our dear Savior himself was hard at holy Prayer, fixed upon his
Fathers will and work: so a Saint of God whilst his body lies asleep on bed,
his soul in a sweet Dream is bent about blessed business, as if in prayer
ardent, in hearing diligent, in Christian conference earnest, as if at the
Lords Table instant, where he thinks he sees Gods Minister giving, precious
people receiving, yea it seems, as if he saw the Lord Christ thereat sitting,
and thereupon the Spikenard smelling, Cant. 1. 12. Oh the rare workings of the
soul at such a time, how admirably and acceptably did the soul of Solomon work
in the time of a Dream? what an excellent prayer did he in the thoughts of his
heart, make? 1 King. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9.

2. The Improvement of men's time in such Dreams is rare and precious. It Is a
blessed thing for men to make the best of time, especially to raise that time
toward their eternal good which others idly sleep away. We know a very vast
part of our time runs out by night and is spent in sleep, of which we must
Deorum immortalium etiam noctes sunt, Hesiodus.
give an account, because not only the day, but the night is Gods. The day
(says David to God) is thine, the night also is thine, Psalm. 74. 16. Luther
has some such like saying. Whether Sive nox est sive dies est, Dei sunt. Qui
vigilat, Domino vigilat. Qui dormit, Domino dormit. Luther. Ex tomo. 3. In
Genesim.
the time be night or day, it is of God, and ought to be to God. He that waketh
must wake to God, and he that sleeps must sleep to God. Now to God he surely
sleeps, that thus surely Dreams. And as these meet times for man had never
been: So time would not continue in its order; but day and night would be
confounded, were it not for God. As God in the Creation did ordain day and
night to be separate one from another, and successive one after another, Genesis
1. 5, 6. So God by a Covenant keeps them asunder, to come in their season, Jer.
33. 20. It Is Gods mercy, day and night does not mingle together, as to mar
their order. As God is worthy of praise, that preserves the night time: so it is
praiseworthy Non oportet eos qui animam vigilantem intus habent tota nocte
dormire, etc. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 9.
in man to improve the time of the night. Yea, that part of the night wherein
he sleeps, so as when his body is at rest, his soul is at work: when his body
lies still, his soul is ascending Jacobs ladder. This is a mavelous mystery
to the most of men.

2. Such Dreams are unto good men comodious,

Thereby the grace of God is evidently discerned, and Thereby the God of grace
is comfortably enjoyed.
1. Through these a clear discovery is made of the grace of God. Physicians
find out the principal and most predominant humors in the body by Dreams.
Divines determine the master, most prevailing and best beloved sin in a man,
by his Dreams. And so it may be surely seen and safely said, such and such
graces are present and potent in man by the spiritual motions of his mind in
Dreams. God by Dreams has unloosed the doubts and enlightened the darkness
of diverse, brought them to the knowledge of what they did not understand. One
hearing the praise of Basil, desired much to know what kind of man he was,
whereupon a pillar of fire was presented in a Dream (says my Author) with
this motto, Talis est Basilius, such a one is Basil, a burning flame for God.
Some of Gods Saints desirous to know the beauties of holiness and to behold
the luster of grace, the Spirit of the Lord has given that light in Dreams,
that they have learned, how illustrious and lovely, grace and holiness in
their hearts has been. Augustine tells of one Eulogius August. de cura pro
mortuis, cap. 10.
a Rhetorician in Carthage, who meeting with an obscure place in Cicero's
Rhetoricks which he was next day to read to his Scholats; being at night
troubled he could not understand it, fell asleep and by a Dream before morning,
the dark place was made plain. (How God has cleared intricate* Scriptures
this way to some, I shall forbear to mention:) And as obscure places in books,
so obscure graces in hearts, have been admirably opened unto men in their
Dreams, when they have been troubled with knotty objections, they have thus
received resolutions; what was cloudy in the day has been cleared in the
night: Graces in the heart, like stars Stellae in die latent, in nocte
lucent. Bernard. in came.
in the heavens, have shined in the night that were not seen in the day. One
writing of the twelve stones in Aarons garment, says of the Rubic* that it is
a Epiphanius de 12. Gem.
precious stone soonest seen and best found out in the night, by a sparkling
light it self therein casts. Thus in the night may a man have experience of
grace and the spiritual workings thereof that did not so appear in the day.

2. In Dreams a close communion may be held with God; a man may have
refreshing fellowship with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Many a good man, as in
Dreams he has had close combatings with Satan, his bed has been as a field,
wherein many a brave battle has been fought and victory got gallantly, has
his soul beat off the Devil, when his body lay bound by sleep: So in Dreams
he has had close conversings with God, his Bed has been as a Bethel, a place
wherein God has been present, and a place wherein he has made near approaches
to God and God to him, Genesis 38. 16, 17. And Jacob Male cubans suaviter dormit
and foeliciter Somniat.
awaked out of sleep saying, surely the Lord is in this place. This is none
other but the house of God and this is the gate of Heaven. Why the place was
the open field, where he had lien amongst the stones; ai but he had had such a
Dream, as put him into the very gate of Heaven, and placed him, as in the
house of God. Hence a Saint may not only say to God, as David, Psalm. 139. 18.
Lord, when I awake, I am still with thee, but Lord, when I sleep, I am still
with thee! There may be somewhat more in that place of the Apostle, then we are
aware of at present, 1 These. 5. 10. Christ died for us, that whether we wake or
sleep, we should live together with him. If it relates to sleep before
mentioned, the Apostle speaks of a double, viz.

A sleep of the Soul in security; Let not us sleep, as do others. ver. 6. and.

A sleep of the body for necessity; They that sleep, sleep in the night, ver. 7.

Now that in the 10. ver. cannot be meant of the Soul sleeping in sinful
security; For therein is no living with Christ if intended of the body in it is
natural and necessary sleeping, then through holy Dreams a man lives with
Christ. A godly man whether he wakes in the day, or sleeps in the night, by the
thoughts of his mind he meets, Christ, remains with Christ; Christ O Sancta
anima s^la esto ut soli omnium serves teipsum quem ex omnibus tibi elegisti, an
nescis te habere verecundum sponsum? Bernard. lib. medit.
and he has sweet intercourse together! O what sweet converse has the Soul
with it is Savior in the solitudes of the night! If thou would solace thy
self (says Bernard) with thy Savior, mind much the most solitary times
o^^^tirements! Oh chaste and lovely Soul be thou alone; thy Heavenly husband,
who will not crowd into thee in the day, through the throng of worldly company,
and earthly employments, may yet give thee gracious visits in the night, when
the curtains are drawn, the door locked, and all the world shut out, then may
he come, and finding thee alone there give thee his loves, Cant. 7. 11, 12. All
men, says an obscure Writer, while they are awake, are together Heraclitus.
in one common world, but when they sleep, each man goes into a single world by
himself. A Saint of God in his sleep goes into a glorious world where he finds
comfortable company, converses with Angels, Apostles, Martyrs, and holy men.
Thus God makes good that promise, Prove. 3. 24. When thou lie down thou shall
not be afraid. [That's not all] Yea thou shall lie down and thy sleep shall be
sweet; in sleep not only free from what affrights, but filled with what
refreshes. Thus the Prophet when he had Dreamt of the Churches happy estate;
Upon this, says he, I awaked and beheld, and my sleep was sweet unto (...)
Jerem. 31. 26. O how have the ^^^forts of God, and the God of comforts in time
of sleep been sweetly received! A Persian Monarch Dreaming that Themistoles the
Athenian, a man of rare parts was revolted from the Grecians and come in to
him, being transported with joy, he broke out with a loud voice in his sleep, I
have got Themistocles Habeo Themistoclem Atheniensem. Xerxes.
the Athenian, He is mine, He is mine, wherewith he awaked, and so it was. Thus
a poor Christian who having been for diverse days in doubts and deep distress
for want of Christ, in whom are hid the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; the
Lord at length has come in a Dream by night, which ^^th made his soul to sing
and leap, saying; Christ my Redeemer is come, is come, I have him, I have him,
which proves more then a Dream: Credibly have I heard it reported of a
Christian man, that lived in Dublin in Ireland, who Dreaming he heard the last
trumpet sound, and that the world was at an end, with joy leaped out of his bed
and run out inthe streets, saying, My Christ is come, my Christ is come. This
I can report of a precious Minister a little before his death, slumbering upon
his bed in the night, and falling into Meditations of the Resurrection at the
last day, when both body and soul should abide for ever in bliss, started up,
and was ready to rise out of bed; being asked what he meant, answered, Let me go
to the pulpit and impart to the people the sweet comforts I have had in my soul
this night! O that these things might quicken and cause us to seek such Dreams
from God;

From God, that such Dreams may be procured, preparation for them is to be
made,

First in the day, and Secondly in the Night.
Whilst the day lasts, if we would prepare for good Dreams, we must
endeavor,

To do much good, and To do all good well.
1. Much good work we must endeavor Quod fi dic dominico men's nostra in piis
exercitiis tota defixa esset, eadem inter dormiendum recurrerent Cartwright in
Ecclesias. Homili.
in the day to do. A dream comes through the multitude of business, says
Solomon, Eccles. 5. 3. He, that goes through a multitude of worldly business
in the day, is apt to Dream of worldly things in the night: and in the night
he is apt to Dream of things holy and good, who is busy about abundance of
good in the day. Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

2. All good work we must endeavor to do well, if thereby we would make way
for good Dreams to follow. We must set our selves in holy and religious duties,

To do them
With strong desires, and Men's humana quod optat. Cicero. de Divinatione.
With great delights.
To do them
With hearts fired, and With hearts fixed.
We ought to stir up and put out our selves about holy service, so as to take
pains thereat and pleasure therein, with minds wholly bent thereupon, to make
the managments of holy matters our meat: My meat is to do the will of him that
sent me, and to finish his work, John 4. 39. yea, to esteem the work of God, as
Job did the word of God, more then our appointed food, chap. 23. 12. These
day-duties to good Dreams are very dispositive; and when night is, then
toward such Dreams there be duties preparative.

Both at the entrance of the night, And in the progress of the night.
1. When Night is begun and we are to lie down in our beds, our business as
introducting to Dreams divine, is, Prayer to God; Prayer, as it beats off the
Devil that he cannot assault us with Dreams that are bad: So it brings on God
graciously to visit us with Dreams that are good. As we must pray for good
sleep in the night: So we must pray for good Dreams, in our sleep reading the
Scripture. Hierom exhorted some godly women, to whom he wrote, to take Hiero,
ad Eustach. de custod. Virg.
the Bible to bed, and to hold it reading in their hands, till they bowed down
their heads with sleep, so as their lips and the leaves met: It Is to good
Dreams a great help. Instructing our families and speaking to them about us,
of the great works and good word of God, which we are to relate when we lie
down, Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19. And the same, Prove. 6. 21, 22. All such means much
conduce to Dreams that are good.

2. When night goes on and in our beds we are laid, to lift up our hearts unto
God in holy meditations. Commune with your own heart upon your bed and be
still, Psalm. 4. 4. The bed is not barely for body-sleeping, but for
heartcommuning and soulsearching, Psalm. 77. 6. In the night (says David) I
communed with my own heart, and my spirit made diligent search. David took
advantage of the night to look more narrowly into his own heart; to sweep his
house; In the night likewise to look up in a holy remembrance of God, I have
remembered thy name O Lord in the night, Psalm. 129. 55. In the intervals or
spaces between sleep and sleep to have the heart with God, to set our thoughts
well a work, when at times we wake; Thus David, Psa. 65. 6. Lord, I remember
thee upon my bed, and meditate upon thee in the night watches; Thoughts good
when awake bring good thoughts in our sleep. It Is a sweet thing to lie in the
night and meditate upon the love of God and upon the Law of God. A young
Scholar asking a Jewish Doctor if he might not have time to learn the Greek
Tongue, he said, if he would do it neither by day nor by night, he might,
because day and night, he was to meditate upon the law of God, Psalm. 1. 2. And
indeed such extended meditations are a mighty means to promote good Dreams.

Have we at any time such sweet Dreams? Then our duty is,

To preserve them in our memories, and To improve them in our practice.
1. In memory we must preserve them, not forget good Dreams. The Devil will
endeavor to draw from us Dreams that are good. What the soldiers falsely said
of the buried Body of Christ, Matthew. 28. 13. His Disciples came by night and
stole him away, while we slept; we may say safely of some blessed Dreams from
Christ, Satan came by night and stole it away while we slept. Hence when we
have been awake, we have been to seek; the matter has been gone from us, as
Nebuchadnezzer said of his Dream, Dan. 2. 5. To maintain the remembrance of
good Dreams is our duty, for which the best way is, when awake,

Much to reflect upon them our selves, and Often to repeat them unto others.
1. We our selves should debate the business in our minds, what Gods meaning
should be; consult the secrets of God therein, and the good pleasure of God
thereupon, that we may well understand Gods drift in our Dreams. What the
understanding does most clearly discern, the memory does most firmly retain.

2. We should relate things to others, and consult with Gods Saints hereupon.
Thus to impart is to imprint; and the way to drive Dreams in, is so to draw
them out. When we keep things from others, we often loose them our selves.

2. In our practice we must improve, what in our sleep we receive; So as may be,

Both for the praise of God, And for the profit of our selves.
1. Hereupon we must put out our selves to give God the praise. Thus did David,
I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel, my reins also instruct me
in the night seasons, Psalm. 16. 7. He thankfully showed forth in the morning,
what mercies he had met with in the night, It is a good thing to give thanks
unto the Lord, to show forth thy loving kindness in the morning and thy
faithfulness in the night, Psalm. 92. 1, 2. So Solomon his son, 1 King. 3.
15. And Solomon awoke and behold it was a Dream, and he came to Jerusalem and
stood before the Lord and offered up burnt offerings and peace offerings, etc.

Now if we would bless God for such Dreams,

We must esteem highly of them, and We must rejoice greatly in them.
Take a good Dream as a great favor from God. Then we heartily give God
glory, when we highly value his mercy; We cannot but praise him if we prize
his. Be glad when a good Dream has been. O with what gladness did the
Isralites gather up the Manna in the morning, that fell from Heaven about their
Tents in the night! Exodus 16. With joy let us gather up the good Dreams God
sent in the night. The most joyful heart is the best thankful heart.

Lastly, Let us improve such precious Dreams, especially for our personal
profit,

To quicken our obedience in dayduties, and To strengthen our expectance of
daymercies.
Has God had good works in us, when asleep? Let us have good works for God,
when awake. That good we Dreamt in the night, let us deed it in the day; draw
it out in^acts to the utmost. Neither let us doubt, but he, who has been good
in the night, will be kind in the day! O says David, The Lord will command his
loving kindness in the day, in the night his song is with me, Psalm. 42. 8. or
[ his song shall be Die praehet mihi bonitatem suam and ita me exhilarat
comtinuabit etiam noctu suum erga me amorem ut de eo laetari possim. Moller in
locum.
with me] This saying of the Psalmist, Mollerus expounds, as a certain
continuing of Gods comfortable kindness, in the night, being begun in the
day: So likewise an enlarging of Gods delightful love in the day, having found
some sweet entrance thereof in the Night. As we may argue from Gods
daykindnesse to his night-comforts: So upon the divine speculative comforts of
the night, we may expect Gods accomplished kindness in the day.

Indeed the Dreams of worldly men about worldly matters vanish and perish,
they do not find that comfort fulfilled in the day, they fancied in the night.
See how the Prophet compares some, Isa. 29. 6, 7. As when an hungry man
Dreameth and behold he eats, but he awaketh and his soul is empty; or when a
thirsty man Dreameth, and behold he drinks, but when he is awake, behold he
is faint; This place of the Prophet, Calvin applies as to the Jews Salse autem
propheta Judaeos somniare dicit quia suis delitiis immersi vident and sentiunt
subito venturos hosts qui dormientibus terrorem incutiunt Calvin in locum.
who were so drowned in security and carnal delights that they Dreamed of
nothing but prosperity and peace; but by and by a bloody Enemy comes and
dashing all, in the dust leaves them desolate.

They found no such real matter to meet them as they fondly imagined. Diodate
considers the place as to the Caldeans, who coming against Jerusalem Dreamed of
great satisfactions, but the more they prospered in their success, the less
they were satisfied in their pursuits; All signifies, men may Dream of those
earthly honors, treasures, pleasures, which yet they never possess, whereas
spiritual mercies that good men imagine in their sleep, God may realize and
make good when awake. Let a gracious man Dream of the matters of God,
converses with Christ, privileges of the Gospel after which his Soul pants
with a holy hunger and heavenly thirst; and afterward when awake, God gives him
that really, which he did suppose in his sleep. And after the Saints manner
should we deal with God, endeavoring to actuate that An nescis O homo quod
primitias cordis tui and qued primo cogitos omni die Deo debeas, Ambros. in
Psalm. 119.
good in the day whereof we did cogitate in the night. Yea, let our day-deeds
be better then our night-Dreames. Nourish, accomplish, establish that Good,
when awake, which was suggested in sleep. And indeed good Dreams considered, in
such after- duties we are undoubtedly concerned,

As to observe God in them, So to improve them for God.
1. To observe God in such Dreams by a due reflecting upon them, and diligent
looking back through them, to find out the footsteps of the all-wise and
wonder-working God, his goings and good doings in the darkest night, and in our
deepest sleep.

2. To improve such Dreams for God and his praise by a present practicing that
good in the day, whereunto God did guide in the night. That every good Dream,
which as good seed God sows, or as a tree God plants in the night, may to the
glory of his great Name, bring forth plenty of good fruit in the day.

And indeed upon all such day-duties both before and after, we may be much
encouraged, by believing, good Dreams themselves are such considerable works,

As God will assist them in us, As God will accept in them.
1. God will assist good Dreams in us. He will help forward these motions
which else in our minds could never Cor non agitare, os non aperir^ possumus,
nisi adjuvante Deo sine quo nihil possumus facere, nihil cogitare, etc. August.
cont. duas Epist. Pelag. ad Bonisacium.
move. Take the best man when best awake, and a good thought cannot stir in
his heart, without divine help. Help God will give, for gracious thoughts to
move in holy hearts, both when men are awake, and when asleep; let us awake,
set to our serious desires, and we might in sleep find such motions frequent,
God would bear them up, and bring them on, under all our imperfections, and
against all other oppositions from sin or Satan.

2. God will accept us in Dreams that are good. Let the words of my mouth
Mentem meam guberna domine ut me quid cogitem, nisi quod tibi gratum and
placeat, ita etiam ostendit Propheta, qualis homo pius and quomodo Deo placeant
ejus opera vel oris, vel cordis, Mollerus in Locum.
and the meditations of my heart, be ever acceptable in thy sight, O Lord,
Psalm. 19. 14. That before-named Expositor notes, the Prophet in the place does
not only propose what is the property of a pious man, viz. To desire the
thoughts of his heart may be at all times pleasing to God: but he proposes
what is the privilege of a pious man; Pleasing to God day and night, are the
thoughts of his heart; What his mind well imagines, God graciously approves;
I do not (says Luther) always pray, nor read, Non semper oro, lego, audio,
praedic^, etc. Sed ed^, ^ibo, ludo, vestic, ^ormio, somnio, etc. quae omnia
recte facta divino judicio appro^a^tur d^r eg^ in illis. Lut. loc. com 34.
tertiae classis. p 98.
nor preach, etc. but sometimes I eat, I drink, I sleep, I Dream, etc. all
which things, they being rightly done, I am pleasing to God therein.

But before I further proceed, or can conveniently conclude, I shall clear
some objections, that against the present discourse may probably arise.

1. Object. Dreams are little and 1. Object.
low things, too mean for a good man to mind, and much less for God to regard,
who is great and high, etc.
Answ. 1. Dreams be they things Answer.
little, and low, yet thereunto the most high God may have a great regard. Men's
thoughts at all times be but small things, yet if good, a great God esteems
them, and preferrs them before the works of some men that seem mighty. Mark.
12. 41, 42. Jesus sitting over against the treasury, saw many rich men cast in
much money. A certain poor widow threw in two mites that make a farthing, and
Jesus said, this poor widow has cast in more than they all. Diverse of the
Ancients do expound this Ita Hiero. Theophylact, Beda vid. Aquin. in Locum.
place mystically and Allegorically; By rich men casting in much money, they
understand specious professors with their great flourishing works Godward; And
by the widow casting in two mites; they interpret the soul of a sincere Saint,
tendering to God an understanding heart and willing mind in all humility,
inwardly thinking to do much more then it can perform, and this small matter
finds great favor with God. God does accept a little night-Dreame Illud pro
facto reput. it Deus quod homo quidem vere voluti, sed non voluad implere,
Bern. Epist. 77.
from a true hearted-Christian, when he rejects the greatest day-deeds of a
dissembling Hypocrite. A man may think of that good in his sleep, he cannot act
when awake, and God may account the Dream for the deed, and accept the deed in
the Dream.

2. Dreams suppose little things in Principium a quo and principium quod.
themselves, yet may be great in their principles. Good Dreams proceed from a
mutual concurrence between God and good men, and therein are great; Whatsoever
good men do (says Quicquid faciunt sancti etsi sordidum glorio sum and
quantumvis exiguum, magnum est, Luth. Loc.
Luther) though it seem poor, it is rich: though vile, yet it is rare, and though
little, yet it is indeed very great; But then much more what God does, we may
maintain to be greater. Even good Dreams be the gracious works of a glorious
God, wherein he has an admirable hand. Gods providence may have great
influences upon our inferior businesses. Gods spirit may have Virtutis est
maxima pertingere minutis sima.
strong motions in our short ejaculations. God in the dead times of the night
may as in Egypt, with an outstretched hand pass through our hearts, when we
are little aware. The soul (say some) is In formicis major anima quam in
elephantis and in nanis quam in gigantibus.
more intense and vigorous in a dwarf, then in a Giant. More of God was acting
in little David, than in great Goliath. As there may be much of nature and art,
so of God and grace; there may be Maximus in minimis.
great measures in little matters. As no sin is little, done against a great
God; so nothing is little done, by a Quae levia and quae gravia unt, non
humano, sed divino pensantur judicio. August. ^n^hirid. cap. 78.
God that is great; Objects are not great or little, according as we apprehend,
but as God therein appears and thereof approves. Little things may be great,
and great things little in our sight and sense. Rich mines of gold
Opulentissima metalla quorum in alto latent verae. Sen. Epist. 23. Altissima
flumina minimo sono la^untar, Q^. Curt. lib. 7.
may lie so low in the earth, as little or nothing seen; and strong streams of
water may pass by our doors that make but a little sound. God may have great
works in our hearts when awake, and therefore sure in our sleep that may to
our sense seem little.

3. Dreams suppose little, yet may be great in their progress and products.
That which comes, as little to us in the night, may come to be great in the
day. In the day God may water that which he did plant in the night, and so may
it grow to be great. Great may our nightthoughts grow even through our
dayendeavours. Those little Babes which be born in the night, we nourish in the
day. We should not make good Dreams to be like Jonah his Gourd, that sprung in
a night and perished in the night, but cherish them in all good ways when
awake; and so may they wax great at last, that were but little at first. The
Parable reports of the mustard seed Mat. 13. 31, 32. Homo qui seminat in agro
suo a plerisque sa^vator noster intelligitur, qui in animis cred^ntium seminat,
Hieronym.
that a man sowed in his field, which indeed is the least of all seeds, but
when it is grown it is a great tree; so that the Birds of the air lodge in the
Branches thereof. This Scripture Jerome unfolding did affirm, that many
Interpreters by the man sowing, did understand Christ our Savior; by the
field, the hearts of the faithful; by the mustard seed sown, the infusions of
good motions in their minds, which are small matters at first, but at Vide
Salmeronis sermones in Parabolas Evangelica^.
length so enlarge, that the very Angels of Heaven, expressed by the birds of
the air, do delight and take pleasure therein. And were we wise, those little
sparks which God in our sleepingtime lets fall upon our hearts from Heaven, we
might when awake, so kindle up, as the Lord himself might be in love therewith.
O let not us slight God in the least of his graces! As we must not despise the
day of small things, no more Zech. 7. 10. vid Calvin in locum. Si in omnibus,
etiam in parvis providentia dei, multo magis, Hieron. in Mat. 10. Tom. 2.
the night. The great God regards little things that relate to us; Even the
hairs of our head are numbered, much more the thoughts of our hearts! O let us
observe the smallest things that proceed from God, even to what he suggests in
our sleep!

2. Object. Knowing men of several Huc spectat illud ^atonis, Somnia ne cures
nam men's humana quod optat, ut qui captat umbras, and persequitur ventos, ita
est qui se ad hibet somniis, etc. Ecclesiastici. c. 34. v. 2, 5, 7.
sorts, in several seasons have condemned the observation of Dreams.
Answer. Observation of Dreams men may indeed condemn, yet with this double
caution and concession.

1. Though all Dreams are not fit for some observation, yet some observation
is fit for all Dreams.

We grant from due grounds men may condemn (as to some sort of Dreams) a
double observation, Homo est animal curiosum, sed cave inquirere, quae non
debes scire, curiositas periculosa praesumptio est, Ber. de pugna Spir. Ser. 2.
and de modo been vivend. Ser. 44. August. de utilitate credendi. c. 9. and lib.
de vera religione.


Curious, and Credulous.
1. Curious,] Christians are not critically and with excess care to observe or
to busy themselves about some kind of Dreams, that may be dark and doubtful.
An humble industry to search into such secrets so far as footsteps may be
found in the word of God, is good: but with a proud curiosity presumptuously to
pry into such mysterious matters without a right use of Scripture, is an evil,
Austin, and others, have excellently declared against, in some suitable cases.

2. Credulous] Christians must not be light of belief. Dreams there be, as we
have seen, wherein Satan acts so subtly, as we must not observe them with
Assent to them or delight in them, least we take Poison for Physic.

What evil men hugg in sleep, they ought to fling away when awake.

Yet some observation may be fit for all Dreams. No Dreams but may be Non
omnium somniorum cura est prohibita, sed tantum eorum quae vel Daemoniaca vel
temeraria esse constable at. Paraeus Tom. in Genesis cap. 4^.
observed, so it be,

From right minds, and To right Ends.
1. Minds right] To observe Dreams with understandings rightly informed. A
candle of good knowledge, light and set up in the soul to see by, so that we
do not grope in the dark, or make blind animadversions, but use well opened
eyes, not only without, but within, Lege Pretinm and Pareum in Locum.
Revel. 4. 8.

2. Ends right] To observe Dreams, so as to guide our selves to good acts and
effects according as the kind of Dreams require; If bad, to observe them that
we may see the evil of them; the Devil in them, that we may be humbled for
them, and fly from them, and all that sin to which they tend; If good, to
observe them, that we may see the good of them and God in them, that we may be
thankful for them, and be bettered by them.

2. Though we are not some way to Answer. 2.
observe some Dreams, yet all Dreams divine ought every way to be observed.
Such Dreams it is our undoubted duty to, ponder;

In their Productions, In their Distinctions; In their Directions, and In their
Predictions.
1. In their Productions: As they (...).
certainly proceed from God and are his wonderful all-watching works in our
sleep; And indeed as they that go down into the sea; so they who lie down in
their Beds, may sometimes see the wonders of the Lord, Psalm. 107. 33.

2. In their distinctions: Though Satan be subtle and seek to assimilate and
imitate God, yet in Dreams divine, to observe and discern clear differences
from Dreams Diabolical, Impressas plerunque habent notas quibus adeo else
plane agnoscuntur. Paraeus. Tom. in Genes. cap. 41.
carrying Characters of Gods Heavenly hand in our hearts, making such
impressions and moving such affections, as are seen to be serious and solid; so
that we may certainly say. This is none other but the work of God; as Jacob
awaking from such a Dream, concluded. This is none other but the house of God,
Genesis 28. 27.

3. In their Directions: To observe In somniis divinitus missis quasi breves
audiuntur voces quid fugiendum, quid agendum sit, admonentes. Iamblicus. lib.
de mysteriis.
what evil they direct us from, and what good they direct us to. God by
Dreams does sometime warn men to beware of evils, sinful and painful, which
they are prone to and in peril of. God also by Dreams does sometimes put on
persons to pious actions purposing either their own advantage thereby or the
benefit of others, which they be bound to observe. Men may hear a voice in the
bed, like that voice behind, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, Isa. 30.
21.

4. In their Predictions: We are to observe what God may by Dreams foretell.
True, in this case Nomine Divinationis intelligitur p^aenunciatio quaedam
futurorum; Divinatio peccatum est quo quis sibi usurpat futurorum, ut futura
sunt, notitiam and praedicationem ad Deum proprie pertinentem. Aquin. 22ae.
Quaest. 95. Art. 1. Nullo igitur pacto utendum est hujusmodi hominibus res
futuras praesagientibus, Phavorin. lib. 14.
is required much care: Prenunciation, or Divination may soon be a sin, and by
Dreams to divine is very dangerous. Diverse men of evil minds have hereby been
misled, as from some (some way so minded) we may learn.

Yet Divination by divine Dreams, Divinat^o per somnia divina omnino lici^a
est Christiano fidesque illi semper est adhibenda quippe quae vera and divina
est, Zanc. Tractat. de Divinat.
or a reporting what God does in Dreams reveal, is a Christian duty, as
Zanchius, Paraeus, and other Orthodox Authors clearly conclude, in relation
unto things hereafter to come. As God in days past to Joseph, Daniel, and
diverse others of his dear servants did in Dreams declare some future things
that should come to pass: So in days present, God possibly may make known by
Dreams some following things which men concerned ought to observe. Do sinful
men observe the Devil in his Dream predictions Vid. Augustine. Tom. 3. lib.
Dedivina. daemonum. Item Tom. 2. Epi. 115. ^d Nebridium. vide, cap. 5. de
Divin. Diabolus multa praedicit, futura tamen non omnia, multa sed non vera
vera, sed mente fallaci. Zanch* Tract. de Divinatione. Demon veritatem dicit,
sed ut decipiat. Aquin. 1a. pa. Qu. 64.
who may foretell some future things but not all? Some true things but many
false, some true matters but with a false meanning, his design being ever to
deceive?

And shall not good men observe God Per somnia divina certa and^ vera divinatio
haberi potest and quidem earum rerum omnium quae per illa somnia significantur.
Ratio, Zan. Tractat. de Devinatione. Quae quia nostro tempore rariora sunt,
ideo non temere sunt jactanda. Paraeus Tom. in Genesis cap. 41.
in his predictions by Dreams, who is able to foretell all future things
infallibly, who never foretells any thing but truth: And always as true
matters; so with a true meaning to advance truth and holiness by righteous and
regular ways, and means?

This with God was formerly more frequent, yet now not impossible; And though
it be not now Gods usual way, yet when ever God goes this way, surely we ought
to observe him. Yea all sorts of divine Dreams are always for Gods sake to be
observed.

3. Object. But Satan is subtle and Object. 3.
may soon deceive men with Dreams merely pretended from God. Answer.

Answer. About this I shall discourse in a double way, Erronei Spiritus body
multiplicantur qui orbem terrarum perturbant somniis suis, sicut Anabaptistarum
exemplum probat. Luther, loc. 4ae. classis.


Of Concession thereto, and Of Consideration thereon.
1. Concession: So subtle we may well say is Satan, that to set forward his
foul deceits with the fuller successes, he uses fair pretenses. Luther
observes a double design of Satan in conveyance of lying Dreams and such like
delusions;

He covers himself from men, and Nullus error venit a Diabolo sub titulo
erroris, sed -- Nec Diabolus ipse venit ut Diabolus, sed -- Non ^ult Diabolus,
deformis and ater esse in suis so nniis, dis* camus hoc esse proprium
artificium Diaboli ut ater Diabolus non agit. Luth. Loc. Quintae classis, cap.
8.
He colors all over with God.
1. Himself as he is, he covers: He comes not in the form or with the face of a
Devil, but cunningly conceales himself; closely hiding his own horrid and
hellish shape. When he comes abroad upon such business he casts off his
clothes of darkness, and as a black Devil he does not act, nor so is he seen.

2. He colors all with God: Makes his proposals appear so plausible as if
plainly proceeding from the true Spirit of God as the Ground, and verily
intending the great Glory of God as the End. He puts out all his Books, and
Baits his Doctrines and Dreams, as glorious discoveries from Diabolus ludibrio
suo hominum mentes ita fascinavit ut somnia and mendacia sua pro certissima
veritate and clarissima luce amplectantur. Fanatici spiritus hodie quicquid
somniant volunt esse spiritum sanctum: Sed egregie Basillus dixit (...), etc.
Tamen jurant per omnia sacra se nihil aliud cogitare quam at promoveant gloriam
Dei and salutem animarum. Somniant se habere singularem sanctitatem, Luther,
ibid.
Heaven of cleerer light, greater Graces, purer ways, surer truths, and more
suitable to the mind of Christ, and rule of Scripture, and so with good words
and fair suggestions he deceives the minds of the simple. Such subtle designs
the Devil even by Dreams drove in Luthers times, and no doubt in the like
manner he may in our days delude the souls of simple ones.

2. Consideration: Such Satanicall Dreams considered, with which the minds of
men may be soon deceived, may well occasion diverse duties toward good Dreams
to be the more carefully performed by all good Christians:

viz.
The more to discern them, The more to desire them, The more to esteem them,
and The more to retain them*
1. To discern Dreams the more, that come indeed from God. Now such are
certainly seen by a Double sign,

Their resemblings of him, and Their returnings to him.
1. Such Dreams they do resemble God: There is in them that Truth, Holiness,
Goodness, Pureness, Spiritualnesse, and such like properties, as bear some
similitude with God himself. We may be sure, man was the workmanship of Vide
Eplphani. haeres. 70. August. lib. de Spiritu. and anima. cap. 39. Ambros. Ser.
10. in. Psa. 119.
God, because he was made after the Image of God. The Ancients though they much
differ in determining, wherein the Image of God consists in man; yet they all
agree, that in man is so much of Gods Image, as proves his certain subsistence
from God. In an Image there is not only a resemblance, Analogy or similitude
of one thing to another, but there is a Aquin. prima par. Qu. 85. and 88.
Deduction, derivation, impression of that similitude upon the one, from the
other, with relation thereunto. Now as man that has Dreams in him; so there
be Dreams in man, upon which is such an Impresse of the similitude of God,
such clear Characters of Gods Image Imprinted, as proves them to proceed from
God. It remains a maxim Whatever is in God is God, and whatever Quicquid est
in Deo est Deus, and quicquid est a Deo est Deo simile.
is of God is like unto God, and ^ converso.

2. Such Dreams they do return to God. Eccles. 1. 7. All rivers run into the
Sea, from whence they come, and thither they return again. This observed made
One say, As the Sea is the Mother of Pul^hrum quoque quod quum mare fluminum
sit matter* flumin^ tanquam filiae, Caesarius Frater, Nazianz. Dialog. 1. Vide.
August. de origin anima^um, lib. 2. c. 5^. and. Colerum l. de animarum
immortalitate Liber amplus and doctus.
Rivers, so the Rivers, as the Daughters run into the Womb again. Man's
reasonable soul is discerned not to be by Traduction from Parents, but by its
first infusion from God as its Father; because separated from the body by
death, it immediately returns to God that gave it, Eccles. 12. 7. Things that
have God for their Author, incline to make God their Center, that whence they
take their Rise, there they may take their Rest. Water which being an heavy
body bends downward, yet is apt to ascend as high as its own spring. Such
Dreams as are the mountings of the Vide Wend. Comt. phys. Sect. 1. p. 1. c.
20.
mind and as make the mind to mount, it is manifest their springhead is in
Heaven. Did not they come from God, they would not so bend back to God again.
It plainly appears their original was from him, because their reflects are to
him and their contents are in him, etc. Thus may we discern Dreams from God,
and thus should we the rather discern God in Dreams, considering Satan's
design in Dreams to deceive.

2. To desire Dreams the more wherein God is manifest. Shall the Devil be
industrious to obtrude Dreams upon us, that do pretend to God, and shall not
we endeavor to obtain such Dreams as do proceed from God indeed? Luther
observes how diligent Nullus doctor tam diligens in veritate seminanda, quam
Diabolus pro falsitate somnianda; est enim Satanae pectus foecundissimum
mendaciis, Luther.
the Devil is to disperse his deceits, how his breast is full of lies, and he
labors day and night to bring them forth under fair appearances. Should not we
then the rather beg into our bosoms an abundance of those blessed Dreams
that be indeed from God, conducting us in the undoubted way of truth?

3. To esteem Dreams derived from God the rather. The more counterfeit coin
is up and down the more we account, and love to receive Silver and Gold that is
good. When the Devil is night and day, day and night scattering among many his
gilded money, we should the higher prize that precious gold given into our
hearts by Gods hand from Heaven. Considering the goodness of Gods wheat, we
should (says Luther) live the more Vigilandum est nobis summa cura contra
Diabolum obambulantem ne dormientibus nobis veniat ipse and seminat Zizania
inter Dei Triticum Luther.
vigilant to prevent the Devil, that in our sleep he may not sow his tares;
and considering the subtilty of Satan to sow such tares, should incite us to
set Gods wheat at the higher rate; I mean to estimate good Dreams from God at
the greater price.

3. To retain these Dreams with the stronger hand and faster hold. Luther
likewise reports of some, who did so dote upon their delusive Dreams, that from
them they would not be drawn by any Nec ab his suis somniis patiuntur se ullis
monitis aut Scripturis abduci. Quia persuassimi sunt, se solos sapere alios
omnes caecutire, Luther.
strength of Reason, or Scripture-argument, supposing in sacred things
themselves only wise, and all others ignorant. O how in an humble way ought
holy hearts to hold Heavenly Dreams, and with good care to keep them firm and
fast in their remembring-minds.

4. Object. But we see so many in our 4. Object.
times miserably mistaken with their trances, strange ecstasies, and raptures,
visions, and revelations, as may make as misdoubt all suggestions, and be
afraid of all unusual motions, etc.
Answer. Unusual motions, suggestions, Answer.
raptures, revelations, and visions, it may well become Christians to question,
and with care to examine, that so they may with the more prudence,

Eschew the bad, and Pursue the good.
It Is very memorable of the virgin Mary, when the Angel of the Lord was sent
and said to her, Hail, thou art highly favored, the Lord is with thee, and
blessed art thou among women. And when she saw him, she was troubled at this
saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be, Luke 1.
28, 29. However this comfortable discovery came from God, yet this good woman
does not suddenly receive it, but seriously considers it. Austin and others of
the Ancients observe, That as she was not wholly suspicious, Dictum ex ami
navit virgo and neque manifest obstitit p^r incredulitatem nec statim paret ex
le vitate. Ambros. lib. 2. in Lucam. c. 1.
so she would not be rashly credulous. Though thus commonly men and women are
made, by delusive motions, deceiving visions, and lying revelations. The
falsenesse of which suggestions, whether asleep, or awake, may be further found
out,

By what they divert men from, and By what they transport men to.
1. They divert, turn and take men off, from those things that true discoveries
from God do keep men to,

viz.
From the public Ministry, From conscience of the Sabbath, From the rule of
Scripture. From relative duties, etc.
1. They withdraw persons from Lege Luth. Loc. Com. Clas. 4th De ministerio
verbi and Sac. Sive Hierarchiae.
the public ministry, so that they will not hear the Gospel publicly
preached by the most faithful dispensers, though those perhaps which formerly
themselves rejoiced in, and blessed God for. Luther relating the case of some
Anabaptists in Germany, who by Dreams and such like ways were deluded, says
thus; We have now daily experiences of diverse who not long since, not only
willingly, Hoc experimus hodie in psud^ fratribus nostris Anabaptistis qui
initio causae Evangelicae libenter imo avide nos au ^iebant ac agnoscebant
donum spiritus sancti in nobis, ac propter illud reverebantur nos tanquam Dei
ministros; at nunc d nobis egressi subversi sunt nemo magis intensus est
doctrinae and etiam nomini nostro, quam ipsi, etc. Luther.
but even hungrily heard us preach, acknowledged God in us, and esteemed us as
the Ministers of God, are now gone from us, and there is none that do less
endure our Doctrine, or abide our name then they, etc.

2. They decline men from a conscionall keeping the Lords day. Hence though
some have entered their names, and so are bound to bear arms, and ought to
fight under the colors of Christ, that they may maintain all the concernments
of Christ, yet they treacherously deliver up this fort-royall of Christ. The
Christian sabbath. The sabbath whereof Christ is the Lord Hierony. de resur.
Domini. di ^ir. Sicut Maria ^ergo inter omnes mulieres principatum tenet ita
inter caeter^s Dies haec Dies ^m^^um dierum est Matter.
they leave. This day they disregard, that God from the beginning has made
among days the most blessed. They pluck and fling away this sabbath flower, as
not sit to grow within the garden of Christ.

3. The Rule of Scripture lying ^evelations lead men from. Hereb^n are made to
become careless of Scripture grounds and bounds, only so far as to defend
their own falsities: Out of the fine and pure web of Gods word, they cut out so
much cloth as to cover their own brats, and cast by all the rest as rags and
refuse, or old garments not Scripturam non ad mittunt, sed tantum soliciti sunt
quomodo sictis and ementitis e capit^ suo glossis adductos contra se Scripturae
locos eludant ac somnia sua in Scripturam invecta defendant, etc. Luther.
fit to be worn. Men are only solicitous (says Luther) being deluded, for to
elude such Scaiptures as are contrary to their errors, and contrary to the true
sense of Scriptures, to maintain their Dream-errors are their daily and
diligent endeavors.

4. From relative and domestic duties, hereby are men drawn as we may see in
our days diverse. Several considered we may well take up the complaint of
Philo, who comparing some in his time with Gods primitive people; They (says
he) were called Vae vae nobis videmus -- Illi cultores and cultrices, hi hodie
vastatores and vastatrices, Philo.
Tillers, because as husbandmen till their fields and manure their grounds, so
did they teach their families, and nurture their children and servants, with
good instructions. But these (says he) may rather be called wasters then
tillers, Lege Chrysostom. Homil 6. in Matthew.
rather destroyers then instructers, for they ruin their families, while they
let them lie like fallow fields, etc. Now who may we expect to perform, that
are more manifest to omit, these Domestic matters, than men misled by mistaken
revelations. Reading the Scripture, prayer, singing of Psalms, though formerly
of singular use, most sinfully they now lay aside.

2. Such raptures, visions and revelations, do transport men to such evils as
true discoveries from God keep men from, Verbum est quod mutat afficit and
corda hominum humiliat. Revelationes autem inflant arrogantes faciunt. Somniant
se habere singularem sanctitatem modestiam patientiam puritatem doctrinae
perfectionem vitae. Se posse sublimiora and magis saluturia docere. Hoc unum
spectantes ut nomen and laudem raealiis acquipant --


viz.
To pride and arrogance, To error and heresy, To lies and calumnies, To
hatred and cruelties, etc.
1. They prompt men to pride and arrogance. Luther laying down differences
between Gods word, and such like revelations; That (says he) changes, affects,
humbles and lays low the Hearts of men; but these puff up men's hearts with
pride, and make them arrogant, high and haughty: So that men thus incited,
(says he) in open-day they Dream they have all singular excellencies, they
are sublimated to higher designs, they alone know the mind of Christ, etc.
Hence such separate themselves from others, Nemo inquiunt ante me hoc Christi
novit ego primus vidi, Luther.
and elevate themselves above others, they love to ride in the Chariot of high
praises, and that others may run by and bow, etc.

2. They dispose men to errors and Haeresus Grecis dicitur ab eligendo. Horum
mentes Diabo lus suo ludibrio ita fascina vit ut mendacia and horribiles
errores pertina^iter tennet. Nec asuissonmis se abduci, etc.
heresies. Heresy is more then an ordinary error. ' It Is a foul error freely
chosen and held fast with a fixed inflexiblenesse, etc. These raptures and
revelations make men run into most damnable opinions, racing foundations, and
raising such buildings, which though abominably bad, they boldly maintain, and
will not be beat out. This likewise of the same Luther observed.

3. They move men to make lies and lay calumnies upon others to them contrary.
We have, Multi vafri and pestilentes homines qui omnia sua pessima dicta and
facta -- miris figuris and artibus sciunt or name e contra aliorum benefacta
and dicta ejusalem atribus calumniari -- ex quolibet verbo novas depravationes
torquent -- and aliud veniat in accusatione (...) quam purassemus.
many guilefull men (says Luther) who will give the fairest glosses upon their
own foulest facts and faslest words, but mis-interpret and mis-report the best
and most innocent words and deeds of other men, they wrest wellmeaning words,
and raise reports of things never thought, much less said or done, They
asperse others with reproaches, painting them always in the blackest colors.

4. They incline men's minds to cruel hatred, and to hateful cruelties. Luther
speaking of the Anabaptists abounding about him, who much vapoured and vaunted
themselves of their Dreams and visions, raptures and revelations; I have very
often (says he) Saepe vehementer admirari soleo unde tam saevum and atrox
odium in animos eorum qui nos tam amanter complexi sunt tam subito ^adere
potest -- novos magistros audierunt horum veneno infecti ita accensi sunt
oderunt Papistas sed non tam a^r^citer atque nos implecabili odio contra nos
laborent and ardeant -- veram doctrinam evertunt pa^em publicam perturbant
nihil aliud dei noctuque ag^tant quam ut nos maxim nocere possint, etc. Luther.
very much marvelled at these men, what should be the matter, that they who
formerly loved and favored us, are now so implacably fierce against us: They
pretend (says he) they hate the Papists, but to be sure they more sorely hate
us; certainly some of those subtle masters have changed their minds, etc.
These, these (says he) are they, who night and day, contrive by what means to
mischief us, to make our labors void, and our persons vile, etc. And into what
bloody practices such proceeded, is sad to say; perturbing the public peace,
slandering all settled ways of sacred worship; so that as Lactantius said of
Lucian, Nec Diis nec hominibus pepercit.
They neither spared God nor man.

Thus it is manifest, what motions, visions, revelations, suggestions, awake or
asleep, do not proceed from God, but from God those Revelations, Illuminations,
Inspirations, Impressions, visions, Dreams do proceed, that withdraw men from
arrogancies, heresies, calumnies, cruelties, blasphemies, and all impieties,
and keep Christians close to the duties of the Lord's Day, public ordinances,
family-performances, and all Scripture-Rules relating to holy life,

In the 2 Cor. 12. The Holy Apostle reporting his heavenly raptures and
revelations of the Lord, let us seriously observe,

What he forbeareth, and What he declares,
1. He forbeareth in setting forth Qua propter ad declinandam suspicionem
jactantiae quasi de alio quodam homine rem narrat Estius.
those celestial things, wherein himself was surely and solely concerned,

All application to himself, and All exaltation of himself.
1. He applies not the things to himself, but puts on a Prosopopeia
representing all under the person of another man. I knew a man in Christ,
caught up into Pararadise, and I knew such a man taken up Itaque in ea re est
fictio quedam personae velut a sua personadiversae. Aretius.
into the third Heaven: he heard unspeakable words: not a word as if this were
himself, but himself he covers and concealeth.

2. He exalts not himself upon this or any other account. Nay not only does
he at present refrain, but he resolves for the future, that he will not vaunt,
boast or glory of himself. Yet Vid. Hierony. in Epistol. ad E^stocium de
custodia virginitatis, etc.
of my self I will never glory. And he renders a reason of this forbearance;
But I forbear, lest any man should think of me above what he sees me to be.
This blessed Apostle was lowest on earth, when he had been highest in Heaven,
and least in himself, when he had been greatest with God.

2. He declares after these high raptures and Heavenly revelations,

His sensiblenesse of sin, and His supplicating against sin. Stimulus, in
carne, Angellus, Satanae vocatur, quia Diaboli parts and regnum adjuvat
incitand^ homines ad peccata and inquinamenta carnis.

1. Of sin he declares himself exceeding sensible: He mournfully complains
of a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan buffeting him. The best
Interpreters understand this of some strong corruption incited and set forward
by Satan's temptation, which sorely assaulted and pitifully perplexed this
precious man, as with pitious pain, dolor and deep sorrow.

2. Against sin he supplicated God, Lege August. Tract. 98. Joan. Gregor.
Hom. 4. in Ezekiel. Hugo victor. Qu. 34. Sup Epist.
that from him this evil might in mercy be removed. For this thing I besought
the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. He then sought to have sin set
farthest from him, when his soul had been set nearest to God: His raptures did
not streiten his prayers, his visions of God did not stay his confessions of
sin, etc.

So then we may safely say, such suggestions, revelations, visions, Dreams, as
draw us more to God, set us more against sin, make us more holy, humble,
prayerfull, etc. are good, and such whereof we should be glad.

5. Object. If such Dreams are so 5. Object.
good, why then are they so rare and so few of them found in good men.
Answer. Their paucity may prove Answer.
their excellency, things most excellent Quod ad excellentiam pertinet paucis
competit. Aquin.
are most rare and fewest thereof to be found. Good Dreams are things
excellent from God though they be not frequent with men.

2. Men good may have more, of these in their minds then they manifest. This
amongst men is a remarkable difference; Some have not that good in them they
speak of; and others have much more Jactat ille merita sed tegit vulnera. Bern.
good in them, then whereof they speak: Some, Pharisee-like, they boast of the
good that is in them, but the evil that is in them they hide: Others like the
Publican they confess their evil, but much good there is in them they
conceal. God upon the spirits and souls of his saints, both awake and asleep,
has several sweet workings the world knows not off. Even in holy Dreams God
may bring Heaven down into their hearts, or carry their hearts up into heaven,
when others are not acquainted therewith, but utterly ignorant thereof. As the
sick paulsie man, Mat. 9. while he lay in his bed, his body by some friends was
let down to Jesus in the house for his cure. So the souls of some of Gods
Saints, lying in their beds, have been by blessed Dreams lifted up into Heaven
and come before Christ to their comforts.

3. The rareness of such soul-refreshing Dreams, should draw Christians upon
the learning a double lesson,

viz.
The cause why they are so few, and The course how they may be more.
1. We should enquire into the cause why good Dreams be so scarce, and come so
seldom from God. God may so seldom send in such suggestions while we are
asleep, because of our ill carriage to good motions when we are awake,

As our intermissions therein, And our opposition thereto.
1. We so much intermit and interrupt good motions from God: And touching good
meditations on God, we make such wide pauses and long intervalls, and do so
little stay our minds on good matters in the day, that no marvel Christianus
ille est, qui dormiens, vigilans surgens, cubans, stan^, ingrediens, quocunque
momento ita est affectus in cord suo. Credo in Deum patrem Domini nostri Jesu
Christi qui pro me sanguinem fundit --
we meet with no more immissions from God in the night. He is a Christian
(says Luther) who standing, and going, lying down, and rising up, sleeping,
and waking, keeps his heart warm with believing applications, and enlivening
meditations of the mercies of God, the merits of Christ, etc. But alas we are
herein so loose, so little, so short, so slight, and put so many broken stops
to Hoc sine intermissione credit. Luther.
the best thoughts, that night and day in this secret manner God may meet us
the seldomer.

2. We (which is worse) so much oppose and resist God in his gracious
approaches and intimate accesses to our souls: We strike down what we should
stir up, 2 Timothy 1. 6. and what we should kindle we quench, 1 These. 5. 19.
Zanchius upon the place observes, that men quench or put out Gods holy fire,
that falls from Heaven (...), 2 Timothy 1. Bifariam extinguiturlignis, 1. Si ligna
non addas, 2. Si aqua perfundas. Zan. in Locum.
upon their hearts, as by not adding of words; so by pouring on water. When
instead of making an addition of good matter, we make a sinful opposition to
matter that is good, God may withdraw his motions, and seldom visit our minds
either by night or by day.

2. We should seek out and set upon such a positive course as may procure Gods
frequent converse with our souls, that he may in night-seasons send in such
motions, in larger measures and greater numbers.

And for that purpose to ponder things of two sorts,

Sound articles of faith, and Good examples of life.
1. Sound Articles of faith in our souls, we should settle and seriously
consider. In my heart (says Luther) In cord meo iste unus regnat Articulus
Scilicet fides Christi ex quo per quem and in quem omnes mea diu noctuque
fluunt and refluunt Theologicae Cogitationes -- Luth. 2ae. Clas. Loc. 18. etc.
I let this article reign, of firm faith in Christ, out of whom, by and about
whom all my thoughts both day and night do flow and re-flow. Plenty of such
principles implanted in us, and improved by us, may profit us much to the
multiplying, as of good meditations in the day, so of good conceptions in the
night.

2. Good examples of holy life, daily laid before our eyes, may be a means to
increase good Dreams: viewed examples, and visible objects, have not only an
attractive, but an assimilative power, to produce, and form Phantasms, and
such imaginations as suite thereunto: O how the mind is ready to rise and run
thereupon! To look upon the lives of good men, to view their virtuous actions,
and behold their holy conversations, is excellent. The more of those good
visions we have in the day, the more we may have of these good Dreams in the
night.

4. Have we found good Dreams but few in times that are past, this should put
us on the more for present and future, by desires, prayers and endeavors every
night that comes, to cause our hearts to keep wakefull, that they may be the
more vigilant and observant of God. God may often make overtures to us herein,
and we take no notice thereof, God, says Elihu, Job 33. speaks once, yea twice
in a Dream by night, and men perceive him not. When our bodies are asleep in
our beds, grace may be asleep in our hearts, and our hearts asleep as to grace,
and as unto God, so that we then regard him not. Many words by night God
speaks, and many motions he makes, and we mind him not. Did but we seek to set
our hearts into such an ever watchful frame as is fit, we might in this manner
find more of God, and by night hear more of his mind, then ever we did.
Wicked men can Vt jugulent homines, surgunt de nocte latrones: ut teispum
serves non expergisceris. S. Horat, lib. 1. Epist. 2.
keep their bodies awake, and in the night to watch for their prey, and work
with the Devil: and shall not we keep our minds always awake for our profit,
to watch for, and wait upon God, to meet him coming, to see his first step
into our souls, and hear the first word he speaks to our hearts? As often as we
laydown our bodies to sleep, we should call up our hearts and minds, to awake,
and attend Gods work; Awake Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake right
early. Though our hearts be abroad in the day, yet let them lodge with Christ
at night. Mr Bradford, that blessed martyr says, Act. and Monum, 1503.
in a certain letter, that as a wife, though in the day time she may eat, and
drink, sit, talk, and walk with her neighbors, yet when night comes, she keeps
her bed, for her husband alone: So the Soul of a Christian that during the day
goes out to meet, and mind necessary matters of the world, yet at night
preserves the bed for intimate converse with Christ; Christ's sweetness; We
should so study; mind and meditate by day, as to resolve our hearts and He
shall lie near all night. My beloved is to me as a bundle of myrrh, he shall
lie all night betwixt my breasts, Cant. 1. 13.

5. If yet for future, we find good Dreams but few, and meet with little of
Christ in our sleep, it must the more prompt and provoke us to walk the more
with Christ, and work the more for God in the day, by the more plentiful
practice of all pious duties. Did we know how precious time is, and did In
tempore sumus and quid tempus sit ignoramus.
but we remember how much precious time goes out in our sleep, and did but we
consider how little of God is enjoyed all that time, it might much move us the
more largly to lay out the time of the day in all holy duties. Do we sleep out
whole nights, and not hear one good word from God, nor of God have any one
good thought? And shall we pass away, the day also, and Christ and our hearts,
God and our minds scarce meet? Do we lodge so much asunder in our sleep, O let
us live the more together when awake? it may be blameworthy, we have no more
communion with God in good Dreams. Indeed it is sad, that deceiving Dreams,
the Devils tares should come up so thick, and grow so fast in the worst of our
fields; and that in the best of our fields, Gods wheat of good Dreams should
spring up so thin and thrive so little. Alas a multitude of vain, idle,
foolish, and frivolous Dreams, like birds at night, that lodge in the trees of
our hearts, and boughs of our thoughts, when good Dreams are driven away, and
by night be forced to fly. As in Pharaohs Dreams, the lean kine devoured the
fat, etc. So in our Dreams Quia paulatim pertranseunt quidam motus a vig^a^t ^^
ad dormientes, mel^ ora sunt phanasm ata studiosorum quam quorum -- libet and
propter animae bonam affectio^em quadam in somnis clarent -- Et ea occurrunt
hominibus phantasiae in dormiendo cir^a quae e^^ cagitatio fuit in vigilando.
Aquin 22ae Quaest. 95. A^t. 5.
matters bad prevent much good, impertinent and idle things shut out all
serious thoughts. This I say is sad, but more mournful may this be made, if in
the day also we live, look, and labor but little for God. Indeed did we in the
day time abound in good; delight in holy obedience, and make religion our
business, we might meet more of God in our minds at midnight. Aquinas
observes, that commonly good students in the day, have best Dreams in the
nights and they who have the best affections when awake, have the best
suggestions in sleep. Were we in the day. more with God by meditation, and
prayer, it might promote these matters in the night. As for evil Dreams, we
should Saepe merogasse Dominum nemini somnia vel visiones permitteret -- multi
enim fanatici spiritus me aderti sunt, quorum alius somnia, alius visiones
jactabat -- ardentibus votis deprecatus sum, Luther.
pray against them; My Lord, let this Dream be to them that hate thee, Dan. 4.
19. So, for good Dreams to pray; Lord, let such Dreams be to all them that
love thee! Were these our daily prayers to God, and were our day-meditations on
God, delights in God, and labors for God, it might fare far better with us
by night. Did we like God in the Creation, look back upon every days work,
whether good: and did we every evening make clear with God, and never dare to
go to bed in our sins, we might in the night meet much of God in our souls.
O how comfortable might it be, if day, and night, by holy motions, we made our
minds to mount upward! Among many mavelous things recorded by Galatinus, out
of the Jewish Doctors to have been about the Temple at Jerusalem, this was one;
That as fire was continually kept in the Brazen Altar, for burnt-offerings, so
no wind, nor weather, could night or day hold down the smoke thereof, but it
would by a direct and strait line, still ascend up toward Heaven. Thus ought
it to be with our souls, against corruptions, temptations, persecutions, etc.
Our minds should day and night, in good motions go directly to God, as a
comfortable evidence, and infallible fruit of holy fire, kept kindled in our
hearts. Were we expert in this work, O how much good might we see, and do in
the dark!

6. Object. Dreame-discoveries are 6. Object.
but like candle lights, or star lights: no need of them, seeing now that the
Sun of the Gospel shines out bright in our eyes.
Answer. 1. Though the Gospel Answer.
of Christ (or rather Christ in the Gospel) now shines as the Sun, yet that
need not put out all candles, or extinguish the light of these stars, stars
are of good use, though the sun does surpass. Of the Suns superexcellency,
several Philo de opi^^cio mundi, Ambros, lib. 4* Hexam, cap. ^. Plutarc. li^.
2. de pla^itis philosoph* rum, cap. 22. etc. 31. A^. de vivit Dei, ^. cap.
Authors speak admirably, and amply: yet also they grant, that much of the
great God, in little stars does appear; of his power, prudence, providence, for
the pleasure and profit of mankind in the world. It Is observed, God did not
make the stars first, and after abolish them, having created the Sun. But
God is said, first to make the Sun, and after it is said, He made the stars
also, Genesis 1. 16. It Is also observed that not only the Eclipsing of the Sun,
but the Si stellae cadunt, venti sequentur. Arist. prob. Sect. 26. Qu. 25.
Elapsing of the stars may portend tempestuous events. As it is no bright day
wherein the Sun does not shine, so that night is dark, wherein no star
appears. And when no sun, nor stars, day or night appeared, no small
Tempest lay upon us, Act. 27. 20. As it should be the sorrow of our souls not
to see the Sun of the Gospel to shine in the day, so should it be our grief
when there is no star ippearance of God in the night; during the daytime,
and while we are awake, it is good to walk in the warm beams of the
Gospel-sunne, to wait at the gates of wisdoms house, conversing with others,
to exercise our selves in all Evangelicall ordinances, as was the practice of
the primitive Christians. They continued steadfast in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship in breaking of bread, and in prayer, Act. 2. But in the night
season, and when we are asleep, we are unfit for such performances, yet then
are the proper times for soul-converse with God in this hidden way of holy
Dreams.

2. The light of these stars may lead to the sun, it is observable, 'twas a
star that guided the wise men to Bethlehem, where Christ was born. Ecce
Dionaei praecessit Caesaris astrum Virgil.
We have seen (say they) his star in the East, and are come to worship him,
Mat. 2. As false Dreams from the Devil do dispose men to desert, and forsake
Gods public service, and the wonted ways of his worship: So true Dreams from
God do incline Christians to close with, and keep to all Gospel Ordinances.
Yea these motions having been first in the night, they may be the more apt to
religious actings all the day after.

3. In good Dreams may be more then the light of a star, even Christ the Son
of Righteousness may shine therein. God himself as the most glorious Son may
therein break out with the brightest beams. Some of Gods Saints can safely
say, that when all the day has been dark, their hearts as the Heavens covered
with clouds, thick and black, yet God as a Sun of mercy has arose at
midnight and shined full fair in their face, If I say, surely the darkness
shall cover me, even the night shall be light about me; darkness hides not
from thee, but the night shines as the day. For thou have possessed my reins,
Psalm. 139. 11, 12. God may suspend mercy by day, and dispatch a De Deo cessante
and requies^e^te ab operibus suis. Lege August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 4. page
125.
sweet message by night. It Is well observed, how God himself was once said to
rest from his works in the day: But God has night-works from which we never
read of his rest. God has in the night-season toward his servants certain
works, as for their protection from evil, so for direction in good; as for
their guiding to duty, so for the giving out of his mercy. God while we sleep,
may be so awake in his merciful works, and may bring in such a clear light of
his love, while we lie on our beds, as to turn night into day: as by the
withdrawing the light of his love, the brightest day is made like the darkest
night. We grant Gods usual Vbique aucupemur verbum Dei de omnium fidelium
Ministrorum ore pende amus, Pauli^us, Ep. 4. Deus dupliciter cum hominibus
loquitur, primo, communiter per publicum Ministerium -- secundo per
revelationem internam, sed hoc posterius tantum solet in specialibus negotiis
and rarissime nosse ^tile est ne amisso verbo cum phanaticis expectemus movas
revelationes.
means for the discovery of mercy is by a Gospel-ministery, his ordinary way
is the word preached by the mouths of faithful men. I create the fruit of the
lips, peace, peace, Isai. 57. 17. So that all people ought primarily and
principally to wait hereupon, and especially to expect God herein: yet God may
sometimes so speak in Dreams, as manifesting to men much of his merciful mind
about matters the same, Of this it is sure (says Luther) all ought to beware
they do not neglect Gospel-administrations, to look for revelations by Dreams.
Though yet God in Dreams has sometimes so revealed himself as has been
certainly, and sensibly a singular mercy to the souls of some men.

7. Object. Dreams though thus they Object. 7.
be good, yet they may so break in, as to make our sleep to be short.
Answer. 1. To have sleep short Answer.
may be best for our benefit; there is a double sleep may do us much prejudice,

Unseasonable, Immeasurable.
1. Sleep unseasonvble, some by such sleep turn day into night, as some by
their watchfulness make night to be day. *It Is reeported of the primitive
Chaistians, in hearing Paul* preach, they watched till midnight, Act. 20. 7.
They (says Chrysostom) watching Media nocte vigilabant, ut eos condemnent qui
media Die dormiunt.
till mid night, condemned those who sleep till midday. Yea sometime, though
the season be night, it may be unseasonable to sleep, as we may see by our
Saviors censure of his Disciples, Matthew. 26. 40. When ever Christ calls to
service, then it is out of season for his servants to sleep. How sad is it with
some, who no further observe the Sabbatb-Day-Rest, than by a lazy, drowzy,
lying in bed. But let not men look for good Dreams in bad sleeps.

2. Sleep immeasurable may prejudice men in this matter. How long will thou
sleep, O sluggard, when will thou arise out of thy sleep! Yet a little sleep, a
little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, Prove. 6. 9, 10. Some
though they have had their several long steps, yet they must have their
slumbers; [ sleeps, and slumbers] in the plural, so Solomon reads the precited
place. Good men will not waste whole nights in long sleeps. How often did David
interrupt his sleep, and how well did his heart work by night! Diodat observes
upon Psalm. 143. 8. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, that
I may know the way wherein I should walk. That in the Ille pro rogans
pernoctabat ut ^u disceres quomodo pro te rogares; Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
night time his prayer was to God, for guidance in the day. How did our dear
Savior pass whole nights in prayer, Matthew. 26. 44. Herein proposing a pattern
for Christians at least in extraordinary occasions, as some have concluded. But
O, how even some Heathens condemn us Christians, Alexander Caesar, and several
others are said to divide the night into three parts, whereof one only for
sleep, the other Nemo est dignus nomine hominis qui unum diem velit esse in
voluntate, Tul. l. 2. definibus.
two for their studies, and other necessary affairs. As Tully professed, he
was not worthy the name of a man, that spent a whole day in pleasure. So is not
he worthy the name of a Christian, that spends the whole night in sleeping.
Upon such, in their besotted sleeps, God may rather send judgments, then
mercies. Epimanondas a Theban captain, finding in the night a Sentinel
asleep, struck him through with his spear, saying; Talem reliqui, qualem
inveni. lege Laert. lib. de vit. Philosophorum.
I leave thee, as I found thee. Aristotle in the night, holding his Book in one
hand, is said in the other hand to hold a golden Ball over a brazen pan, that
sleeping, the fall thereof might awake him. Such will hardly Dream what they
should, who sleep when they should not.

2. Answer. Short sleeps may be best for good Dreams. In a long sleep may a
heavenly Dream dye and be buried, so as never to rise or come up in
remembrance but like Nebuchadnezzars Dan. 2. 7. Jun. lectiones in loc.
Dream be quite gone and forgotten. But when a man suddenly awakes, he the
sooner reflects, and re-views over what he thought in his sleep. And all things
thus received, the Dream is revived, so that in the mind matters are more
readily settled being more easily recalled. By a long sleep after a good Dream,
the footsteps of God may be lost, and little recoverable left. It Is good for
Christians upon several accounts to be sooner wakefull, then sleepy. Somnus,
ut ex Aristotele disputat Averrores, accidit propter frigidum, and humidum quae
dominantur in cerebro vigilia vero propter calidum and siccum dominantia in
corde-Nolite mei fratres in religione esse frigidi and humoribus dediti, -- sed
animam possidete igneo zelo ferventem, ut s^ media nocte sponsus advenerit
vobis ad intrandum cum eo gratia non denegetur, etc.
Sleep (says the Philosopher) is caused and increased, as cold and moist are
more or less predominant in the brain. And the more heat prevails in the
heart, the more apt is man to awake* Is it not our coldness in the cause of
God, that makes us so exceedingly sleepy? Had we more holy heat in our hearts,
we should be the more quickly awake to mind God in his work.

3. Answer. But yet a good Dream may not make man's sleep to be short. Upon
this the Lord may dilate sleep, not letting man to awake till his work be done.
God may prolong the sleep of a good man to take in the more of his mind. What a
long sleep had Solomon, because therein God had much to say by a Dream, 1
King. 3. from the 5, to the 15. ver.

8. Object. Sleep is appointed for 8. Object.
our rest, and necessary refreshment, but Dreams though good, may much
disturb, and trouble our sleep, etc.
Answer. To this I shall speak in a Answer.
double way.

By concession, and By negation.
Concession] 1. We will grant with Omnia necesse est vel vi vel natura
quiescere, Arist. de Caelo, l. 3. c. 2. Arist. Ethic l. 4. c. 15. Bern. Sup.
Cant. Ser. 19. Hic quietis gustus suavis.
Authors of all sorts* that rest is requisite, and that the sleep of the night
is for the refreshment of nature. Cicero reports of Cn. Aufidius, that he was
wont to say. We might think sleep to be given us against Somnium nobis nisi
requietem corporibus and medicinam quandam laboris affert contra naturam
putaremus datum, etc. Cicero de finibus bonorum, l. 5. p. 154.
nature, it so deprives us of our senshs, etc. but that we sensibly find our
selves thereby sweetly refreshed, as with a medicinable cordial.

2. We may grant some divine Dreams do disturb sleep, and may molest the mind,
and interrupt men's rest, as precited Scriptures report, Genesis 15. 12. Dan. 7, 8,
10, Chap. Yet be it so, it is better in sleep to be somewhat troubled with
molesting Dreams from God, then sinnefully tickled with enticing and seducing
Dreams from the Devil. The Devil may make a man's Dreams to be like Lots
Daughters, that in the night gave him wine to drink, but drew him to sinful
and sad evils: so Satan may to the mind of a sleeping man administer much
pleasant matters: but the most disturbing Dreams from God be abundantly better.

2. Negation] Dreams from God may make the heart glad, refresh the mind, and
make sleep sweet to the whole man, and behold my sleep was sweet unto me, says
the Prophet, having had a Dream from God of the Churches happy estate in the
world, Jer. 31. 26. Thou shall lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet, Prove. 3.
24. This is fulfilled in that comfortable In nocte iniquus conteritur, quum
peccatorum praecedentium confusione damnatus veritatis lumennon invenit, and
quod deinceps agere debeat non agnoscit -- Greg. Mor. l. 25. c. 9.
converse God has with the souls of his Saints in their sleep. Wicked men who
have stood up stoutly in the day, God has tumbled, and overturned with
terrors in the night, Job 34. Chap. 25. Ver. On the other side, some of Gods
Saints who have been down in the deeps of sorrows all day, the Lord has lifted
them up by heart-gladding-comforts in the night; And God spoke to Israel in a
Dream by night, saying, Jacob, Jacob, I am God, the God of thy father; Fear
not to go down into Egypt, I will go with thee, and I will bring thee up
again, Genesis 46. 2, 3. Much to this purpose, see that great Apostle. There stood
by me this night, the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve, saying;
fear not Paul, be of good cheer, God has given thee all that sail with
thee, Acts 27. 26. O the heart-ravishing cups of comfort that God sometimes
brings down for his Saints to drink in in the dark; yea, O how sometimes by
soul-solacing Dreams are their hearts drawn up into Heaven!

Luther speaking of the Soul of a Anima post discessum a corpore non dormit,
sed vigilat and patitur visiones loquelas Angellorum and Dei. Luther loc. 59.
3a. clas.
Saint, separated from the body by death, says; That it sleeps not, but is
ever awake, walks in Heaven, hears the language of Angels, sees the visions of
God, etc. The same in some measure may be said of such a Soul, while united to
the body in this life. It sleeps not, but being ever awake, it even in the
night-season ascends up into Heaven, and sees the face of God, and sings the
praises of Christ. So that we may say of a Saints sleep in this case, as Austin
once said of O So^^ium pacis quam dulce and jucundum qui inter lapides
inimicorum dormivit. August. Sermon. de Diver.
Stevens sleep martyred among the stones; O sleep of peace, how pleasant and
full of delight!

Quest. May not the Devils deluding Dreams have many delighting joys?

Answ. Suppose so, yet the joys of Divine Dreams are far differing, and may
be discerned, by

Antecedent preparations, and Consequent inclinations.
1. Before a Christian is penitentially prepared by afflictings of Soul, and
affrightings for sin, deep humblings, and day-tremblings, under sense of Gods
wrath, etc. then by night God may represent to the mind, his mavelous mercies
S^mnia jucunda and l^t^ imo in rebus civilibus nos solent ex^i^^rare, etc. Lu^
^^^. com. 1ae classis. De An^^lis. ^t in spi^itualilus ^uod in multo magis.
in the Covenant of grace, his favor upon the account of Christ, pardon of
sin, to the singular joy of the Soul.

2. After a Christian is graciously inclined, his spirit disposed to the
advancing of God, the abasing himself, the opposing of sin, the pursuing
holiness of life, and the like: Such joys in Dreams, are more then Dreams of
joy. One well observes, That all the Devils pleasing power, it is placed in
deluding T^tam -- Vim ^^am in mendac^is Diab^lus coll^^avit omnia dec^ptio^^m
genera de d^ hoc venenatissi^^ a^^is suae s^n^^ pr^d^xit. L^o ^e El^^mosin.
Sermon. 4.
lies; He delights to delude, and he deludes in his delights; He rejoices to
deceive men, and he deceives men in their rejoycings. Their joys in Dreams be
but Dreams of joy. They seem to solace, but they do not solace as they seem.
Be such delusive joys examined by things before or after? they may be found
very vain, as in the causes, so in their essects; whereas the virtuous vigor
of true joys that are in and through Dreams Divine, we may soon discern, as by
their good causes, so by their excellent effects, viz.

They engage to truth, and They enlarge our strength.
1. To truth: our hearts are hereby engaged, obliged, more bent and bound to
truth-embracements. Such a Byas set upon our souls, as may carry us the more
strait on, in obedience to the strict^st truths contained in holy Scriptures.
Yea, we are taught not only to retain the truth, but to rejoice in the truth,
through the truth of joy. Whereas false joys, that proceed in and through
delusive Dreams, leave men's minds loose, for the letting in most lamentable
errors: So, that the saving truths of God in the Gospel, are the sooner very
sadly deserted.

2. In strength: our hearts are hereby enlarged, increased. Nehem. 8. 10. The
joy of the Lord is our strength. Such joys as God sends in sleeping, or
wakeing, they strengthen with much spirial might our inward man, making us the
more apt and able to the holiest duties, and for the heaviest Philippus
Landsgravus de Hessia, qu^modo tam mala. Patienter passus, interrogatus --
resondebat, se divinas Martyrum consolationes sensisse, and corroborasse
Manlius.
difficulties, that may several ways be set before us; Whereas false joys
from Dreams delusive, do rather debilitate, enfeeble, and weaken man's soul, as
to hard service or suffering. Thus rightly to discriminate these, is a lesson
very well worth our learning. Yea: and let us learn likewise, not only how to
perceive and discern, but how to reeive and maintain: not only Dreams real
and truly right for delights, but also the most rare and ravishing Dreams that
can come from Heaven upon our hearts.

For the more constant compassing of such high night-comforts, we ought through
our whole daily walkings,

To beware, and To be wise.
1. Beware of walking from the settled counsels of God. Take heed of turning
aside to seek uncertain ways, to look for new Revelations, and so forsake the
ancient Tracts, and leave the long beaten paths of Bible-truths: least we not
only prevent from our selves such caelestial sweets, but on the contrary,
procure to our selves the sowrest draughts, that our minds can drink day or
night. May not we concur with Cassianus. col. 24. cap. 24. Qui viam regiam
Apostoli^is and Propheticis silicibu^ c^mmunitam Sanctorum omnium a^que ipsi^s
Do^^i^i v^stigiis c^mpl^^^tam cla^a die deserentes per d^^ia qu^que and dumosa
lacerati^ auribus and dirupta ^^st^ reptant n^n m^d^ acutis^ veprium a^^leis
con^igenai, se^ e^^am viru^entorum ser^entum ictibus vulnerandi, etc.
Cassian, and confidently conclude: That those Christians, who during the clear
day, do deviate from Gods wonted ways, from Christ's the Kings known rode in
his Word, paved with Prophetical flints, and Apostolical stones, and made
plain by the footsteps of all the foregoing Saints, yea, and the Lord himself:
to seek out unknown ways, and to wander into briery and bushy paths, may look
to lie down at night with legs all scratched, garments torn: with souls full of
sores, such wounds and woeful stings, as will not well suffer them to sleep.
Excuse me good Christians, if again and again, I give this Caution; lest men
make a wrong Use of this requisite Subject, in our monstrously mistaking season.

2. Be wise to walk in the most certain comforts of God. We may find that this
is without doubt our daily duty, not only to walk in the fear of the Lord, but
likewise to walk in the comforts of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9. 31. Heus Domine
Deus, rara hora, brevis mora, sapit quidem suavissime sed gustatur rarissime,
etc.
This for pious persons, is possible, though indeed so difficult, that with
Bernard the best may say, Such soulsolacing days and hours are very rare and
sweet, though very seldom and short.

Yet without question, good care might carry us in, and keep us to far more
continued ways of comfort, than in which commonly Christians are found. Were
we so exact as we ought, might not we make even our extraordinary comforts, our
much more ordinary Walks? Sure, we are not only to take some steps into
spiritual comforts, but we are to take up our daily walks in the comforts of
the Spirit. And if we thus walk into these comforts while awake, what walks may
such comforts have into us when asleep? If we in our more constant course could
converse with God, by the most rejoicing thoughts in the day, would not God
have a more frequent converse with us by most refreshing Dreams from Heaven in
the night?

Did but we aforehand accustom our selves to be with rejoycings of soul in the
service of the Lord, how afterward might we meet with that of God, which now,
to the most of men* remains a Post multas lachrymas -- Post caeli inhaerentes
animi oculos videbar mihi interesse agminibus Angelorum, etc. Hieron. in lib.
de virginita. Serve.
mystery? Jerome reports, that after some most affectionate and fervent
performance of some holy duties, as Meditation and Prayer, he had sometimes
seemed to himself, as if he had been caught up into Heaven, and had been
triumphing with Troops of Angels, etc. Thus may a good man, even after a
comfortable intercourse with God in religious exercises, be by night in a
Dream, as if drawn up into Heaven: as if he heard those Hallelujahs and sweet
singings of Angels, as if he saw the bright and beautiful Body of his blessed
Savior, sitting at the right hand of God, etc. To come out of such a Dream, is
to come out of Heaven; O how happy would it be herein to abide! O how blessed
and comfortable is the case of that Christian, who from personal experiance
can hereof make report! To such a purpose some Ancient Authors Chrysostom. Homil.
54. in Genes. Augusti. Sermo 79. De tempore, etc.
do excellently open Jacob's Dream, Genesis 28. Let us chiefly mark what the
Scripture speaks: Jacob dreamed, and behold a Ladder lifted up, and the top of
it reached to Heaven, and behold upon it the Angels of God ascending and
descending. And above he saw the Lord himself. Male cubans Suaviter dormit and
^eliciter Somniat Jacob, etc. Pa^aus in locum.
standing, and heard him speaking such sweet words, and in such a way, as so
well warmed his heart, that awaking he break out; Surely the Lord was in this
place; this is none other than the House of God; this is the Gate of Heaven.
Nunc Jacob ad fae^arum in^ursu^ e^p^situs, and ^^^^xiu^ omnibus caeli terrequae
injuri^^ -- Dominus e^us (...) lestias somnio vel oraculo praeclaro mirisice
sublevat -- Deus signum sui amoris insculpsit animo servi -- ut vigilans, etc.
Calvin in loc.
Some of our more Modern Writers, do also much admire this Dream, in the season
and subject of it, for the expressions and impressions of it. That Jacob lying
now obnoxious to all the injuries of Earth and Heaven, God did graciously
relieve him in a Dream, that left such legible letters of love, and visible
Characters of Divine care, as in sleep to receive them was exceeding sweet; and
awake to review them was very comfortable.

Neither let us think in these latter Times, the Lord to be lesser in his love,
and lower in his care over afflicted Christians, but rather let us believe,
that as the Devil in these latter days, has not only the same, but has
subtiller projects, and soarer conflicts to assault Gods Saints: So God
certainly, has now not only the same, but has stronger supports, sweeter and
greater comforts for the sensible asistance of his Saints oppressed. Quanto
magis potestas and caliditas Diaboli derescunt in in tempore: tanto magis
augescunt in malignitate and subtilitate.
The policy and power of the Devil, as they more decrease in time, so they
more increase in their measure. The Devil, when his time is most short, his
temptations will be most sharp. And when the temptations of the Devil be the
sharpest, then the Consolations of God shall be the sweetest, for the suitable
and seasonable solacing the Souls of his Saints, whether their Bodies be awake
or asleep.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER. OR, The Authors EPILOG, In Some concluding
Requests.
Christian Reader,
I Crave yet once more, and do (the praeceeding Treatise considered) from my
whole soul, most seriously beseech the actual concurrence of

Thy Piety, and Thy Charity.
1. Thy Piety, in most earnest Prayer to Almighty God, as graciously to pardon
in the precious Blood of Christ, those many humane frailties, which therein
both God and Man may easily find, and I confess: So successfully to prosper by
his abundant blessing, my true endeavors therein, for the Gospel of his great
Name, and the real good of souls.

2. Thy Charity, in a candid interpreting, and right understanding, both of the
Author and Matter, notwithstanding the accidental errors of the Press.

The Printer, in his Composings and passings through the main Body of the Book,
has left great Faults but Few: yet too many lesser, in literal and
syllabicall mistakes, with many misplaced Commas, etc. All which, as by thy due
Observings, thou may soon find them: So, by thy right Correctings, thou art
desired friendly to mend them.

VIZ.

Page 55. line 26. for Dreams read Dreamers. p. 71. l. 20. for Suedland r.
S^abland. p 77. l. 6. for waring r. warming. p. 69. l. 19. for strange r.
strong. p. 113. l. 15. for at r. in. p. 135. l. 13. for provision r.
praevision. p. 163. l. 9. for new r. Men's. p. 152. l. 12. for as condition r.
his condition. p. 242. l. 21. for Chamber r. Chair. p 271. l. 21. for Nations
r. Motions. p. 286. l. 28. for surely r. sweetly. p. 296. l. 12. at sleep, make
a full stop. p. 303. l. 13. for Saints r. same. p. 304. l. 18. for as r. so. In
the same line, for accept in r. accept us in. p. 34. l. 16. for words r. wood.
With others such like.

In the Margin all Quotations may be manifest mistakes, in the mis-naming of
some Authors, and the mis-noting of some Numbers of their Pages, in their
mentioned Writings: besides several other (...) and Errata's, especially in
the Greek and Latin. All which the Learned Reader is likewise earnestly
entreated, as kindly to excuse, and courteously to correct: So notwithstanding,
rightly to receive, and to accept, etc.

VIZ.

Pagina 34. pro target lege torquet. p. 56. pro lit iam l. licentiam. p. 34.
pro ineo r. imo, etc. p. 38. pro ineam l. etiam. p. 27. pro (...). l. (...). p.
50. pro (...) l. (...). p. 121. pro (...) l. (...), etc. p. 232. pro (...) l.
(...). p. 150. pro decen l. december. p. 284. pro uqae l. quae nec. p. 334. pro
aptis parentibus l. apparentibus. p. 343. pro dooet l. doeet. p. 312. pro
pretium l. Aretium. Et similia.

And now (good Reader) that good hand of our most gracious and all-glorious
God, rectify, and fully reform far worse Errors, (or those broader and
blacker Blemishe) found in the most lamentably mis-carried leaves of our lives:
And our infinitely good Lord, with the indeleble Characters of his heavenly
Grace, ingrave, and imprint the most precious and permanent Truths upon the
Tables of our hearts, unto his own deserved Honor, and to our Eternal
Happiness. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, P. G.
1657.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE: OR A DIRECTORY, BY The Order of Letters, Leading To
Some Chief Things found In The foregoing Treatise.
A
A Bell, what the name notes p. 171 Actings of man of two sorts p. 166 Adam,
what God appointed him for to do in Paradise p. 78 Adam considered in a double
estate p. 362 Adiaphora, or middle matters, how far to be granted p. 263
Afflictions, how made easy p. 196 Ages of the world, how many p. 262 Angels
their Ministry, what p. 272 Angels their chief help, when p. 320 Anabaptists,
whence their first original p. 32 Anabaptists, how dangerous in their
principles and practices p. 33 Anabaptists, the chief opposers of Magestracy
and Ministry p. 36 Anabaptists in Germany, their reign and their ruin p. 38
Antidots against pride, what p. 44 Altar of Apollo, how frequented p. 30
Alexander, how encouraged to Battle p. 62 Apollidorus, what a Tyrant p. 228
Artaxerxes, how idly he spent time p. 188 Articles of Faith, how revealed p.
269 Articles of Faith, what and how to be embraced p. 335 Arrogance, how great
a sin p. 326 Atheism, how abominable p. 44 Augustine, what sins in youth
p. 96
B
Babes of the Devil, how dressed p. 42 Baptism of Infants, by whom most opposed
p. 71 Baptism of Infants, how long maintained p. 281 Balam, the Divine Visions
he had p. 250 Basil, how good a man he was p. 288 Bible, how much to be read
p. 296 Birds, where they usually build p. 173 Body of man, how full of beauty.
p. 15 Body, how much defiled by sin p. 100 Body, how after this life said to
sleep p. 89 Books bad, what hurt they do p. 50 Breaches, how great an evil p.
233 Bruits, how said to Dream p. 17
C
Calumnies, what, and by whom raised p. 327 Capacities, of what kind given to
creatures p. 19 Cares, of what kind required of Christians p. 148 Christian,
who is indeed p. 333 Chrysostom, what Text he would choose to preach of p. 190
Children, how vexed p. 216 Church, how compared p. 177 Cleomenes, his falsehood
p. 134 Confidenee men have of themselves, how great and groundless p. 51
Company with vain persons, how bad p. 189 Comforts from Scripture, how sweet p.
172 Courts in which all may be accused, twofold p. 131 Creatures, how they
deceive man p. 207 Cruelties, in what men worst p. 328 Cyprian, what he reports
remarkable in his times p. 322
D
Daemocles, how sitting in his Chair p. 242 Darkness not created of God. p. 211
Darkness pleasing to the Devil p. 100 Darkness affrighting to man p. 210
Deceits of two sorts p. 53 Deceivers of several sorts p. 48 Defiling, only by
sin p. 103 Delights carnal, their ill Eeffects p. 226 Delights in God, how
good p. 310 Desires covetous, how bad p. 226 Desires in the Devil of two sorts
p. 214 Devil, how described p. 28 Devil, how large a knowledge p. 64 Devil, how
great a power p. 50 Domestic duties, how neglected p. 325 Domition, how he
spent his time p. 187 Donatists, how they condemned Austin p. 51 Duty
neglected, what a sin p. 177
E
Emanuel, how good a word p. 68 England, how apt to Errors p. 36 Elenor, Wife
of King Edward p. 112 Errors compared to chaff p. 42 Errors of the last times,
worst p. 71 Errors, all prone thereto p. 210 Evils of two sorts p. 202 Evils of
sin, worst p. 203 Evils of sin, how to be shunned p. 124 Excellent things but
few found p. 325 Examples good commended p. 335 Ecstasies bad discovered p. 31
F
Faith, how excellent a grace p. 229 Faith, every man must have of his own p.
181 Families, how to be instructed p. 325 Favor of God much to be desired p.
213 Fear of God, upholds Gods Throne p. 163 Fear of God, Unites man's heart p.
180 Fear of men forbidden p. 179 Fancy, how strong in working p. 120 Filthyness
of men twofold p. 95 Flesh in man, the fountain of sin p. 101 Fire two ways
put out p. 334 Fort-Royal of Christian Religion p. 324 Freedom for thoughts a
mistake p. 104 Fury in man, how a sin p. 334
G
Gastio, his Book against the Anabaptists p. 33 Geneva, how preserved by Beza
p. 281 Gentiles, what knowledge some had of Christ. p. 249 Germany's troubles,
what and whence p. 72 Gifts of Gods love, how sweet p. 240 God, that he is, men
commonly believe p. 215 God is the best Friend and worst Enemy p. 205 God not
the Author of any sin p. 203 God the Fountain of all good p. 6
Gospel-Sacrifices most excellent p. 193 Gospel-Discoveries most clear p. 338
Graces, how some counterfeit p. 83 Graces, when most visible p. 289 Grace, how
excelling Nature p. 202 Greek tongue excellent p. 297
H
Habel, what the word singnifieth p. 193 Hands proper only to man p. 187
Harlots, their property p. 145 Hatred of good men, how bad p. 326 Haters of
good men, who worst p. 328 Heresy, what and how described p. 327 Heretics,
who, and how to be used p. 239 Herod, how cunning and cruel p. 254 Heart
gracious, how excellent p. 275 Heart, how carefully to be kept p. 175 Holiness
of life, how laudable p. 230 Horror, whence it arises p. 210 Hypocrites, how
great sinners p. 254 Hypocrisy, how abhorred of God p. 255 Hypocrates, how
rare a Physician p. 224
I
Jaddus the High Priest, how clothed p. 279 Idle persons like Drone-bees p.
186 Jedidiah, what it signifies p. 240 Jealousy, whence it arises p. 153
Jerome, how in Prayer transported p. 354 Jews had God diverse ways discovered
p. 264 Jews, how great their incredulity p. 261 Ignorance, how gross in men p.
50 Ignorance, the evils thereof to men p. 234 Images, when first set up in the
Church p. 140 Images often set up in men's hearts p. 185 Immortality of man's soul
proved p. 284 Incubi and Succubi, how to be believed p. 114 Innocent Infants,
by whom, and why slain p. 259 Joys true and false how differenced p. 355
Israelites, how they received Manna p. 300
K
Kings, how of God preserved p. 274 Kings, how with cares oppressed p. 253
Kingdoms, how by wrong obtained p. 254 Kingdoms, how from one to another
translated p. 62 Knowledge intuitive God has only p. 111 Knowledge of man's soul
difficult p. 24 Knowledge in humane Arts excellent p. 249 Knowledge Divine, how
much required p. 124 Knowledge by Satan much opposed p. 121
L
Law of God, how transgressed p. 123 Law of God fit for Meditation p. 297
Learning, how to be esteemed p. 249 Life of man, how compared p. 156 Life of
man, how shortened p. 131 Light of Scripture, how admirable p. 23 Light of Gods
countenance comfortable p. 231 Light of a quiet conscience, desirable p. 232
Leviathan, what, and when best taken p. 126 Lodging, what it imports p. 161
Lord's Day, by whom neglected p. 324 Lord like a Lion, how sad p. 205 Love, how
excelling fear p. 201 Love to truth, how requisite p. 76 Lives of good men much
to be viewed p. 327 Lucian, how bad a man declared p. 328 Luther's Doctrine, by
whom condemned p. 33 Luther's Question often to himself p. 52 Lycurgus, what a
Law he made p. 138 Lycanthropie, what a sad disease p. 224 Lies, by whom
ordinarily raised p. 327
M
Magi, what the word signifies p. 249 Magicians of Egypt, what they did p. 40
Magistracy, by whom opposed p. 56 Majesty of God, how great p. 208 Man, a
person compounded p. 4, 5 Man excelling other creatures p. 187 Manichees, their
opinion p. 14 Manna, what a mercy to the Jews p. 300 Means, how to be used p.
177 Mercies, how to be prized p. 183 Meditation of God, how good p. 128 Misery
of man, how great p. 209 Memory, how necessary p. 128 Ministers, by whom
opposed p. 324 Miracles, true and false differenced p. 47 Moses among the
Prophets, how excellent p. 262 Mortification of sin, how necessary p. 137
Muncer, what a seducer p. 33 Mysterium, what the word signifies p. 2
N
Nature of man defiled with sin p. 103 Nature, all men alike miserable p. 172
Nebuchadnezar, how great a Prince p. 222 Nebuchadnezar, how living among Beasts
p. 224 Nero, how he killed his Mother p. 132 Nescience and ignorance, how they
differ p. 21 Neglects of good, how dangerous p. 177 Nocturnall-polutions, how
perilous p. 92 Nourishing of sin, how odious p. 81
O
Obedience to God, how just p. 211 Observation of God, how fit p. 313 Oneness
of heart, how good p. 180 Oneness of way, how meet p. 355 Opinions, some how
abominable p. 71 Oracles, how once used p. 256 Oracles, when they ceased p. 31
Organs given to man excellent p. 167 Original sin, how certain p. 55 Original
sin, how active p. 183 Outward actions follow inward motions p. 166
P
Pardoning power in God, how great p. 116 Pardoning sin, God thereto very
prompt p. 44 Peace false, by the Devil furthered p. 215 Peace sound, through
God settled p. 219 Fantasy and Memory, their differing acts p. 11 Philosophers
of two differing sorts p. 34 Philo, of what men he complained p. 325 Philo,
what of man he affirmed p. 252 Philpots Judgment about Infant Baptism declared
p. 281 Plato, reading the Books of Moses p. 249 Places, two after this life p.
8, 9 Policarpus, how warned of death p. 282 Prayer in the heart, how prevalent
p. 257 Prayer with fervency, how efficacious p. 136 Preaching, of how great use
p. 338 Pride, how prone man to it p. 45 Prosopopeia, what and how used p. 329
Prudence, wherein it consists p. 195 Publican and Pharisee, how differanced
p. 322
Q
Quenching the Spirit, how caused p. 334 Questions idle, by whom raised p. 324
Quietness of conscience, how disturbed p. 205
R
Raptures, how therein men mistaken p 324 Reason in man, how excellent p. 5, 6
Reason in man, when active p. 6, 7 Reason, how fitly compared p. 194 Reason,
how often seduced p. 192 Remembrance of God, how good p. 128 Repentance for
sin, how necessary p. 119 Repletions with grace, how excellent p. 333
Revelations from God, how described p. 329 Revelations false, how discovered p.
323 Richard the third, how slain p. 225 Rome, who friends thereunto p. 328
Rubie, how precious a stone p. 289
S
Sabbath to be kept by Christians p. 324 Saorifices, what under the Gospel p.
193 Scorpion, what the Name signifies p. 232 Scorpions, what their properties
are p. 243 Scriptures, by whom perverted p. 325 Simon, what the Name imports
p. 32 Sin, what evils it implies p. 106 Sins of several sorts considered
p. 81 Seducers, how sedulous and subtle p. 311 Satan, how cunning and cruel
p. 210 Skarring, what the word signifies p. 199 Sleep, by what means caused p.
222 Sleep quiet, what a mercy p. 240 Sleep quiet, how procured p. 230
Sodomites, how great sinners p. 89 Solomon, how rare a person p. 151 Souls
activeness, how discovered p. 185 Souls dignity, how preserved p. 20 Stars,
their excellent use p. 339 Star leading to Christ, what p. 250 Spira, his sad
case discovered p. 227 Sun, its excellency advanced p. 219 Sufferings upon
man inflicted p. 233 Sybils of Greece, what they were declared p. 30
T
Temple of the Holy Ghost, what p. 140 Tempests, how far of the Devil p. 212
Temptations of several sorts p. 214 Telmisenses, their opinion p. 35
Tertullian, his Apologies for whom p. 158 Thankfulness, how due to God p. 144
Themistocles, what kind of man p. 293 Thoughts are secret words p. 168 Thoughts
in man of three sorrs p. 159 Thoughts naturally only evil p. 180 Thoughts, all
known to God p. 196 Thunder, how it is caused p. 212 Truth, how much deserted
p. 352 Truth, all ought to be loved p. 77 Time, all is Gods and for God p. 286
Time, how well divided p. 53 Time, how much abused p. 188 Tyrants, their ill
properties p. 259
V
Vanity, what the word signifies p. 154 Vanities, how diverse in man p. 150
Vanity, how it debaseth a man p. 188 Voice of God in Scripture sure p. 351
Voice, audible from God in crosses p. 188 Vineyard, what to be kept p. 177
Unity of heart, how good p. 180 Unity among the Devils, how great p. 49 Union
with Christ, how sure and sweet p. 30 Virtue Theological, what p. 201 Virtue,
how it advances a man p. 188 Visions of three sorts declared p. 266 Visions,
true from false discovered p. 323
W
Walking, what of Christians required p. 339 Wandering from Gods Word condemned
ibid. Watching, why to Christians commanded p. 188 Warring with the flesh
continued ibid. Woman hearkening to the Serpent p. 192 Will of God, how opposed
p. 331 Wolf, how ravenous a Beast p. 135 Word of God, how transgressed p. 211
Word of God, how compared p. 41 Word of God, how preferred p. 326 Wicked, how
described p. 191 Witches, how seduced p 61 Wisdom, why to be desired p. 211
Work of a Chaistian, what chiefest p. 174 Wounds, of what sort are saddest p.
131
X
Xerxes, at what he rejoiced p. 293 Xenophon, what he denied p. 380
Y
Young men, their lusts p. 117 Young men, their conceits p. 52
Z
Zeal, its want bewailed p. 339 Zeal, by whom opposed p. 321 Zwinglius, what he
practiced p. 33
THE SCRIPTURE-TABLE, OR A CATALOGUE Of Principal Scriptures, occasionally
cleared, and fitly unfolded, in the foregoing TREATISE.
Genesis. Chap. Verse. Page 1 3 211 6 5 108 15 12 208 20 3 271 35 5 183 Ex dus.
Chap. Verse. Page 14 15 257 15 9 9^ 23 28 216 Numbers. 12 6 263 Deutren^my. 13 5
69 13 8 75 15 9 168 29 9 91 1 Samuel. 26 12 129 2 Samuel. 12 4 166 Job. 4 11 43
6 4 204 7 14 198 11 12 52 20 8 7 29 3 221 33 17 45 Psalms. 1 1 191 4 3 190 4 6
231 6 5 9 19 14 305 24 4 196 34 7 136 42 8 301 49 11 91 74 16 286 77 7 297 86
11 180 119 45 190 127 2 240 139 14 17 Proverbs. 3 24 292 4 23 175 7 9 112 23 17
182 24 9 168 Ecclesiastes. 2 23 226 3 21 18 5 7 150 5 12 215 12 3 140 12 13 163
Isaiah. 20 7 302 30 32 121 36 7 211 45 7 302 59 5 160 Jeremiah. 2 5 189 4 14
161 23 28 41 23 32 46 29 8 75 32 40 180 Ezekiel. 8 12 185 Daniel. 2 29 12 4 4
221 7 1 209 10 1 201 Hosea. 3 5 68 3 7 136 7 6 110 Joel. 2 28 269 Micah. 2 1 69
3 6 67 Zechariah. 2 5 237 10 2 27 Matthew. 1 20 269 2 20 259 6 9 8^ 8 29 113 13
32 309 15 19 104 26 41 276 27 19 22 Mark. 12 41 306 Luke. 1 28 322 1 74 179 11
5 273 12 17 97 John. 14 30 102 Acts. 2 17 269 8 9 46 8 11 31 9 31 358 10 10 265
16 9 265 Romans. 1 12 172 1 Corinthians. 3 20 196 6 19 140 2 Corinthians. 6 17
37 7 1 129 12 1 328 12 4 329 Ephesians. 6 16 204 Colossions. 2 18 103 1
Thessalonians. 4 4 130 5 6 197 5 10 291 5 19 334 2 Thessalonians. 2 10 77 2
Timothy. 1 6 334 Hebrews. 1 1 264 Jude. 8 88 1 John. 1 8 81 Revelations. 2 17
117 3 17 83 12 10 131*

FINIS.
Mystery of Dreams.


