A SHORT ANSWER To A. S.

ALIAS ADAM STEWART'S Second part of his overgrown Duply to the two Brethren.

Together with Certain difficult questions easily answered; All which A.
Stewart is desired to consider of, without replying, unless it be to purpose.

A. Steuart in his second part of his Duply to the two Brethren. page. 166.

The Civil Magistrate cannot be Orthodox, and tolerate a new Sect, [hee
means Independencie, and may as well say Presbytery] unles he tolerate us to
believe that he is either corrupted by moneys, or some other way, so to do.

Proverb. 12. 13. The wicked is snared by the trasgression of his lips: but the
just shall come out of trouble. Printed in the Year 1644.

THREE OF A STEVART'S CONCLVSIONS, with their PARALELLS, which are added for
better explanation of them; their contradicting of themselves and their
rebellious Doctrine.
CONCLUSION. 1.
Page 105. The Supreme Ecclesiastical Judicature itself may fear that if
they judge any thing amiss, their judgments will not be approved, and put in
execution in particular Churches; and in all probability they are like to be
crossed [ just as much as Independents ask for, by this ensuing Parallel.]

PARALLEL.
Particular Churches or Congregations may examine the judgments of the supreme
Ecclesiastical Judicature, and if they find them to be amiss* they may refuse
to put them in execution, they may cross them.

CONCLUSION. 2.
Page 30. The Civil Magistrate is subject in a spiritual way unto the Church;
He must learn Gods will by the Ministers of the Church who are Gods
Ambassadors sent to him: He must be subject unto Ecclesiastical Censures.

CONCLUSION. 3.
Page 166. Whatsoever the Ecclesiastical Senate or Presbiterie is bound not to
tolerate, but must suppress in the Church; That, the Civil Magistrate is bound
not to tolerate, but must suppress in the State: Neither is the Civil
Magistrate less bound to put it out of the State; than the Presbytery is to
put it out of the Church* [ Exquisite Popery; Pestilent Doctrine as appears
yet more clearly by this following Parallel.]

PARALLEL.
If the Presbytery shall think good to excommunicate King or Parliament; the
Civil Magistrate, the people in whom the Sovereign power resid^s originally,
page 167. is absolved from all obedience, and bound to put them out of the
Civil State.

A TASTE OF A. STEVART'S EXTRAVAGANCIES and contradictions in the second part of
his Duply to the two Brethren.
Page 13. The Civil Magistrate [even] as Christian, has power not to admit the
true Religion, to reject it, yea when it is received or approved, and confirmed
by his secular and Civil authority, to reject it and exile it. If the Church
be corrupt* and Church Officers negligent in their charge, and will not
reform it [as the Magistrate thinks good;] he may command, yea compel them
to do it. When the Church is reformed, he may command them, when they are
negligent to be diligent in their charge. If [hee conceave] they oppres any
man in their Ecclesiastical judgments and censures* against the laws of the
Kingdom, he may desire them, yea command them to reverse their judgments;
and in case they reform them not, [againe] command them, yea compel them by
his Civil power, to give him satisfaction, according to the laws of the
Kingdom* if [hee conceave] they derogate not from the laws of God, [which
neither Popish nor Turkish Magistrates will acknowledge, though their laws be
never so contrary to the word of God.]

Page. 166. The Civil Magistrate if he follow Gods word cannot grant a
tolleration [of Independent Churches] without consent of the Church, if he
judge it is not corrupted: [as if the Church being corrupted; the Magistrate
may be corrupt too, and tolerate what he will.]

Page. 47. How be it, The Church compel not to subscribe; yet the Civil
Magistrate after sufficient conviction may compel to subscribe or to begone.
Page 179. What power has the King or Parliament to intrude and force upon the
Kingdom new religions or a tolleration of all Sects? the Parliament assume no
such power unto it self.

A short Answer to A. S. alias Adam Stewarts second part of his overgrown Duply
to the two Brethren.
SIr;
Had you concealed your self under the two first letters of your name, all the
A. S'es in Town and Country would never have been able to clear themselves;
for what you make but words of; however, I may not add a tittle in
commendation of you for Preamble to this Pamphlet, as you tell us (and is no
more then requisite to justify your own Epistle) is ordinary with writers in
dedication of their books, least I be put to a more shameful recantation
then A. S. was, and that for nothing but what charity, as himself confesses,
induced him to acknowledge in behalf of the Apologists. Give me leave then to
observe first, that page 21. 23. you say Idolatry is a sin against the second
Commandment. Juris naturalis and perpetui; insinuating that the power and duty
of punishing both Idolatry and Heresy is such also: If so; then it obliges
all Nations of the world, and consequently supposes them capable to judge of
all manner of Idolatry and Heresy, which we see to be notoriously false, and
that, besides the confounding Ecclesiastical with Civil power, whilst one
State punishes this or that for Heresy, it cannot possibly be otherwise,
(since they are not only different but diametrically opposite in profession)
but that another must canonize it for a sacred truth: secondly if States and
Powers must punish Heretics, they are bound to punish those for such only,
who in their own judgments are such: and if you will engage States in
punishing of Heretics, and they punish only such as they find themselves
obliged to punish in their own consciences and understandings, How can you
according to your doctrine, blame them for punishing Gods dearest children
instead of Heretics, since they took them to be Heretics, and thought they
had done God and you good service to punish them?

If we may not suffer Heretics to live amongst us; then is the Parliament to
blame for suffering German, French, Spanish, and Portugal Papists or Dutch
Brownists and Anabaptists to live here amonst us, though as Merchants, only
for a time; since their marchandizing gives them greater advantage of working
people to their opinions by the respective civil conveniences and benefits,
which they bring both to the whole Nation in general, and to some in
particular; nay, the very Ambassadors of what States or Potentates soever of
different religions, ought not to be permitted to reside Ledgers amongst us
under any pretense, if this doctrine be Evangelicall: So likewise may not we
under pretext of merchandise, live in Turkish Popish Lutheran or other
Countries differing from us in religion, travel into such parts for fashion
sake as is usual, nor keep Ambassadors there, nor be by foreign States
permitted to remain amongst them, if we would, or on any terms join with such
in wedlock; Man may by no means dispense herewith, if the command for
punishing herecie and schism be natural and perpetual as is pretended etc.

Page 29. You quote out of Deuteronomy. 17. 12. The man that does presumptuously and
will not hearken unto the Priest, or unto the Judge, even that man shall dye;
aleadging, that there is the sa^e reason for the Ministers of the New Testament
etc. But that we may clearly see what dangerous consequences would follow
hereupon, it may be best to return back unto the place in Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 9. 10.
11. 12. 13. The text says; If there arise a matter too hard for thee in
judgment between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke
and stroke, being matters of controversy within thy gates: then shall thou
arise and get thee up into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose: And
thou shall come unto the Priests and Levites, and unto the Judge which shall be
in those days and enquire, and they shall show the sentence of judgment: And
thou shall do according to the sentence which they of that place (which the
Lord shall choose) shall show thee, and thou shall observe to do according to
all that they inform thee: According to the sentence of the law which they
shall teach thee, and according to the judgments which they shall tell thee,
thou shall do: thou shall not decline from the sentence which they shall show
thee to the right hand nor to the left: then follows how the man that will do
presumptuously and will not hearken unto the Priest (that stands to minister
there before ^^y Lord thy God) or unto the judge, even that man shall dye and
then shall put away the evil from Israel: And all the people shall ^eare, and
fear, and do no more presumptuously: To let pass all other exceptions to AS.
his misapplication of this text which was directed peculiarly to the Jews, and
cannot concern any other people except Papists who interpret Rome to be the
place spoken of, verse 18. which God did choose, and the Pope to be sole
supreme infallible Judge, Priest and Levite of these days to be enquired
after in matter of such difficulty and moment:

If this law be of natural and perpetual obligation, as is insinuated by
saying; there is the same reasons for the Ministers of the Gospel, it will
follow, that upon all matter of difference whether for blood, plea, or
controversy verse 8. though any people, even Gods own, be never so uniustly
sentenced, ty^a^^i^ally enslaved, and most Antichristianly persecuted; they
must by no means decline such sentence all the days of their life, least they
be thought to do presumptuously and so be put to death:

What if a good number of the Great Turks subjects should have their
understandings enlightened to see the captivity and bondage they are brought
into? What if God should open the eyes of Papists in Spain, Italy, and France*
to see the spiritual fornication they are ravished into, and each of these
Nations in a submissive Godly manner humbly implore their Princes both for all
common privileges of Nature, and Christian Liberties of the Gospel; If the
respective Priests and Judges instead of redressing their just grievances shall
say as Pharaoh did, Exodus 5. 8. 9. 17. T* is idleness which makes them seek
for lawful privileges and Christian liberties, commanding their Egyption
taskmasters to increase both their Civil and spiritual slavery; must they not
according to AS. his divinity and policy still suffer themselves and their
posterity to continue Turkish bondslaves and Antichristian Idolaters, lest
they be judged to do presumptuously and so be put to death? Can AS. avoid this
consequence? Will the Priests Levites and Judges appointed in these times and
Countries unto which AS. binds them over remediless, give other sentence?
Deuteronomy. 17. 9. Surely if the case be so, we might well desire that God would
make us Jews to whom as I said those laws were given; or send us Christian
laws to govern us withal.

Tell me a little; when Jereboam set up two calves of gold in Dan and Bethel,
crying out behold your Gods O Israel, which brought you up out of the land of
Egypt: 1. King. 12. 28. 29. 30. etc. do you not think he did conjure the
people not to go up so far unto Jerusalem to sacrifice, alleging from your
text in Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 9. 12. that it was the sentence of the Priest and Judges
it should be so, from which they might no whitt decline, lest they were found
to do presumptuously? Doubtless his plea was this; from hence he enforced his
commandment for the peoples joining with him in worshipping his Gods, his
Calves; and had as good a warrant for it then, as AS. has now to say, there is
the same reason for the Presbyterian Ministers of the Gospel to legitimate
their own inventions, their Idolatry, The 12. and 13. Chapters of the first of
the Kings are worth reading, that beholding their own, in Iereboams sins, and
calling to mind Gods judgments on him, they may in time repent, lest a worse
thing befall them.

But whereas you would oblidge us unrepealably to stand to whatsoever your
Presbytery degree concerning us, by sacriledgiously producing and
blasphemously applying those reasons and effects which were only appliable at
such a time, and to such a people as God was pleased to discover doubtful
cases to, as by Oracle in the mouth of the High Priest, chief Judge, or
Levites; I may not forbear to tell you that your Presbiterians are now noe
better Southsayers then their neighbors, they must either confess to be of
the same Royal Priesthood with their brethren in the mass 1. Pet. 2. 9. and
so pretend no more than others, or else be out of it, and so be Baals Priests,
if any.

But that we may clearly understand the full ground, whereupon God required
obedience from the people unto the sentence of the Priests Judges and Levites,
as also a commensurate reason, why the people might not only without scruple,
but with full and entire satisfaction yield such obedience, as was expected
from them, it may be exceeding requisite to make search into Gods original
proceedings, as well before, as after, that he imposed his commands upon the
Jews in this behalf.

First, God calls upon Moses saying, that he would send him unto Pharaoh to
bring his Israel out of Egypt. Exodus 3. 10. Moses excuses himself unto the
Lord, saying, they would not beleave him nor hearken (...) him, alleging, that
the Lord had not appeared unto him. chap. 4, 1. Hereupon the Lord furnished him
with miracles from verse. 3. to 9. and 17. 21. ordering him to take Aaron unto
his assistance, saying, that he would be with both their mouths and teach
them what they should say. verse, 12. 15. that Aaron should put upon his heart
the breast plate of Judgment wherein was Vrim and Thuminim, that he should
bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the Lord
continually Exodus 28. 30. Lev. 8. 8. according whereunto Iethro (prophetically
no doubt) counseled Moses his Son in Law not to ware out himself with
continual attendance of the people from morning until evening to enquire for
them of God, but that he would provide able men out of all the people, who
might judge of all smaller matters themselves, and bring the greater unto
Moses, who was to be for the people to Godward, and bring the causes unto God.
Exodus 18. from verse, 8. 13. to 22. And when Moses was to be gathered to his
people, the Lord required him to lay his hands on Joshua, in whom was the
spirit, that he might be enabled to go in and out before the people, and
stand before the Priest who should ask counsel for them in all doubtful
matters. Numb. 27. 13. 17. 18. 21.

The Priests and Judges being thus miraculously qualified, God commanded the
people in all streights and controversies of difficulty to have recourse unto
them for sentence or direction; according whereunto they were required to yield
absolute obedience without gainsaying or murmuring, lest they were put to
death as those that did presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. to 13. and 19. 7. 2. chapter
19. 11. 1. Sam. 9. 9. 2. Sam* 24. 11. 1, King. 14. 3. 2. King. 8. 8. with
diverse others: and well they did deserve it doubtless, when they might see
such infallible evidence in these Ministeres of the Lord, that it was his
divine pleasure it should be so, and that for their advantage too* The children
of Israel therefore had recourse unto them upon all occasion, and the Lord kept
good correspondence with them, not answering them by amphibologies, doubtful
and delusive Oracles, but by discovering to them, his will his purposes and
intentions about whatsoever they enquired of him 1. Sam 22. 13. 14. 15. Jer.
23. 37. Amos 3. 7. Judge. 1. 1. and 20. 18 So on the contrary, when they took
in hand an enterprise without asking his counsel and advice, we may observe it
did not thrive with them, it proved otherwise than they desired, as when Joshua
made league with the Gibeonites Joshua 9. 14.

And now not to send you again to the Jews, though you will have much a do
to find an other Nation to which you may apply your text of Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 9. in
which the sentence spoken of, must either be fallible, or infallible; if
fallible, then it follows that God required the people to hearken, and be
Subject unto such sentences as might be sinful; such as they apprehended to
be unjust and sinful; such as were in themselves absolutely sinful, (for all
these cases might possibly have happened upon such a supposition) which were
blasphemy to imagine: If the sentence be to be presumed infallible, then
questionless God might very justly require the people to be subject to it and
impose a law unalterable after the manner of the Meades and Persians, that such
as would not harken to it, might be condemned to dye, as one that did
presumptuously:

Do but prevail then with your Presbyters, in cortesie, to discover to us
some gleanings of their Prophetic spirit; or let us see what signs and
wonders God is pleased to do by their mediation, more then by other men's; and
then whosoever will not yield a proportionable honor and obedience to them,
for my part, let Artaxarxes his decree be put in execution against him, whether
it be to imprisonment* confiscation of goods, banishment, or death: Ezra. 7.
26. In the mean time if there be any thing of Godliness, or understanding of
a man in you, dispense with such as cannot make Idols, fall down and worship
them.

Page 30* says the Civil Magistrate is Subject in a Spiritual way unto the
Church, and that the Church is subject to the Civil Magistrate in a Civil
way: But what if these different Judicatiories will not be subject to each
other in their respective spher's? What if the Civil Magistrate will not
learn Gods will by the Ministers of the Church? as AS. says he must.

Page 30. What if he become Heretical, Schismatic ^ must he^ not be
proceeded against by the utmost of Church censures, to wit, excommunication?
And if he be not worthy to remain in the Church; must he not by AS. his
doctrine be turned out, or cut off from the Civil State? But some perhaps
will be so Court affected as to say, If the Magistrate will be so, who can help
it* w^^ must suffer what we cannot remedy: It Is true we must; but page, 166.
you say that whatsoever the Ecclesiastical Senate or Presbytery is bound not
to tolerate but must suppress in the Church; that, the Civil Magistrate or
Senate it bound not to tolerate, but must suppress in the State, since he is a
nurse of the State, and keeper of the two Tables: and since whatsoever power
the Civil Magistrates have, is derived from the people; Who says there is no
remedy against a Magistrate thus offending? Are not both Houses of Parliament,
are not millions of the people enough to do justice in such a case?

But what if the Civil Magistrate be without, not of the Church? can you not
with Paul be contented that God should judge him? 1 Cor. 5 13. If you say it is
now too late to make such a querie, and that he was admitted into the Church by
baptism so long since, will he not, think you, repent his Baptism, and co^^
such little thanks as promised submission for him unto the Church without his
order and consent? Nay, will he not plead nonage? you know there are many good
laws provided for relieving of the Pupillage in money matters; Having then
thus m^^acled the Civil Magistrate whilst he was in swaddling cloutes, you say
he must now be subject to the Church; and that if he be once turned out of the
Church, he must likewise be turned out of the Civil State* Is not this the
Popish doctrine of l^^^ing Subjects from their obedience to Prince or
Parliament? Are we thus leap't out of the Popish drying pan into the midst of
Presbyterian firebrands? But, I dare say, you^^^ stagger, and deny the words,
being laid unto your charge; the truth is, I find by this discourse, that you
have a treacherous memory, which has led you into such a company of
unreconcileable contradictions, far worse than many thieves and harlots, but if
your heart or understanding had been better than your memory, this doctrine had
never issued: Turn then to p^. 166* where you say that whatsoever the
Presbytery may not tolerate in the Church, the Civil Magistrate must not
tolerate in the State; then turn to p. 179 where you say that al power is
Originally in the people, which makes them the supremest Magistrate of al,
above both King and Parliament; as King and Parliament are above other
inferior and subordinate Magistrates* Now if you know how to spel and put
these together, this Popish doctrine besides others will clearly arise from
thence, to wit; that if Primes and Magistrates become Heretics, they may be
excommunicated; if excommunicated, the subjects are freed from their obedience
to them; and the people which having al power in themselves originally, become
the supremest Magistrate of al, are bound to cut them off from the Civil
State, whether they be Kings or Parliaments. But let us beware of such Infernal
tenets, according unto which there would be found no safety, neither for Prince
nor Parliament; but each of them, and every body else, all alike, be forced to
be of whatsoever religion shall by most voices in a Consistory or Synod, be
thought to be the true one (which is too great a hazard) or else be deemed to
do presumptuously, and so loose their lives: But chapter 3. you say, if the Church
be corrupt, and the Church Officers negligent in their charge, and will not
reform it, the Civil Magistrate may command, yea, compel them to do it; or
if they will not, he may extraordinarily do it himself* Good now; who shall
here reach the Civil Magistrate whether the Church be corruptor no? At what
time the Church Officers be negligent in their charge, not willing to reform;
and when they oppress any man with Ecclesiastical censures? If you say the
Civil Magistrate himself may see it by bringing them to the rule of Gods word;
do you not contradict your self in page 30. and elsewhere saying, the Civil
Magistrate must learn Gods will by the Ministers who are Gods Ambassadors sent
unto him? is it possible to reconcile the Civil Magistrate unto the spiritual
office-bearers in such a case as this? nay, is it ever possible for AS. to make
his atonement with this present Assembly for frustrating so many years
endeavors as they are like to make of it, in saying the Civil Magistrate has
power not to admit the true Church, to reject it, yea, when it is received or
approved, and confirmed by his secular and Civil authority, to reject it and
exile it Ibid? which yet is true enough; but do you think the Synod would have
taken so great pains, and our Scotch brethren have sacrificed so much of
their own blood, if even at best it should have been so hazardous whether ever
their Presbyterian discipline should be received or no; or when received* rest
in ^uch daily danger to be turned out again with shame? Is it not an ea^^y
matter for the Civil Magistrate to say, these Presbyterian Churches are grown
corrupt, their way of government was never Apostolical and good, they*
Tyrannize over their brethren insted of feeding them* aiming at no Reformation
so much as to get themselves into the fattest, Benifices, and so banish them
into America or some worse place? Woe would it have been for any Independent
to have been known to publish such Theology such Heresy:

Page 47. You say How be it the Church compel men not by external vi^l^^ce to
subscribe contrary to their judgments, yet the Civil Magistrate after
sufficient conviction may compel you to subscribe or to be gone etc. The Church
you say compels not externally, but the Civil Magistrate may: But whence has
the Civil Magistrate this power in Church affairs? or why may not the Church
use the Civil external arms in Church matters, rather then the Civil
Magistrate should e^terpose with his own weapons in Church affairs? Is it not
all one, think we, in the sight of God, for Churchmen, Church Officers
themselves to hang such a one whom they deem a Heretic, as to set a cross a
gallows, a mark upon him, out of a tacit compact with the Civil Magistrate to
hang him whenever, or wheresoever He should meet with him? If a combination
of any people should thus compass the death of any man, would they not all
equally be found guilty? shall a politic reservation of Popish Canon or
Civil law to keep the Clergy from the peoples odium, thus delud all
Christians to the end of the world? may Churchmen connive* approve, teach, and
applaud the Civil Magistrate in punishing whosoever they suppose to be
Heretics by imprisonment or death; and not as innocently as Christianly be
executioners themselves? Perhaps they will say they have no authority nor call
to become executioners, to banish* imprison or put to death (and yet they have
as good a call as to approve it in the Civil Magistrate;) but this is not the
point we stand upon: What if a Town or Principality were given unto a company
of Presbyterian Clergymen? (I cannot think they will refuse it) would they in
such a case imprison banish or cause Heretics to die in this their
Principality? If they say (as the Pope in the same case* as Pilate when he
crucifide Jesus* and Bishop B^nner whilst he made so many Protestane Martyrs)
they may not wash their hands in the blood of Heretics; I reply neither in the
blood of Civil delinquents by the self same principle of theirs* If they
refer such judicature and executing of Spiritual or Civil Offenders unto
Laymen to be their deputies within this Principality of theirs; I answer that
this is but a Popish eua^ion; and such blood being shed by their authority or
approbation; must be accounted for by them* as if they themselves had sat upon
the Bench, passed sentence, and been executioners: If Heretics were
punishable by death as murderers and Traitors, I know no cause but that
Clergymen* if need were, might as actually assist at execution of the one,
as of the other: But if any man should expect my opinion of what these
Presbyterian Clergymen may do upon the proffer of such a Principality; I
confess the refusal thereof might seem a very great degree of Evangelicall
perfection, and the excessive care and travel which is required to govern it,
though by a substitute, are altogether inconsistent with the ministry of the
Gospel; but to interpret the passing sentence and execution of death by such
Deputies or their Officers, to be so entirely the peculiar acts of such
Deputies only, as that the said Presbyterian Clergymen from whom the
jurisdiction is derived, had not even as great a share therein* as if they had
been present upon the bench, is a mere Popish invention and delusion.

Our Savior and his Apostles did neither tell the Magistrates that then were,
that it concerned them so much more to become Christians that they might compel
their Subjects to be so too; nor yet gave the Christians instructions, or left
upon record any such order or warrant* that when ever the Magistrate did become
Christian they might constrain the people to Christianity etc.

But in the same Page 74. you grant these Spiritual Delinquents must be first
sufficiently convinced, alleging that after a sufficient conviction, it is,
morally, and should be supposed that they know the truth; or should know it; or
if they know it not, that nothing can have bl^dered them, but their own
pertinaciousnes, which cannot excuse, but rather aggravates their ^in: But
what, I pray, or how much do you call sufficiently convinced? How can any one
do otherwise, than yield unto whatsoever you have convinced him of* How can you
be infallibly assured that a man ^s sufficiently convinced, if he himself
denies it? How know you which is Gods ^^oure for convincing of a man? May not
you likewise possibly interpret a dullness of apprehension in him, or your own
want of truly and well informing him, to be his obstinate wilful rejecting of
the truth* Are there not above 24 degrees of capacity and understanding between
some men, and shall such whom God and Nature have made more dull or less
ingenious in judging of Presbyterian Discipline or Doctrine be condemned to
banishment or death for these defects of Nature, believing, or discoursing
about matters of belief, or but opinion only? Such you say the Civil
Magistrate may compel to subscribe, [against their conscience] or to be gone:
But who gives the Civil Magistrate this authority* Or how comes he to know or
understand them to be Heretics? The Presbyterian Clergymen, I hope, will be
no more informers than executioners; I am sure in most (of such as are aleadged
to be) Christian Countries, the Informer is counted more infamous than the
Executioner, because the one does all the business for the most part in
darkness and under board; whereas the other exposes his actions to the public
view*

But why may not Church Officers themselves as well hang or cut the throat of
such a Heretic, whom they have prepared and designed for the shambles of the
Civil Magistrates execution, by their excommunicating of him? If the putting him
to death were just, they need not use any Machivillian Stratagem to prevent the
peoples censuring them of cruelty, or make so nice to ^owle their fingers with
the blood of such as they put to death deservedly: The Levites when Moses
required them every man to kill his Son, his brother, companion, and his
neighbor, were not so scrupulous Exodus 32 27. 28. 29. And why may not the
Civil Magistrate as well excommunicate, as banish or otherwise punish any
Heretics? Do not all punishments inflicted for spiritual offenses, equally
become spiritual? Or is it not necessary they should be spiritual to work a
Spiritual effect? doubtless they be, or ought to be so; and if hanging of a
spiritual offender be as lawful as excommunicating of him, surely, both the
Civil Magistrate, and the Presbyterian Church Officers may execute him, both
alike.

Please then to satisfy me concerning these three Queries:

1. By what authority does the Civil Magistrate punish a Heretic? 2. What is
it he punishes him for? 3. And Thirdly, Upon what ^^^all and indictment?
If the few particular warrants upon special occasion for punishing some
certain Idolaters expressy poynted it in the old Testament, obliged all
Magistrates then* and ever since to do the like; you must condemn the greatest
part of Godly* Magistrates for omitting it* and if you will ha^^ extraordinary
(...) to ^^gage th^^ there unto upon all ordinary (...) you must in^er that
(...) the People of the land who have entered into the la^e solemn League and
Covenant are bound with one accord to assault and cut the throats of all the
Papists they should meet withal, without any farther process or impeachment,
just as the Israelites served Mattan, B^als priest after that jehoida had made
a covenant between the Lord, the King, and the people 2. King 11. 17. 18.
Secondly, For what cause does the Civil Magistrate punish this Church Offender?
were it for Civil delinquency, then is he no longer a mere heretic a bare
Church offender; the Church would have no jurisdiction to punish him for such
Civil delinquency: But that you may see it was for spiritual, for Church
offenses for which he is unjustly banished, imprisoned or put to death; it will
appear upon the third Query or Inquiry, that the Civil Magist^ate proceeds
against him after an implicit manner, by passing sentence by putting him to
death upon the Church trial and indictment only; or else arraignes him the
second time for the self same offense, (a double injury and injustice) which,
besides, being spiritual, the Civil Magistrate has no cognizance, is no
competent Judge thereof, nor can take upon himself any such authority without
confounding the Ecclesiastical Judicature with the Civil.

But I must trouble your patience a little longer with an other touch upon this
string, this whipcord which you grant the Magistrate to scourge your Brethren
withal, in confidence your selves for this benevolence shall escape scotfree,
and pass for white boys, whatever offenses you commit; this no doubt will
expiate them all, and make atonement for them though they be never so many:

You say the Civil Magistrate may compel [men of different opinions] to
subscribe or to be gone; nay, you say the Civil Magistrate may command and
compel a corrupted Church and negligent Church Officers into a Reformation; and
that even when they are Reformed, he may command and compel them by his Civil
power, to give satisfaction, and reverse such Ecclesiastical censures and
judgments, as the Civil Magistrate shall apprehend to be oppressing unto any
man, or contrary to the Civil laws: Tell me, is this power which you present
the Civil Magistrate withal in spiritual matters, a lesser, less spiritual
or efficacious power, than what you reserve as peculiar to the Church? If it
be less, the Civil Magistrate surely is much beholding to you that you are so
bountiful to him of such scrapps; that you will set him ^ work (as the
Egyptian Task-master did the Israelites Exo. 5. 18.) with such leavings and
shredds of discipline, and yet expect he should do that for you, which all
your broad sides and batteries of Decrees, Ordnance, and Canons of
Excommunication etc. could not effect; And why I pray may not the Church her
self make use of small shot as well as greater? But if you mean really side
publica, and this power which you attribute to the Civil Magistrate concerning
Spiritual Offenders and offenses, be greater, more Spiritual and efficacious to
win and gain men unto true piety and Godliness by fining, banishing,
imprisonment or death; Can you not give him in the vantage? Can you not let him
have the lesser of Excommunication and other Ceremonious (in comparison of
Civil Coercive) Censures?

Briefly then; if this power which you give the Civil Magistrate about the
Church, be a toy or trifle, bate it him, and let not so many thousand
Ind^pendents your Brethren be longer scandalized thereat; But if you insist
still to make it of so great concernment and necessity, teaching the people
that the Civil Magistrate must likewise be a terror to spiritual offenders;
assure your self that both Magistrate and People, will likely ere long see the
injustice and absurdity, of having two Magistrates to punish one offender for
one fault, which also may disagree, may possibly contradict each other in their
sentences, resolving through the corrupted principles which you instill, that
the Civil Magistrate has power and understanding sufficient to discipline and
govern both Church and State.

But perhaps you will say there is an Act of Parliament, a Civil law declaring
heresy, or any different, from the State opinions, such as for the present are
in fashion to be censurable by the Civil power: I answer not without all due
respect unto the laws and such as made them, that if there be any distinction
betwixt a Church State and a Civil State, which all Christians ^itherto
acknowledged, the enacting Civil laws to punish spiritual offenses, is not
only a Soloecisme an improprietie in State, but an incroaching on the Churches
power, a profaning of the Keys, and injurious to the offender, who by this
means is punished both beyond the degree and nature of his offense.

But if you remember, as I put you in mind of before; page 1^^, you say,
Whatsoever the Ecclesiastical Senate or Presbytery is bound not to tolerate,
but must suppress in the Church; that the Civil Magistrate is bound not to
tolerate but must suppress in the State: But if this be true, must not the
Civil Magistrate join with the Ecclesiastial in judging of Heresy, Schism
and all Church offenses? Or if, forsooth, your meaning be the Presbyterial
Officials shall have the pre-eminence and pass their verdict first; Are not
the Civil Powers obliged to pass the like implicitly, to do the same good
justice whether it be right or wrong, or else set at large, to give a
different judgment, and so, ips^ fact^, condemn your doctrine as arrogant and
Heretical? Oh that you would but ba^e us these impertinencies, these
inconsistencies* how many fair sheets of paper would it have saved from
fowling? But whereas you enthraule the Magistrate hereunto as Nursing-Fathers
and Mothers; you may as well engage your Nurse to knock all children on the
head, because they speak not so readily or plainly as your own, though
sublimated, extracted from Mercuries brain: And yet this rule of yours needs
not be so stout to admit of no exceptions no qualifications; since the
offspring of Fornication or adultrie are forward Imps, and forwardnes a
character of such Imps, though otherwise undiscovered to the world:

But for the text in Esa. 4^. 23. which propheside that the King^ of the
Gentiles should become Nursing Fathers and their Queens Nursing Mothers unto
the Church: mean you by their fighting for it? By their cruel persecuting or
tormenting Christians? It Is clearly by submitting themselves unto the Churches
spiritual yoke, by whose example their subjects might be encouraged to do the
like, of their own free accord and Godly disposition, without the least
color of compulsion, in that the Blessed spirit in the end of the same verse,
brings for a reason of these Kings and Queens administering to the Church, That
they shall not be ashamed that wait for him? Now there would want a just
capacity in them of being ashamed, for waiting on the Church, or on Christ the
Head thereof, if they were constrained to wait.

Page 60. You say an Ecclesiastical judicatore is nothing else but a certain
n^mber of men endowed with an authoritive power according to Gods word to judge
of Church ^usinesses according to Gods glory, and the weak of the Church; or
in a word, the representative Church of one Parish, ^l^sse Province, Nation or
of all the world: But where meet you with any such Chimera of an Ecclesiastical
Indicatorie in all the word of God? Where find you such an authoritive power as
is by you insinuated? Where find you that it would be either for Gods glory,
or the Churches weal it should be so? and last of all, Where find you that a
certain number of Ecclesiastical men, may be the Representative Church of the
whole world? Though you rack and torture the 15th. and all other Acts of the
Apostles by all the Ecclesiastical judicatories and Authoritative Powers which
you can muster up, you will never be able to get so much as a distinguishable
Echo from them to this purpose: However, please your own imagination; erect
as many Consistorial Babels as you will; hammer out what Decrees your selves
think good; and if you can, with a good conscience, tell us, we may do well if
we observe them: But go no farther; since the Church of Jerusalem (which you
will, I believe, acknowledge your only President for Assemblies) did noe more;
and yet there were present there, Apostles inspired men; whereas if there be
any thing else in the very best of your Ecclesiastical Judicatories, as you
call them, besides such infirmities a^ are common to you, with any other number
of your brethren, it is more than all the world believes; and therefore blame
them not if they cannot run ^udwink'd with you into Limbo, Purgatory or Hell,
since the way to heaven is too straight for men of implicit faith, blind zeal,
orignorant devotion (which are the best fruits your Presbyterian Discipline can
produce) to light upon: And besides the manifold weighty exceptions which have
been made already, and may yet be farther multiplide, to prove that to be no
Synod or Ecclesiastical Judicatorie in Act. 15. Tell me, good Sir, whether if
they will make that a President; the Assembly which sits now at Westminster may
not according to the same grounds send their Synodal Decrees into Germany,
France, Spain, Italy and other pretended Christian Countries, as well as they
of Jerusalem did into Syrio, Cilicia, who had noe R^presentatives in Jerusalem,
that we hear of, at the making of those Decrees? and by consequence, any
certain number of men who have but confidence enough, and the Civil sword to
fight for them, (else they will be thought to say and do a^ little to the
purpose as their neighbors) may take upon them to be an Ecclesiastical
Judicature, the Representative Church, and so condemn the whole world into
spiritual captivity, because their phansies tell them it is for Gods glory and
the Churches weal it should be so? But suppose that Antioch, Syria and
Cilicia were willing to receive and yield obedience unto the Decrees which were
made by the Church of Jerusalem where there were present inspired Apostles;
must this needs oblige all other Churches now to do the same toward such as
have no more infallibility than their brethren? especially whether they will or
no? were not this to hang the Christian liberty of the whole Church Militant
upon the arbitrary proceedings of some few particular congregations only? Good
Sir consider of it.

To the exceptions which are justly alleged against the peremptorinesse of
some Ecclesiastical Synods and Assemblies which think they may Parallel their
own decisious with those of the Apostolical Church of Jerusalem Act. 15. which
were infallibly certain of the Holy Ghosts Assistance, or else might possibly
have erred, and consequently seduced all Christians unto the end of the world,
which would be blasphemy of the greatest magnitude to imagine; You ask
wherefore may not every particular Minister say it seems good to the Holy
Ghost and me? To which I answer, that your Ministers and you too, may be rash
in saying so, as you are in other matters: Who can hinder you? But must all the
world be mad or sottish to believe you? because you are rash to say you know
not what? You say, that what seems good to the Holy Ghost, should likewise
seem good to all Ministers; I say so too; but not contrariwise? which rests on
you to prove, or not require obedience as though the Holy Ghost were in your
bosom, were at your beck: It is true, that whatsoever the Church does rightly
bind or loose on earth, is infallibly confirmed in heaven; but that upon this
presumption, every A S. a Synod or Assembly may take upon them to bind and
loose, such as are not of their Congregation prescribing both Discipline and
Doctrine unto their brethren, according to their own imaginations; much less
expect that others should take their Decisions to be Oracles, and themselves
little God Almighties; Is a character of such high floane conceitednes and
presumption, as since the creation was never equalized by any, except the son
of the morning, Lucifer himself Es. 14. 12. 13. Surely if God should say of
these m^n (as he did ironically of Adam) behold they are become like us; they
can make new Scriptures, new religions; they are like enough to take him at his
word, still soothing themselves in their fond attempts, until with Adam they
were excluded Paradise:

You think you may say it seems good to the Holy Ghost and you; and what if I
should grant you may possibly in some sense* say so unto your own heart with a
good conscience? Must your conscience therefore become a rule, a yoke to other
men's? And if the Blessed spirit should at any time be are witness unto your
spirit, or unto the spirit of a whole Parliament and Synod, what were this to
the spirits of other men? Must not they wait with patience until the Blessed
Spirit be pleased to visit their Spirits likewise, before they can join with
yours or the Assemblies Spirit? But if the Synods Determination of this or that
controversy should seem good unto the Holy Ghost, as the Churches Decrees of
Jerusalem did; Must they therefore be imposed upon the Country, the whole
world? Is not this to equalize your Synodal Canons with those Decrees of the
Apostolical Church of Jerusalem, and so make Scripture of yours as well as
theirs? Is not this to add to Scripture? Nay, to alter it? For adding to it is
ipso facto altering, and it is said thou shall not add thereto? Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
Revel. 22. 18.

Can you or any Synod say they are, or will be at any time, at their pleasure
infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost? If not; Why do you take so much upon
you? But you will say, you fast and pray; you mean and hope well; May not a
company of Tinckers and Cobblers say the like? But you are more wise, learned,
noble, and therefore think it fitting that others should yield to your
determinations; rather than you to such as are rustic, illiterate, and
obscure; This in courtesy, may be granted you, in part, that is, the not
submitting your consciences to Independents; they seek nothing less, being
still willing to expect and pray for you with all long suffering and patience:
What postumate dispensation then since* the Apostles leaving us, have you, not
to do the like? They are the Presbyterian Doctors whose Asses must pass for
Trumpeters, and whose Geese are Swans; whose war a^ must be thought better, and
paid for deerer than any of their neighbors; whatever they say must be
accounted Seraphical; and Mechanics, all Laymen wave their own reason and
religion whilst they worship their's:

It Is true, that Jesus does tacitly commend Nathaniel for believing in him,
because he heard him only say, that He saw him under the Figtree; yet withal
he tells him that he should see greater things than those Ioh. 1. 50. that is,
he should see that, which would be a full and just ground of a higher degree
and measure of faith in Christ: in like manner, Paul when he falls upon
intergatories with the Jews his brethren after the flesh saying, How shall we
escape if we neglect so great salvation? He tells them withal that it was such
a salvation as first began to be preached by the Lord himself, and afterward
was confirmed unto us by them that heard the Lord, God bearing witness thereunto
both with signs and wonders and with diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy
Ghost Hebr. 2. 2. 3. 4. From whence it follows, that we may now much less
believe new Gospels, new doctrins which are not evident in Scripture within the
reach of our own capacities, and apprehensions; or upon slender grounds, such
as may possibly deceave us; or upon any other less grounds than what are
abundantly able to satisfy both the strongest and weakest reasons and
understandings of those from whom faith is required.

It is said in Paul's Epistles to the Ephesians that Christ gave some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifynig of the body of
Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith; some whereof we find to
have been more immediately and largely gifted than the rest, as Apostles
Prophets and Evangelists, to whom in their rare indowm^nts and power of
miracles, we do not know any to have succeeded since the Apostles days: But
whether may we not take the want of them as a grievous curse upon all
Christians with the rest of the world ever since? Whether can the Gospel be
truly and thoroughly propagated without such infallible officers? How can we be
assured that the Gospel has been inviolably conserved and preached unto ^^
without such glorious witnesses to bare testimony thereto by signs and
wonders! How can the Jews be certain that they have the law and Proph^ts
conveyde unto them without being adulterated considering their several
captivities and persecutions? Who knows whether Ezra his memory might not
fail him, in restoring unto them the Scriptures, as is reported of him, after
they were said to be almost all consumed by fire, when the Chaldea^s took
Jerusalem? Sixtus Senensis Bibl: Sanct. l. 1. Ezra. pray, must their own or
other men's reason be the handmaid to lead them through these Laberinthes.

We see in Genesis 27. that when Isaac had an intension to bless Esauh;
Jacob by his mother Reb^ckah's counsel, having covered his hands and neck with
kidskins, subtly counterfetted himself to be Esauh, and so beguiled him of
his blessing* in the carriage whereof we see that Isaac conceived it was
Jacob's voice, but that the hands were the hands of Esauh; whereof though he
doubted, yet he suffered himself to beswaid that way, in regard that Jacob
affirmed himself to be Esauh; verse 24. even so is it with multitudes of
Christians in many points of controversy, whilst the Scriptures furnish us
with testimonies which in some respect seem to make for both sides; however,
in regard we cannot believe them both, I conceave a man may safely betake
himself to that wherein he apprehends more evidence of the two; and though it
prove the wrong, yet God may accept of his endeavors and good intension, who
did not blame Isaac for thus blessing Jacob through an error, who yet since
he had suspicion of him by his voice, might have satisfyde himself concerning
him, had he but felt the other parts of his body which were not counterfetted.

Paul likewise although he was a great blasphemer and Persecuter 1. Tim. 1. 13.
Act. 26. 9. 10. 11. Yet he said of himself that he had lived in all good
conscience before God until that day Act. 23. 1. It is a very small thing that
I should be judged of man's judgment; I judge not my self, for I know nothing
by my self 1. Cor. 4. 3. 4. and Romans 14. 6. It is said He that regards a
day regards it to the Lord, and he that regards not the day unto the Lord,
he does not regard it: He that eats, eats to the Lord for he gives God
thanks, and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not and gives God
thanks: From all which way he gathered, that a good meaning and intention is
greatly excusable before God, though it were in an erroneous way of fearing
him: For all which respects the Presbyterians do not only show themselves
injurious in distip ^^ing, and ruling over their brethren, over whom they have
no power, being Freemen, Free-Christians equal to themselves; but
sacriledgious to Gods bountifulness and long suffering, who like the Scribes
Pharisees Hypocrites lay heavy burdens upon others, but they themselves will
not put a finger to: Luke 11. 46. who streighten, if not quite dam up the way
to heaven, not suffering others to enter, nor yet go in themselves. Math. 23.
13. Good now let us fast or feast; let us observe Holy Days or not; and so for
other matters, according as Gods spirit shall guide us thereunto, and not the
Spirit of a Presbytery, unless we could see more in it than in our own.

Page 105. You say The supreme [Church] Iudicatorie may fear that if they
judge any thing amiss, their judgments will not be approved, and put in
Execution with particular Churches; and in all human probability they are like
to be crossed: Pray demur a little, and consider whether in these few lines you
have not utterly demolished that mighty (but imaginary) Babel of unlimmited
authoritative Jurisdiction which you had raised unto your Classical
Presbyteries or Superlative Ecclesiastical Assemblies? Do you not here of your
own accord acknowledge that in some cases, i. e. If they judge any thing
amiss, the Supreme Church Judioature it self may fear ^er judgments will
not be approved and put in execution (so much as) in particular congregations?
yea, and that in all humane probability they are like to be crossed? Since then
you grant your Synods and highest Church Assemblies may judge amiss; and that
in such cases particular Churches may refuse to yield obedience; will it not
follow by undeniable consequence that such particular Churches must have Power
to examine and even judge the judgments of such Assemblies according to their
own reasons and understandings? And that whatsoever shall appear to be
decreed or ordered amiss by such Ecclesiastical Assemblies, according to the
light of their own reason and understanding which God has given them, and not
to be submitted unto with a good conscience, ought and must not be put in
execution by particular congregations? This is your own doctrine sometimes
though unawares; For even on the top of the next page, 109. where you bring M.
S. enquiring what should be done in case an Ecumenical or General Counsel
err; you say you will return him answer, when he tells you what must be done
in case the Parliament should err, or if the great Sanedrin of the Old
Testament or the Council of Jerusalem had erred; and yet you might remember to
have objected thrice in this frivolous discourse of yours upon the like
occasion, that Quaestio non solvit qu^stionem: But do you not perceive a little
spirit of perversenes in your self, that you can thus prevaricate? thus play
at fast and loose? Did you not just now confess (oh the power of truth! That
if the very supreme Church Judicature should judge amiss she may fear her
judgment will not be approved and put in execution by particular
congregations? And do you so soon boggle at the same Querie afterward? Will
not this small pittance of ingenuity reconcile you (how fierce soever) unto the
Independents? Either then recant this and such other passages; or stand to
them, and burn that confused volumne of Sophistical distinctions and mere
contradictions.

Page 170. 171. You say the example of the Protestants in France suing for a
toleration of their Religion serves nothing toward the obtaining the like for
Independents in England: But why pray so Magisteriall and peremptory? Have not
the Independents fought for the Parliament against the Cavaleers? Did they not
refuse to join with the Cavaliers in fighting against the Scots? Your
Presbyterian Discipline had scarce been settled in Scotland by Civil and
Ecclesiastical authority, which you so much boast of in page 160. if
Independents had not done that for you which you were not able to do for your
selves? And do you thus require them? Was there not the same reason for the
Scots some few years since to have submitted themselves unto the English
service-booke, then adored by such an English uniformity, and sent, yea
attempted to be imposed upon them by the Ecclesiastical authority of England;
as that the English and Irish, two numerous and renowned Nations, must now be
subjugated by fire and sword unto a Scotch Directory? Surely if there be a God
in Heaven, or any conscientiousnesse on earth, it will never be, or never long
endure; nescis quid serus vesper trabat: you say the Protestants of France were
compelled to idolatry and to be actors in the damnation of their own souls
against the light of their consciences: And what if it be said the
Presbyterians profess and practice the same against the Independents, against
all that differ from them barely in opinion? All the principles which concern
coercive Discipline in, about, or for the Church are common both to Papists and
Presbyterians? Insted of arguments and reason, Will you not say it is false,
foolish, fond, idle, ignorant, childish, currish, contradictorie, impertinent,
non sense, nothing but wind and words of Goodwin? page 169. etc. How long will
this Great Goliath of the Presbyterians thus boast himself? How long will the
braying of this foul mouthed AS. disquiet the people of God? Pack up your
pedl^rs budget of such absurd distinctions abominable contradictions,
unsufferable tautalogies, (to say no worse) and be gone, even any where, that we
may be quit of you; speak or write to instruction or edifying hereafter, or
else hold your peace for shame of God and men: But do you not know that it
shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for many people amongst
whom Christ wrought most of his miracles? Know you not that many who live and
dye Papists because through ignorance, (as Paul whilst he persecuted the Saints
1. Tim. 1. 13. Whom God therefore had mercy on) shall rise up in judgment
against all Protestants which know Gods will and do it not? Do you not take it
to be mad doctrine of Paul's when he presupposes there may be a case when the
best Christians (I say not Presbyterians) may, nay, ought never more eat flesh
drink wine, nor anything where at a brother stumbleth, is offended or made
weak? And yet if you believe Romans 14. 21. 1. Cor, 8. 13. you may find it
Evangelical, a little othergates, than such stuff as you baptize with
Orthodox, and then think it pleases the Holy Ghost, (because such men, such
dust and ashes as your self know no better,) that all the world, will they,
nill they, must fall down and worship it:

If Independents say, they have no faith in communicating with your mixed
multitude, and joining in an English Directory, alias a Scotch
Common-prayer-booke; and you notwithstanding by imprisoning or discountenancing
compel them to it; do you not make them commit Idolatry? Are they not damned
because they doubt thereof? Romans 14. 23. Can the Priests in Frame, the Devils
in Hell, or Presbyterians any where, do worse by Protestants? But you promise
largely; you say the Presbyterians will not compel the Independents to act
against their consciences: only you will not suffer them to seduce other men's
consciences: What an Agrippa-like half Christian paradox is this? Does the
truth constrain you to acknowledge that compelling Independents to join with
you in your mixed communions and stinted worship against their consciences,
would amount unto Idolatry? and may they not instruct their Famelies, friends,
brethren, and all such, who gasp after a word of knowledge, or but desire to
be instructed by them how to decline Idolatry, and worship God in sincerity
and truth? Did not Nature engrave it in the hearts of al men, that it is better
to obey God than man? Did not the Apostles for our clearer understanding
resolve it when 'twas made a question? Act 4. 19. Are not all such condemned
for unproffitable servants who put a candle under a bushel? For lapping up
their tallent in a napkin? For not strengthening others after they themselves
are converted? And though you so often upbraid this as a licentious course and
way, to let in all Heresy and impiety; have patience if I tell you the Papists
say the very same for excluding Protestantisme out of their Dominions; and
neither you as profownd an AS. as you take your self to be, nor all the
Presbyterians in the world, can say one tittle more than Papists do in this
behalf: now, wherein your Divinity, your Discipline, your Righteousness exceeds
not that of Papists; take it not so hainously, that Independents who have not
so learned Christ, may not, dare not join with you: yet if upon a second
consideration hereof you shall still remain headstrong, banishing all farther
truth, left some Heresies should creep in therewith; good now, do but discover
to us a possibility how after the Presbyterian rule, (which, according to AS.
says the Civil Magistrate has power not to admit the true Church, or to turn
it out, though it had been admitted and established by low.) The Roman Church
can ever be reformed, or the Jews converted to the Gospel:

Concerning the Churches of New England, you say their Independency is worse
than Heresy; you strengthen your self in denying them a toleration in
Old-England, because they will not grant you one in New England, and yet you
bid them begone thither and live in peace: but tell me a little; how can they be
secure in New England from the omnipotency of the Presbyterian Discipline which
is as covetuous and ambitious as Rome it self which claim's no less than all
the World? ought you not to endeavor their conversion equal to your brethrens
of Old-England, and that as well unto your Discipline as to your doctrine? Are
their souls not worth saving? Or their Country not worth living in? the soil
is thought no whit inferior, if not better then the best in Old-England;
though there be not so good plundering for money and rich movables: But why
should not the souls of your New-English Brethren be as dear unto you, as
those of Old-England? Or though your Brethren of New England should know the
way to heaven of themselves; How can you with a quiet mind endure they should
get thither without your Pass, your Mittimus, your Peter Pence? Or why may not
the Old-English be thought as charitably on, or find the like favor from your
over dilligent Presbyerie? But put the case you did really desire the
New-English their conversion? you approve of them in suffering no opinions to
be published but their own? If this Discipline be strictly observed; How can
they possibly attain to better light and knowledge? What course will you take
for their informing, for convincing them of this worse than Heretical tenet as
you call it, if to their's, and your Church policy, they should likewise
attain as sharp a Civil sword as yours? Or put case that even your own most
excellent Doctorship were not so sound or orthodox as self conceited, which
many have strong presumptions for, who are thought better able to judge thereof
than AS. himself, will you put your self in an impossibility of ever being
reformed except tumultuously or illegally, both ways compulsively? Was ever
any AS. so dull, so stupid, so void both of Civil and Christian policy? But
what shall I say unto you, since according to your Theology, nothing is so
likely to prevail with you as cudgelling?

Page 172. You say that refusing to tolerate the Independents will help to
confirm the Churches and people in the truth of Presbyterian Diciplin and
Doctrine; that many men are led by authority, and take many things upon the
trust of great men etc. Phy AS! Are you not ashamed thus to uncover the
nakedness of your Churches? To tell us and them that the Presbyterian world
takes up a religion and government upon trust? And if the Venerable and learned
Assembly, as you style them, should not grant a toleration of any thing but
Poprie or Turcisme, would not your good people whom you speak of, be as easily
confirmed of the truth thereof? Surely they will, unless they be wiser than
their Anchesters, which will not be believed.

Page 179. You ask What power has either King or Parliament to intrude and
force upon the Kingdom new religions or a toleration of all Sects? And say the
Parliament assumes no such power to it self: If this be true; How can it
settle (not to say intrude as AS. does improperly and unmannerly) the Scotch
Presbyterian discipline in England, more than the Independency of New-English
Churches? For since the Churches of Scotland and New England for Doctrine agree
in fundamentals, differ only in Discipline, and as AS. aleadges, do persecute
all opinions but their own; How come the New-English and Scots not to be both
Sects alike, since AS. calls the Apologists a Sect? But he says the
Presbyterian Government is already established in England in the Dutch, French,
Italian and Spanish Churches page 160. And I answer that he may as well say
the Popish government was settled in England, because permitted to be made use
of in in the Queens Chappells and so many Ambassadors houses, little otherwise
than was the Presbyterian: But if the Presbyterian government be already
established, what needs all this imprecating, this conjuring of AS. yet for a
farther settling of it? But if the Parliament may not, as AS. says, intrude and
force upon the Kingdom new religions; and since the Civil Magistrate as you
likewise say page 166. if he follow Gods word cannot grant a toleration
without consent of the Church if he judge it be not corrupted: Why do you not
then betake your self to the Synod, forbearing to be farther troublesome unto
the Civil Magistrate, until it be at leisure to talk with you for
stigmatizing of it worse than mad, corrupted by bribery, or some other way,
page 166. unless it descend unto such notions only as AS. arrives to:

And why, I pray, must the Parliament needs tolerate all AS.' ses to think they
are worse than mad, corrupted with money or some other way, if they should
tolerate a new Sect, you mean Independents, i. e. any that but differ from one
another in opinion, and such are all, as will not upon any occasion say, black
is white, and white is black, or seem to believe any thing else implicitly? I
know your meaning, your grand and common (more than understood) objection; that
there is but one true religion, but one faith, one way to Heaven; and why
should we then suffer men and women to be of so many different ways faith's
and religions? For answer hereunto I can be contented to grant that there is
but one true religion, one true faith and way to Heaven; But who can tell me
the precise and just precincts thereof? What mean they by one true religion,
one way, one faith? The Papists, Luthrans, Calvinists, all Episcopal and
Presbyterian disciplind men generally are of this opinion; each of them, whole
Nations and People, damn for the most part hand over head, all other
professions but his own; and even amongst these who by compulsion they will be
sure to make as good Christians as themselves, to any man's thinking but their
own, how few of them notwithstanding will they allow to get into Heaven with
them? Would it not be wonder if this Circumference, this little continent of
earth, should satisfy the vast desires of such, who seem to think, that the
Heavens so infinitely more capacious, were only made for them and some few of
their familiars? O the malecontednesse of such Spirits! To say nothing of
Mahumetans nor any sort of Pagans, no nor Jews who yet were the beloved Nation
of the Lord, who promised to make all their enemies his own; To say nothing
neither of Papists, nor millions of Christians, especially in the East which
never heard more of Poprie, than England had of Presbytery five years ago;
(which you may say was but a little, though since too much) would it not be a
harsh sentence for men of the Classical Presbyterian-way to pass, which must
send hedlong to Hell all Lutherans, Calvanists, Independents with sundry other
differing Protestants? Perhaps you will say though they live Lutherans or
Independents, they may die Converts, or well-willers to the Presbyterian
Discipline and Doctrine: I answer, that this is such a May-bee, that if it come
not whilst they live, I Will pass my word 'twill never happen afterward: You may
as well say or think they may die Jews or Papists, were you not apt to flatter
your self, or glad to say any thing, rather than by plain argument be made
appear as if you thought, God had first made the joys of Heaven, and in the
fullness of time sent his Son to repurchase them, for your fond opinions only
to vapor in; But in case you do not thus reprobate all Lutherans,
Independents and such as differ from you in opinion, allowing them a
possibility, even whilst they live and die Lutherans or Independents, to find
the way to Heaven; why will you then not let them go their own way? What if it
should seem to you the farthest way about? May it not prove the nearest home,
according to the proverb? I am certain it must be the surest way to them that
know and apprehend no other: If then you cannot possibly decipher or chaulke
out unto me exactly this only true religion and way to Heaven, without imminent
danger of streightning or enlarging it, do not take upon you to make enclosure
of it, or compel others to leave their own way, unless you could be
infallibly assured, that were a better which you put them in, or were able to
make them reraration, if it prove a worse.

There are two great controversies which have set both State and Church on
fire, about which so many Pamphlets have been scribled, and not a few
continued musing until their heads grew addle, which yet, in my slender
judgment, may be fully Stated in a very few lines only: That in the Civil
State, is betwixt Magistrate and Subject; On the one side it is alleged, that
if every soul, the whole body of a people or Nation must be subject unto the
Higher Powers in all cases, whether they govern justly or tyrannically, then
would it rest in the Magistrates breast and power to ruin and destroy the whole
Nation at his pleasure: On the otherside, if the people may in some case deny
subjection, it must be in such as they apprehend themselves in imminent danger
of destruction; and then it will follow, that so often as they apprehend this
imminent destruction, this necessity; so often they may deny subjection,
which would render the Higher Powers obnoxious unto the bare pretentions of the
people, if they did but withal allege their fears were real:

Both these I confess are great stumbling blocks, yet the latter, as I
conceive, is to be adhered unto; because it is a greater evil, to expose a
whole Nation to destruction, than a Magistrate only: And lest it should be
thought this tenet does expose the Magistrate unto the inconstancy and
violence of the People; Let such remember that Magistrates are Gods
Vicegerents and as many times it happens that some escape better, for the
present, For offending God than man but pay for it with a witness afterward;
so if a People shall injuriously employ that natural power and might, which
God has given them only for their defense, against the Magistrates just
commands and privileges; God becomes so much more engaged to vindicate them,
by how much being few in number, in comparison of the People, they want an arm
of flesh to help themselves.

As for the Church controvesie, it may be said in behalf of Independents,
that unless differing and erroneous opinions be tolerated; the most orthodox
and rectified are equally Subject to be persecuted: On the other side,
Presbyterians say, that the permitting differing opinions in a State, is to
open a flood-gate to all manner of Heresies and Schysmes: What if we did
suppose these to be the two Great Rocks of offense, which in some sense were
no otherwise than Scylla and Charibdis; one of which you could not avoid
without adhering unto the other? Does it not remain then, that we should
consider which of them is accompained with the greatest inconveniences? The
latter presupposes a possibility of entrance unto all Heresies; the former
concludes a certainty of withholding a great measure of Truth, and even a
possibility of keeping out the whole Truth: Now, this truth is like God
himself; even very God himself, invallewable; we may not hazard the least
attom, the smalest proportion thereof, for all other possibilities or
impossibilities whatsoever: What? Shall we put our selves into such a
condition, that if we be in an error it shall be impossible for us to get out
of it again, unless the whole Civil State, the men of war, the world do see
it as clearly as our selves? That if as yet we have but some degrees of truth
and knowledge, it shall be impossible for us to attain to greater? That though
we were in possession of the true Religion, we should be liable to have it
taken from us by every sharper Civil sword than our own? This is your Doctrine
page 13. where you say the Civil Mgistrate though Christian has power to admit
Christian Religion; or when admitted to exile it afterward; but God keep such
Presbyterian Principles from farther taking root in England.

But if King and Parliament may not force a new religion or Sect, suppose
Presbyterian, upon the Kingdom; much less can the Synod which neither has,
nor yet pretends, as is alleged, to use the material sword? And if for
matters of religion, all power originally is in Christ, as you sometimes
acknowledge page 179. How can King, Parliament, or Synod wrest it from him?
Nay, what think you? Is it not secondarily in the people, as well as Civil
power which you affirm in the same page? And so doubtless is spiritual power;
unless you will make God to have provided mankind better of a safeguard, or
liberty to defend their bodies, than their souls: If then the spiritual
power be so inherently in the people next under Christ, as that they cannot so
well renounce and part from it in many respects, by what they may of Civil; how
can it be thought by any one that the King Parliament or Synod though never so
much importuned by a thousand such AS. ses, should go about to settle a N^w
Presbyterian Scotch Government, with an intention to force a conformity of the
whole Kingdom, three quarters whereof cannot, as yet be thought to submit unto
it willingly, or for conscience sake?

Page 180. and elsewhere, you advise the Independents to quit their fat
Benefices; but Presbyterian know how to quit the lean Benefices without your
counsel: And where do you find the Independents in such fat Benefices? What if
you cannot find one of them in a fat Benefice? Will you not say good cause why,
because the Presbyterians would quickly heave them out, and get themselves ^n?
If they find any fatter than an other, and be so liquorish; If they regard
neither flock nor the Great shepherd of the flock Christ Jesus, but with Esa^h
or Judas prefer 30. pence or a fat Benefice before them both; let them at least
carry it more cau^elo^sly, and not ^^^ skipping so, from one fat Benefice or
Lecture unto a fatter, that all the world cry shame of them; I need not name
them, they are known to every body but themselves.

But prithee A. S, tell me, do thou not intend this as a pious plot and
Masterpiece of thine to accuse the Independents of fat Benefices, that they
may be provoked to vindicate themselves by discovering who they were amongst
the Presbyterian Rabbis that solicited so actively and dexterously, obtaining
such an Ordnance for Tithes as all the subtle invention^ of Antichristian
Bishops could never get the like? Who they were that had more than a finger in
helping sundry Ministers out of their Livings partly for not paying the
twentyeth part and other taxes; and so soon as Presbyterians had filld all
Benefices and Lectures, to move, that Ministers might then be totally freed
from all manner of ^essment^; and is it not fitting it should be so, think
you? That they should set and keep the Kingdom on ^ fire, in ^ desparate
bloody Civil war, and yet be totally exempted from contributing toward
quenching, toward obtaining of a blessed peace? I know these Heathenish,
Jewish, Popish notions of Tithes, Offerings, and (...)ons, were long since
abominated* and abolished amongst our Scottish Brethren; And A. S. does well in
not flattering the English Presbyterians therein, lest Independents should be
farther scandalized at him, who, it is well known, are not guilty of such
Si^oni^; they (...) bargain of the Ministry of the Gospel, as if it were an
unholy thing; or themselves like so many Cobblers or Shoe-makers to prostitute
their labors, to them that proffer most; they compel noe man to buy of them
whether they will or no, much less at what price they themselves will, what
God requires to be given for nothing, Esa. 55. 1. 2; They force no man to pay
for that he never had, as Presbyterians do such as cannot with a good
conscience communicate with them in their ordinances; as if a Tayl^r or Hatter
should wrench your money from you though you liked not, would not have his
wares, his service: who will, may see the Bloody Tenet, and John Baptist
concerning tithes more largely.

Page 181. You say the power of the Ministry, or Ecclesiastical power is able
and sufficient to beat down all fin spiritually: But pray tell me; can fin be
sin politically, and not be fin spiritually? Now if Ecclesiastical power can
beat down sin spiritually as you acknowledge; Will it not follow, that fin so
beaten down spiritually, ceases to be sin at all either spiritually or
politically, and consequently no need of Civil power to punish it?

But to be brief, as the Title promised for me; Our Savior bids us do as we
would be done to; that is, Love our Neighbors as our selves, on which
commandment hangs the Law and Prophets, Math. 7. 12. and 22. 39. 40. and Paul
tells us that Love is the fulfilling of the whole Law; Romans 13 10. Nay our
Savior would not have us dare to ask forgiveness of our heavenly Father,
otherwise, than as we forgive our Brethren. Math. 6. 12. 14. 15. Now, amongst
all sorts of transgressors, there is no one offends so highly, so
undoubtedly against this law of loving his neighbor as himself; or doing as
he would be done to; as he that persecutes, that but disturbs his Neighbors
welfare, because he differs from him in opinion, for cause of conscience though
erroneous; which I prove thus:

Every man has so much of an Athist in him, by how much he esteems not the
enjoyment of his conscience, above all enjoyments under heaven; And though we
have known many turn, some with more facility, others perhaps not without some
difficulty, from Popish opinions unto Episcopal, and then from Episcopal to
Presbyterial, according as either of them became more commodious, gainsome or
fashionable; yet, if Athisme not having totally taken possession of their
hearts, they began at any time to demur or scruple, according to the remnant of
conscience which might be remaining in them; it was never known that such were
contented to have even these relics of conscience persecuted or disquieted,
howsoever absurd and Heretical they might seem to other men; and therefore
such as raise any manner of persecution against their Brethren for conscience
sake, which they could not be contented to have done unto themselves, unless
they were very Athists, must necessarily be the greatest offenders against this
Law of loving our Neighbors as our selves, of any in the world: And although I
am enforced at present to apprehend you in this gall of bitterness, yet my
prayers and hopes shall be, that with the Apostle 1 Cor. 6. 10. 11. it may be
only said hereafter, that such were you once; but you are now enlightened; you
are washed; you are sanctify'de; which God grant in his good time and pleasure.



TWENTY SIX Difficult QVESTIONS Easily ANswered concerning a toleration of
differing opinions.
Quest. 1. IS it not the greatest presumption for a man to be overswayde with
his own opinion, when others for the most part submit themselves to be
governed by most voices?

Ans No: but far more presumptuous are they, who not content to enjoy quietly
their own opinions, proceed in compelling others to join with them therein,
which yet may possibly be as erroneous as other men's.

Q. 2. Is it not the greatest hazard for men to build their faith upon their
own private interpetations contrary to the Decrees of Synods and established
laws of Kingdoms?

An. No: because broad is the gate which leads to destruction, and narrow is
the path which leads to salvation; though many be called, few are chosen;
and every man must be saved by his own faith, not by the faith of Parliaments
or Synods.

Q. 3. Is it not great indiscretion to be led away by a man's private reason
and understanding contrary to the judgment and sense of many, and those
perhaps the wise and learned?

An. No: because a man is to be guided by his own reason in all things and at
all times; and it would be a double error, a Sin against the Holy Ghost, not
only to err, but also to err against his own reason and understanding.

Q. 4. May it not seem singularity for some one, or a few inferior people, to
be totally governed by their own judgments and opinions, when the whole Nation
is uniforme?

An. No: because there is no mean betwixt being governed by a man's own reason,
or that which is his implicitly, his ignorance.

Q. 5. Is it not an ungodly thing to suffer men to be of any religion?

An. No: for both our Savior, his Apostles and the Primitive Christians did
the same, neither is it in the power of flesh and blood to hinder it.

Q. 6. Is it not the most unseemly sight to see the people of one City run
scambling from their Parishes to 20. Conventicles where so many several
doctrins are taught?

An. No: but far more monstrous and abominable in the eyes of God, for people
of 20. several opinions for fear or favor to assemble and join together
hypocritically in one way of worship or Church discipline.

Q. 7. But may we not yield conformity of the outward man as a matter of great
decency and order in such cases which we do but doubt of, not certainly know
to be forbidden?

An. No: Because it makes us hypocrites, twofold more the children of the Devil
than we were before, and worse than they, who, yet unjustly, did overpresse us
to conformity.

Q. 8. Ought we not then at least to keep our different opinions and religion
unto our selves in obedience to the Civil Magistrate that co^maunds it?

An. No: because it is better to obey God than man; and Christ says we must
not fear them who can kill the body only; bidding his disciples speak that in
the light which he had told them in darkness, and on the house tops what he
had told them in the ear, affirming that he would deny whosoever should be
ashamed or deny him; Act. 4. 19. Mat. 10. 27. 28. Mark 8. 38. 2. Tim. 2. 12.

Q. 9. If Jesuited Papists and other subtle Heretics be suffered, will they
not likely seduce many unto their erroneous by-pathes?

An. Though a toleration of erroneous opinions may gain some to Satan, yet
Truth being therewith permitted to be published and improved, will in all
probability, not only gain so many more to God; but any one thus won to God,
unto his Truth, is worth thousands of those that fall from it, or rather from
the seeming profession which they made thereof. 1 Ioh. 2. 19.

Q. 10. But may not the multiplying of Heresies stifle or expel the Truth, like
as the abounding of tares and weeds often choke the Wheat, and for this cause
not be permitted?

An. Though it seem so to many at the first, yet our Savior in the Parable of
the Tares Math. 13. teaches us a quite contrary doctrine, and forbids [Heresies]
the Tares to be pulled up before [the day of judgment] the the Harvest verse
30. 39. least the Wheat [the Children of the Kingdom True Professours] verse
30. 39. be therewith rooted up.

Q. 11. Is it not wonderful extravagant that men and women should have a
latitude to yield obedience to no manner of discipline or doctrine than what they
themselves list?

An. No: unless you will have them obliged to yield unto whatsoever discipline
and Doctrine others list, though they neither understand nor know it.

Q. 12. But may it not likely prove a subvertion of the Civil State whilst such
scrupulous people may upon all occasion pretend out of conscience to deny
obedience to the Civil Powers?

An. No: For such as are truly conscionable in Gods, though but supposed work,
and service, are also more exact and conscientious in rendering all due
obedience unto man, unto the laws and Magistrate, not only for fear, but more
for conscience sake.

Q. 13. May not diversity of opinions cause dissentions or breach of love in a
Country or Cyttie?

An. No: but rather the contrary, whilst the Civil Magistrate countenanceth all
alike and each man finds his neighbor not only permitting, but in some manner
assisting him out of love, in such a way to heaven as he apprehends to be the
only true way.

Q. 14. Is it not equally impossible for a Church-Society as for a City to
continue long without a Government?

An. Yes: if you mean spiritual Government with its spiritual Relations; for
as a Church Society is spiritual; so must be the Government in all Relations
and respects.

Q. 15. But do we not by daily experience in all places and houses find the
Independents wrangling with the Presbyterians about Church controversies?

An. No: but rather the contrary; for if you mark it well, you may see they
are still the Presbyterians who generally begin first to find fault, and pick
quarrels with the Independents opinions, not the Independents with the
Presbyterians.

Q. 16. May not the permitting men to teach and embrace new opinions be
occasion that we quite loose old truths?

An. No: for if all opinions be permitted, the true ones must necessarily be
included.

Q. 17. But is it fitting then for every man to be of what religion he will?

An. Yes surely; and far better so, than to be of whatsoever religion an other
will have him to be of, since one of them must necessarily fall out.

Q. 18. Must we then suffer men to run headlong in the way to Hell, if they
have neither will nor understanding to prevent it of themselves?

An. Surely yes: we must suffer what we cannot hinder.

Q 19* But may it not be hindered by hindering so many erroneous doctrins to be
published, which if they never hear of they cannot long after, nor believe in
to damn themselves?

An. N: because a man's own fancy, Imagination and Discourcive facul^y of
themselves suggest and present unto his Memory variety of Opinions, though not
so clearly perhaps at first; which if it be not granted him freely to debate,
ask counsel, judge and make choice of, his condition were worse than beasts,
incapable of doing either good o evil; and such as are carried away with every
wind of novelty and false doctrine, were never sound in the true doctrine, though
they might seem so before, for want of oppertunity to show the contrary.

Qu. 20. If there be but one true religion, why should we suffer above one
religion in a Country?

A. If there be but one true Religion we ought to be the more careful how to
get and keep it in the Country; not banishing any religion which in opinion of
different Judges may possibly be the true one, and by such as make profession
of it, (both, as wise learned and conscientious as our selves) is proemptorily
affirmed to be the only true one.

Q. 21. Is it not a pious act to compel a company of careless idle people to
hear a good sermon, to do a good work whether they will or no?

An. No more pious an act, then for Papists to use the like compulsion toward
Jews and Protestants in forcing them to hear their sermons, mass, or Vespers.

Q. 22. Yea: but though they be thus compelled to hear good sermons at first
against their wills, the power and efficacy of truth is such, as that in
likelihood it will win upon their affections, and work in them afterward a
desire to hear and practice them of their own accord.

An. This is not likely; because we do not find in all the Gospel, that such
unwarrantable means were ever sanctifide to produce so good effect.

Q. 23. But have we not seen it by experience, that whilst the Papists in
England were made go to Church, many of them were converted, and dyed
Protestants.

An. The conversion of such Papists was rather to be suspected counterfeit to
save their purse; and if it had been real at any time, we must attribute it to
some private illumination, or other handiwork of God, and not to such means as
are so contrary, both to the doctrine and practice of our Savior and his
Apostles.

Q. 24. May not the Civil Government interpose to punish such Church Members
with whom the spiritual, by reason of their refractorines cannot prevail?

A. Nothing less; since the Civil State or Government has no more power nor
virtue to make a Papist turn protestant in England, than it can prevail to
make a Protestant become a Papist in Spain.

Q. 25. Because Papists do ill in compelling Protestants to hear an Idolatrons
Mass; may not Protestants do well to force Papists to hear Godly sermons?

An. A Protestant sermon is as Idolatrous to a Papist, as a Popish Mass is to
a Protestant; and neither of them can more judge with the understanding, than
see with the eyes of the other, besides that God regards only such as serve him
willingly.

Q. 26. But can there be any hurt in forcing refractory people to be present ^^
religions Orthodox Assemblies, where, if they will, they may be informed of the
truth?

An. Yes: 1. Because there can come no good thereof through want of willingness,
which God only regards, in him* which i^ thus compelled; and 2. Because this
[forcing] is a doing evil that good may come thereof, which is prohibited, Rom,
3. 8.

FINIS.

