IRELANDS ADVOCATE: OR, A SERMON PREACHED UPON Novem. 14, 1641. to promote the
contributions by way of lending, for the present relief of the PROTESTANTS
party in IRELAND. In the Parish CHURCH of St. STEPHENS Coleman street LONDON,
by the PASTOR there.

JUDGES 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the LORD) curse ye bitterly
the Inhabitants thereof; because they came not out to the help of the LORD, to
the help of the LORD against the mighty.

But who so has this worlds goods and sees his Brother has need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him?

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LARNAR, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
sign of the Golden Anchor, near Paules-Chaine. 1641.

IRELANDS ADVOCATE: OR, A SERMON preached upon Novem. 14. 1641. to promote the
contributions by way of lending, for the present relief of the Protestant
party in IRELAND.
1 JOHN 3. 16. Therefore we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren.
THE sad and most deplorable condition of our Brethren, professors of the same
Faith and Religion with us, in the Kingdom of Ireland, as it has very lately
bin represented by Letters from thence unto us, is the occasion of turning me
aside (for the present) from that Scripture that I had intended to have
proceeded with, and of casting me upon this; that so, as we have a great
opportunity from Hell, we may have another from Heaven also, to excite and
stir you up, to quit your selves like the Children of GOD, and the redeemed
of JESUS CHRIST, by drawing out the bowels of your compassions readily and
freely unto those, that are, or ought to be as dear to you, as your selves,
and your own Souls. The Author of this Epistle, was that Disciple and Apostle
whom Christ loved, that is, loved in special manner above his fellows: who
(it seems) as he received abundantly of the sweet fruits and expressions of
this affection in GOD, and in his Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST toward him, so
did he abound proportionably in his reciprocal affection toward GOD and JESUS
CHRIST again: the fire burned in vehemency and strength of heat according to
the pile of wood that was laid upon it. And thus knowing by a double
experience, the infinite sweetness and preciousnesse of this affection: he
labors more then all the rest of the Apostles, to propagate and multiply it
in the hearts of the Children of GOD, both toward GOD, and toward one
another. To pass by all other passages in his writings, wherein he labors to
promote the cause and Kingdom of this heavenly affection, in and near about
the Scripture read unto you, he makes out with a high hand, and with many
important arguments, to kindle this fire in the hearts of men, yea and to make
it burn out into a vehement flame. Greater love has no man (says our Savior
John 15. 13.) then this, that a man should lay down his life for his friend:
and lesser love then this ought no man to have (says John in effect in this
place:) Therefore we ought also to lay down our lives for the Brethren. Not so
much as to mention any other of his arguments, adjoining near unto the text
both before and after it, whereby he pleades like an Angel of GOD, for
sincerity and truth and soundness of this affection we speak of; in this 16
verse, being come to an argument or ground that he saw could bear it, he
raises his demands in this kind very high; and tells them (in effect) not
only that it stands them in hand, or that it is their duty simply to love one
another, no nor yet to love one another in deed and in truth; but to love one
another to the height, or to the highest pitch and streyne of this affection:
we ought also to lay down our lives for the Brethren; which is nothing else
(being interpreted,) but (as was said) to love one another with the ferventest,
and largest, and deepest affections that our hearts will hold. True it is, such
a demand as this, to lay down our lives for the Brethren rises very high (as
was said) but behold an argument at hand, that will justify it, and reduce it
to a point of the greatest reason, equity and fairness that can be. Herein
(says he in the former part of the verse) have we perceived or known love,
that he, that is, JESUS CHRIST laid down his life for us: as if he should say:
this was love indeed, this was love in the glory and exaltation of it, that our
Savior CHRIST so holy a person, so wonderful in Glory and all manner of
excellency as he was, who had no bond or engagement either of duty or example
upon him, should freely and willingly part with his life for our sakes, to
accommodate and pleasure us withal who were his enemies: but now for us,
having such a pattern and example before us to conceive by, and such an
infinite engagement upon us, as that love of CHRIST, is, and such an advantage
likewise as the benefit redounding to us by that love of CHRIST is to
facilitate and make easy any expression of love whatsoever toward those on
whose behalf Christ shall require it: it is no great matter in us, it is but
matter of equity and duty in us, to be so far raised and carried out in our
affections of love toward those that are our Brethren in Christ, and partakers
of like precious Faith with us, as to lay down, and part with our lives for
them. We shall add no more either for the dependence or meaning of the words.

We shall from the passage recommend only this one general point of Doctrine
unto you: That Doct.
the highest and deepest expressions of love to those that are Christ's, are but
matter of duty from Christians when they stand in need of them. For we are to
take the Apostles expression or inference here, with such a limitation as this:
therefore we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren, viz. if they stand
in need of them, or if we may accomodate and pleasure them in any proportion or
considerable good or benefit thereby, not that we ought actually to do it at
all times (for then we shall be all bound to die immediately) nor yet that we
ought to do it, when we may accommodate them in their necessities otherwise,
no nor yet to accommodate them in matters of lighter consequence, though
(happily) they cannot otherwise be gratified or provided for, however I conceive
this to be a case rarely incident, if incident at all, I mean that the common
and ordinary affairs or necessities of Christians should not possibly be
provided for, but by the lives of other of their Brethren for them, but in this
sense and upon these terms, we are all bound to lay down even our lives
themselves for the Brethren in the Faith, when their necessities are great and
sore upon them, and the laying down of our lives may in likelihood relieve
them, or stand them in some special service, and there is no other mea^es in
appearance likely to do it. Therefore I include al these proviso's and cases of
exception, in that clause in the Doctrine, when they stand in need of them,
laying it down thus, the highest and deepest expressions of love to those that
are Christ's, are but matter of duty from their fellow Christians, when they
stand in need of them. The point lies large and full in the Scripture read unto
you: so that we shall not need to add much for the further proof of it. Take
we only a Scripture or two. So then being affectionately desirous of you, we
were willing to have imparted unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also
our own souls (i. our lives) because you were dear unto us. 1 These. 2. 8. We
see the Apostle here very glorious and high in expressing the tenor of his
affection toward this people: he was willing to have imparted even his own
soul unto them, viz. if their condition had required it, if he had conceived
that he might have enriched them with peace or comfort by it. Whatsoever the
intensnesse or pitch of his affection toward them was, he could not ascend
higher then this, in a way of expression to them Greater love then this, i. a
greater expression or testimony of love then this, has no man (says our
Savior, as we heard) that a man lay down his life for his friend. Now then I
demand, whether in case Paul had actually performed, on their behalf, what he
here professes himself willing and ready to do, that is, had indeed imparted
his own soul unto them, whether (I say) he had supererogated or no, or gone
beyond the line of that which was his duty to do? Doubtless that commandment
Luke 10. 27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy Soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, reaches the
utmost extent and point of the utmost ability that is in man: neither is it
possible for any man to rise in any expression whatsoever of love either to God
or man, above it. So then, if Paul in laying down his life for the
Thessalonians, should have done no more then what God required of him, in case
their condition had required it, certainly he requires no less of any man,
when the necessity of his Saints do require it. Take another Scripture from
the same pen of somewhat alike importance. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for
you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church, Col. 1. 24. These sufferings
of the Apostle for these Colossians, that is, to accommodate them in the
ministry of the Gospel, though (as he says) he rejoiced in them, yet
(doubtless) they took deep of his outward man, and were grievous to the
flesh, and consequently were great and weighty expressions of his love to them:
and yet upon the ground lately mentioned, they were no more, then the demand of
a good conscience of him. Now Paul (and so any other faithful minister of the
Gospel) may be said to fulfill, or fill up, (...) the remainders or wantings,
or afterlings (as it were) of the sufferings of Christ (to open this by the
way) for the Churches sake, when he desisted not from his work and employment
of preaching the Gospel for any persecution, or outward loss or trouble be
sustained thereby. There are two things (amongst many others) of absolute
necessity (according to the counsel and course of Gods ordinary dispensation)
to accomplish the salvation of his elect, of whom his body, that is, his Church
consists. First, the making of a Gospel. Secondly, the preaching or making
known of this Gospel. The Gospel is no means of salvation unto any man,
except it be revealed and made known unto him. Now the Sufferings of Christ,
were of absolute necessity to constitute and make the Gospel, and they are
also of absolute and entire sufficiency this way: Christ wants no sufferings
to be added to his, or to come up in the reere to second his, for any such
purpose as this, to perfect the Gospel intrinsecally in any kind. But because
the making of a Gospel, though never so complete, rich, and absolute, was not
enough to effect and actuate the salvation of his Church, but the publishing
and preaching of this Gospel up and down the world, was further necessary:
hence it comes to pass, that the afflictions and sufferings of Paul (and so
of other Ministers of the Gospel) are necessary too, over and above the
sufferings of Christ, to bring the Church into an actual possession of her
glory. For Satan, the God of this world, will be sure to take a course where
he has to do, and as far as the length of his arm will extend, that the
Gospel of Jesus Christ shall not be effectually, and with power preached in
the world without the trouble, and persecution and sufferings of those, that
shall put forth their hand to that Plough, and break up the fallow ground of
the world with it. So that except Jesus Christ should make the Ministers of the
Gospel willing to suffer from the hands of the world, as well as himself did,
his sufferings, according to the platform of the counsel of God touching the
means of the Churches salvation, would not accomplish it. This interpretation
might be further argued, and strengthened, from that word in the original,
(...), which our translation renders, I fulfill, or fill up: but this English
does not fill up the Greek, the word has a more emphaticall signification then
so. The word properly signifies, ex adversa, or ex opposito adimplere, that
is, to fill up on the one side, as it were over and against another, who
likewise fills up on the other side, or in another way. This force or
importance of the preposition (...) is clearly seen, in that expression or
phrase of speech used by our Savior himself Luk 24. 17. where (...)
signifies to confer together, or to speak by way of answer or opposition
one to another. So that the Apostles meaning in this place seems to be this:
that as CHRIST took up the one end, the foreend (as it were) of those
sufferings whereby the Church was to be saved, and carried and bare that; so he
helped to take up the other end, the hinder end (as it were) of the same
sufferings; this end being as necessary to be taken up and borne by the
Ministers of the Gospel* as the other was by the Author of the Gospel
himself, But this by the way. For further confirmation of the Doctrine, I only
touch one Scripture more, 1 Pet. 4 8. And above all things have fervent
charity (or, love) among your selves. If it be the duty of Christians to have
fervent love among themselves, doubtless it is their duty also to manifest
this love, in the full proportion, and in all the dimensions of it, with
expressions suitable to it, and every way commensurable with it, when
opportunity requires. A candle is not lighted to be put under a Bed or a
Bushel (as our Savior speaks) no more is an excellency or fervencie of
love enjoined the servants of God, to be dissembled, or to be kept prisoner in
the hearts or souls of men, but chiefly for this end and purpose, that the
heat, light and beauty of it, may be the comfort, riches, strength and glory of
the whole society or body. The Greek word (...), translated fervent, properly
signifies, that which is extended, or stretched out at large, or at length:
and doubtless the spirit and soul (as it were) of this injunction or
exhortation is, that there ought to be such a love vigent in the hearts of all
believers, that should be able and ready upon all occasions of their Brethrens
necessities, to do execution (if need be) a great way off, and to stretch out
it self in the fruits and expressions thereof, beyond the line of the
ordinary affections of men; as a fire that is very hot and has much wood
burning upon it, will warm men at a great distance from it. I forbear the
drawing together any more Scriptures, for this service: the mind of them (I
conceive) this way is better known unto us generally, then to require any
anxious or long examination. Let us make forward to the grounds, and Reasons of
the point.

love to the Brethren in Christ, when their conditions do require it, because
God requires this at our hands (as ye have heard.) It is one of the
impositions of heaven upon us. It is a tribute of thankfulness which God has
said upon the Great and rich commodity of salvation by Jesus Christ, to be paid
toties quoties, as often as the necessities of our fellow-Beleevers call for it:
We ought (says the Holy Ghost, in the words of the Text) to lay down our lives
for the Brethren. Now the laying down of our lives (we know) is an expression
of love that goes very far, and reaches very high. So then, if we
acknowledge a lawful Authority and Sovereignty of Heaven over us in other
things, and all things meet and fit to be done; every thing to be just matter
of duty that God requires us: there is no withstanding the truth of the
Doctrine, which requires the deepest and weightiest expressions of our love to
our Brethren in Christ, when they stand in need of them.

God does not only require this at our hands, but he has himself begun unto
us, in the highest and deepest expressions of his love unto us; he has
provoked and engaged us hereunto, not so much by his own example, as by the
choice of his Subject, upon whom he was pleased to exemplify this exceeding
love of his, in the highest demonstrations of it, viz. our selves: So God loved
the world (i. the inhabitants of the world, men) that he gave his only begotten
Son, as John 3. 16. If God had showed the same love unto the lapsed Angels,
which he has done unto Men; if he had lifted up the like horn of salvation
for them, there had bin the like Example; but there had not bin the like
engagement, or provocation unto us, to rise to those heights of showing love
likewise, where he should appoint, as now there is: As the example of love,
which he has now shown to men, is not any such obligement upon the reprobate
Angels, to show love any where, as it would have bin, had themselves bin the
object of this love of his.

Jesus Christ himself has walked in the steps of his Fathers love, and has
gone as high in the declaration and expressions of his love, as the Father has
done in his. He has given himself, and offered up himself in sacrifice upon
the service of the peace and happiness of a most miserable, woeful, and
sinful world. For we must not look upon the death and sufferings of Christ
simply as the ransom and atonement of the world; nor as the gift of the
Father only unto the world for the ransom of it, for then we shall fall short
in our reckonings: but further, as the free and glorious testimony and pledge
of the unspeakable, and unconceivable love of Christ himself unto the world.
The Holy - Ghost is very careful to vindicate the honor and glory of the love
of Jesus Christ himself in his death, and so to recommend and set forth the
love of God the Father, in giving his Son unto the world, that he may not
drown, or quench, or prejudice in the least measure the glory of the love of
Christ himself herein. Here in perceive we love, (those words of God, were not
in the former translation, neither are they found in the best Greek copies)
that he i. e. Christ has laid down his life for us (in the word immediately
before the Joh. 6. 51. 10. 18,
Text) besides many like expressions, whereby it appears, that the death and
sufferings of Christ, were not of constraint or necessity, as the typical
sacrifices of Beasts under the Law were, who had no inward principle to incline
or make them willing to offer themselves: they were feign to be drawn and
dragged to the Altar* by a strong hand, and to be bound with cords to the horns
thereof; otherwise there was no sacrificatorie death to be had of them: but the
sufferings of Christ were absolutely and entirely free, and consequently
excellent and high expressions of his love unno us. And the truth is, were the
frame of our hearts eminently spiritual, and our apprehensions truly Noble,
and keen in touch and taste of things of highest worth, and excellency, the
death of CHRITT would be more taking and transporting with us, in respect of
the Parent that brought it forth, I mean his love to the World, then in
respect of all the Children that are brought forth by it, I mean all the great
benefits, and blessings, and privileges, that are procured and purchased by it
for the world. But generally, we are (even the best of us) no better then a
generation of spiritual pothunters, all for the prey, but little or nothing
for the game.

So then, this is another ground or reason of the Point: we are bound to rise
high in the expressions of our love, when CHRIST shall require it, because we
have received like measure from his hand* and where much is given, much may
very lawfully and equally be required.

love to your Brethren in the Faith, as are required of you, you shall glorify
the Name of CHRIST on earth, and convince the judgments and Consciences of
ignorant and wicked men, that he is what he is, viz. the Son of God, and sent
into the world by him to be the Savior thereof. Thus CHRIST prays unto his
Father for those that shall believe in him, that they may all be one, as the
Father and he are Ioh. 17. 20* 21, 23.
one; so that they also may be one in them, and that for this end, that the
world may believe that thou (meaning God his Father) have sent me: and somewhat
more plainly (verse the 23.) I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
perfect in one, that the world may know (viz. by this their perfection, or
being made perfect in one) that thou have sent me, etc. But what is there in
this, in Believers being made perfect in one? (as our Saviors expression is)
that should produce such an effect in the world, as is here attributed to it,
viz. the making them to know, or the giving of them to understand, that God
has senr JESUS CHRIST into the world: what proportion is there, between such
an effect as this, and such a cause as that? I must not stand to open my self
at large in this: take a taste of what I would say further in two words. By
being made perfect in one, our Savior (doubtless) means, that entirenesse
and dearness of affection that should be between them, their being made all
one heart (as it were) and one soul. Love (we use to say) is an affection of
union: and when it is reciprocally and mutually fervent and strong, and raised
to an excellent degree, though amongst never so many, it makes a strong
consolidation of all into one, so that every one has (in effect) the same
strength, and the same wisdom, and so every other perfection, which any other
has, yea or which they all have amongst them: In such a case, one man so
perfected in one with others, though never so many, has as much of every thing
that is desirable or good, as they all have together. Now then when those that
believe in JESUS CHRIST, are thus made perfect in one, thus intimatly and
mightily affecting one another, that intercourse of Love, and those glorious
expressions of this affection, passing to, and fro, from time to time between
them, cannot but be taken notice of by the world: and the interpretation of
what they see and take notice of in this kind, can lightly be no other (when
their judgments and consciences are but in any measure themselves) then this,
that that CHRIST, whose Disciples and followers these men profess themselves
to be, was (doubtless) the Son of GOD, and has appeared unto them,
otherwise such an excellent Spirit of Love which we see and behold, could not
work in them As Nebuchadnezar and his Nobles saw a fourth man in the Furnace,
walking with those three which he had cast in, whose appearance was like the
Son of God: Dan. 3. 25.
So in those flames of love wherein the Saints and servants of JESUS CHRIST
live and walk together on Earth, there is a Spiritual visage or appearance of
one greater then they, even the appearance of their Great Lord and Master JESUS
CHRIST himself.

We should answer that objection here (but that we have no time.) But are
there not many other factions, or societies of men in the world, that hold fast
together, and express themselves many times with much affection and
cordialnesse one toward another? therefore how should any expression of Love
whatsoever between those that truly believe, be any argument or conviction
unto men, that Jesus Christ is he, that he is the Son of GOD, and sent by him
into the world? we must respite the full answer to this objection to some
other time: Only you may please to take a taste (in two words) of what would
have bin further enlarged upon this occasion. It is true, there are many
factions and parties and combinations of men in the world, that seem very
dear, and deeply engaged amongst themselves, that are ready to stand up to
plead the cause one of another (perhaps) even unto blood. But here is the
difference between the affection of love, which seems to rule in other
Societies of men, and that which rules amongst true believers, when they are
perfected in one: the reason, ground, or root of that affection or deerenesse
which reigns amongst Christians, is not any thing visible, any thing savoring
of the flesh, nor can their enemies, the men of the world, satisfy their
judgments or consciences in conceiving so of it (though many times they
satisfy one another in so speaking) whereas the band wherewith other societies
of men are chained and linked together, is always somewhat that is natural,
and which falls within the reach and comprehension of a natural understanding.
So that the greatest affection that is found amongst natural men, leads the
apprehension but to that natural thing which is the ground and cause of it,
and there it stays: but that affection which is, or should be found amongst
Christians, carries the mind and thoughts of him that diligently inquireth
into the original and pedigree of it, unto a supernatural principle, which
can be no other but Jesus Christ, as might be showed more particularly, but
time hasteneth.

love to the Brethren, we may be a means to open the eyes of the ignorant and
blind, and cause them to see and look upon him, whom they have pierced with
their sins hitherto, especially with the sin of their unbelief. This
reason runs pararell with the former, and depends (in part) upon it. Strange
tongues (and so other miracles) are for a sign unto those that believe not
(says Paul 1 Cor. 14. 22.) viz. for the conviction of their unbelief, and (as
it were) the opening of an effectual door unto them, to believe. Now such
expressions of Love as we speak of between the Saints, are of the same kind
of importance and working, that tongues and miracles were. By this (says
Christ John 13, 35.) shall all men know that ye are my Disciples (that is, may
know it hereby, that there is an aptness in it to convince them hereof) if ye
have love one to another. Now that which is a means to discover and prove men
to be the Disciples of Jesus Christ, is a means likewise of great efficiencie
and power, to prevail with men that are yet strangers and enemies to him, to
become his Disciples also. For such a Master, were he known (and those that
know his Disciples, cannot lightly be ignorant of him) would draw Disciples
apace after him.

Christ had singled out us, out of all the world, or any other parcel of
believers, and had imposed that by way of duty, which the Text or Doctrine
speaks of, to lay down our lives, or to rise so high in our expression of love
unto the rest of the Saints, and had not laid the same charge and commandment
indifferently upon them, in respect of us, and our necessities, the
commandment might have secmed somewhat hard, and the practice of it might have
bin stuck at; but now since he who has engaged us to engage our selves so
deeply in the behalf of others, when they stand in need, has engaged them
likewise to engage themselves proportionably for us, when we stand in need;
obedience unto the commandment, cannot but seem very equal and reasonable,
as well on our part in respect of others, as upon others in respect of us.

The Apostle takes off the seeming hardness or offensivenesse of that demand
which he made to the Church of Corinth, for somewhat a larger contribution then
ordinary, the necessities of the Saints in other places requiring it for the
present, by this very consideration or reason. 2 Cor* 8. 13. For I mean not
(says he) that other men be eased, and you burdened: But by an equality: that
now at this time your abundance may be a supply for their want, that their
abundance also may be a supply for your want, that there may be equality.

and level of that duty now presented unto you, it is because they do not
effectually stir up the grace of God within them, as the Apostle somewhere
speaks, they bow down their backs to the suggestions of the flesh, whereas
their strength were it put forth accordingly, would serve them to go upright.
Consider that one Scripture to this purpose. 1 Pet. 1. 22. Seeing you have
purified your Souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned
love of the Brethren; see that ye love one another with a pure heart
fervently. Here two things (amongst many others) are plainly implied. First,
that no man is able out of any natural principle to love the Brethren, that
is, the Saints; the heart must be purified through the word and Spirit of GOD
together, that is, that base and drossie affection of inordinate selfe-klove
must be purged away, before a man be able to lift up his heart to such a
spiritual and heavenly service as this. Secondly that a man or woman having
obtained such an excellent principle as this, a power of loving the Saints
unfeignedly through the purifying of their hearts, are bound in a special
manner to give out themselves fully and freely according to the nature,
strength, and importance of this principle, to express themselves in excellent
terms of love and respects unto them, as their necessities shall require it.
This for the 7 and last reason. We address immediately to the Use and
application of the Doctrine, we shall be very brief in particulars here.

By way of Instruction (in the first place) we may Use. 1. Instruction.
from the Doctrine observe sundry particulars. As

First that the mind and good pleasure of JESUS CHRIST, concerning his Saints
and people on Earth, is, that you should be a society or body of men and women
in the world, animated and quickened (as it were) moved and acted by a spirit
of love, as the life or soul of it, that you should abound in this affection,
above all other societies of men whatsoever. Doubtless he that commands us to
lay down our lives one for another, commands us also by a commandment involved
and wrapped up in this commandment, to maintain a Spirit of most ardent and
burning affection toward one another. A man can never be instructed or taught
to die willingly by any other teacher or teaching whatsoever, but by Love, yea
and that such a Love, of such a conquering and commanding power, that it must
tread down the strength of a thousand loves and desires besides, yea and many
of these of sovereign strength and power also. To require a man to lay down
his life for the Brethren out of any other ground or principle whatsoever, then
out of an affection of love to them, and that transcendently glorious, is (in
effect) to bid him gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles.

Secondly, This likewise is by way of instruction observable from the Doctrine,
That men do but that which is their duty in this kind, when they are enlarged
in the greatest measure, in the expressions of their love toward their
Brethren: if they should give all their goods, and part with their whole
substance to them, yea, if they should lay down their necks, and jeopardie
their lives for their sakes, yet there is nothing to boast of in all this: they
are never-the-lesse to remain vile and little in their own eyes. If their
right hand does never so much in this kind, yet should not their left hand
know any thing at all of it. Heights of duty should no ways prejudice or
hinder the depths of humility. So likewise ye (says our Savior to his
Disciples) when you shall have done all things that are commanded you, say, we
are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.

Observe Thirdly (by way of Instruction) what gracious and blessed provision
the Lord JESUS CHRIST has made, for the poor and weak, and distressed ones
in any kind in his Church. He has engaged the rich and strong, and those
that are at liberty and that have means of relief or support in any kind,
in their hand, to be ready at all times to minister unto them. The necessities
of any, as far as they are made known, are a summons from Heaven to call the
rest to look after them and relieve them. If this royal Law were duly
observed in the Church of CHRIST, one sufferer should create and raise up many
relievers; neither should there be heard the complaint or cry of any man
sinking, whilst there remains any one swimming. It is a sign, that the mind
of CHRIST is not fulfilled by his body, if there be one member 1 Cor. 11. 21.
hungry, whilst another is drunken, if there be want in any place, before there
be want in all.

Fourthly, (we are yet in the way of instruction) If the highest and deepest
expressions of our love to the Saints, be but matter of duty in us, as their
necessities may determine it; then is it not any discharge of a man's duty, nor
to be counted obedience unto GOD, or unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, when the
necessities of your Brethren being great and sore upon them, men shall minister
unto them in a sparing, pinching, and contemptible manner: when the condition
of the Saints requires (it may be) the one half of our substance, and we cast
in two mites into their treasury: when their exigences call us to lay down our
lives for them, and we are willing only to bestow the parings of our nails
upon them. Doubtless to minister unto the necessities of the Saints upon such
terms as these, is no better obedience, nor any whit a more acceptable service
unto GOD, then that of Saul was, when being commanded to smite Amaleck, and to
destroy utterly all that appertained to them, etc. he only destroyed that which
was vile and naught worth amongst them, but spared Agag the King, and all the
best of the sheep and oxen, and all that was good 1. Sam. 15. 3. 9. As Saul
was rejected by GOD, and that with much indignation, and arrested from Heaven
with a writ of rebellion served upon him by the hand of the Prophet Samuel, for
such an abusing of the commandment of GOD, which yet to himself seemed a
sufficient and plausible obedience: So is it more then to be feared that many
men please themselves, and are lifted up in a self admiration, for doing that
in a way of charity and relief unto the ^aints, which being interpreted by
GOD, is rather a reproach and mockery to his pleasure and command that way,
then any obedience or subjection to it.

Lastly (for Instruction:) if the highest, and deepest expressions of love to
the Saints, be but matter of duty, when their necessities require them: then is
not that which any man possesses in the things of this world, whether estate,
liberty, life, etc. so much to be looked upon, as a man's own (to speak
properly) as the Churches and houshold's of Faith. GOD we see both in the Text
and Doctrine delivered, who has an absolute Sovereigntie of right and power to
dispose both of our persons and of all we have, has interessed the Brethren,
that is, the whole communion and Brotherhood of the Saints, both in our
persons, and in our possessions. The necessities of the Saints are sealed and
confirmed from Heaven, as a lawful right and title to such proportions and
shares in our estates, and in any other means of help and support that we are
able to afford, as are proportionable to them, and of a considerable importance
to relieve them. That civil right or propriety we have in our possessions, is
not by Christians to be looked upon, or pleaded in Bar to that Spiritual
right which all the Saints have in them also.

Secondly, The Doctrine affords matter of Reproof Use 2 for Reproof.
also, and that of four sorts of men. The first are those that will needs be
numbered amongst the righteous, yea are ready to think themselves evilly
entreated, and hardly dealt with, if they have not their place assigned them at
the upper end of the Table amongst the Household of Faith, if they be not looked
upon as the true servants of Jesus Christ (at least) and yet are as a dry, and
barren wilderness to the Saints, and look upon this family of Heaven as
strangers unto them, especially when they stand in need of an helping hand from
them in any kind. A little affliction falling upon a servant of GOD wherein
their help is required, puts him quite out of their knowledge; as David's
necessity made Nabal that he did not know him. 1 Samuel 25. 10. Who is David?
and who is the son of Ishai? If David had bin a great Courtier, or the Son
of Ishai a favorite of King Saul, it is no otherwise like, but Nabal could
have known him well enough. But perceiving that his knowledge of him in such a
condition, and straight as he was now in, would be chargeable to him, and cost
him some of his bread, and of his flesh, he would by no means own his
knowledge of him. Such a condition, wherein a man shall stand in need of the
help of another is, in the interpretation of a base close-fisted generation
amongst us, an evidence against him, that he does not belong to CHRIST Alas,
how far are these from laying down their lives for their Brethren, and
consequently from being Christians, who can acknowledge none for Christians,
but those that have no need of them at all? when Lazarus shall be cast out of
Abraham's bosom, these shall go thither in his stead.

Secondly, There is another sort of Professors too, which though they seem not
altogether so bad as the former, yet their prerogative above them were a dear
bargain of the Widows two mites, if it were to be bought with them. These are
such, who though they will not be seen to sit out in the necessities of the
Saints, when others are in, yet they will play but at very small game (as we
say) to relieve them: they neither consult with the greatness, or depth of the
Saints necessities, nor with the fullness or superfluities of their own
estates, but with the narrowness, and seantnesse of their own base
dispositions: This is the only Oracle they inquire at, and by which they are
regulated in all they do for the Saints, upon any occasion whatsoever. They
have a form of giving (as the Apostle speaks of some that have a form of
knowledge) which neither mends, nor paires, neither rises nor falls, nor any
ways alters by any difference or occasions, or opportunities whatsoever. If
the fit of charity be upon them, they will give as much to a vagrant beggar by
the way side, as they will to save the lives of ten thousand Saints: and no
great matter neither to the one, or toward the other. If men be rich in the
things of this world, and not rich in good works too, they are not like to lay
hold of eternal life. 1 Timothy 6. 19. We know the rich young man in the Gospel,
though he was near unto the Kingdom of heven, yet because he would not sell
all that he had, and give liberally to the poor, being required to do it,
never entered thereinto. For rich men under the Law that had great herds of
Cattle and flocks of sheep, and Goats, to have brought Turtles, or
young-Pigeons for their offering, had been a profanation of the Temple, and
despising of GOD. And so for men of great estates to have cast in 2 mites into
the Treasury, as the poor Widow did, had rather bin a co^tumelie or affront
put upon that service or custom of offering, then any expression of charity or
devotion. Cursed be the deceiver (says the Lord himself by his Prophet) which
has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt
thing. Mal. 1. 14. And is it not a sin of very near affinity with this, and
so obnoxious to the same Curse, when men that are able to relieve by thousands,
and the extremities of the Saints call for relief by thousands, shall yet
minister relief but by tens, yea and scarsely by this proportion?

Thirdly, another sort worse then both the former are such, who are so far
from managing an affection of love to the Saints with those high, and excellent
expressions we speak of, even when the greatest need requires, that to keep
their bread and water, and credit too, are still ready to blaspheme the
poverty or hard condition of the Saints in any kind, as if they were of a base
original and descent; as if they always proceeded either from negligence,
sloathfulnesse, rashness, want of discretion and foresight, or the like.
Because men have no mind or will in this case to part with their money, nor
are yet willing to make any part of satisfaction for that baseness with their
names and reputations; they have no ways to bring both these ends together,
but by insimulations aspersions and sundry imputations to render those
unworthy, whose necessitous condition calls upon them for relief. Thus Nabal
sought to make a covering for his own shame in refusing to supply David in
his extremity, of that wicked insimulation or reproach cast upon David, as
that he should be some servant run away from his Master. 1 Samuel 25. 10. There
be many servants now adays that break away every man from his Master: Out of
these impertinent premises, this base minded wretch thought he might lawfully
and commendably infer this conclusion: therefore there was neither reason nor
conscience why he should part with any thing to David. The like spirit of base
insinuations against the Saints in distress is taken in by that other unclean
spirit of covetousness which reigns in the hearts of many amongst us, to
defend him against the just smitings both of conscience, and of the tongues of
men.

Fourthly (and lastly for reproof) those are yet worse then the former (if
worse may be) who instead of loving the Saints fervently, and with a pure
heart, and with all demonstrations and rich expressions of this love as
occasion requires, are still snarling and biting, and vexing them, with
injuries, reproaches, backbitings, and all manner of evil entreatings. And yet
there are of this generation also, that must be honored before the Elders of
their people too, with the Names, and reputations of good Christians. Any thing
(it seems) will serve for the present to make Christians and Saints of: Hey,
and Stubble, and wood will serve to bear the name, and outside of
Christianity, as well as silver, gold, and precious stones: but when they shall
be made to pass through the fire of Gods judgment, then that Hey, and
Stubble, and wood we speak of, will make no more Christians, but base
hypocrites, and accursed unbeleevers only. How far are these men from that
streyne of Christianity, which is required of all men in the Doctrine, from
ministering richly, and with a large heart, and with an open hand to the
necessities of the Saints, when their daily practice is to give them gall, and
vinegar to drink, and to bring pressures, and to heap sorrows upon their
head? instead of making their beds for them in their sickness, they cast them
into beds of sickness and sorrow. If the ministers of Satan be Angels of
light, such men as these are good Christians: and when God shall Eze. 16. 53.
bring again the Captivity of Beelzebub and his Angels, and restore them to
their first estate in Heaven, these shall have part and fellowship in Heaven
with them.

A third and last Use of the Doctrine, shall be for Use 3 for Exhortation.
exhortation, and that to all those that mean to do any good, upon the
profession and trade of Christianity, that desire to raise themselves for ever
by it: The duty I shall recommend unto you, is only this, that you would make
it matter of conscience (as well as you do any other duty in the world, as to
abstain from Murder, Drunkenness, Adultery, or the like,) yea that you would
make a solemn work and labor of it, to abound in that sweet and heavenly
affection of love toward the Saints, and to give full and free testimony and
account thereof both unto God and men, as their occasions shall from time to
time require. Quit your selves in this kind, (I beseech you) as the Disciples
and followers of him, who when the necessity of the world (and of your souls
particularly) required it, and could not be saved without it, freely emptied
himself of all his greatness and glory, and poured out his dearest soul an
offering for it; and was content to take rest and peace and glory in reversion,
when as otherwise he might have had them in present possession. In a word, that
you will count nothing of all you possess in this world dear unto your
selves, that your love to the Saints may reign and triumph in all the rich and
glorious and high expressions thereof, as the condition of any of these shall
require. Particularly (to turn in a little to that special occasion, which
has drawn out my heart and soul unto you this day, in this subject) that you
will vindicate your selves for Christians indeed, and your love to the Saints
and servants of JESUS CHRIST, like it self, by your ready and free, and
liberal contributions by way of lending (for your love for the present is not
put to any greater trial then this) to redeem the lives and liberties and
estates of your poor Brethren the Protestants in Ireland (if GOD will yet
vouchsafe to honor your zeal and forwardness in this kind, with such an
honorable vouchsafement as this) out of the merciless hand of those cruel,
blood thirsty and implacable enemies both theirs and yours, that Butcherly,
and bloody faction of Rome, who are now gathered together like an Army of
chafed Bears, and fierce Lions against them, in an heat and ecstacie of
revenge, and being led on by that Prince of darkness, that great roaring Lion
the Devil, have their hands lifted up on high, to slay and kill, and to
destroy, to commit all manner of insolences, and barbarons outrages, as they
shall be inspired, and taught by that God of this world whom they serve in this
spirit of revenge, which now possesses them. The considerations, and motives
that may strengthen your hand to this service that is recommended to you, are
both more in number and greater in weight and consequence by far, then I am
able to express. Give me leave to touch you with some few of them.

First, that faction of Hell, the Romish party, are of a very formidable
strength and power amongst them: they were some while since reported to have
bin an Army of about 30000 fighting men, and to be daily increasing, and
gathering greater numbers unto them. They have already taken many strong Towns
and Castles, and have made themselves Lords and Masters of them: and many
Captains, and other Officers that have bin trained up, and exercised in
Wars, are said to have come over from beyond the Seas unto them, to assist
them in their enterprise: In so much that the fear and dread of them is fallen
and ready still to fall upon many, that they have and are likely every day more
and more to revolt and fall in unto them. So they are not like to be resisted,
or withstood but with an high hand. The strength and power of the enemy, which
is so formidable to your Brethren, and in it self also* let it not (I beseech
you) be contemptible in your eyes, but gain proportionably upon your hearts
and souls to consider them.

Secondly, the Protestant party of your Brethren, are but very weak in
comparison of their enemies, they are but few in number, in respect of the
swarms of those Antichristian hornets that nestle amongst them: and that which
is yet of sadder consideration, they are but naked, and unarmed, and no ways
appointed or provided to defend themselves; having not long since had their
Arms, and means of defense, most cruelly taken from them, by him, who has
made some part of atonement for that and other his outrages, with his head. In
which respect they are but as a flock of Kids, before an Host, or Army of
Lions. Let this consideration also of the weakness of your Brethren,
strengthen the hand of your love and make tender your respects unto them.

Thirdly, their enemies are of a bloody, barbarous, and revengefull spirit: all
mercy, pity, and compassion, yea humanity it self is hid from their eyes:
there is neither age, nor sex, neither young men, nor Maids, neither old-men,
nor Babes, but all are one before the rage of their cruelty. They have shut up
all the bowels of their compassions as it were with bars of iron, that
neither cries nor tears, nor misries, nor extremities, nor the Law of GOD, nor
the Laws of men, nor the Laws of nature or humanity it self, can do any
thing to open them. I beseech you let the shutting up of the compassions of the
enemies of your Brethren against them, be the opening of your compassions so
much the more freely, so much the more abundantly unto them.

Fourthly, they are deeply, indeed most desperately engaged to go through with
their enterprise, and are under a vow, to make as clear riddance of
Protestants and Protestant Religion out of the Kingdom, as their lying Legend
reports that their Saint Patrick made of Serpents and Toades, and al venomous
creatures. They have made a covering of their breaden God, wherewith to hide
all repentance from their eyes: so that all relentings, all doubtings, all
faintings or feebleness of spirit, all hanging down of hands from the work in
hand, are no less then deadly sins with them* if they look back from the
Plough whereunto they have now put forth their hand, they are afraid they
shall fall into Hell immediately. That God and creature of theirs which they
make of bread is amongst them of as great authority and power, as the Poets
made the Rivers Styx in Hell, to be among their Heathen God's, when they swear
by it: Timor et Deus ille Deorum est. It is the inspiration of their Religion
and teachers, that it is no less then damnable sin, and to be punished with
Hell fire, once to doubt or question whether it be meritorious or no, to
murder, Kings and Princes, when the advancement of the Catholic cause
requires it. I beseech you let the height of their resolutions, and the depths
of their engagements to do evil, be both heights and depths of engagements
and resolutions unto you, to do good, to the countermanding (if it be
possible) of their evil.

Fifthly, they have already consecrated themselves unto the Devil and his
service upon the lives and blood of many of the servants of GOD, your Brethren
in the Faith, hewing, and hacking some in pieces (as it were on purpose to
quench, and smother all sparks of humanity that might yet be alive in their
breasts) after they had murdered them, and by other most barbarous villainies,
and outrages committed upon them; setting themselves a coppie (as it were) for
their future proceedings, and giving those that yet remain to understand, what
measure they must expect, and look for, if they make resistance, and mean to
keep their Religion. I beseech you let the lives, and cruel and cursed usages
of those that have already perished by their intercede and mediate with the
bowels of your compassions on the behalf of the remnant which is yet left.

Sixthly, It is the holiness, purity, and truth of that Faith and Religion
which your selves profess, and wherein you hope to be saved, that has kindled
that fire of hatred and revenge in those Romish spirits, which is now broken
out, rageing and devouring, as you have heard. These servants of God whose
cause we now plead before you, are for no other cause, nor in any other
respect made the miserable objects of the wrath and fury of their enemies,
exposed to that fiery storm and tempest of blood that hangs over their heads,
but because they are your Brethren, and Professors of the same Precious Faith
with you: They suffer not as evil doers, but only because they have given the
right hand of fellowship unto you in the things of GOD, and of the Lord JESUS
CHRIST. I hope the power of that Religion which you profess, will set you on
fire to make up the breaches, which the Profession of it has made, or further
shall make upon others.

Seventhly, Consider, that the cause, for the maintenance whereof you are now
solicited, being so clearly and entirely as it is, the cause of your
Religion, and you of this City looked upon as the greatest Friends, as the
solemnest and most serious Professors which it has not only in this, but in
all other Kingdoms also under Heaven, and withal many of you being of known
estates and sufficient abilities to do much for it in that way, which is now
expected from you; if then you shall now discover any backwardness in
ministering to the necessities of it, if you shall give the least suspicion to
the world, that your estates are competitors for your hearts with your
Religion, if your contributions toward the maintenance of it shall either fall
low, or come off heavily from you, you shall much quench the glory and esteem
of it in the hearts of men, and represent it unto the world as a Religion weak
and contemptible and of a doubtful assureanc, upon the service whereof silver
and gold were too great to be sacrificed. The truth is, that the opportunity
that is before you, enableth you to set the prize and estimate of your
Religion, at what rate, or height you please: you have the world at such an
advantage to compel them to think highly and honorable of that truth which
you profess, the loss and neglect whereof would be an inexpiable streyne of
unworthiness in you, and which you can hardly ever redeem, no though you
should sacrifice your selves and your whole estates in the flames of the
greatest zeal for it afterward. Nay if you shall sin against the Crown and
dignity of the Religion you profess, by being remiss, and low and cold in
the service recommended unto you, all the Professors it has in the world
besides, though they should rise up in their might and cloth themselves with
double zeal to do their uttermost for it, will not be able to build up what
you will throw down, nor exalt the glory of it according to the measure of your
abasements. Therefore if your Religion be of that inestimable worth and value
whereof you have given information unto the world hitherto by your profession
of it, seal to these informations of yours this day, and rejoice in free and
liberal contributions over it: cause your silver and gold to do hommage to
it, and to acknowledge the Divinity of it.

Eighthly, Your zeal and open-handednesse for the relief of the distressed,
may strike a dampe of fear and teror into the hearts of their enemies, when
they shall either by hearing of seeing, come to know it, and so weaken their
hand to their work. When they shall perceive what deep and dear interest in
your hearts and affections those have, whose confusion and ruin they hope to
reap as the recompense and reward of their present rebellions, this may, cut
the sinews, and strength of their expectation this way, and take off the fiery
edg of their presuming confidence. The interpretation of what you shall do in
this kind like your selves, may be of much more consequence to your friends,
then the text it self. I beseech you give not those bloodthirstie wretches any
scope or liberty of hope or thought, but that those whose lives and fortunes
they seek to ruin and trample under foot, are a generation very precious in
your eyes, and that your hearts are fully set and bent upon their preservation
and deliverance. Little (perhaps) do you think or imagine, of how rich a
concernment such a conceit as this begotten in the spirits of their enemies,
may be for the peace and safety of your friends.

Ninthly, By casting on sufficient quantities of water to quench the fire that
is kindled in that Kingdom, you may prevent the kindling of the like, or a
worse, in your own. Jreland is not unfitly termed, a back door into England:
and of what dismal portendance it must needs be to you and your Nation, to
have the Pope keeper of the keys of your back door, I shall not need to
represent unto you. If Jreland ever be brought under the power of the Romish
faction, the Sun of Englands prosperity will suddenly be darkened in the
midst of the Heavens thereof: that Land and Kingdom will receive immediate
consecration from the triple Crown, for a Sanctuary unto those that shall
undertake or attempt the ruin or molestation of this: it will so one be a
receptacle for Ijm and Oijm, I mean for the furies and firebrands of Rome, to
lodge in. Besides, the neighborhood of such a confederate Kingdom as Ireland
will be, if ever that generation of vipers we speak of, should Lord it there,
will foment and cherish those seeds of seditions, Treasons, conspiracies, and
Rebellions, which are sown in the natures and dispositions of that Popish gang
amongst our selves. If you let Ireland go, the peace and safety of your own
Land and Nation (it is much to be feared) will soon follow after it. I beseech
you be not backward to do the best you are able for those who are now
recommended unto you: that which you shall part with, may be the price of the
redemption of your own land.

Tenthly, There is no better foundation can be treasured up for your selves
against an evil day, then by a compassionate and tender consideration of those
that are in distress, in the mean season. Bowels of compassion toward the
afflicted, make the best shelter and covert from a storm and tempest, of any
other material whatsoever. By the same shield which you shall hold forth to
defend others from evil, you shall protect your selves also. The Scripture is
abundant in the testimony of this truth. Blessed is he that considers the
poor: the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble. The Lord will preserve
him and keep him alive* etc. Psalm. 41. ver. 1. 2. you know not what evil
times, what days of darkness GOD may yet please to bring upon your Land and
Nation: take heed I beseech you, least by leaving your Brethren naked to that
storm and tempest which now threatens them, and in part lies sore and heavy
upon them, you do not consult nakedness to your selves, against the day
wherein the like storm or tempest shall fall upon you* He shall have judgment
without mercy, that shows no mercy. Jam. 2. 13. Take heed, he that has
said i^, will do it accordingly.

Lastly, to make my motion unto you greater then denial (if it may be) be
pleased to consider this one thing further, that if you shall deal unworthily
in that work of Christ whereunto you are now called, and shall love the wages
of unfaithfullnesse, and resolve to keep your money by you, notwithstanding the
importunate and loud cries of your Brethrens blood and lives for it, you may
justly fear that it will soon alter the property of it; and that, that which
was life and strength unto you hitherto, will from henceforth be but labor and
sorrow, in comparison. Whatsoever God calls for at any time at the hands of
any man for his glory, if it be denied unto him; whether it be a man's credit,
friends, liberty, estate, life, or whatsoever, it seldom or never prospers;
nor is it self afterward any more unto him. There may well be an insinuation
or breathing of this truth, in that of our Savior, He that will save his life
(and so his credit, estate, liberty, etc. when the Gospel and my affairs
require it) shall lose it: meaning (happily) that after such a saving it, a man's
life will be no more it self, no more a life, but rather a death to him, and
shall never have the like contentment or sweetness in it, which it had before.
I beseech you put this consideration also to heart with all the former.
Whatsoever it be that God now requires of you for the support of his cause and
servants, it is to little purpose, I mean in respect of the flesh it self, or
any outward accommodation, for you to withhold it, or to deny it unto him: This
call of God for it, has made it good for nothing, but for consecration: it is
no more for any civil or natural use or service unto you, till God has bin
served by it, and shall return it again into your bosoms. That bread which
God commands to be cast upon the waters, will certainly mold and putrify, if
it be not cast upon them: but if his voice be obeyed concerning it, so that it
be cast upon the waters accordingly, when it shall be found and taken up again
from the waters (as his promise is it shall be) it shall be unto the owners, or
him that cast it, as the bread of Angels: there will be more nourishment and
sweetness in one morsel of it, then in full tables of other provision.

All these things duly weighed, I beseech you consider what you have to do in
the service propounded and recommended to you. It will be of sad consequence
unto you to seek out pretenses and excuces, why you should not willingly take
this yoke upon you: the exigencie of the occasion is such, that no pretenses
or reasons whatsoever are to be known or once regarded against the motion that
has bin made unto you. It seldom or never falls out, but if God has one
request to make to us, the flesh and the world have another to make in
opposisition and bar to it; and that (for the most part) very plausible and
satisfactory to the Conscience of him that desires to decline the work and
service of God* Nay rather if pretenses and excuses shall offer themselves unto
you, hide them from your eyes, and bury them like your dead, out of your sight:
tread them down under your foot as often as they offer to rise up against you to
trouble you in your way. Wife and Children, and charge, and poverty, and want
of moneys, and occasions of disbursments otherwise, with a thousand other such
insinuations as these, must with Satan himself be commanded to get them
behind us: these are not to be admitted into this consultation. Ireland must be
looked after, and provided for, as if we had neither Wives, nor Children, nor
charge, nor were poor, nor wanted Moneys, nor knew what to do with our Money
otherwise. Uniform and standing occasions, are but nences, in the presence of
great exigencies, and precipitate exigences, and precipitate occasions. And
know that you are not your selves, except you be more then your selves, and
above your selves in this work: you do not that which you are able to do, and
consequently not that which is your duty to do, except you do more then you are
able to do, upon such an occasion as this. To their power, I bear them record
(says Paul concerning the Churches of Macedonia) yea, and beyond their power
they were 2 Cor. 8. 3.
willing of themselves. The meaning is not (as perhaps the face of the leter
seems to import) that they were desirous and willing to have done more then
they did, in case they had bin better provided: but that out of an abundant
willingness that was in them to promote such a service as was now proposed to
them, they stretched themselves in their contributions, beyond what the line of
their outward estates would well bear. We know that exigencies and
extremities, and ecstacies of fears in other kinds, will intend and raise the
natural strength and abilities of men far above themselves. In a plunge of
danger, and by the help and advantage of some great fear, many have bin able
to leap ditches, and to take up weights, and to run with that swiftness, which
by their standing strength and abilities they were never able to do. And
doubtless such a spiritual exigencie as is now presented to us, if we took
the impressions of it kindly and fully, would raise the powers of grace also
within us above themselves, and enable us to work miracles, in comparison of
our ordinary expressions of our selv's, it would make even our most extreme
poverty (in case our poverty were such) to abound to the riches of our
liberality; as the Apostle records concerning the Churches of Macedonia which
we speak of. The Lord grant that the efficacy and power of what has bin said
unto you, may be found in your deportments and behavior in that great work
that is before you.

FINIS.

