THE ORACLE OF GOD.

A Sermon appointed for the Cross, and preached in the Cathedral Church of
St. Paul, in London, on the 20. day of December, being the Sunday before
Christmasse, Anno Dom. 1635.

By John Gore Rector of Wenden-lofts in Essex

LONDON, Printed for J. P. and are to be sold by Andrew Greek and Charles
Green. 1646.

Perlegi hanc concionem, cui titulus (Gods Oracle) in qua nihil reperio sanae
fidei, aut bonis moribus contrarium.

Tho. Weeks, R.P. Epi. Land. Cap. Domest.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHRISTOPHER CLETHEROW, Lord Mayor of the honorable
City of London; whose dignity and prosperity, God long continue.
WHat it pleased your Honor to desire, may it please you also to accept ( a
poor man's Sermon.) I have no other plea, nor other hopes nor means to find
grace in your eyes (seeing I am a stranger,) but only for that Grace's sake,
which is the theme and subject, the pith and marrow of my text. In a word
therefore, As Jacob prayed heartily for his sons, when they went to present
themselves before Joseph, Genesis 43. 14. God Almighty give you mercy in the sight
of the man: Such is my hearty prayer to Almighty God; God Almighty give me
mercy in your sight, and you in his sight, Oratum est,

Your Honors poor servant and suppliant, JOHN GORE.

THE ORACLE OF GOD.
2 COR. 12. 9* My Grace is sufficient for thee.
IT is well known that this Sunday, and some of the rest that are gone before,
are commonly called in our Liturgy by the name of Advent-sundayes, as you would
say in plain English Coming Sundays. And wot you why? because therein we do
thankfully celebrate and solemnize the blessed time and memory, of our Saviors
coming to us in the flesh, and his arrival from heaven in this vale of
misery. If any man desire a reason why we celebrate the coming of our Savior
in so solemn, so sacred, and so settled a manner, being gone and past 1600.
years ago? Saint John has given me an answer to my hand, Because grace and
truth came by Jesus Christ, Ioh. 1. 17. When Jesus Christ came from the bosom
of his Father, he came not empty-handed, nor unprovided: but brought Truth and
Grace into the world with him: Truth to direct us to heaven, and Grace to
deliver us from hell: and that is a Congiary that deserves commemoration to the
worlds end. If any man shall yet further inquire, what is this Grace to us? or
what are we the better for the Grace that he brought? For that my text will
resolve you, and make it evidently appear unto you, that Christ is no niggard
of his Grace, neither does he keep it to himself (as Nabal did his victuals)
but does graciously impart it, and mercifully bestow it, so much upon every
one, as he sees in his wisdom to be enough and sufficient for him. My Grace
is sufficient for thee. And let that suffice for the occasion and choice of my
text, that it is not (...), not altogether unsuitable and impertinent to the
time.

Come we now to the Text it self, which is nothing else but The Oracle of God,
or Gods own immediate voice, not disdaining to utter it self from Heaven, for
the comfort and satisfaction of his poor distressed Suppliant here on earth.
Fur thus stood the case.

Our Apostle at this time was punished with two strange and strong afflictions,
the one internal, the other external; the one he terms the Thorn in the
flesh, the other the Messenger of Satan that buffeted him. By that same (...),
Thorn or splinter in the flesh. I suppose he did mean his own
concupiscence, his own corruption and lust, which is as painful and vexatious
to a tender soul, as a thorn in the hand, or a splinter under the nail, is
irksome and grievous to the tender flesh. By that (...), the messenger, or the
angel of Satan, must needs be understood the Devils temptation; for before
that wicked one come himself, he sends his Messenger or his Angel before him
to make way for his entertainment, and as Elisha said of the King of Isreal's
man which was sent to behead him, 2 Reg. 6. 32. Is not the sound of his Masters
feet behind him? so believe it, whenever an evil temptation, or a
temptation to evil does come before, the devil himself who is the master and
maker of it is not far behind. Now mark how this evil angel used, or
rather abused S. Paul; the Text says, He fell foul upon him, and buffeted
him* now you know that buffeting is a malicious act joined with violence, or a
violent act joined with malice, and it signifies unto us, what a malicious
mind the Devil bears to Gods especial servants; if he cannot by fair
means entice, and allure, and inveagle them to sin; if God will give him
leave, he will fall upon them by foul means, even (...), to buffet them, and
enforce them in a manner to sin against God and their own souls. Thus sorely
was our poor Apostle haunted, thus cruelly was he handled, both with venomous
corruptions within, and with violent temptations without, so that neither
inwardly, nor outwardly: he could be free or at liberty to enjoy himself and
his God: Whereupon (says the Text) He besought the Lord thrice, that they
might depart from him; all his desire, all his prayer to God was, to be rid of
these annoyances. Now mark the answer, and observe the Oracle of Almighty God.

Just as some skillful Physician, when his Patient in a fever calls for
drink, gives him a sirrope, or some conserve, and so quenches his thirst in a
better kind, than drink could do: so dealt the Lord with Paul, who was now
in a spiritual fever, and cries out amain, (as it were for drink) that is,
for some present refreshing, and release of his punishment. God seems to take
no notice of that, but quenches his souls thirst in a better kind, gives him
a spiritual conserve, endues him with his Grace, and let that content thee
(says God) let that suffice thee; for that, even that alone is entirely enough
and sufficient for thee.

My Grace is sufficient for thee. From which passage of Gods providence (before
I come to particulars) give me leave to commend unto you this brief
observation in general: viz. That if after all our prayers, after all our
entreaties and importunities with God for private and particular favors and
mercies* as for health in time of sickness, for ease in time of pain, for
rest and deliverance in the time of trouble and affliction: Though God should
seem to take no notice of us, but deny or withold all these things from us;
if he do but condescend unto us in this one thing (as he did to Saint Paul) if
he do but vouchsafe us his Grace, Summam votorum attigimus, we have as much
as heart can wish, we have that which is in stead, or in liew of all the rest.
As the Jews write of their Mannah, that it had in it Omne delectamentum, all
manner of delightful tastes, and was in stead of bread, in stead of meat, in
stead of all kinds of dainty fare; so may it truly be affirmed of the Grace
of God, that it is in stead of health, in stead of wealth, in stead of all
other earthly blessings whatsoever: so that as a man that walks in the Sun,
never looks nor regards whether the Moon or the Stars shine or no, because
he has no need of their light: so he that enjoys the light of Gods
countenance, that has the Grace of God to befriend and bestead him* needs care
the less for these inferior commodities, these Bonae scabelli (as the Fathers
call them) these goods of Gods Footstool; because, if he have them not, God
will so provide he shall have no need of them. In a word then, if thou were put
to thy choice, as Solomon once was, to ask any one thing at the hands of God,
and to have promise of acceptance, what should that one thing be? would thou
ask for riches, or pleasure, or long life, etc? Alas, all these things thou
may have, (as many a man has had) and be never the holyer, never the
happier, never the higher in Gods account and favor: Leave therefore all these
things to Gods disposal and dispensation; let God do with thee for these
things what seems good in his own eyes: but pitch thou thy heart, and the
desire of thy soul upon that Vnicum necessarium, that one thing necessary
(which our Savior speaks of) in comparison whereof all other things in the
world are needless and superfluous, I mean upon the Grace of God, and nothing
else; and in thy daily prayers to Almighty God, let this evermore be the maine
of thy requests. Whatsoever thou denyest me for other things, Lord, grant me
thy Grace, and it is sufficient.

My Grace is sufficient for thee. Out of which words I shall endeavor to show
you four remarkable points, perhaps not unworthy your observation. 1. The
meaning of the word (...), or what is meant by the Grace here spoken of. 2. The
Author or the owner of this Grace, whose it is, and to whom it does of right
belong, and that is to God, as the next word implies, (...), My Grace. 3. The
efficacy or virtue of this Grace, what it profits, and whereunto it
avails, and that's expressed in the word (...), it is sufficient; and therein I
shall show you, how, and wherein the sufficiency of Gods Grace does consist. 4.
The Application of this Grace, or the bringing of it home to the conscience and
soul of each believing Christian, and that I gather out of the last word,
(...), that God does not say in general (...), My Grace is sufficient for all;
nor in special (...), My Grace is sufficient for many; but in particular,
(...), My Grace is sufficient for thee, and so for me, and so for every one
upon whom God in mercy is pleased to bestow it, (...), My Grace (says God) is
sufficient for thee.

Of these in their order as briefly and effectually, as God and his good Spirit
has enabled me; and first of the meaning of the word (...), or what is meant
by the grace here spoken of.

By the grace of God (in few words) I conceive to be meant nothing else but the
favor and good will of God; that which the Schoolmen term Complacentiam Dei,
the well-pleasednesse of God: the same which the Scripture calls Lucem
faciei, the light of Gods countenance, Psalm. 67. 1. Because as God is said to
frown and bend his brows upon the wicked train, Psalm. 34. so on the
contrary, he seems to smile (as it were) and to look amiably and lovingly,
and lightsomely upon all them that are in grace and favor with him. It is an
usual expression among us to say, such a one is in great grace with the King,
or in great grace at the Court, we mean, he is in great favor there. And it
is a phrase no less usual in Scripture, Genesis 6. 8. Noah found grace in the
sight of God, i. e. he found favor in his sight; and God Almighty says of
Moses Exodus 33. 12. Invenisti gratiam coram me, Thou have found grace in my
sight, i. e. favor and good acceptance: And so the Angel greets the blessed
Virgin, Luke 1. 28. Fear not Mary, Invenisti gratiam, Thou have found grace,
i. e. thou art highly favored of the Lord. So that the grace of God, and the
favor of God are (as Joseph said of Pharaohs dreams) both one and the same.
Now the thing that I muse upon is this, that the grace and favor of God is
thus often, if not always expressed in the Bible, sub termino inveniendi, under
the name and term of finding: It is not barely said of Noah, and Moses, and
the Virgin Mary, fuerunt, they were in grace and favor with God, but
invenerunt, they found it: this phrase does certainly seem to imply (as
Oleaster well observes) that the grace and favor of God is sometimes found, as
a poor man finds a treasure, or a bag of gold, non industria, sed casu; not
by any industry or paines-taking for it, but merely by casualty and Gods
providence in it. As when Joseph's brethren found their money in their sackes
mouths, it enriched them, and it ravished them too, with wonder and
admiration, Genesis 42. 28. in like manner, when a poor disconsolate wretch,
shall without all desert, and beyond all expectation, find a sensible
experiment of Gods favorable goodness toward him; how can he choose, but
even bless himself, and say, Lord, what am I that such a favor should be
cast upon me! In a word, as Jacob answered his aged father when he questioned
him about the matter of his venison, Genesis 27. 20. How is it that thou have
found it so quickly my son? (says he) Because the Lord thy God brought it to
my hand. In like sort, if any shall seem to question the matter, how it comes
to pass that some one man finds favor and rises to preferment so easily
and so quickly over that some others do, which to our thinking deserves it
better, In promptu ratio, the Lord their God brings it to their hand: when God
brings a blessing to hand, the labor is not long to find it. But that by the
way.

I shall here take occasion to resolve you of two questions, which do offer
themselves to your consideration; the first is this, when a man wants the grace
and favor of God, how shall he do to find it? the second is like unto it,
when a man has found Gods grace and favor at his need, how shall he do to
keep it, that he do not forfeit it, nor loose it again? I will answer you
for both, in a word.

Do thou want the Grace of God, and feign would find it? Thou must do
two things for it.

First, thou must depreciari teipsum (it is Tertullians word) thou must
disparage and disgrace, thou must humble and abase thy self before the face of
God: for if that be true which our Savior says, Ioh. 10. 35. non potest
solvi scriptura, The Scripture cannot be broken: then no man living can find
Grace with God, but he that is truly humble (for God resists the proud and
gives grace to the humble) Let one example serve for all, and it is a
seasonable one for this time: that of the blessed Virgin, of whom we spoke
before: The Angel told her (as you have heard) that she was (...), highly or
extraordinarily in favor with God, for indeed she had such grace, as never
mortal woman had the like with God, to be made (...), the Mother of God, and
to bear him in her body, who in his body bare away the sins of all the
world; to give her own Savior suck; it was a favor beyond expression: well,
but whence came this to pass that the Virgin Mary found this favor with God
rather then any other Virgin in Israel? no doubt (as our Savior said in
another case) many widows were in Israel in the days of Elizeus, but to none
was the Prophet sent, save only to the widow of Sareptah: So, many Virgins
were in Israel in the days of the Virgin Mary, yet to none was the Angel sent,
but to her only: And why to her, and not to them? she that knew it best,
gives the reason her self in her Magnificat which we daily read; My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior; for why?
Respexit humilitatem (says she) He has regarded the lowliness of his
hand-maiden. It was not then for her loveliness, but it was for her
lowliness; not for her handsomeness, but for her humbleness that she found
such grace and favor with God above her fellow Virgins: Other Virgins there
might be that were as chaste as she, as beautiful as she, and far more
wealthy and gay then she was; but no Virgin in Israel, nor in all the world,
was so humble nor so lowly as she was; and this was the only materia struendae
misericordiae, (if I may so speak) the matter that Gods mercy had to work
upon; that, that only, was the foundation and groundwork of all the grace
and favor that she found with God. In like manner, if thou do desire to be
partaker of the same mercy, to find favor with God as she did, thou must
also be partaker of the same humility, thou must be humble and lowly as she
was: do as Benhadads servants did to Ahab, 1 Reg. 20. 31. We have heard (say
they) that the Kings of Israel are merciful kings, let us go then and put
sackcloth upon our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and so humble our selves
before him, peradventure we shall find favor with him, that we shall not die
but live: So thou have heard that the God of Israel is a merciful God, stand
not then upon terms of ease or state if thou love thy self, but go and
humble thy self unto him, prostrate thy self before him, pray and seek his
face in the lowliest, the dejectedst, the devotest manner that possibly thou
can express both with thy body and with thy soul, and (believe it for a
truth) if any thing under heaven bring thee into favor with the God of Heaven,
that will do it, depreciare teipsum, to disparage thy self.

Secondly, thou must Appropriare Christum, thou must appropriate Christ unto
thy self, thou must shroud thy self under thy Saviors wings, thou must sue
to God under his protection and patronage, and as the Herodians, Act. 12. made
friendship with Blastus the Kings Chamberlain to help them into favor with
Herod; so must thou make friendship with Jesus Christ, for it is he and only
he that can help thee into grace and favor with thy God. Gratificavit nos in
dilect^ (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 6.) He has brought into grace, or he
has made us accepted in his beloved Son. Gratiam pro Gratia (says Saint
John elsewhere, Ioh. 1. 16.) We have received Grace for Grace; that is, for
the Grace and favor that Christ has with God, we also are received into
grace and favor with him: For otherwise, as Elisha told the King of Israel, 2
Reg. 3. 14. As the Lord lives were it not that I regard the presence of
Iehosaphat, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee: So stands our case
with God, we are of our selves such vile bodies (as the Apostle rightly terms
us, who shall change our vile bodies) I mean so foul and so full of
corruption and lust and sin, so odious and abominable in the holy eyes of
God; that as the Lord lives, were it not that God does regard the person, the
presence and the prayers of Jesus Christ our true Jehosaphat, he would not
look to us nor see us: but that (as he says himself,) This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased. (There come we into favor) and mark, that he does
not say, This is my beloved Son which pleases me well, but in whom I am
well pleased; which intimates a further matter unto us; namely, that our
blessed Savior does not only please God his Father, for his own part, but
that God in him, and for his sake is well pleased even with them that are in
themselves (as the Prophet speaks) even vessels wherein there is no pleasure,
Ier. 22. 28. Thou therefore that desire to get into favor with thy God,
flatter not thy self in thy own eyes, think not that God will accept thee
for thy own person, or for any other personal qualities or abilities that are
in thee; but as Jacob shrouded himself under the garments of his elder
brother, and by that means got him the blessing of his Father; so do thou
shroud thy self under the garments of thy elder brother in Heaven; I mean, as
the Apostle speaks, Labor to be found of God, not having on thy own
righteousness, but the righteousness of Christ by faith: Say as Tertullian
does, Mihi vendico Christum, mihi defendo Iesum; claim thou thy part, stand
thou for thy right in Jesus Christ; and as thou art a Protestant, so make this
protestation before God and the world, that thou hopest for grace and mercy,
not by any merits or deserts of thy own, but merely by the merits, and by the
spirit, by the death, and by the Blood of Jesus Christ. This is another
infallible way for a man to find the Grace and Favor of God, that wants it,
Appropriare Christum, to get an interest into Gods beloved Son, our dear and
precious Savior.

2. Now for the second question; Have thou found the favor of God, and feign
would keep it? Thou must (...), (it is the Apostles own word, Gal. 2. 14.)
Thou must walk with a right foot to Godward; or as John Baptist expresses it
in other terms, thou must Rectas facere semitas tuas, Make thy paths straight;
the meaning is, Thou must bind thy self to the good behavior unto God, thou
must resolve against sin and evil, and set thy self constantly, carefully,
sincerely to walk with God, so far forth as frailty shall permit thee, so
that though there fall out many intercurrent infirmities in the course of thy
life, for a man may, etiam in bono itinere pulverem colligere, gather dust and
soil even in a good way, yet let it be the general drift and desire of thy
soul, in nothing, willingly to finne against God, but in every thing to please
him, and to approve thy self unto him: which if thou do, see what will
follow upon it, Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord will give Grace and Glory, and no good
thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly with him. The Scripture
says of Enoch, that he was Raptus a facie malitiae, snatched (as it were) out
of this wicked world, as a brand is snatched out of the fire and saved from
burning; that is, He was translated alive from earth into Heaven, and never
felt, nor tasted of death: This (you will say) was an extraordinary favor of
God, but what might be the reason of it? Moses tells us, Genesis 5. 24. it was
because He walked with God; the Apostle commenting upon it, Heb. 11. 5. says,
it was because He pleased God, (...), (is the word) which signifies, He gave
God content, or kept Gods favor and good will; so then, the way to keep Gods
favor and good will, is to please God, and give him content; and the way to
do that, is to walk with God as Enoch did. But what does Moses mean by
walking with God, how may that be done? Answ. Generally, A man may then be said
to walk with God, when he leads his life in such a way as God does best
accept, in the way of Godliness and Honesty, in the way of temperance and
sobriety, in the way of diligence and industry; when a man has a mind on God
in all his ways, and desires Gods protection and conduct to guide his feet
into the way of peace. This is, in a general sense and acceptance to walk
with God more particularly; A man is then said in proper sense to walk with
God, when he walks with none else but God; as Isaac did when he sequestered
himself, and went out alone into the fields to meditate and to pray, Genesis 40.
69. (The word ( Suach) signifies both, then went he out to walk with God: And
indeed there is no such time for a man to converse with God, and (as the phrase
is in Job) to acquaint himself with the Lord, as when he is solitary,
private, and alone: If any thing grieve a man, or lie heavy upon his
conscience, when he is Alone, he may freely disburden his heart into the bosom
of God. If a man have faulted any way, or done amiss for want of good
take-heed, when he is Alone, he may freely and fully bewail and bemone, and
even beshrew and shrive himself unto the Lord his God. If a man want any good
thing that's requisite and necessary either for the body or the soul, when he
is Alone, he has free and full opportunity to beg and to entreat it, to win
and to obtain it at the hand of God. No such time for a man to reconcile
himself, and to make his own atonement and his peace with God, as when he
is Alone. In a word then, if thou do desire to keep the favor of the Lord,
and to abide in his grace and his good will; do as Isaac did, take one turn
with thy God every day thou risest; steal away from thy earthly occasions (as
our Savior stole away from his earthly Parents) to do the business of thy
heavenly Father, or as the Apostles word, 2 Pet. 3. 9. (...), to retire and
repent. Let no day pass thee without some commerce and conference with thy
God; and (believe it) if there be any means in the world to fasten and rivet
the favor of God unto thy soul, that will do it, (...) to walk aright with
God.

I have done with the first general part of my Text concerning the meaning of
the word (...), or what is meant by the Grace here spoken of: Come we now to
the second, and that is the Author and Owner of this Grace, expressed in the next
word ((...)) God claims it as his own peculiar) and calls it by a term of
propriety, My Grace, to show that none has to do with the dispensing of that
but himself alone.

Now if you mark the course of Scripture, you shall observe that there is not
any thing which belongs to man, but in one place or other God claims it for
his own. Though he has given the earth to the Children of men, yet has he
not alienated it from himself, but that still, The Earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof: whatsoever fullness the earth affords us, whether it be
Fields full of Corn, Folds full of Sheep, Orchards full of Fruit, Tables full
of Meat, etc. all these fulnesses are the Lords, who opens his hand, and
fills all things living with plenteousnesse. And not only the earth in
general and the fullness thereof, but the very Cattle and Beasts of the
earth, are all the Lords too: Psalm. 50. 10. All the Beasts of the Forest are
mine (says God) and so are the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. The Beasts of
the Forest (we know) are ferae naturae, of a wild unruly nature, they know no
Master, acknowledge no owner, are in subjection to no keeper; yet because the
Lord takes care of them, gives them their being, and provides them their food,
therefore does he justly claim them for his own, and says, (All the Beasts
of the Forest are mine) and so are all the Cattle upon a thousand hills*
whether they be sheep or goats; Neat or Foul; there is no man living has
any right unto them upon earth, but he holds it in capite, and has his right
from the God of Heaven.

Not only so; but the very Corn in our Barnes, the Wine in our Cellars, the
Wool upon our Sheep backs, the Lord claims for his own, as ye may see,
Hos. 2. 8, 9. For God bestows his blessings, as the Sun does his beams, in
such a manner, as that they depend still upon himself after he has bestowed
them. Nay to come nearer yet, the very money that is in our purses or coffers,
whether we keep it close to hatch a purchase; or put it out, as the Lion puts
out his claw to rend and gripe the poor needy borrower; wheresoever God finds
it, he claims it for his own, Hag. 2. 8. The Silver and the Gold is mine;
and as little conscience as men make of their gains, they must one day be
accountable to the Lord, How they got it, how they used it, and how they wasted
it. All this is to let us understand to whom we are beholden for our Lands,
for our goods, and for whatsoever else we inherit or enjoy in this world, even
to the Father of lights, (as James terms him, Iam. 1. 17.) from whom both
(...), and (...), both gifts and goods, and all descend unto us; therefore as
in the sacrifices of old, whosoever had the flesh, God had the fat; so
whosoever has the goods of this world, let God have the glory, for his they
are, and from him we have and hold them.

But there is one thing in my Text, for which we are more beholding to God,
then for all the rest; and that is for His Grace, other things though they come
originally from God, yet they come mediately by the means of other
instruments, by Parents or Friends, or Benefactors* but Grace is a thing that
comes solely, and only, and immediately from God; as there was no corn to be
had in Egypt, but from the hand of Joseph, so no grace to be had on earth, but
from the hand of God: He is the God of all Grace (as Saint Peter truly
styles him) there is no grace whatsoever that is wanting in man, but there is
a gracious supply to be had in God, which made David (as it were) in a rapture
to cry out and say, Oh taste and see how gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34. 8.
First taste, and then see; because as a man can never truly tell the
sweetness of Honey, till he have tasted it first* so can he never truly see
nor perceive, nor understand how gracious a God the God of Heaven is, till he
have first had a taste of Gods Grace, and an experience of Gods favor in
himself and for his own soul. Taste then and see how gracious the Lord is:
Gracious in his Throne, for it is the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4* 16. gracious in
his spirit, for it is the spirit of Grace, Zach. 12. 10. Gracious in his Word,
for it is the Word of Grace, Act. 20* 30. and above all, gracious in himself,
for He is the God of Grace: yea, (...), The God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10.
And therefore do thou desire wisdom? He is the God of that Grace; do
thou want patience? he is the God of that too; do thou stand in need of
Faith, or Hope, or Charity? he is the God of all these* Oh what a gracious God
do we serve, and what graceless beasts we are if we serve him not, seeing
he has grace sufficient for all his servants? My Grace (says God) is
sufficient for thee.

In a word then, forasmuch as all Grace is of God, that He, and none but He,
has the disposal and the dispensation of it to whom he pleases; take (I
beseech you) into your consideration these brief advertisements following.

1. Ne deficias, do not fail of it; It is the Apostles own caveat, Heb. 12.
15. Look diligently least any man fail of the Grace of God. God for his part
is so gracious, that he denies his grace to none, but offers it, and (I may
say) gives it to every one that will but ask and accept it, as the Scripture
says of Araunah, 2 Samuel 24. 23. when he offered King David his Oxen for a
sacrifice, and his threshing instruments for wood to burn them; the Text
says, All these things did Araunah as a King give unto the King: whereas we
know, he did not give them, because David would not accept of them, but his
will was to have given them, and that the Holy Ghost accounts as a gift, and so
records it. In like sort, God offers his grace in the Word and Sacraments,
his will is graciously and freely to bestow it, if sinful men were but
like-minded to receive it, and to make themselves capable of so great a mercy
by desiring it. It was Gods own proposition to his own Son, Psalm. 2. 8.
postula a me, etc. desire of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thy
inheritance, etc. If he that was sole Heir of Heaven and Earth ( haeres ex
toto ass, as the Romans used to style them) could no otherwise come by his
inheritance but by way of petition to desire it before he had it, much more so
is it with us; where no desire is, look for no gift, no prayer, no grace. We
see in Esaias, God makes a gracious promise to his people, that he would put away
all their sins, and take them all into his favor, as though they had never
sinned; but mark the condition, for all these things I will be sought unto
(says God.) So though God offer his Grace to men, he will not force it upon
them against their wills, he will have them sue for it, he will have them
desire it, or they may thank themselves if they go to hell without it; and
God may justly complain of them, as David did of Naball, 1 Samuel 25. 21. All is
in vain that I have done for these men. Seeing then there is no backwardness
in God to make denial of his grace, but he is willing to bestow it upon all
that are desirous to embrace it; Oh be not wanting to thy own mercy, ne
deficias, do not fail of it.

2. Seeing that Grace is the Lords, ne superbias, be not proud of it, do not
(...), (as Saint James his word is, chap. 3. 5.) do not magnifically lift up
thy self above thy brethren whose graces are not so eminent as thine: but
rather as the ears of Corn, and the boughs of trees, the more they are laden
with fruit, the lower they hang to the earth, so the more god has laden thee
with his graces and favors, be thou so much the more lowly in thy own eyes;
and think not scorn to do as thy God does, who though his Glory be above
the Heavens, (says David, Psalm. 113. 6.) yet he does Abase himself to behold
the things that are in the earth; and as the more direct the Sun is over us,
the shorter and lesser is the shadow: so the more that Gods grace is over thee,
and in thee, the lesser let the shadow of pride be seen to come from the: for
consider (says the Apostle) What have thou that thou have not received? or
what is that thou can properly call thine own, but mendacium and peccatum,
lying and sin? as our Savior said of the devil, John 8. when he speaks a
lie, he speaks de suo, of his own, God never put that into him: so for thy
sins thou must thank thy self, or rather indeed beshrew and blame thy self,
for they are thy own; but if thou have any grace or any virtue in thee, thank
God for that; for it is not thine, it is the Lords: seeing then thou art but a
Tributary to God, and have nothing that good is, but what thou art beholding,
and must be countable to the Lord for it, ne superbias, be not proud of it.

3. Seeing Grace is the Lords to bestow on whom he pleases, ne invideas, do
not envy it, let not thine eye be evil because God is good, nor think the
worse of another man because God is better to him then unto thee: for Gods
grace is his own, he may give it to whom he will. When God shall take off his
grace, and of his good Spirit (as Samuel said to Saul) shall give it to a
Neighbor of thine that is better then thou: what cause have thou to be envious
at this? and not rather to humble thy self, and think that (as Daniel told
the King, chap. 5. 27.) God has weighed thee in a balance, and found thee,
minus habens, wanting to God and to thy self, and therefore has justly
withheld his favor from thee, and given it to one that will use it better,
for his glory, and for the Churches good, far be it from any child of God to
cherish in his breast the spawne of that old serpent the Devil; for envy is no
better; (as the learned have well observed) there is so near a resemblance
betwixt an envious man and the Devil, that in the Book of God the one is
taken for the other; so the Devil is called (...) an envious man ( Mat. 13.
28.) and an envious man is called (...) a devil ( Ioh. 6. 70.) How far
better would it become us in this respect to be (...), like the Angels of
Heaven; who now at Christmas time, when they saw that our Savior would in no
wise take their nature which was far better then ours; but took our nature
upon him, which was far worse then theirs, and which was most of all, and
would have gone most against our stomachs, commanded them to worship it, Heb.
1. 6. they were so far from envying, or taking offense at this; (as that
elder brother did in the Gospel, when the younger was received to grace after
his riotous course) that even then they sung an Anthem for the joy of our
happiness, and even to this day; (Saint Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 1. 12.) they
do (...), stoop down (as it were) in duty and love, to honor the mystery of
Christ's incarnation, and to admire the Grace and favor of God to mankind: In
a word then, seeing that the honoring of Gods grace wheresoever it lights, is
a quality so Angelical; and the contrary so diabolical, let it be thy
practice evermore to reverence him that has it, to judge thy self unworthy of
it, seek it in Gods name, and get to be partaker in it, but in any case ne
invideas, do not envy it.

4. Seeing that Grace proceeds from so holy a Fountain as is the Lord, ne
Abutaris, do not abuse it, do not vitiate nor stain it with sin, as Lot
entreated the men of Sodom, Genesis 19. 8. that they would not abuse the Angels
of God, seeing they were come to shelter themselves under the shadow of his
roof; So let me entreat you all in the Name of Christ that you would not
abuse the graces of God, seeing they are come from Heaven to take shelter and
harbor in your breasts and bosoms. The Apostle speaks of some ( Iud. 4.)
that turn the grace of God into wantonness; and that is a woeful kind of
Alchymie (as one says singularly well) would he not esteem that man
prodigally foolish and mad, that would spend all his time, all his stubstance,
and all his industry to find out a perverse Philosophers stone, that should
turn all the gold it touched into lead and dross? even such are they that
pervert the grace of God, and turn it into wantonness, into lasciviousness,
into all manner of scurrility and deboistnesse, and never lin, till they have
made a poison of an Antidote, and baned themselves with that which would have
been their bliss, Lucerna Dei inspiritu hominis (says Solomon, Pro. 20. 27.)
The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord; it implies, that a man naturally
walks in darkness, which is full of error, and full of terror, till God in
mercy set up a candle in his soul, (I mean) endues him with knowledge and
grace from heaven, that he may show him the path of life, and to avoid the
snares of death.

Now you know, that a candle naturally burns upwards, if you take it and turn
it the wrong way, and hold it downwards, it dies and goes out alone, so fares
it with (...), Graces and gifts of God, as Wit and Wisdom, Knowledge and
Learning, and all these are the candles of the Lord, and are purposely given us
to light us up to heavenward; but if we take Gods candles and hold them
downward, turn them the wrong way, and apply and abuse them to sin; it is
much to be feared, the light of God will go out, and thou shall be left at
the length in a place of utter darkness. Therefore as thou tenderest the
favor and goodwill of God, and the eternal welfare of thy own soul, deal
not with the Graces of God, as Iehu dealt with Iehorams messenger, 2 Reg. 9.
do not turn them behind thee, and make them serve against their own
masters; but remember that if the sons of Jacob would not endure to have
their sister abused ( Genesis 24. ult.) how do thou think thy God will endure
to have his grace abused, and to be prostituted to every sin? In a word, as
Ruben said to his distressed brethren, ( Genesis 42. 22.) did not I speak unto you
saying, Sin not against the child and ye would not hear? Oh be not you like
them, monitoribus asperi, so careless and regardlesse of divine admonition;
but remember that you have been spoken unto, that you have been warned of God
not to sin against your own souls in this too common kind, but if the Lord
have betrusted you with his grace, labor to cherish it, and (as the Apostles
word is (...) 2 Timothy 1. 6.) to blow it or stir it up, as we do a dying fire,
to kindle and quicken it by the use of good means, but in any case, ne
abutaris, abuse it not.

5. Lastly, seeing thou have to do with the grace and favor of God, ne
diffides, do not distrust it, do not make any doubt or question of it but it
will bestead thee, and befriend thee, and be firm and sure unto thee at any
time of need. It is the Apostles own advertisement, 1 Pet. 1. 13. (...), trust
perfectly on the Grace that is revealed and brought into the world by Jesus
Christ. It is a thing that a man may lean his whole weight upon, and venture
his whole estate upon, and pawn his life and soul upon, the certainety, the
truth, and the infallibility of Gods heavenly grace to all that make their
peace, and put their trust in him. Fear not Mary (said the blessed Angel to
the blessed Virgin) for thou have found favor with God: as if he had said, Let
them fear that are out of Gods favor, let them be distrustful that are
wicked and deceitful, that make no conscience of their ways, but live in the
displeasure of an angry God; paveant illi, let them fear; but noli tu, fear
not thou, be thou steadfast and unmovable in thy affiance to God, for why?
invenisti gratiam, thou have found favor with him, in whose favor is life,
and whose grace will be thy guide unto the day of death. In a word then, (to
close up this point) As I said before, so I say it over again, (...), gird up
the loins of your minds, and trust perfectly to the Grace of God; do it not
in any wavering, or timorous, or unconfident manner, as if God were like the
Poets Tenedos; Stati^ malefida carinis, a trustles Anchor-hold to the
sea-beaten Traveller; or like those deceitful Jews, (Ioh. 2. 24.) to whom our
Savior durst not commit himself, though they seemed to believe in his Name.
Oh let not thy heart entertain the least suspicion, the least jealousy of the
faithfulness and fidelity of thy God; but try him by thy prayers, and trust
him by thy faith, and urge him with this Text that now is preached unto thee,
(as St. Austin says his mother Monica did, Chyrographa tua ingerebat tibi,
Lord (says he) she urged thee with thy own handwriting) tell him but how
hard the world goes with thee, and then say ere God have done with thee, if
thou do not find his Grace to be sufficient for thee. And so I am come in
the third place to show you the efficacy and virtue of the Grace of God, how
and wherein the sufficiency thereof does consist; (...), (says the Text) My
Grace is sufficient.

The principal things whereunto the Grace of God (and besides Gods Grace,
nothing else under heaven) is available or sufficient, are these that follow.

1. Ad Cond^nandum, to pardon and forgive us all our sins, which would be
the bane and destruction of all our souls. Grande est barathrum peccatorum
meorum (says a Father) sed major est Abyssus misericordiae Dei: Great is the
gulf and whirlepoole of my sins, but greater and deeper is the bottomless
Sea of Gods Grace and mercy: see that place, Romans 5. 20. where sin abounded,
Grace did much more abound: Have thou abundance of sins, let not that
dishearten thee, God has abundance of Grace; if thy sins be great, his Grace
is greater then thy sins, and far more sufficient to justify, than all thy
sins are to condemn thy soul. Only ne desis, be not thou wanting to God in
thy prayers and repentance, and his Grace shall never be wanting to thee in
thy pardon and forgiveness. What a golden sentence is that of St. Chrysostom,
(...); Thou do not, thou can not so much desire to have thy sins forgiven
thee, as God does desire to forgive thy sins unto thee. I forgave thee all
thy debt, because thou desiredst me, (said that gracious Lord to his
ungracious servant, Mat. 18. 32.) intimating unto us, that if God do not
forgive us our debts, if he do not pardon and remit our sins; we may thank
our selves, the fault is our own, because we do not desire him, for if we
desired him, he would do it. In a word then, as our Savior asked the Cripple,
John. 5. 6. Will thou be made whole? so, will thou be made holy and clean,
and fit for absolution from God? do thou desire in sincerity and truth to
have thy sins remitted, and thy soul absolved by the blood and death of
Jesus Christ? to have all thy misdeeds expunged and blotted out, that they may
be as if they never had been? Then take the Prophet Esaies counsel ( Esaias 43.
25, 26.) put God in remembrance of these things: (it is a pregnant place, I
pray read and remember it) I even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins: (there is a gracious
promise; but mark the condition in the next immediate words) put me in
remembrance (faith God) and I will do it, and not otherwise: for though God
remember all our sins, and can tell them better than our own souls; yet he
does not remember them to our comfort, but rather to our confusion, unless we
tell him and put him in remembrance of them: so that the only way to put our
sins out of Gods remembrance, is to put them into his remembrance; the only
way to make God forget them, is daily and hourly to declare them and put him
in mind of them. If therefore thou can not be so good as thou would, be
not ashamed, be not afraid to tell God how evil thou art; tell him how
ungodly, how unthankful, how unprofitable a servant thou have been unto him,
and desire God to mend thee, and make thee such a one as he would have thee:
And as Joseph of Arimathea went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus; so go
thou to God and beg the Spirit of Jesus; even that spirit of grace and
Supplication (which the Prophet speaks of, Zach. 12. 10.) which will come
down from heaven and bring into thy soul, first Supplications to prepare
thee; secondly, Grace to assure thee of the free and full forgiveness of all
thy sins: And then let thy sins be what they will be, sins of death,
sins of blood, sins of hell; if thou can find in thy heart to pray, God
will find in his heart to pardon, for his Grace is sufficient to do it.
That Is the first.

2. The second thing whereto the sufficiency of Gods Grace does belong, is ad
consolandum to comfort those sad and heavy hearts that can no other way be
comforted. I should have fainted (says David, Psalm. 27. 13.) for all my
worldly comforts, but that I steadfastly believed, to see the Lords good grace
in the land of the living, (that is) to see it before he dyed; therefore we
read, 1 Samuel 30. 6. when he was in great distress, had neither house nor home
to shelter him, neither wife, nor child, nor friend to be any comfort to him,
but his own very soldiers began to talk of stoning him; Then (says the
Text) David comforted himself in the Lord his God. Hear this thou poor
disconsolate man, that art (as thy Savior was said to be) (...), sad round
about; thou that look into thy purse, and there is no comfort, money is
gone; that look into thy cubbord, and there is no comfort, provision is
gone; that look into thy Barn and Storehouse, and there is no comfort,
Corn and wares are gone; that look in thy heart, and there is no comfort,
cheerfulness and joy is gone: Then look up to God, and there is comfort to
be had: if there be any water, it is in the Sea; if there be any light, it
is in the Sun; if there be any comfort, it is in God. Therefore the Apostle
justly calls him, The God of all consolation, 2 Cor. 1. because when all
other comforts fail, there is comfort to be found in God. For believe this for
a truth, there is no man's case, no man's estate, no man's soul is desperate to
God; but when they are at the lowest ebb, at the poorest stay, at the most
forlorn hope; then does God speak peace unto their souls, then does he draw
out those same ubera consolationes, those breasts or dugges of consolation
(which the Prophet speaks of, Esaias 66. 11.) and drops down that same (...)
that sincere milk of heavenly comfort, to revive the spirit of the humble, and
to give life to them that are of a contrite heart. The Hebrews observe that
one and the same word ( nakam) signifies, first to repent, and then to
comfort; and it may be well applied to this purpose: that true comfort belongs
to none but such as are truly penitent: so our Savior tells us that the holy
Ghost whom he calls the Comforter when he comes, the first thing he will do,
is to convince the world of sin; that is, first put men quite out of comfort
in themselves, then put them into comfort by their Savior. In a word then,
forasmuch as comfort cannot be had without repentance, nor repentance be
endured without comfort, nor either of these be attained without God; it
remains, that as the daughter of Caleb besought her earthly father ( Iud. 1.)
so we beseech our heavenly Father, to give us the Springs above, as well as
the Springs beneath; I mean, that Irriguum superius, the spring of grace and
comfort from above, as well as that Irriguum inferius, the spring of sorrow and
repentance from beneath: and then let our discomforts and discontents be what
they will, we shall have grace sufficient from God to countervaile them all,
and as Philip said to our Savior, Ioh. 14. 8. Lord show us the father and it
suffices us; so though our sins confound us, and our consciences condemn
us, Lord show us thy favor, and it is sufficient for us.

3. The third is Ad sanandum, His Grace is sufficient to cure and heal us of
all those (...) those bodily ailements and infirmities which God for sin does
inflict upon us, (...)* from those scourges and rods (as the Holy Ghost
terms sore diseases, Luke 7. 21.) for indeed they are the very rods which God
uses to chasten and correct us for our follies: I say, there is no rod so
sharp, no disease so sore, but Gods grace is sufficient to heal it and to
take it off. I am R^peca (says God, Exodus 15. penult.) I am thy Physician, or
I am the Lord that heals thee: and if God be the Physician, his Grace is the
Physic, for whosoever be the instrument of our health, God is the Author,
his Grace is it that does the cure. Therefore in common speech, when any
outward malady does befall us, where of we know no second cause; we use to say
(and we say well) that it came by the Grace of God: now if thou beleevest that
it came by Gods Grace, believe this also that by the same Grace it shall (in
Gods good time) be remedied, and removed and done away, for (as St. James
says in another case) God gives (...), Cap. 4. 6. He gives more grace, and
shows more favor, to heal those that are sick and broken in heart, than to
break their hearts, with sickness that were well and whole; both are from
the same Grace, but the one more especially then the other.

But then the maine point for satisfaction will be this: seeing it is in the
power of Gods Grace to cure all infirmities, and that in a moment, with a
word-speaking, (as the Centurion said, Speak but the word, and my servant
shall be whole.) Why will God suffer so many of his own Patients, that have no
Physician but himself, to lie languishing so long under his own hand, and
seem to take no notice of their miseries? The best answer I can give, is that
of our Savior to his Mother, John 2. 4. Nondum venit hora, My hour is not yet
come; for you must conceive there are two kinds of hours; we have our hour,
and God has his Hour. As soon as we begin to sicken, that we feel but any
pain, or find the want of any ease; then is our hour to be healed, then do
we cry out, as it is fit we should, Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak,
Lord heal me for my bones are vexed, Psalm. 6. 2. But God has another hour,
and that you shall find, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. When my people humble themselves, and
pray and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, (that is, when they
are bettered and amended by my afflictions) Then (says God) will I hear in
heaven, and have mercy upon them, and heal their Land. God complains of that
people in many places, that their hearts were waxen fat, that they would not
see with their eyes, nor hear with their ears, nor understand with their
hearts, Ne convertantur ut sanem, Mat. 13. 15. lest they should be converted,
and I should heal them. So that the time of our conversion is Gods
healingtime; First, labor to be converted, and then look to be healed, and
not before. So Acts 3. 19. Repent and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, and then (and never till then) look for a Tempus refrigerii, a
time of refreshing from the presence of the Lord. We read, Numb. 12. 14 When
Myriam was stricken with leprosy, Moses was importunate with God to heal
presently out of hand; Heal her now, O Lord, I beseech thee; Heal her now. No
(says God) I will not heal her yet, she shall stay the time that I have
determined upon her, for if her Father had but spit in her face, should she not
have been ashamed and kept in for seven days, etc. So persuade your selves of
this, that there is a (...) an appointed time that God has set down with
himself in heaven, when and wherein his mercy shall appear on earth for our
recovery; and till that time we must wait, (as David says, Psalm. 123. 2.) As
the eyes of a servant wait on the hand of their masters, and the eyes of a
maiden on the hand of her mistress, so do our eyes wait upon the Lord our
God, until that he have mercy upon us. Mark that same donec misereratur,
until he have mercy: that is, though God show thee not mercy, this day, nor
to morrow, nor the next day, may be, not till a long time after; yet, let not
thy heart be dismayed, but let thy soul truly wait upon God, until he show
thee mercy, let him show it when he will. In the mean time know, thou art
under the hands of a wise and gracious God, who measures every dram of sorrow
that thou feel, who will not only be about thy bed, but will ever make all
thy bed in thy sickness, and will so establish and under* prop thee with his
Grace; that though thy body lie in pain, thy soul shall lie at case; though
thy outward man consume and melt away for very heaviness, yet that same
Interior cordis home, (as Saint Peter speaks) the inner man of thy heart shall
be so strengthened with might, and armed with patience, and guarded with peace,
that neither pains of death, nor the powers of Hell shall ever be able to
prevail against thee. In a word, if ever it shall please God to cast thee
down upon that same, Lectum languoris, that bed of languishing, which David
speaks of, Psalm. 41. 4. (for that we all must make account of) though we now
lie and laze upon our beds, the time may come that we shall lie and languish
on our beds; wishing (as they did in Deuteronomy,) when it is morning, would God
it were evening, and when it is evening, would God it were morning. If ever such
a doleful time should happen to thee, I pray God of his mercy look graciously
upon thee, and say unto thy bleeding soul, as he did once to that forlorn
Infant, Ezech. 16. 6. Dixi in sanguinibus, etc. when thou wast in thy blood, I
said unto thee, live; yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live;
if God do but say, thou shall live; though thou were in thy blood, though thou
were in thy grave, his Word shall fetch thee, for his Grace (if it stand with
his glory) is sufficient to heal thee.

4. The last and chiefest thing whereunto the Grace of God, and nothing else
but Gods Grace, is sufficient, is Adsalvandum, to save the soul of every one
that has it. The Apostle calls it, The Grace that brings salvation, ((...),
Tit. 2. 11.) for as the wickedness of man brings destruction, so the Grace
of God brings salvation to every soul that entertaines it. Saint Paul is
direct, Ephesians. 2. 5. By Grace ye are saved; whether it be meant of the Grace
of God within us, which our Savior compares to Salt, Mark. 9. 50. (Habete
salem in vobis, etc. have Salt in your selves, and peace with one another)
because as Salt preserves the flesh, so does Grace preserve the spirit from
corruption and rottenness in sin: or whether it be meant of the Grace of
God that is over and above us, I mean, his favor and loving kindness which
lightneth upon us from Heaven; (as we pray in our Liturgy, let thy mercy
lighten upon us, as our trust is in thee,) Take it either way, it holds good
and true; for by the one we are prepared for salvation, by the other salvation
is prepared for us; the Grace of God within us prepares us for salvation; the
Grace of God over us prepares salvation for us: so both ways it is our
happiness, By Grace to be saved. It was Gods merciful promise, Deuteronomy. 11. 12.
Mine eyes shall be upon this Land from the beginning of the year, to the end
thereof; Such is Gods goodness where he bestows his Grace, such a care has
God of their souls, that his eye is upon them from the beginning of their
conversion, to the end of their salvation: and as his eye is upon them to watch
over them, so his hand is with them to conduct them in the right way of
pleasing God, and of saving their own souls, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. All his Saints are
in thy hand: as a Father leads his child, so does God lead his Saints by his
Grace, and by his good Spirit, from all things prejudicial, to all things
profitable, to his service and their own salvation. (To conclude this point)
because (as the Schoolmen say well) Ad singulos actus desideratur Gratia, a
man has need of Grace to every action that he takes in hand, and that he can
do nothing well without it; let us all desire of God (as it is in the Collect)
That his special Grace may evermore prevent and follow us, first, that God
would prevent us with his Grace, to put into our hearts good motions, good
thoughts, and good desires; and secondly, that it may follow us too, (as the
water of the Rock followed the Camp of the Israelites to the Land of Promise,
1 Cor. 10. 4.) so that Gods Grace may follow, accompany, and go along with us
in this world; and never leave us, never forsake us till it has brought us to
the end of our Faith, which is the salvation of our souls, according to that,
Psalm. 109. ult. Dominus ad dextram, etc. the Lord is at the right hand of the
poor, to save him from all them that would condemn his soul, where note that
he does not say, the Lord is at their left hand (which is as I may term it)
the lazy hand, to save men in their negligent and idle courses; But he is at
their right hand (which is the working hand) to save all them that work for
their salvation, and carefully use the means to save themselves: which thing
if thou make a conscience to do, though thy sins and thy enemies should
conspire to condemn thee, Thy God and his Grace will be sufficient to save thee.

And so at length, I am come aboard the last and long desired part of my Text,
which contains the application of all in particular, which has been spoken
and delivered in general; drawn out of the word ((...)) My grace is
sufficient for thee, so that, as it is said of our Savior, Mat. 21. 45. that
his Doctrine was so punctual, and clapped so close to the consciences of his
Auditors, that the Pharisees knew he meant them: So by that time I have done
with my Text, (neither will I be long in doing it) I trust you shall perceive
that Gods meaning was to you, when he spoke to Saint Paul, and told him that
His Grace is sufficient for him.

Briefly then, see what Paul was, and say what thou art; if your case be the
same, your comfort is the same; for God is no accepter of persons, his Grace is
as sufficient for the one, as for the other.

1. Saint Paul was Homo in Christo, he was a man in Christ, as you may see by
the second verse of this chapter ( I knew a man in Christ, that was taken up
into the third Heaven:) Art thou such a one? I mean, art thou regenerate and
become a new creature? (for he that is in Christ is a new creature. 2 Cor. 5.
17.) do thou daily renew thy repentance, and renew thy obedience, and renew
thy duty and devotion to God? And is it a grief to thy soul, that so much of
the old leaven, thy old corruption remains still in thy heart? Then take this
holy Scripture to thy comfort, and assure thy self, though thy conscience
disquiet thee; Gods Grace will be sufficient for thee: contrarily, if thou
be an old weather-beaten sinner, an old rusty drunkard, swearer, and that
stand at a stay, and gatherest sin, like an old tree that stands and
gathers moss; I must say unto thee (as Peter said to Simon Magus, Act. 8.)
thou have neither part nor portion in this privilege; thou art not a man in
Christ, and consequently can claim no interest in the Grace and favor of
God.

2. Saint Paul was Homo in Cruce, a man upon the cross, Gal. 2. 20. I am
crucified with Christ; and elsewhere, Colos. 2. 24. I fill up that which is
behind of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh: whereupon (says a Father) quid
deest passioni Christi, nisi ut nos similia patiamur, what is, or what can be
wanting to the sufferings of Christ, but that as he took up his Cross, so we
take up ours and follow him: for Vae portantibus crucem, and non sequentibus
Christum, woe to them that are crucified, and not with Christ; that bear the
Cross, and follow not Christ, but turn from him clean another way. It is
well known that afflictions go under the name of crosses; now a Cross was a
piece of wood for a malefactor to dye on, there was no other use of a cross
but that: Affliction therefore is called a cross, because it should have the
nature and power of a Cross, that is, it should be a means to crucify and
mortify all carnal lusts and affections in us; that the more we are
afflicted, the more we should dye to sin, and the less life and power
should our corruptions have in us. Thus it was with Saint Paul, is it so with
thee? do thou wish and desire the death of thy sins? do thou make this
use of thy afflictions, even to die daily? (as the Apostles speaks) do thou
every day drive one nail into the body of sin, I mean one sigh or groan to
God against it? do thou labor to draw blood of thy soul (as they drew blood
of thy Savior) I mean, the tears of true repentance? and is it a death to
thy heart, that thou can not dye unto sin, and live unto God, as thou
should and ought to do? Then look no further for Hearts-ease, but to
the words of my Text, and assure thy self, what ever Crosses be upon thee,
Gods Grace (in Gods good time) shall be sufficient to case thee. Contrariwise,
if thou be one that do (...), (as Saint Stephen speaks, Act. 7. 51.) one
that do fall cross and contrary to all but to thy sins, and art indeed a
very cross to God himself and to his good Spirit, by thy perverse ungodly
courses, I must say unto thee, as the Prophet Esaias says, Esaias 3. 6. Woe be
unto thy soul, for thou have rewarded evil unto thy self: thou forsakest thy
own mercy, and deprivest thy self of the comfort of Gods Grace in the time of
need.

3. Saint Paul was Homo in negotiis, a laborious man, a man full of
employments, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more then all my fellow-Apostles (says
he) yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me. (there is an honest
acknowledgement by whom he profited.) And elsewhere he tells the Corinthians,
2 Cor. 11. 9. When I was with you and wanted, non obt^rpui, I was not
chargeable nor burdensome to any man. The Learned observe, that word has his
weight from Torpedo, which signifies a Crampfish; a Fish (they say) that has
such a benumming quality, that the cold of it will strike from the hook to the
line, from the line to the goad, from the goad to the arm, from the arm to
the body of the fisher, and so benum him, and take away al use and feeling of
his limbs: His meaning is, that he was none of those idle drones, that by
their laziness and lewdness do even chill, and benumme, and dead the charity
of well-disposed people; but as he labored in preaching, so he wrought in his
calling too; and put himself to any pains, rather then be chargeable or
burdensome to any friend or stranger: and by this means it came to pass,
that what he wanted at home, he found it abroad; and Gods grace that was with
him did ever supply him with that which was enough and sufficient for him. Is
it so with thee? Thou that art a poor man, art thou also an industrious and a
painful man? that as Jacob got the blessing in the garment of Esau, which
signifies, Working; so do thou work and take pains to get the blessing of
thy God? do thou labor with thy hands the thing that is good, that thou
may rather be charitable, then chargeable to him that needs? and will not
thy honest labor maintain thee, nor suffice the charge that daily lies upon
thee? Take comfort by this Text that now is taught thee, and let not thy wants
nor thy necessities dismay thee, for there is a God above that has sufficient
for thee; contrarily, if thou be one that live in pleasure (as Saint Paul
says of that widow, (...), she was dead even while she lived) one that
spendest thy time in this world, no otherwise then that Leviathan does in the
Sea, only by taking thy pastime therein, or like those Lyllies that our
Savior speaks, that neither labor nor spin, but only make a fair show as
long as it will hold: Then as Iehu said to Ioram, What Peace? so may I say to
thee, What Grace? or what favor can thou look for at the hands of God?

4. Saint Paul was Homo in aerumnis, a man full of cares. I do not mean of
carnal or wordly cares, or such as Martha's were, for the things of this life;
for these he had cast upon God, and had learned in whatsever estate he was,
therewith to be content; but I mean of spiritual, divine, religious cares,
for the health and welfare of the soul, such as he commends in the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7. 11. as being the first fruits of Grace and godly sorrow
((...), What carfulness it has wrought in you) how much it wrought in them,
I know not; but sure I am, it wrought in him a mavelous and a manifold care,
and that of the better kind: first, an immediate care for himself, and his
own soul, lest after he had preached unto others, himself should be a
castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 27. secondly, a charitable and that a Catholic and
universal care for all Churches and Christian souls under the cope of heaven.
2 Cor. 11. 28. Non aliter in ecclesias quantumvis remotas affectus, quam si
illas humeris gestaret (as Beza said of Calvin) he was no less tenderly
affected for those Churches that were remote and far off than if he had
borne them upon his own shoulders, and carried them (as Nurses do their Babes)
in his own bosom. But his third and most especial care was for the souls
and saving health of his little children (as he calls them, Gal. 4. 20.) Of
whom he traveled in birth till Christ was formed in them. His care was greater
for them, than either for himself, or any others; and he gives his reason
(...), for (says he) I stand in doubt of you. Good Parents the more they love
their children, the more they stand in doubt of them, least they should fall to
any defection, or decline to any corruption, or come to any disaster when they
themselves are dead and gone. This made Saint Paul in such perplexity for them;
and yet were they but his spiritual children; what care then (may we think)
would he have taken for them, if they had been his natural children too? then
might he justly have used that word, and said (...), I am in doubt of you: for
(...) in Greek signifies both dubious and pauper, doubtful and poor; for
none have so much reason to be doubtful of their childrens welfare as they
that are poorest and have least to leave them. They may justly fear (as the
woman of Tekoah said to David, 2 Samuel 14. 7.) lest their coals should be
quenched: (for so she calls her child her coal; for as coals either warm
or burn, as they are used, so do children either comfort or cross their
parents as they prove) now when a poor man shall dye and leave his coals, I
mean his Orphans behind him: such is the world, that where you shall light of
one good body that will be a means to cherish and maintain and keep them
alive, there be twenty to that one so unchristianly and uncharitably minded,
that they care not how they use them, yea though they quench and crush, and put
them clean out. And hence come those (...), those perplexities and doubtful
cares of tenderhearted Parents for their Children. Have thou therefore many
little ones, and little to leave them? and does thy heart even yearne with care
and fear to fore-thinke what shall betide them, when thou by death art taken
from them? I will give thee the same counsel that I desire of God to take my
self, and that is this, Cognovisti Gratiam Dei, (says our Apostle, Colos. 1.
6.) Thou know the Grace of God: thou know that to be a sure stay when
all other props and stays are done away: That Anchor will hold when all other
tackling breaks: Make trial of that.

Do by thy Children as Saint Paul did by his brethren, Acts 20. 32. Commend
them to God, and to the word of his Grace; Lay them down at the feet of Jesus
Christ, as they in the Primitive Church, laid down their money at the feet of
the Apostles; desire God to be their Father, Christ to be their Guardian, the
Holy Ghost to be their Guide; and when thou have done so, then as David says,
Psalm. 116. 7. Revertere ad requiem, Return unto thy rest, O my soul, then
settle and assure and resolve thy self, that Heaven shall want mercy, and
earth means, before any of those that are under Gods protection and patronage
shall want maintenance. Never be in doubt what shall become of them, knowing
that His Grace is sufficient for them.

I might add hereunto many particulars; as that Saint Paul was homo in
vinculis, a man in bonds, but the Grace of God unloosed them all: that he was
Homo in necessitatibus, a man in wants, but the Grace of God supplied them all:
that he was Homo in periculis, a man in many perils and dangers, but by the
Grace of God he escaped them all: that he was Homo in tentationibus, a man
mightily troubled with temptations, but by the Grace of God he overcame them
all: All these I purposely overslip (which perhaps might comply with many a
man's condition, and conduce to his comfort) but there is one behind that is of
greater value than all the rest, that S. Paul was, as I pray God of his mercy
make me and thee, and every Christian soul to be.

5. Homo in Coelestibus, a man of an heavenly disposition; though his bodily
abode was upon earth, yet his (...), his souls commerce, and conversation was
in heaven, Phil. 3. 20. no marvel then, that being so much acquainted with
God, as he was; and so conversant in heaven, which is Gremium Gratiae, the lap
and bosom of Grace; if, as it is said of Saint John that leaning in the bosom
of Christ, he thence sucked out his heavenly knowledge; So St. Paul being so
intimate, and so entire with God who is the God of all Grace (whatever else he
wanted) could not possibly want Grace sufficient for him. In a word then: Is it
so with thee though in a far inferior degree? Art thou, as every good
Christian is, and ought to be (...), a Citizen of Heaven? Do thou account
that thy home, and this but the place of thy pilgrimage for a time? and as our
Savior set his face to go to Jerusalem, Luke 9. 51. Do thou set thy face to
go to heaven? does thy heart stand Heavenward? Art thou bound for that coast?
(as Paul went bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, Act. 20.) I mean, do thou
set thy affections upon things above, upon God and his Grace? and not on things
below, upon the world and her goods which drown men's souls in perdition? Art
thou one of that same Generis Aquilini, of that Eagle kind, whereof our
Savior speaks, Mat. 24. (where the body is, thither will the Eagles resort)
the body of thy Savior thou know is in Heaven, and does thy soul resort
often thither? do thou wish (as Macarius did) (...), that thy soul might go
up into heaven with thy prayers, and there abide for ever with God? Then, what
Nathan said to David in a case of conviction, I dare apply to thee in a case of
comfort; Thou art the man whom God delights to favor: and therefore as the
Patriarchs are said Heb. 11. (...), even to kiss and embrace the promises of
Christ: so do thou even claspe and hug this promise of Grace to thy self;
and let neither thy wants, nor thy weaknesses dismay thee, for both in life and
death thou shall find Gods Grace to be sufficient for thee, which God of his
mercy grant unto us all, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

