ZERVBBABELS ENCOVRAGEMENT TO Finish the Temple.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at their late
Solemn Fast, Apr. 27. 1642.

By THO. GOODWIN, B. D.

Published by Order from that House.

REVEL. 11. 4. These are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks standing
before the God of the earth, etc. LONDON, Printed for R. DAWLMAN. 1642.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
YOur Command giving me the opportunity, I took the boldness to urge and
encourage you to Church-Reformation, (which is the maine scope of this Sermon)
a subject which otherwise (and in all other Auditories) I have been silent in,
and am no whit sorry for it: For I account it the most fit and happy season to
utter things of this nature unto Authority it self, (although the people
likewise are to know their duty.) My comfort is, that what I have spoken
herein, I have (for the general) (and I have spoken but generals) long
believed, and have therefore spoken.

You were pleased so far to own me, as to betrust me with this Service, to be
Gods mouth in public unto you; and also this Sermon of mine, as to command
the publishing of it. Wherefore as in propriety it is now become yours, more
then mine, or all the worlds: So let it be in the use of it. If it shall add
the least strengthening to your resolutions, to keep this purpose for ever in
the thoughts of your hearts, I have what I aimed at. Go on, (worthy Fathers,
and Elders of this people) and prosper in, yea by this work; without which,
nothing that you do will prosper. -- But the rest I shall speak to God for
you. Let me be known to you by no other thing then this, To be one, whose
greatest desires, and constant prayers are, and have been, and utmost
endeavors (in my sphere) shall be for the making up the divisions of the
Church in these distracted times with love of Truth and Peace: And therein (to
use David's words) am

Wholly at your commandment, Tho: Goodwin.

ZECH. 4. VER. 6, 7, 8, 9. Ver. 6. Then he answered and spoke unto me, saying,
This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by
power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts.

7. Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a
plain, and he shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shoutings, crying,
Grace, grace unto it.

8. Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

9. The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house, his hands
shall also finish it; and thou shall know that the Lord of hosts has sent me
unto you.


THese words are part of the interpretation of a stately Vision of a
Candlestick, and two Olive trees standing thereby, and pouring Oil into it,
made to the Prophet Zechariah, in the 2. and 3. verses; and the scope and
matter both of that Vision, and of this Interpretation, is to encourage
Zerubbabel their Prince, and with him the Priests and Elders of the Jews, to
finish the building, and make complete the ornaments of the Temple, whereof the
foundation had many years before been laid, but was left imperfect, and was
left dis-furnished. And this his scope is plainly and without a Parable held
forth in the 9. ver. The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this
house, his hands shall also finish it. And indeed, to stir him and them up unto
this perfecting Gods house, unto which work they had been too backward, (as
appears by Hag. 1, 2, 3, and 4. verses, The people say, The time is not come
that the Lords house should be built) was the principal end why God sent unto
them no less then two Prophets, Haggai and Zachary, as two extraordinary
Ambassadors from heaven, on purpose to put them on upon it, (for the finishing
of the Temple is a business of that moment as is worth two Prophets at any
time.) And this appears not only by both their Prophecies, but also by the
story, Ezra 5. 1, 2. THEN the Prophet Haggai and Zachariah prophesied unto the
Jews that were in Judah, in the name of the God of Israel. -- [Then] rose up
Zerubbabel and Jeshua, and began to build the house of God which is at
Jerusalem, and with them were the Prophets of God, helping them. That same
particle, or circumstance of time, [Then,) does refer us to the story of those
times, recorded in the book of Ezra, as that which is necessary for the full
understanding of their two prophecies; what is recorded there, being the
occasion of them; but more especially for the understanding of this piece of
our Prophet Zachary his Prophecy, which I have read unto you, which wholly
concerns the finishing of the Temple.

I must necessarily therefore, An Introduction to the Exposition of the words.
as a preparative Introduction to the exposition of these words, set you down
in, and give you a prospect of those times, and the occurrences thereof, which
were the occasion of these words here, [Who art thou O great mountain? etc.]
And if Zachary himself, a Prophet, and that lived in those times, knew not at
the first the meaning of the Vision in this Chapter, ver. 5. (Know thou what
these be? And I said, No my Lord) much less shall we be able to know the
interpretation thereof, and how fitted to this vision, nor what this mountain
here is, etc. without being pre-possest of the knowledge of this story, which
in brief is this:

The Babilonian Monarchy (Romes Type) had trod down the holy City, and laid
waste the Temple and worship of God for seventy years; which being expired,
the Jews had liberty and authority from the first Persian King, Cyrus, to build
the Temple, and restore Gods worship, according to their Law. This is the sum
of the first and second Chapters of Ezra. In the third Chapter you have an
Altar set up, Sacrifices renewed, Feasts kept, and the foundation of the Temple
laid, (which was as true a Type of that great Reformation from under Popery.)
But after this work had been begun, and fairly carried on in all the
Fundamentals of it, there started up a company of Samaritans, that were
adversaries to the Jews, (as we read, Chap. 4.) Samaritans they were, as
appears by ver. 10. They were the Nations seated in the City of Samaria,
brought thither, ver. 2. in the room of the ten Tribes. A generation of men,
who were not heathens in their profession, for they professed the same Religion
with the Jews. So they allege for, and arrogate to themselves in the
aforesaid verse, [We seek your God as you do, and we sacrifice unto him, and
have done so long, from the days of Esar Haddon, who brought us up hither:]
And yet they were not true Jews neither, nor perfectly of the same Religion,
but of a mungrell and mixed kind between the Religion of the Heathen and of the
Jews, intermingling Heathenish Idolatries with Jewish worship. So 2 Kings 17.
ver. 33. and 41. compared, it is said, These Nations feared the Lord, and
served their graven Images after the manner of the Nations. Yea, they expected
the same Messiah that the Jews did; I know that the Messiah comes, who is
called Christ, (says the woman of Samaria) and he will tell us all things,
John 4. 25. Now these Samaritans were Adversaries to the Jews, (as they are
called, ver. 1.) and so unto their Temple, and the finishing of it: And yet at
first they were but underhand adversaries, for they friendly offer to build
with them, [Let us build with you, ver. 2.] but so as with an intent to have
defiled and spoiled the work. Zerubbabel and those other builders refusing
them, they grew thereupon enraged, and openly professed their opposition; both
weakening and discouraging the hands of the people: and also when they could not
altogether hinder it, then they troubled them (all they could) in building,
thus ver. 4. And they ceased not here, but further, they incensed, and made the
Court against them, (they growing potent there) both by hiring counselors
against them, ver. 5. and also by insinuating to those mighty Persian Kings,
such suggestions as they knew would take with Monarchs, mis-representing these
Jews unto them, as of a rebellious spirit, opposite to Kings and Monarchy;
calling Jerusalem that rebellious and bad City, so ver. 12. hurtful unto Kings
and Provinces, and that had of old time moved sedition, so ver. 15. (for even
thus old is this scandal) and that therefore these Jews must be kept under:
For if this City be builded, and the walls set up, and they once but get
strength, then they will not pay toll, tribute, and custom, but withdraw their
allegiance, so ver. 13. But on the contrary, for themselves, they profess that
they are their faithful servants, v. 11. and that which made them speak, was
only a tenderness of the Kings honor; so ver. 14. Now because we have
maintenance from the Kings palace, (had their dependence wholly upon them) and
it was not meet for us to see the Kings dishonor; therefore have we certified
the King. And by these their flatteries and mis-representations they raised up
so great a mountain of opposition, (as it is here called) that they frustrated
the Jews good purpose of perfecting the building, (as the words are, ver. 5.)
And though they could not prevail so far as to throw down the foundation
laid; yet they made them to cease building any further by force and power, so
ver. 23. And thus the work did cease, during all the days of Cyrus, and the
reign of one or two Kings more, even until the second year of Darius, ver.
5. and 24. and THEN it was that these Prophets, Haggai and Zechariah, did
prophecy unto the Jews, as it follows in the very next words, Chap. 5. 1, 2.
then when they had thus been overtopt by so potent a faction for many years,
and with opposition wearied out, then it was that God stirred up our Zachary to
put spirits into them to revive the work again, and among other visions gave
him this, (which is in this 4. Chapter) of all the most eminent, to strengthen
them thereunto. And so I have brought you to Zachary again, and unto the words
of my Text; And now you shall see how necessary this story was to interpret
this his Prophecy, for which simply I have related it.

The words are (as was said) the interpretation of a Vision; The Exposition of
the words, and Vision.
take in both: Let us therefore first view the Vision, and secondly, this the
Angels Interpretation of it, which are the two parts into which this whole
Chapter is resolved.

The Vision is made up of two things: In the Vision, two parts.


First, a glorious Candlestick all of gold, with a bowl or cesterne upon the
top of it, and with seveu shafts, with seven lamps at the ends thereof, all
lighted.

And secondly, that these Lamps might have a perpetual supply of Oil, without
any accessory way of humane help, there are presented (as growing by the
Candlestick) two fresh and green Olive trees on each side thereof, ver. 3.
which do [empty out of themselves] golden oil, ver. 12. that is, did
naturally drop and distill it into that bowl, and the two pipes thereof, to
feed the lamps continually. A Vision so clear and full of light to set forth
the work then to be done by the Jews, that the Angel wonders, that at the first
sight the Prophet should not understand it.

First, 1. The Candlesticks, what.
this Candlestick thus lighted, betokened the full perfecting and finishing the
Temple, and restoring the worship of God within it, unto its full perfection of
beauty and brightness, (as the Psalmist speaks.) And so the Angel interprets
it, This is the word of the Lord, ver. 6. that is, this Hieroglyphique contains
this word and mind of God in it, that maugre all opposition, Zerubbabel should
bring forth the head or top stone that should finish the Temple, so ver. 7. and
9.

Secondly, 2. Two Olive trees, who.
the two Olive trees betokened two eminent ranks and sorts of persons that
should give their assistance to this work:

First, Zerubbabel their Prince, and the Elders of the people with him.

Secondly, Jeshua the High Priest, and the other Priests with him. And of both
these the Rabby Doctors have long ago expounded it.

And accordingly, both in the story Ezra 5. 2. and in these two Prophets, we
still find mention both of Zerubbabel and Jeshua, as the Builders of this
house: Yet so, as collective under Zerubbabel, the Elders, and under Jeshua,
the other Priests are to be understood as included and intended. And therefore
in the 3. Chap. of this Prophecy, ver. 8. when Jeshua is spoken to, the other
Priests his fellows are spoken to together with him, Hear O Jeshua, thou and
[thy fellowes] that sit before thee: And in like manner when Zerubbabel is here
spoken to in the Text, to build the Temple, the Elders his fellows are
intended in him: And accordingly Ezra 6. 14. it is said, that The Elders of the
Jews builded and finished the Temple. And so these taken together, are the two
Olive trees.

Now concerning the first part of this Vision, How fitly the Candlestick
lighted, signified the perfecting the Temple.
namely, the Candlestick, with all its Lamps lighted, you may ask how this
should come to be a fit Hieroglyphique to betoken this work of finishing and
perfecting the Temple? I answer, thus: The Candlestick was one of the chief
Utensils and Ornaments of the Temple, and therefore is still first mentioned,
as in Exodus 25. 31. and in the 9. to the Heb. ver. 2. where all the sacred
household stuff of the Inner Temple are specified, the Candlestick as being
chief is ranked first, [wherein was the Candlestick, and the Table, and the
Shewbread;] and therefore is here most aptly put for the bringing in all the
rest into the Temple; and of all those other best and aptliest served to
represent the finishing thereof: for whilst the Temple remained uncovered with
a roof, there was no bringing in the Candlestick, as lighted; and till then
there needed no light to be brought into it, it being sub dio, under open air:
But when the House it self should once be reared, according to the pattern,
without the Candlestick and its light, it would have been full of darkness,
(as some affirm, which I will not now dispute:) For however, the bringing in
the Candlestick argued not only the compleatnesse of the edifice, and building
it self, but also by a Synecdoche, the introducing all sorts of ordinances
that were appointed for the adorning of it. An Altar would not so evidently or
necessarily have supposed the Temple perfected; for Ezra 3. 3. an Altar was set
up, when yet not so much as the foundation of the Temple was laid, ver. 6. But
a Candlestick, and that lighted too, supposes the house built and completely
furnished. And therefore under the Gospel their whole Church state, and that as
in the Primitive times, under their full perfection, is set forth by seven
golden candlesticks, so Revel. 1. 13. which ver. ult. are interpreted to be the
seven Churches of Asia. The difference is, that here is but one candlestick,
because the Church of the Jews was national, and but one; but there are seven,
for the Churches under the Gospel are many.

And for that other part of the Vision, How fitly the Elders and the Priests
are resembled by two Olive trees.
the representing Zerubbabel and Jeshua by two Olive trees, and those planted
in Gods Court, so near the Candlestick, is no new or strange thing: For David
being the Ruler of the Jews, and a nursing Father to the Church, compares
himself to a green Olive tree in the house of God, Psalm. 52. 8. and the
pillars of the doors of the Temple, and the Cherubims therein being made of
that wood. The allusion is less remote. And these emptyed golden oil, that
is, their estates and pains for the finishing this costly work; and likewise
because it was done in sincerity of heart, therefore it is called golden, or
pure oil. And further, seeing it was made the duty of every Jew to bring pure
oil olive beaten, to cause the lamps to burn continually, as Lev. 24. 2. hence
therefore to compare the eminent persons, the Magistrates and Priests of that
Church, to Olive trees themselves, that for the first lighting of the
candlestick did naturally afford it, was every way most elegant. And they are
called sons of oil, ver. 14. as being fruitful, and affording plenty of it.
Thus Esaias 5. 1. a fruitful hill, and a fertile soil, is in the Original (as
here) called A son of oil. And thus much for the Vision.

Now for the interpretation of it in the words of the Text; In the
interpretation of the Vision, three things.
as it explaines the mind of the Vision, so it adds all encouragements unto
them, to that mountain of opposition (which you heard in the story was raised
up against it) should be made a plain before them: namely, that Samaritan
faction which was backed by many of the people of the land, The Samaritans
opposition, why called a Mountain.
Ezra 4. 4. A Mountain is a similitude frequent in Scripture, to note out high
and potent opposition, lying in the way of Gods proceedings. Prepare ye the way
of the Lord; every mountain shall be brought low, Luke 3. 5. And so the Poets
do express their fained war of the Giants against the Gods, by heaping up
mountain upon mountain.

And secondly, whereas their doubting hearts Not by might, (or, as in the
Original, an Army or multitude) nor by power, (of authority) that was in any
humane foresight as yet like to countenance it) but by my Spirit; and he that
says it, is the Lord of Hoasts. What by Spirit.
By his Spirit, meaning both the holy Ghost, enclining and strengthening their
hearts, yea turning those of their opposites thereunto: And by Spirit also
meaning many concurrent acts of Providence, which should fall in to the
effecting of it: For there is said to be a spirit of life in the wheels of
Providence, which moves them, Ezekiel. 1. 20. Not but that God did use the power
and authority of the Persian Monarchy; for Ezra 6. 8. Darius reverst the former
Decree, and made a new one for the building of the house. But because that God
by his Spirit and own immediate hand brought about the power of that State to
countenance it: Therefore it is said to be not by power, but by the Spirit; and
for this he used not an Army, as it is in the margent; there was no sword
drawn, the state stood as it did, but [by my Sprit] says the Lord of Hosts;
that so it might appear, that although Zerubbabels hand was in it, yet that
God would bring it so to pass, that nothing should be ascribed to them, but
the glory of all unto God himself.

Zerubbabels bringing forth the head stone thereof, (as Master builders use to
do the first and last stone) they should with many shoutings and acclamations
of joy, cry, Grace, Grace unto it; that is, magnify Gods mere free grace, and
acknowledge this to have been the work of it alone; and it was marvailovs in
their eyes.

Thus much for the Exposition of the words: I shall now raise some Observations
out of them.
Out of the recited story, and what is here said in the 9. verse, which does
put Jeshua upon finishing the Temple; 1. Obser.
The first Observation is this, That God carries on the building of the second
Temple after the coming out of Babylon, (which was a type of the Reformation
of our Churches) not all at once, but by degrees. The first Temple under the
Old Testament was at once erected perfect, so by Solomon; And the Tabernacle
before him, by Moses, was quickly finished, according to the pattern of the
Mount, Exodus 40. 43. but this second Temple after the Captivity received
degrees of rearing of it. And thus in the New Testament, those Primitive
Churches were set up perfect (as for matter of rules) by the holy Apostles. And
so it was meet they should be, because the Pattern was but once to be given,
in the model of them. But Antichristianisme having laid that Temple desolate,
and defiled Gods worship in all the parts of it; and those Ages wherein it
should be restored, wanting Apostles immediately inspired, hence the
restoration of them becomes a work of time: The holy Ghost Age after Age
gradually revealing pieces of the platform of it; the Spirit by degrees
consuming and dispelling the darkness that Antichristianisme had brought in,
by light shining clearer and clearer to the perfect day, which is the
brightness of Christ's coming, as 2 These. 2. 8. Compare we for this the type,
the building of this second Temple here, with this Antitype under the Gospel.

These Jews when first they were come out of Babylon, and gathered to Mount
Sion, (which was holy ground, where they might sacrifice) they erected an Altar
only, Ezra 3. and that in haste, (the fear of the people of the Country
being upon them, verse 3.) and so a poor and mean one, and (as it is thought)
but of earth, as in the law of Moses direction was given, before the Tabernacle
was reared; and accordingly of this here it is said, [As it is written in the
law of Moses,] ver. 2. They now began the world, anew, and offered burnt
Sacrifices upon Mount Sion, kept a few Feasts; But (says the 6. ver.) the
foundation of the Temple was not yet laid: Then in the 8. ver. it is said, that
the foundation of the Temple was laid, but left imperfect: But many years
after, and after the succession of two or three Kings, the Temple is said to be
finished, Chap. 6. 15.

Come we now to the Antitype, the times of Reformation from under Popery: In
the story of which like graduall proceedings might easily be observed out of
Ecclesiastical story, if it would not be too long to make such narrations: I
will rather take it as it is briefly and at once presented by the holy Ghost
himself in that great Prophecy of the New Testament, and the succeeding times
thereof, the Book of the Revelation. In the 13. Chapter throughout, you have
the Beast of Rome in one entire view presented in his height, and as possessing
all the European world as worshippers of him: And then in the 14. and following
Chapters you oppositely have Christ and those that followed him, and the story
of their separation from, and the several degrees of winning ground upon that
Beast, in the like entire view laid forth before you. In the 1. v. the Lamb
appears with his company nakedly standing upon Mount Sion, without the mention
of any Temple as yet built ore their heads, even such as these Jews condition
was when they came first to Sion. Some Ordinances they had; they harping with
their harps, ver. 2. and sung as it were a new song, uttering something
differing from the doctrine of those times, but so confusedly, as no man could
learn that song, v. 3. and they in a great part kept themselves virgins, and
from being defiled with the fornications of the whore: And these are said to be
the first fruits to God, ver. 4. that is, the first beginnings of a dislike of
Popery. But then by degrees the Lamb sends out three Angels, to make a more
open separation from Rome; the later of which rises still higher then the
former. The first, ver. 6. only preaches the everlasting Gospel, that is,
salvation by Christ alone, and calls upon men to fear and worship God alone
who made heaven and earth, and not to worship Saints and Angels: (thus the
Waldenses did.) But then ver. 8. an Age or two after that, there follow others
who proclaim with open mouth, and tell Rome to her face that she is the whore
of Babylon: (thus Wickliff and Hus.) And then ver. 9. after these follows a
third Angel, who proceeds further, and preaches that all those that will cleave
unto her doctrine and superstitions, shall drink of the wrath of God for ever:
and so urge a separation from her, upon pain of damnation. And then at the 14.
ver. you have the Son of man crowned, the Lamb having overcome the Kings, to
profess and countenance the Protestant Religion with their authority: And then
ver. 15. you have mention of a Temple, Churches being in all these Northern
parts publicly erected by their allowance and commandment; as the Jews did
build the Temple by the Decree of Cyrus. And Chap. 15. the pourers out of the
vials do come all forth of the Temple, ver. 6. And if we consult the 11. Cap.
(the maine occurrences of which are evidently contemporary, and do sum up
the story of the same time with the Vials, as by comparing the one with the
other, late Interpreters have observed. This Book running over two entire
Prophecies of all times, (each of them) whereof the first ends at the end of
Cha. 11.) Now in that Chapter (which therefore contains the story of the last
times) there are three editions of that Temple plainly intimated. The first,
supposed to be already standing when the Vision is given; but imperfect in
this, that it has too great an outward Court of an ignorant and profane
multitude laid to it. And therefore John, bearing the person of the godly of
that age, is stirred up to set upon a second Reformation of it, and is bidden
to measure that Temple, Altar, and worshippers anew, and to cast out that
outward Court that had defiled it. And then ver. 19. there is a third edition
of an Holy of Holies, for therein the Arc is said to be seen; now the Ark
stood only in the Holy of Holies: noting out a more perfect Church at last
then all the former had been. A manifest allusion this is unto those three
parts of Solomon's Temple, the outward Court, the inward Temple, and the Holy of
Holies.

Thus much perhaps might more clearly have been discovered in the story of the
Reformation; but I judged it would better and more briefly be done in this the
Prophecy of it. Use.

Let no Church therefore think it self perfect, and needing nothing, (as
bragging Laodicea did) especially when it has but that first foundation which
it had when it came newly out of Babylon; and more especially in matters of
worship and discipline. It is no dishonor unto those Reformers, to say, that
they fully finished not this work; as it was not unto Zerubbabel here, that he
perfected not the Temple at first. Blessed men! It is evident they purposed
more then they did or could effect, because the peoples hearts were not [as
yet] prepared, as the phrase is, 2 Chronicles. 20. 33. In our very Common Prayer
book there is an [Untill] the said discipline may be restored, which argues
they aimed at more. And besides, They were not Apostles, to whom nothing might
be added, as Gal. 2. 6. And God raising up the Tabernacle that was fallen down,
not by immediate inspiration, (as at first by the Apostles) but by his Spirit,
renewing and begetting light in an ordinary way: Hence therefore the Churches
coming out of the darkness of Popery, must needs recover that fullness and
perfection of light (which the Apostolical times had) (...), by piece-meals
and degrees. As for the great things of the Gospel, matters of Faith, or
Doctrine, they had so happy a hand therein, that there is to be found little,
if any Hay or stubble therein: But in matters of Order, which concern Worship
and Discipline, (for so the Apostle distinguishes, Colos. 2. 5. [Faith and
Order] let it be enquired into, whether they were so exact therein. Although
this must be said, that God did take care for all Fundamental Ordinances of
his worship; and it is a bitter error, and full of cruelty, to say, We have
had no Churches, no Ministers, no Sacraments, but Antichristianall. Gods first
and chief care was, to build up his Church mystical, to make men Saints, and
he has made glorious ones in their personal walkings with him: and to that
end he made a plentiful provision in matters of faith, even from the very
first. It fell out in this case, as in a new Plantation; which if men were to
make in another world, and so to begin the world anew, their first care would
be to provide necessaries for their subsistence as they are men; to have corn
for bread, cattle for meat, and the like: But matters of Order and Government
they think of afterward, and often fall into the right, by seeing their errors
by degrees. Think not much therefore, that men call for (as most men do) a
reformation of some things amiss in matters of worship and discipline, or an
addition of some things; perhaps a Candlestick, or some other utensil or
ordinance of Church-worship is found wanting. You will wonder, that all along
during the reign of those good Kings, both David, Solomon, (who yet gave the
pattern of, and also built the Temple) and those other Reformers among the
Kings of Judah, there should something have been omitted about the Feast of
Tabernacles, until their coming out of the Babylonish Captivity: Yet we find
it was so, as appears by Nehem. 8. 16. and 17. verses, The people went forth,
and made themselves boothes, every one upon the roof of his house, and in
their Courts, and in the Courts of Gods house, and in the streets; [and since
the days of Ieshua the son of Nun, until that day, the Children of Israel had
not done so.] This feast was kept (as is thought) by Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 7. 8.
and by these same Jews, Ezra 3. 4. yet not in this manner, according unto the
Law, and therefore at the 14. ver. of that of Nchemiah, it is said, They found
it written in the Law, that the children of Israel should dwell in boothes;
which before that they had not done, although they might have kept that Feast.
But now they had learned by a sad experience to keep it aright, with dwelling
in boothes, by having been lately strangers out of their own land; to signify
which and to profess themselves strangers, was the intent of that Feast, and
that rite of it, the dwelling in boothes. And this reason is intimated in the
17. verse, All the congregation [that were come again out of the Captivity,]
made boothes, etc. They did read also every day out of the Law, ver. 19. which
before, when that Feast was celebrated, they had not done.

A second Observation, 2. Obser.
That in the greatest businesses which most concern the good of Gods Church,
and his own glory, he oft-times suffers Mountains of opposition to lie in the
way of them: So here, in the way to the building and perfecting his Church. To
give another instance of it, and that the highest. The Salvation of the sons of
men, whom he had chosen before all worlds, is a business which of all other he
most minds and effectually intends, but does he bring it about without
rubs? Never such Mountains lay in the way of any business. Adam he sins, and
in him, all those whom God meant to save, whereby the way to their salvation
was quite blockt up: Mountains of Sins make a Separation between him and
them, Isai. 59. 2. and not all the power of men and Angels can any whit move,
much less remove them, no more then strawes can move a mountain. But then
comes the Son of God, who throws and buries all these mountains in the bottom
of the sea. And when Christ had thus removed the guilt of sin, and would come
into men's hearts to apply his death, there lie as high mountains in his way to
us, as before lay in ours unto him. Luke 3. 5. Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make his paths straight; [every mountain shall be brought low.] There are high
things, and strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. that exalt themselves against the
knowledge of Christ: but all these shall be brought low, and shall be made a
plain. And as this is found true in the salvation of the Church by Christ, so
in its preservation and growth. There is almost no mercy, but some mountain or
other lies in the way of it.

And the reason of this dispensation of Gods, Reas.
is, both that his hand and power in bringing things to pass, for his Church,
may be seen and acknowledged, and that his enemies may be confounded: I put
both these reasons in one, because we find them mentioned together in one
place, Nehem. 6. 16. In which Chapter you may read of the great opposition
made in building the City, as here the Temple; which yet when God had carried
on, It came to pass, (says that 16. ver.) that when all their enemies heard
thereof, and all that were about them saw these things, [they wene much cast
down in their own eyes,] (there is one part of the reason) for they perceived
that [this work was wrought by our God,] there is the other part. First, Gods
power appears, in carrying things bring Israel out of Egypt with a strong
hand, Exodus 13. 30. but because it was carried on through much opposition?
There lay no less then ten mountains in the way of it; Pharaohs heart was
hardened ten times, which God did on purpose to show his power, Exodus 9. 6.
Secondly, He renders vengeance to his adversaries, and is ncercifull to his
Land, both at once, Deuteronomy. 32. 43. He often suffers them to have the ball on
their foot, till they come to the very goal, and yet then to miss the game:
That so wherein they dealt proudly, he might show himself above them, which is
Jethroes reason, Exodus 18. 9.

This Observation but in general: 3. Obser.
More particularly, a third Observation is this: That Temple-work especially
uses to meet with opposition. You shall find the building and the finishing
of this Temple in all the degrees of it, to have had many contentions against
it, all along accompanying it. Thus, when first that Altar was set up, Ezra 3.
3. it is said, that fear was upon them, because of the people of those
countries. Again, when the foundation was laid, what interruption that met
with, you heard before, out of the 4. Chapter. And lastly, when they came to
finish it, Chap. 5. 2. at ver. 3. their enemies came and questioned them for
it, Who has commanded you to build this house? etc. and the devil was in it,
in a pure opposition to the Temple; for they had suffered them to build their
own houses, as appears Hag. 2. 4. and never stirred against them; but only
now when they began to build the Temple. Thus in the New Testament, [Aedificabo
Ecclesiam,] [I will build my Church,] has and will always have the gates (or
the power) of hell following it to oppose it. I could demonstrate it all along
out of that story also; but it would be too long.

The Reasons of it are,

First, Reas. 1.
there is nothing more contrary to Satan, then the setting up of Gods worship,
and the purifying and completing of it. And therefore whilst the devil is god
of this world, and has any power therein, he will be sure to raise a head
against that of all things else. So far as there are any aberrations in
worship, Satan is set up: And so far as the worship of God is perfected, God is
set up, and Satan falls as lightning, Revel. 3. 9. false worshippers are called
the Synagogue of Satan.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
there is nothing more contrary to flesh and blood. When Paul came to set up
Evangelical and Spiritual worship, (which is called a Reformation, Heb. 9.
10.) he met with opposition every where; and that from such who were
worshippers also. There is a natural and blind devotion in men, that is most
opposite to spiritual worship. Therefore Acts 13. 15. [Devout] women raised up
a persecution against Paul. And men are addicted to their old Customs, and
what they were brought up in. Thus it is said of the Jews, though godly, that
many thousands of them opposed Paul, out of their zeal to the Law they were
brought up in. Acts 21. 20. Many thousands of the Jews which believe, are all
Zealous of the Law: And thereupon at ver. 27. we read that they stirred up the
people, crying out, ver. 28. Men of Israel, help; This is the man that teaches
every where against the people, and this place, (namely, the Temple, and the
Ceremonial worship of it.)

The Use of both these Points together, Use.
is, Not to be discouraged in, or think the worse of any business that is for
God, because of difficulties and interruptions. In the 4. of Nehem. when the
Jews went to build the walls of the City, the enemies mocked them, and said,
What will these feeble Jews do? but still ver. 6. the people they went on,
for they had a mind to work: which when their enemies heard of, they then set
upon them with open force of arms, ver. 8. Yet nevertheless, We (says he)
made our prayer to God, and set a watch day and night; they doubled their care
and pains, and wrought both night and day, and did not put off their clothes,
ver. 21. And when Nehemiah heard that the enemy threatened to kill him, on
purpose to dishearten him) yet Chap. 6. he would not flee, ver. 11. neither was
he at all disheartened, as knowing it was a sin to be afraid, ver. 13.

There is no mountain of opposition so great, 4. Obser.
that can stand before Zerubbabel, (or Gods people) especially when he goes
about to finish the Temple. (I might have made two Observations of it, but I
put them both together.) You see how contemptuously he here speaks, of the
opposition made; [Who art thou, O great mountain?] though great in their own
eyes, yet as nothing in his: He speaks as a Giant unto a Pigmee, Who art thou?
I will name one place more, suitable to this allusion, Esaias 41. 14, 15. Fear
not, thou worm Jacob: I will help thee, says the Lord. Behold, I will make
thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou shall thresh [the
mountains,] and beat them small, and thou shall make the hills as chafe. He
supposes in these his expressions, the Church to be in the lowest, weakest,
and most contemptible condition that might be; a [worme] which no man fears,
for it cannot do the least hurt, and which no man loves; yea, thinks it no
cruelty or oppression to tread upon, and kill. On the other side, he speaks of
the enemies, all that might argue greatness, strength, and exaltation: he
calls them [Mountaines,] and [Hils:] And what an unequal match is this, for
Worms to be set upon Mountains to overthrow them? Yet, says God, I will take
this worm, (for it must be his power must do it) and make it as a new sharp
threshing instrument with teeth, (with which kind of instrument those Eastern
Countries did use to mash in pieces their rougher and harder fodder for their
cattle) which shall thresh these mountains even as small as chafe, which is
scattered with the wind, as ver. 16. This is the Metaphor; the plain song you
have in the 11. and 12. verses, Behold, all they that are incenst against thee
shall perish, and those that contended with thee, be as a thing of naught. But
this is especially found true when Gods people go about to build the Temple;
no mountain then can stand to hinder them: There stood in the way of laying
the foundation of this Temple, the greatest mountain that was then (and
well-night that has been since) upon the earth, the Babylonish Monarchy; by
the power of which these Jews were detained captives, and they would never have
let them go: And therefore Esaias 57. 14. this phrase is used, Cast ye up, cast
ye up, take the stumbling block out of the way of my people. And more expressly,
Jer. 51. 25. the Prophet calls Babel a destroying mountain, I am against thee,
oh destroying mountain: and for strength of situation he compares it to a
mountain seated upon a rock, which is a farther addition of sortification to
it. Yet says God, I will stretch out my hand upon thee, and roll thee down
from the rocks, and make thee a burnt mountain, so as they shall not take from
thee a stone for a corner, or for foundations: ver. 26. Whereas thou did
unbuild Jerusalem and my Temple, I will unbuild thee, so as not so much as a
stone of thee shall serve for any other building, but my Sion shall be built
again. For to what end was this mountain thus removed? even that poor
Jerusalem and Gods Temple there might be built again. Thus Isai. 44. last,
and the 45. 1. and 2. verses compared, Thus says the Lord of Cyrus, He is my
shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure; even saying to Jerusalem, Thou
shall be built, and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid. Cyrus and his
Army were the workmen whom God hired to cast up (as Esays phrase is) or throw
down (as Jeremies) this rubbish that lay in his peoples way, and of their
building this Temple. And all the victories that Cyrus obtained, and hidden
treasures that through spoils he acquired, were all that Jerusalem might be
built: So it follows in the 45. Chap. 1, 2, 3, and 4. verses, and so on, Thus
says the Lord to Cyrus, whose right hand I have strengthened to subdue Nations
before me, and I will loose the loins of Kings: He was to overcome other
Nations and Kings, before he could come at Babylon: as Croesus, that rich King
of Lydia, etc. And God threw down all before him. I will go before thee; I will
break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron, (all
difficulties flew open, and nothing could stand in his way) and I will give thee
the treasures of darkness, the hidden riches of secret places. And why did God
do all this for him? For Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine elect. For
(otherwise) says God of this Cyrus) thou have not known me, so ver. 4. All
this which God did for him, was, that he might perform Gods pleasure, saying
to Jerusalem, Be built, and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid, as you
had it out of the last ver. of the foregoing Chapter.

And then again, when the foundation thereof was thus happily laid, there stood
(as you see in the Text) another Mountain in the way to the finishing and
perfecting of it, namely, this Samaritan Faction, who gained the power of that
Persian Monarchy to be against it: (of which Mountain the Prophet here in like
manner says, that it should be made a Plain.) And if the Persian Monarch
Dartus had not come off too as he did, EZra 6. from the 1. ver. to the end of
the Chap. God would have served him, as he had done Babylon. Be ye wise
therefore now, O Kings, and instructed O ye Judges of the Earth. Reas.


The Reason of all this lies but in three words which God has spoken once, yea
twice, [Aedificabo Ecclesia^ meam] [I will build my Church,] which have more
force in them, then all the created power of Heaven, Earth, or Hell. He had
said it in the Old Testament (as you heard) Isai. 44. 28. saying to Jerusalem,
Thou shall be built, and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid. And
Christ said it over again in the New Testament, Mat. 16. 18. I will build my
Church: He speaks of that Church under the New Testament, which in future ages
was to come. And what follows? [The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it.] You heard before in the Old Testament, that the Brass Gates were opened
to make way for the building of that Temple, Isai. 45. 2. But here in the New
Testament, there are stronger Gates then of Brass: here are the Gates of Hell:
which yet Christ (like another Sampson) flings off their hinges. As whilst the
Devil is god of the world, [Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam] shall be sure to be
hindered, if he can: so whilst Christ is King of this world, and has all power
committed to him, both in heaven and earth, most certainly, the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail against it. It is this same [Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam,]
[I will build my Church,] that has made all the stir in the world. I
remember in the year 1619. or 20. (or thereabouts) when the Wars in Germany
began, it was reported, that a great Brass Image of the Apostle Peter, (which
had that pretended claim, by which Rome would hold her Keys, fairly embossed
upon a Roll that hung down upon the Image, in these wordst [Tu es Petrus, and
super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam: and tibi dabo Claves, etc.] [Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church: and I will give to thee the
Keys, etc.) standing (as I take it) in S. Peter's Church at Rome; there was a
great and massy stone fell down upon it, and so shattered it to pieces, that
not a letter of all that sentence (whereon Rome founds her claim) was left
whole, so as to be read, saving this one piece of that sentence, [aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam] [I will build my Church,] which was left fair and entire.

That Promise [I will build my Church] is the Magna Charta, yea, the Prima
Charta, the Great and First Charter of the Saints in the New Testament; those
words in the 16. of Mat. being the first that Christ uttered about it; and so,
contain within them, all lesser Promises of all sorts, that follow, that
concern the building of his Church, or any piece of it. Now all that concern
the Building of his Church, are reducible unto these two heads: First, the
preservation and enlarging of his Church Mystical, and of his Saints on earth;
and thus considering them personally, although they should be scattered each
from other: or secondly, the Building up his Church, as gathered in Assemblies
to hold forth his public worship in the world, as that place forementioned,
is apparently to be understood by the next words: For he speaks of the Keys
in the following verse; whereby are meant all Media cultus, all Ordinances of
worship, whereby his Church is built. So then this Reason taken from
[aedificabo Ecclesiam] branches it self into two Parts; Two Branches of this
reason:
The first is taken from his love to his Church Mystical, on his Saints simply
considered as such: The second is from his interest in his own worship: for
which he loves his Churches that are the Seat of it, more then all the world.

1. 1. His love to his Saints.
His Love to his Church Mystical is such, that no Mountain of opposition can
stand before it, to hinder the enlargement and building of it up. This Reason
you have Isai. 43. 3, 4. I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for
thee, since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, [and I
have loved thee:] therefore will I give Men for thee, and People for thy life.
It is put upon this Reason, Quia amavi te, because I have loved thee; and that,
more then all the world. Or if you will have it expressed in the language of this
similitude here in the Text, Mountains shall depart, and Hills be removed, but
my kindness shall not depart from thee, says God, Isai. 54. 10. It is such a
kind of speech as that of Christ's: Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not a
tittle of my word, etc.

2. 2. Gods love to his worship.
His love to his Churches holding forth his Name and worship in the world, is
such, as nothing shall withstand the repairing and perfecting of them, and of
that his worship and every parcel of it. If God had not such Assemblies in the
world, he should have no worship. Therefore these Churches are called the
Ground and Pillar of Truth, both where it grows, and where it is held forth; 1 Timothy 3. 15. he there speaks of Church assemblies, as wherein Timothy was to
learn how as an Evangelist to behave himself, in the ordering and governing
of them, as you have it in the words immediately foregoing, Th^^ thou might
know how to behave thy self in the House of God, etc. And the truth is, that
that building of the House of God, of which only Zachary here gives us occasion
to speak, was but the completing all the ordinances of worship. It was not so
much the building up the Nation of the Jews that was here directly intended;
but the building of their Temple, the seat of worship, and introducing the
Candlestick, etc. And their Assemblings there to worship according to Gods own
prescription, was more to him, and is so still, then what ever else was or is
done in the world. In the 87. Psalm. ver. 2. The Lord loves the gates of Sion
more then all the dwellings of Jacob. The gates of Sion were the gates of the
Temple that stood upon mount Sion, set open for the Jews to worship in; and
these he loves more then other Societies, or Assemblings, though of Jacob, and
this more then them All, take them all together; whether civil in their Cities
and families, or religious in their Synagogues; where they were capable but of
some few, not of all the Ordinances that were in the Temple.

And the reason of this his love is, How much Gods glory is concerned in
setting right his public worship, and the government of his Church.
the great concernment that his public worship is of unto him. God has but
three things dear unto him in this world, his Saints, his Worship, and his
Truth; and it is hard to say, which of these is dearest unto him; they are
mutuo sibi fines. God therefore ordained Saints to be in the world, that he
might be worshipped; and reciprocally appointed these Ordinances of worship as
means to build up his Saints. In the Commandments (the Epitome of the Old
Testament) the institutions of Gods worship have the second place: The second
Commandment is wholly spent thereon; and therein how jealous does God profess
himself of any aberration or swerving from his own rules? now jealousy (you
know) proceeds from the deepest love. Yea the third and fourth Commandments
are taken up about it also; the one about the manner, that his Name (for so his
worship is called, Micah 4. the 5. ver. compared with ver. 2. and 3.) might not
be taken in vain; the other about the time. And then in the Lords Prayer,
(which is the Epitome of the New Testament) in the second Petition (if not the
first) the worship and government of his Church comes in; for his Worship is
his Name, (as was said) and we desire that to be Hallowed: and nothing is more
properly Christ's visible Kingdom here, then the right administration of
Ordinances in his Church, which do set him up as King of Saints. To this
purpose I shall open that in the 15. of the Revelation, where when the Saints
had got a Temple over their heads, ver. 6. (as was before hinted) then they
call for a true and right worshipping of Christ, and this because he was King
of Saints: They sing, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty;
just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee, O
Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy: and all nations shall
come and worship before thee, etc. There are three paires, or conjugata, which
harmoniously answer one to another: First, here is a double title and Kingdom
given unto Christ, 1 [Lord Almighty,] 2 [King of Saints:] or (if you will) He
is King of Nations, and King of Saints: 1 King of Nations, for so in that
parallel place, Jerem. 10. 7. (from whence these words here uttered are
evidently taken, and therefore it is quoted in the margent) he is called; and
so is all one with that expression here, [Lord God Almighty,] unto which 2 they
add this other, Thou King of Saints: And so these two are distinct, and both
His titles. Then secondly, here is a double duty sutably due unto him according
to these his titles, to fear him, and to worship him, both which are expressed
by this general, to glorify his Name. Thirdly, here is a double declaration
of the justness of these titles, and the ground that calls for both these
duties, his great and mavelous works in the world declaring him to be Lord
God Almighty, or King of Nations, and therefore Fear is due unto him, (and
accordingly in Jeremy we only read, Who would not fear thee, O King of
Nations?) and then there are his just and true ways, declaring him to be King
of Saints, (which these here in their song add unto that of Jeremy) and this
calls for Worship from us unto him: Who shall not worship thee, O King of
Saints? for true and righteous are thy ways and judgments. In fine, here is
Christ's supremacy acknowledged both in matters Civil and Ecclesiastical, in
his government of the world, and of his Church. And as he is known to be King
of Nations by his works of Providence abroad in the world, so to be King of
Saints, by those true and righteous ways wherein his Churches are to walk. And
a parallel place unto this latter, (as that of Jeremy was unto the former) is
that in Psalm. 68. 24. where the Psalmist speaking of this worship of Christ,
says, They have seen thy goings, O God, even the [goings] of my [King] in the
[Sanctuary.] Mark it; the goings he speaks of are restrained to his goings in
the Sanctuary; and spoken of him also as the Churches King, [My King.] And so
the words are the very same in sense, that they in the Temple here do utter,
[Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.] And the Psalmist evidently
speaks of his ways of worship in the Church, as appears by the very next
words, ver. 25. The singers went before, the players on instruments followed
after, etc. expressing the worship of him in his Church in the language of the
Old Testament, and he as their King in the midst of them, going in his greatest
state. And yet more clearly, ver. 26. Bless ye God in the congregations. Yea
and all this proves to be New Testament too, and a prophecy thereof, though
uttered in the phrase of and in a prophecy of the Old. For what is said in the
18. ver. before of this their King, is by the Apostle in Ephesians. 4. 8. applied
unto Christ's Ascension: Thou have Ascended up on high, thou have led Captivity
captive, and have received gifts for men, namely, the gifts for building of his
Church, and directing of his worship under the New Testament, as it is
expounded by the Apostle in the following verses. And therefore that which I
have even now cited out of that Psalm. ver. 24, 25, 26, etc. is to be understood
as meant of the worship of the Gospel in the congregations thereof, erected
after Christ's Ascension. I shall add but this, These ways are called just and
true, in opposition to ways invented by men, which on the contrary are
unrighteous and false; Psalm. 119. 104. Through thy precepts I get
understanding, therefore I hate every false way. There is certainly a right
Rule, or way chalked out for every administration in Gods Sanctuary, if we
could find it out.

To illustrate all this by a similitude from other Kings. Two things manifest
a King to be a King, and show forth the glory of his Majesty: 1. His power and
rule abroad throughout all his Dominions: 2. The observance, the worship, and
State ceremonies that are at Court; and these show him to be King as much as
the former. This we may see in Solomon, whose Royalty and Majesty was held
forth thereby, as much as by his power, 2 Chronicles. 9. 4. When the Queen of Sheba
had seen the house that he had built, the meat of his Table, the attendance
of his Ministers, and their apparel, and his ascent by which he went up into
the house of the Lord, it was said, there was no more spirit in her. And in the
17. and 19. verses, He made a Throne for the glory of his Majesty, the like
whereof was not made in any Kingdom. Now Christ's Court on earth are his
Churches, which are called Gods House, Heb. 10. 21. and 25. compared. And there
his throne is set up, as in the Temple of old. In all the Visions of God, as
sitting on a throne made unto the Prophets, that throne is presented as in the
Temple: So Esaias 6. 1. I saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne, high and lifted up,
and his train filled the Temple. The Temple was therefore called the place
where Gods honor dwells, Psalm. 26. 8. that is, his Court: as some of our Kings
houses are called Honors. And thus in the New Testament, in the representation
of the Church on earth as worshipping him, Rev. 4. 8, 9, and 10. verses: This
Church has a Throne in the midst of it, and God sits thereon, ver. 5, 6, 7. So
that indeed, there is nothing does more exalt and glorify God then his
public worship, and the government of his Church purely and rightly
administered. 1 Chronicles. 16. 29. Give unto the Lord the [glory] due unto his Name,
[worship] the Lord in the beauty of holiness. These two are joined together.
(The like you have Psalm. 29. 2.) And it is part of that song which David made
when he brought back the Arc, and so set up Gods worship. And further, in Esaias
60. 7. it is called the house of his glory; and that Chapter is a Prophecy of
the Gospel, ver. 5.

Now if the worship of God, and the government of his house, and every
ordinance thereof tend so much to his glory, and set him up as King; then how
much is he engaged to perfect it? He will fully show himself to be King of
Saints in his worship, as well as King of Nations in his works. And therefore
as his work is said to be perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. so he will in the end make his
worship perfect, (I speak for the outward administration of it) even the
perfection of beauty, (as the Psalmist calls it, Psalm. 50. 2.) which it cannot
be styled, whilst any part is wanting, or misplaced: or (to conclude this
reason in the language of the Metaphor in the Text) God is not like the foolish
builder, that will begin to lay the foundation of his Church, and not fully
perfect and finish it.

The first Use shall be an extract of the first Branch of this Doctrine. Use 1.
Let Gods people therefore know their strength; Though their enemies be as
mountains, yet in a cause of God and his Church, let them not be affrighted at
them, Deuteronomy. 7. 21. yea let them despise them all, as the phrase is, Esaias 37.
22. When Rabshekah brought a threatening Embassage from the King of Assyria,
with this Preface unto it, Thus says the great King, the King of Assyria,
(Esaias 36. 4.) where are they among all the gods of the countries, that have
delivered their land out of my hand? etc. In answer to this, what does good
Hezekiah, through the Prophets encouragement, return again, but this, The
Virgin, the daughter of Sion has despised thee, Esaias 37. 22. Although she be
but a virgin, yet she has a Champion who is in love with her, that will take
her part, and fight her quarrel. The people of God are weak in themselves, but
they have a strong Captain; so Christ declares himself to be unto them, Josh.
5. 14. As the Captain of the Lords Host am I come. And if a Lion be the
Captain, though the Army consists but of Hearts and Sheep; yet they will be
too hard for the wolves that come against them. It is the comparison the
Scripture uses, Esa. 31. 4. Like as the Lion and the young Lion roaring on his
prey, when a multitude of shepherds are called forth against him; so shall the
Lord of Hoasts come down to fight for mount Sion, and for the hill thereof.
And then how still and quiet is the enemy and avenger! Jesus Christ was borne,
as to be a King, so a Conqueror; and we may style him King Jesus the
Conqueror; so Rev. 6. 2. He went forth conquering, and to conquer.

If God will throw down all mountains of opposition, Use 2.
that hinder the perfecting of his Church: Then get up your Faith and
resolution, for this great work of reforming the Church, and forecast not what
opposition you are like to encounter with, get but your hearts filled with
Faith, and you will be able to say, (as Zerubbabel here) Who art thou, O great
Mountain? It was long ere Zerubbabel could be brought to believe, or to
resolve to do it, the discouragements were so great: the greater mountain of
the two was the unbelief in his own heart; but when he once did resolve to
set upon the work, he found all those mountains to vanish before him. To
speak still in the language of the metaphor here, Have but as much faith as a
grain of mustard seed, and you may say to this mountain, Be removed into the
sea, and it shall be removed: Hezekiah was a great Reformer, he removed the
high places, and brake the Images, and cut down the Groves, and brake in
pieces the Brazen Serpent, 2 Kings 18. 4. and then withal it is added in the
following words, He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, ver. 5. They that will
reform a Church or State, must trust more in God in doing it, then in any work
else.

Is a word of Caution: Use 3.
For if the worship of God and every part of it does so much concern Gods
glory, (as has been showed in the Reason of this Doctrine) then take heed how
you meddle with it. Be sure you set the service of the house of the Lord in its
right order, (as the phrase is of Hezekiahs Reformation, 2 Chronicles. 29. 35.) and
that according to clear light from the word of truth. Know and consider, that
you meddle with edged tools, when you take this work in hand. Which I speak,
not to discourage you from it; but to make you wary in, and attentive to it,
more then all the works you ever did set your hands and hearts unto. It was a
good and a religious purpose in David to bring back the Arc; and for the
substance of the duty, he was right in it; he mistook but in the order: he set
it upon a cart, when as the Priests shoulders should have carried it. Himself
thus speaks of it, We sought not God after the due order, (that is, Gods
Institution) 1 Chro. 15. 30. And when it was like to fall, (God confuting
thereby their error) Uzzah did but touch it to keep it up, (and that too was
done out of a good zeal) God smote him for it; though God himself
acknowledges it to have been but an error, or rashness in him, even when he
smote him, 2 Samuel 6. 7. The anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah, and
God smote him for his [errour.] But yet it was an error about the Arc, (Gods
worship,) and a small one there is dangerous. But you will then say, We had
best not meddle with it at all, but let it alone, and leave it as it is. It is
true, that David himself in his fear had just the same thoughts, 1 Chronicles. 13.
12. David was afraid of God that day, How (says he) shall I bring the Ark of
God home to me? If men be stricken thus for touching of it, God be merciful to
me, (thought he) let it rather remain where it is. So David brought not the
Ark home to himself, but carried it aside into the house of Obed Edom, ver.
13. But God did soon confute him of this his error also; for the 14. ver. tells
us, that The Lord blessed the house of Obed Edom, and all that he had. And then
David began to bethink himself, surely if it brings a blessing upon the house
of Obed Edom, it will do the like on mine too. And then we read in the 13.
Chap. He prepared a place for it, and brought it home; and he being by this
breach made, put upon searching into the Word, found that the Levites only
ought to carry it, and that because they did it not at the first, the Lord
therefore made a breach upon them, ver. 30. Now above all all observe, that
when he amended that error, and brought it home, he was blessed, and blessed
indeed: For no sooner did he think of building a house for it, but God
promised to establish his house for ever. 2 Samuel 7. 11. And read the 18.
Chapter, and you shall see how all his enemies upon this were subdued before
him. And then of his son Solomon, God says in the 13. ver. He shall build an
house for my name, and I will establish the Throne of his Kingdom for ever:
His own house and the Kingdom were established together by it. Thus likewise
when this second Temple was to be finished, God provokes them to it by this,
[From this time will I bless you,] Hag. 2. 19. And as he blessed them, so he
will bless you, and your families, and the Kingdom. To instance in some
particulars, (which have been in your hearts also, as that purpose was in
David's) together with encouragements out of the Scriptures suited thereunto.
You have declared your godly resolution to be (to express it in your own
words) to use your utmost endeavors to establish learned and preaching
Ministers, with a good and sufficient maintenance throughout the whole
Kingdom, wherein many dark corners are miserably destitute of the means of
salvation; which project tends to enlarge Christ's mystical Church. From this
time God will bless you; (look for it) and establish the Kingdom by it. The
Scripture for your encourageme^t holds forth an example of just the like
practice of one of the best Kings, and of that same blessing following upon it,
which is in all your aims, 2 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8, 9, 10. Jehoshaphat in the third
year of his reign sent to his Princes, to teach (that is, to countenance the
teaching of the Word) in the Cities of Judah, and with them the Levites and
Priests, and they taught in Judah, and had the Book of the Law of the Lord with
them, and went throughout all the Cities of Judah, and taught the people. Here
is the same practice that you have resolved upon; and the success is
answerable to your hearts desires: For ver. 10. it follows, And the fear of
the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Lands that were round about Judah;
and they made no war against Iehoshaphat. This will secure the Land, as much
as that posture of War you intend. You have also issued out an Order for the
purging out diverse Innovations in and about the worship of God, for the
abolishing of all Crucifixes, scandalous pictures, etc. and other the like
superstitions. Go on to establish it; you will establish the Kingdom by it.
Not to quote the book of Kings and Chronicles, which is abundant in such
examples; we have an instance more ancient of the like blessing of God upon the
like practice, Genesis 35. Jacob reformed his family of all their strange Gods,
and all their eare-rings, ver. 2. and 4. and the success was, that the terror
of God was upon all the Cities round about them, ver. 5. You have likewise
declared, that you intend a due and necessary Reformation of the Government and
Liturgy of the Church, etc. you will find the like blessing to be upon this
also, in the War you have undertaken against the Popish Irish Rebels. When
Abijah King of Judah was to fight with Jeroboam King of Israel, that had
perverted the worship of the Lord, see how he pleades the cause against them
and his Army; Ye have cast out the Priests of the Lord, but as for us the Lord
is our God, and we have not forsaken him, and the Priests which minister unto
the Lord are the Sons of Aaron; that is, such as by Gods own appointment were
to govern the Church, and to minister before the Lord: And they burn unto the
Lord every morning and every evening, burnt Sacrifices, and sweet incense; the
shewbread also set they in order upon the pure Table, and the Candlestick of
gold with the Lamps thereof: We keep the charge of the Lord our God, but you
have forsaken him, and behold, God himself is with us for our Captain, but you
shall not prosper, etc. ver. 9, 10, 11, and 12. and the issue of all this is
recorded; ver. 16, and 17. God smote Jeroboam, and all Israel before Abijah and
Judah, and the Children of Israel sled before Judah, and Abijah and his people
slew them with a great slaughter, so that the children of Israel were brought
under at that time. But on the contrary, If you falter in the matter of
Religion and Worship, know, that from that time God will curse you, as he did
Jeroboam and Israel with him; who when he had set up the calves, to hold the
people to him, God threatens his house to take it away, as a man take away dung
until it be all gone, 1 King. 14. 10. And as for Israel and the state of that
Kingdom, he threatens to smite it as a Reed is shaken with the water, ver.
15. Whereas you may stand as a Rock in the waters, and all alterations and
turnings of the stream would but dash and break themselves upon you, you all
that while abiding firm and immoved; you will then become as a reed in the
waters, tossed up and down, with contrary motions of fears and troubles, as
the stream carries you this way or that way, even as that state of Israel from
that time was but fluctuating, and at best, unstable as waters with variety of
governments and Governors, the stream of the people sometimes turning one
way, sometimes another, (as in the story appears;) and in the end, God says
that he will root up Israel out of this good Land, and pluck up this Reed even
by the roots, when it has been tossed a while up and down. So it follows there.

I will end this Caution with two Rules. First, be sure you establish nothing
but what you have full, clear, and general light for. Secondly, condemn
nothing, and suffer nothing to stand condemned, in which, you in your
consciences are doubtful, there may be a truth: For if you should build the
least Hay and Stubble, you will not only suffer loss, but lay a foundation of
a new rent and division in the age to come. For there is a Spirit mentioned in
the Text, even the Holy Ghost, who will not rest working in men's spirits, till
the whole building be rightly framed according to the pattern in every piece of
it. And what ever is amiss, and not according to his mind, the light of his
fire will both discover it and burn it up, which leads me to the 5.
Observation, which is this:

That God carries on the work of finishing his Temple, 5. Obser.
[not by power nor might, but by his Spirit.] By Spirit he means the holy
Ghost, by a more immediate hand stirring up men's spirits unto this work;
turning and convincing them of the truth, and of their duty toward it; and
likewise by coincident acts of Providence, so apparently wheeling about to the
effecting of it, that though might and power be brought to concur in it, yet so
as his hand alone shall be seen and acknowledged in it. And thus his [Spirit]
here is manifestly interpreted in the 10. ver. where it is said, that as all
should see the Plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel, (the instrument of building
it) so they should perceive those seven eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro
through the whole earth: (that is, his eyes of Providence, called seven,
because of their perfection) these to have so guided and managed all the
affairs thereof, that all the rays and beams of Providence issuing from those
eyes, might be seen to meet in the accomplishment of this, as their ultimate
aim and scope. Now these seven eyes, Rev. 5. 6. are called the seven Spirits
of God, sent forth into all the earth: And Rev. 1. 4. are plainly interpreted
to be the holy Ghost in his various workings, for Grace and Peace is there
wished from the seven Spirits. Thus much for the explication of it.

Now that the building of the Temple is thus more immediately carried on by the
working of the holy Ghost, you may read it all along in all the story of the
building of this Temple in the Old Testament, as likewise in that of the New.

First, the laying the Foundation of this Temple, it was done indeed by the
power and might of Cyrus; but yet Ezra 1. and 2. it is added, The Lord stirred
up the spirit of Cyrus; and how, but by a mere act of foresight or providence
aforehand about it? God had an hundred years before his birth, by his Spirit
written a Prophecy of him, and that by name, Esaias 44. ult. which these Jews
showing him, Gods Spirit stirred up his spirit thereby; for in his Proclamation
himself says, The Lord has charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, so
ver. 2. of Ezra 1. And when he had thus given leave to the Jews to go and
build it, yet still it was a great matter of self-denial to them, to leave
their houses and gardens which they had built and planted at Babylon, Jer. 29.
5. Therefore it is further added in the 5. ver. of that 1. of Ezra, Then rose
up the chief of the Fathers, and the Priests and Levites, with all them whose
[spirit God had raised up] to build the house of the Lord. And then again, when
it came to this second work, the Finishing of it, they were exceeding backward
to it; but God sent Two Prophets, who convinced them of their duty; and
therefore Hag. 1. 14. it is expressly and on purpose put in, that The [Lord
stirred up the spirit] of Zerubbabel, and the spirit of Jeshuah, and the spirit
of all the remnant of the people, and they came and did work in the house of
the Lord their God. And again, whereas the Persian Kings had made Decrees
against the building of it, (which was the greatest impediment of all the rest)
God brought Darius his heart at last off to it, and that by so unexpected a
way, as made all the people joyful: So it is expressly said, EZra 6. 22. They
kept the feast of unleavened bread with joy; for the Lord had made them
joyful, and had turned the heart of the King of Assyria unto them, to
strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God. Yea and his heart was
so much stirred in it, that he not only makes a Decree for it, ver. 8. but
likewise against all those that should oppose it, under a capital punishment,
ver. 11. yea, he curses all that should put to their hand to alter it, ver.
12. so that the enemies that before opposed it, were now constrained to further
it, ver. 13. All this was done, (as you see) Not by power, nor by might, but by
Gods Spirit. Thus much for this instance in the Text out of the Old Testament.

See the like in Gods building his Church in the New; Both in setting up his
Church in the world at first, when Heathenisme backed with the power of the
Roman Empire stood in the way of it; and likewise in raising it up again,
when Antichrist had thrown it down. For the first, (the Erecting of it) Did
he use might, or power, or an Army (as it is varied in the margent) to conquer
the world by? No such matter: He chooses twelve or thirteen men, whereof the
most were poor fishermen; and he sends them not all together in one troop
neither, but dispersed apart into several parts of the world, some taking one
Country to conquer, some another: The most ridiculous course in appearance, for
such a design, that could be imagined. Yet (as Revel. 6. 2.) Christ in these
went forth conquering, and to conquer, and took nothing with him but his Bow,
(as it is there) and his Arrows, (as it is Psalm. 45. 5.) the preaching of the
Gospel, even the foolishness of preaching, (as the Apostle calls it) yet
hereby the people fell so under him, (as the Psalmists phrase there is) that in
three hundred years that whole Empire was turned Christian, and Heathenish
worship thrown down; and this you see not by power, nor by might, but by his
Spirit.

But then again Antichrist steps up, the Beast of Rome, and after Him all the
world wondered, (that is, the European world,) Revel. 13. 3. saying, Who is
like unto the Beast? who is able to make war with him? ver. 4. But at the 14.
Chap. a Lamb encounters him, and but with a handful in comparison, out from
among whom he sends a few emisaries, to preach the everlasting Gospel to every
Nation, tongue, and kindred: ver. 6, etc. and in the end he wins all the
Northern Kingdoms, to embrace that Gospel, and will still go on to conquer
and win ground, so that in the 15. Chap. and 2. ver. we read of a perfect
victory over the Beast: And whereas before it had been said of his Holiness
the Pope, Who is like unto the Beast? Now it is said, ver. 4. Who shall not
fear thee, O Lord? for thou [onely art holy.] And whereas before All the world
wondered after the Beast, and worshipped him; the world is now so altered, that
it is said, All Nations shall come and worship before THEE, in the same 4. v.
And now the wonder is as much, how all this is brought about: Not by power, nor
by might, but by his Spirit. So it is expressly said, 2 These. 2. 8. speaking of
this man of sin, he says, Whom the Lord shall consume with the [Spirit of his
mouth:] that is, by his Spirit, in the preaching of the Gospel, and working in
the hearts of men, and overcomming Kingdoms unto Christ and his Church: So we
read Revel. 17. 4. The Lamb shall overcome the Kings that made war with him,
and yet not by power, but by his Spirit.

The Reason of this is, Reas.
because the building of Gods Church is his own business, in a more special
manner, more then any other; therefore he will be sure to do it himself, and
more immediately be seen in it. As it is said of Christ Personal, (the
Tabernacle of his humane nature) Heb. 9. 12. that it was not made with hands,
that is to say, not of this building, (as the Apostle there speaks) that is, It
was not framed by the power of nature, as other men are, but by the Spirit: So
it is true of Christ mystical, his Body, and the Tabernacle of his Church. It
is not of the ordinary make that other societies of men (whether Families or
Kingdoms) are of; it is not made with hands, (with humane wisdom or power, as
they are) that is to say, is not of this building. Thus Heb. 3. 4. Every house
(says the Apostle) is built by some man; That is, All Kingdoms, Families, and
Societies, God in an ordinary providence leaves to men to build in their own
way; but (says he) He that built all things, is God. Which is spoken of Gods
building his Church, (which is his house) and all things appertaining unto it,
as is evident both by the foregoing words, ver. 3. He that built the house
(the Apostle speaking of Christ, who is God) has more honor then the house:
And also by those words that follow after, Moses was faithful in all his
house, (namely, in the building of that house then) as a servant: but Christ as
a Son over his own house, (now) whose house are we. The reason why thus
himself by his Spirit builds it, is held forth in that one world, It is his
[owne] house: and therefore he will over-see the doing this himself, and will
do it so, that none shall share in the glory with him, although he uses them.

First Use, Use 1.
is, that which is made of it in the 10. verse, namely that in matters which
concern the building of the Church, we should learn to despise the day of
small things: The Prophet speaks it by way of reproof, Who has despised the
day of small things? Because the beginnings of this work then were but small,
and there was little appearance in humane foresight to effect it: Therefore,
who almost was there that did not despise it, and despair of it? Remember that
there is a Spirit in the Text, and no man knows how far he may carry on the
smallest beginnings, which he lays as the foundation of his greatest works,
that his own immediate hand may the more appear. The Kingdom of heaven was
at first but as a grain of mustard seed, (says Christ) the least of all
seeds; but when it is grown, it is the greatest of herbs, and becomes a tree,
Mat. 13. 32. In the 2. of Dan. ver. 34, and 45. there is mention made of a
stone that was cut out of the Mountain without hands; which expression is used
not only to show the Divine power that accompanied it, but to intimate, that
it was at first but some little stone, which without hands dropped out, or was
blown down from the Mountain; for if it had been a great one, it must then
have had hands to cut and hew it out, and to throw it down. And yet lo this
little stone became a mountain, and filled the whole earth, as it there
follows.

A Second Use is, that which is in the Text, that when you see any thing done
for Gods Church beyond the reach of humane wisdom and foresight, that you
would fall down and cry (as they are taught here ver. 7.) Grace, Grace unto
it: You are not to cry up Zerubbabel, Zerubbabel, that is, any means or
instrument whatever, whether King or Parliament, much less this man, or that
man, but to exalt the free grace of God, the work of which alone it is and
has been.

One word more unto Zerubbabel, the Text calls for it; This is the word of the
Lord unto Zerubbabel. From which let the Observation be this:

That this work of finishing the Temple, lies first and chiefly upon
Zerubbabel, and his Elders to take care of: That is, upon Prince and Elders.
And though Jeshuah and his fellows the Priests are intended, (as being the one
of those Olive trees formerly mentioned) yet Zerubbabel and the Magistrates are
only spoken to. All such motions should come first from You; it is Your duty
to be the he-goats of the flock to lead on all the rest, as the Prophet EZekiel
speaks: Thus EZra 1. 5. Then rose up the chief of the Fathers of Judah and
Benjamin, to build the house of the Lord: It had otherwise never been done to
purpose. So in the building of the Temple at first, the motion came first into
David's heart; 1 Chro. 29. 3. I have (says he) set my affection to the house of
God: And then, ver. 6. The chief of the Fathers and Princes of the house of
Israel, they follow; and then fell in the people, and they rejoiced and offered
willingly, so ver. 13. You should commend unto the people what is good and
right. Let us bring back the Ark of our God unto us, (said David, 1 Chronicles. 13.
3.) and no sooner had he commended it unto them, but (as it follows, ver. 4.)
all the congregation said, they would do so, for the thing was right in the
eyes of all the people.

And the reason why this is your more especial duty, is, because God has
honored Princes and Magistrates above, and set them over others: And as those
who honor God, God will honor; so those whom God has honored, he expects
should honor him; and you cannot do it better then this way: For how much his
honor is concerned in his worship, you heard before.

Let the honor of it move you: Take the renowned men in Scripture, and their
greatest glory has been to be builders of Gods house. It is mentioned as Moses
his highest honor, Heb. 3. 2, 3, 4. And David (though a King already) accounts
this a greater honor then his Crown. So 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. Who am I, (says he)
and what is my people, that we should offer so willingly? He speaks it of
offering toward the building of the Temple. And in the New Testament it is the
Apostles honor, that they were Master Builders; yea it is made Christ's highest
honor, Heb. 3. 3. This man was accounted worthy of more glory then Moses; in
as much as he who has builded the house, has more honor then the house. So
far as you are capable of it, and have power to do it, be in this conformed
unto him. The Prize of this honor is set before you, and you have the first
offer of it. An opportunity such as these last hundred years wellnigh have not
afforded the like to it. This Parliament seems to have been called by God, for
such a time as this; and if you will not do it, God will do it without you:
As he said that Deliverance, so (say I) Reformation will arise some other way;
God has a Spirit here in the Text, that will work it out in men's hearts, if
power and might should not: And That will be little to your honor, as Deborah
said to Barak. In the 5. of Micah, ver. 7. The remnant of Jacob is said to be
as a dew from the Lord, and as the showers upon the grass, [that tarrieth not
for man, nor waits for the sons of men.] The Prophet uses two similitudes,
to show both that the multiplication and growth of the Church depend not upon
man; first, for their propagation, and their being multiplied, he compares them
unto the dew which is engendered and distilled from Heaven immediately.
Therefore Psalm. 110. 3. New converts added unto the Church are compared unto
the Dew, and Gods begetting of them unto the womb of the morning, when
overnight, the earth was dry. Again, the growth and maintaining of them he
compares unto the sprouting up of herbs and grass in wildernesses where man
comes not, and so their springing tarrieth not for man, nor waits for the
sons of men, for them to come with watering pots to nourish them, (as herbs in
gardens do) but these have showers from heaven that give the increase: I the
Lord (speaking of this Vineyard) do keep it, I will water it every moment,
Esaias 27. 3.

The Conclusion.
NOw for a Conclusion, and winding up of all. Is this Word of the Lord spoken
to you, in a way of general Application only, such as similitudinary examples
(which in some things hold a likeness) use to have, (All things happening in
the Old Testament for examples, and are written for our admonition, upon whom
the ends of the world are come, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10. 11?) Or is
there not some more special word that applies this Vision of the Candlestick
and Olive Trees, as Prophetique Types of the like work of finishing the Temple,
to fall out under the times of the Gospel, when the Church is come out of
Popery? That Babylon was the Prophetique Type of Rome, you all know where to
find that; it is in the 17. and 18. of the Rev. and so applied by the holy
Ghost. And that the foundation of this Temple was the type of our first
Reformation when we came out from Babylon, was in the first Observation shown
you, out of Chap. 14. and 15. And that the Samaritans are by the holy Ghost
made the type of those that shall in any Age corrupt the worship of God, by
mingling Idolatrous or Popish superstitions, as our Innovators have done; we
meet with the application thereof, by the holy Ghost himself, unto some living
in the best of Churches under the Gospel, namely, that of Philadelphia, Revel.
3. 9. who say they are Jews, and are not; Behold, (says God) I will make them
to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee, (as
speaking unto that Church.) Now whereas the holy Ghost describing them to be
such as say they are Jews, but are not, it is in a Periphrasis of speech all
one, as to say they are Samaritans. Josephus tells us, that when the Jews were
in a prosperous estate, the Samaritans would then say that they were Jews; and
that forementioned place, the 4. of EZra, manifestly implies as much; for they
there plead, We worship God as you do, etc. And although we pass not this
judgment on men's persons, yet we may speak of causes and things as the
Scripture has done before us. Now as certain it is, that those Gods
Magistrates, who under the times of the Gospel, especially in these last days,
have and shall assist the Reformation of the Churches from under those
Samaritan superstitions, intermingled with their worship, and shall afford
their countenance and aid to the finishing and perfecting the Temple, they are
typisied out by the Olive trees here, (which were then, Zerubbabel their chief
Governor, and his Elders:) And accordingly we find as express an application
of it by the holy Ghost himself, as Prophetically intended herein. Thus in the
same book of the Revel. (in which Prophecy of the New Testament, the Holy
Ghost borrows all the elegancies and flowers in the story of the Old, thereby
to set out the story of the New in succeeding ages) in the 11. Chap. ver. 4.
the Holy Ghost describes the Two Witnesses, that should oppose the Beast and
his party in all (and especially the later) ages, saying, [These are the two
Olive trees, and the two Candlesticks standing before the God of the Earth.]
Where by the Candlesticks are meant the Churches (as was shown before) and by
the two Olive Trees the eminent Magistrates and Ministers that supply Oil, for
the maintaining of these Churches light and glory now, as Zerubbabel and Jeshua
the Priests did then. Yea the Holy Ghost deciphers them not only by the very
same Hieroglyphique that is presented here in Zachary, but also he uses the
very same words which we find there in the interpretation of the Vision,
[standing before the God of the earth.] And further, this vision of the
Candlestick, and those two Olive Trees in Zachary, did signify, as was shown,
not so much (if at all) the first laying of the foundation of the Temple, which
had been done many years before, but was eminently (if not only to hold
forth that work of finishing, and completing it, which remained then to be
done; and to stir them up thereunto was that vision as there given. Therefore
answerably now, the full analogy of the type must principally fall upon, not
so much the first Reformation, or laying the foundation of the Churches
Reformation; as upon a second work of the perfecting and finishing of them: And
accordingly, as Zerubbabel there in Zachary is seen with a Plummet in his
hand, ver. 10. to measure out what remained unfinished for the building of the
Temple, so here in the 1. ver. of the 11. of the Revel. John has a Reed given
him, (he representing the godly of those ages) and is bidden to measure the
Temple of God, and the Altar, and the Worshippers, and this as supposing a
Temple to have been already built, only having too vast and great an Outward
Court laid to it, ver. 2. And although the computation of the whole time of
Antichrists reign, is there mentioned and annexed to these occurences; yet but
to this end to show how that time allotted him to reign should end and expire,
and so in that to show what passages should fall out in the Church, toward the
expiration of it, as a warning and signal of it, (whereof these are the
chief) for Chap. before, ver. 6. the Angel that gives that Prophecy in the
11. swears that time should be no longer: (that is, the Beasts time:) but
until the days of the seventh Trumpet which were shortly then approaching:
for immediately after these occurrences rehearsed we find that that seventh
Trumpet sounds, ver. 15. of that 11. Chap.

But then you will say, There is mentioned after this an overcomming and
killing of these witnesses by a war of the Beast, even his last war against
the Saints, whereby he shall throw down there Candlesticks, and cut down
these Olive trees; And if so, where then is all the encouragement which you
have given?

I dare not (...), that this killing is as yet to come; it is the greatest
controversy in this Book, whether it be past or no; But however, supposing it
not yet past, to take off discouragements from thence,

First, for the time of it, we know it not how long, it may be a good while
unto it, and in the mean time we may yet enjoy a summer of the Gospel, and an
harvest of a better Reformation, a little time of which (if it were to be
bought) were worth a world.

Secondly, If you attentively observe it, you shall find that killing
expressed by an allusion unto Christ's being crucified at last, and then their
rising again like his rising again with an earthquake, and ascending into
Heaven, as these are said to do, ver. 11, 12, 13. Now with what does Christ
comfort himself before he was to dye? Destroy this Temple, (says he) and in
three days I will raise it up again: With the same may you be encouraged
also, (though you supposed it yet to come.) It is but a Destruite hoc Templum,
a destroying of that you are about to repair, this Temple, and but for three
days and an half, no longer, for After three days and an half, (as it is
twice said, in the 9. and 11. verses) God will rear it up again, and that
with advantage, making a better edition of it, even an Holy of Holies, in which
the Arc is seen, (as ver. 19.) in comparison of the former. Yea, and further,
(as some think) this killing shall be but a Civil death, that is, of them as
witnesses only; not a natural death, as men: (For how else are their bodies
said to lie dead for three years and an half?) And so the same persons shall
rise again and enjoy the fruit of their former labors, and ascend into a
greater glory.

And thirdly, suppose this should come upon you, even when you are about to
finish your work, (as the 7. ver. has it, ((...)) when these Olive trees are
about to finish or [perfect] their testimony, (as some do read it) yet let not
even this cause you any whit to forbear this work: Christ knew he was to be
crucified, yet he casts the money changers out of the Temple; and so do you:
Purge and Reform the Temple, though you die for it, in the doing of it. It is
worth the observing, that though it was told good King Josiah in the beginning
of his reign, that God would bring evil upon Jerusalem, because of their
Apostasy in Manassehs time, and he knew that all he could do in reforming
should not quench Gods wrath, 2 Kin. 16. 17. yet he reformed with all his
might, and therein there was no King before him, that was like unto him, ver.
23, 25. Do you your duty, and serve your generation, (as David is said to
do.) Be strong, and let not your hands be weak, for your work shall be
rewarded, as it is in 2 Chronicles. 15. 7.

I conclude all with that speech unto this whole State, which David used to
Solomon, concerning the building of the Temple in his days, 1 Chronicles. 28. 20,
21. Be strong and of good courage, [and do it;] Fear not, nor be dismayed,
for the Lord God will be with thee, he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee,
until thou have finished all the work for the service of the house of the
Lord. And behold, the courses of the Priests and the Levites shall be with
thee, for all the service of the house of God, also the Princes and the people
will be wholly at thy Commandment.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii 27. Aprilis, 1642.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons, That no man shall Print the
Sermons preached at the last Fast day before the House of Commons by Mr Goodwin
and M. Carol, besides themselves, for the space of these two months, without
the particular license and approbation of the said House of Commons.

H. ELSYNGE, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

These are to give notice, that I appoint R. Dawlman to Print my Sermon.

Tho: Goodwin.


