THE COPPIE OF A LETTER WRITTEN FROM the Lo. Viscount of Gormanston unto Sir
Phelim o Neale.

Which Letter is all written by the Lord Gormanston's own hand, and was found
in Sir Phelim o Neale's Cloak-bag, when on the 16. of June 1642. the said Sir
Phelim, Rory mac Gwyre, some of the mac Mahownes, the mac Genises, and mac
Cartan, the o Cahans, Coll Kittagh, mac Donells sons, and the rest of the
Rebels gathered from the several Counties of Tirone, Antrim, Armagh, Down,
Fermanagh and Donegall. And also some out of the English Pale, being in all
6000. foot and 500. horse were defeated in battle by Sir William Stewart, and
by Sir Robert Stewart with part of their two Regiments, 300. of Colonel Gore's
Regiment, four Companies from the Derry, and Capt. Dudly Phillips with his
Troop of 60. horse, in all not exceeding 2000. foot and 300. horse.

Whereunto is added Sir Robert Stewarts Letter to the Right Honorable Sir John
Borlase Knight, one of the Lords Justices for the Government of the Kingdom of
Ireland.

DVBLIN: Printed by William Bladen. 1642.

Lo. Viscount GORMANSTON'S LETTER TO Sir Phelim o Neale.
Written by his own hand, and was found in Sir Phelim o Neale's Cloak-bagge on
the 16. day of June. 1642.
Noble Sir,
IF I had received but the least notice or hope that you would have come to the
meeting place; I had stayed longer to expect you, though I did not part thence,
till such time as I feared to be benighted by the way, and shall be ready upon
all occasions to wait on you. I am very sorry to hear of the Arrival of more
Enemies, We having already more then We can suppress, and do presume to offer
to your Consideration what encouragement it will be to our disanimated Enemies
in those parts, and discouragement to Ours; if they shall overthrow your forces
at the first Encounter. Wherefore you will do well to meet them with as
strong forces as you can, thereby to defeat them, which will make them the
more fearful thenceforth. I have conferred with your Brother whom I have
acquainted with what I know, to whose relation I refer you.

Our forces here shall be ready to assist you on the least notice, which may be
don from hence, for all places about Ardee are so consumed with fire, that
there can be no meat had for the Soldiers, for want whereof they will
doubtless disperse, they are so prompt thereunto upon the least occasion. Thus
praying God to give us better success then hitherto, I rest

Your assured loving Kinsman and Servant, Gormanston.
Navan this 15. of April. 1642. I can write you no News from about Dublin,
but that Ours have burned a street in the Suburbs, and have good store of
forces about the English Army that is gone forth, I pray spare me some powder,
for I protest we have not ten shots a piece.

Directed thus on the backside, Phelim o Neale, General of the forces of
Vlster. These



THE COPPIE OF A LETTER WRITTEN BY Sir ROBERT STEWART Knight: And directed To
the Right Honorable Sir JOHN BORLASE Knight; One of the Lords Justices for the
Government of the Kingdom of IRELAND.
Right Honourble and my very good Lord,
I Presume I need not inform your Lordship of the several Encounters these
Regiments have had with the Rebels, how in a place of the greatest advantage
for the Rebels, of any in Vlster, after relief of the Castles of Donegall,
Ballishanon and Castlerachan, and bringing off Sir Ralph Gore, his house being
no place of Strength, in our return we were assaulted in the middle of a wood
growing upon steep Mountains on every side, at a very strait pass, by near
two thousand Rebels, our forces not exceeding much twelve hundred, we forced
the passage, and so beat them in their own known choice ground, brought off
all, after a skirmish continued five hours, and made a safe retreat, with
little or no loss at all, having killed above a hundred of the Rebels. I
presume also that your Lordship has heard of our marching to o Cahan's
Country, where with some eighteen hundred, my own, Sir William Stewart, and
Sir Ralph Gore's Regiments, assisted with some four Companies out of Derry, we
did encounter two thousand four hundred rebels beat them, killing two
hundred, took nine or ten Colors, and took in the Castle of Dungiven, taking
prisoner one of the chiefest of the Sept of the o Cahans, releeved Colrane, and
victualled the two Castles of Limavaddy and Ballicastell, yet defended by the
British, and so having killed some three hundred more, which we found in
scattered Companies, by twenties and thirties at a place, called Macgillegin,
we retired home with very little or no loss at all, as also how Sir Phelim o
Neale with some four thousand coming strong to assault us the 25. of April,
was beat, and put to the flight by some two thousand of ours, having lost one
hundred men, we were stopped from prosecuting the victory, and pursuing the
Rebels, by reason of the boggs, impassable for our horses, That which now I
would impart to your Lordship, is a late conflict which befell on the 16. day
of this month of June, The Rebels being gathered from all quarters, chased by
the English and Scots forces, from the several Counties of Tirone, Antrim,
Armagh, Down, Fermanagh and Donegall, under the Command of Sir Phelim o Neale
himself, Collonell a Caen, lately arrived from Spain, after twenty years
travells abroad, assisted by Coll Kittaghs sons two Scots High-landers, with
many high-landers more, making up in all six thousand foot and five hundred
horse, the former night having stood in arms at a half a mile and less
distance all the night, that morning about sunrising our forces being drawn up
in number not exceeding much two thousand foot and three hundred horse, after
we had sent out some commanded Musquettiers, and horse, to view the rebels more
near, who being drawn up very orderly, upon the approach of our Commanded men
from a hill opposite to us, where they lay the night preceding, and were then
drawn up in two brigades, judging that our body should have fallen down, to have
seconded them, came on with a furious and swift March, making a terrible
outcry in their march according to their manner, but our men having received
orders to retire to the body, if they were assaulted, did retire accordingly,
and in retiring gave fire, the Rebels apprehending that retreat to be a
flight, marched straight close together in two brigades toward ours, which
after we had perceived, having obtained our end, in drawing them toward that
little hill, where we were scituat, we began to march slowly, they still
advancing, Coll Kittaghs sons (cried up for their valor as invincible
Champions) with their high-landers and some others assaulted my brigade
fiercely, insomuch that they were not far from coming to push of pike but
seeing the resolution and constancy of our men advancing still, and not loosing
ground, galling them with continual shot, finding their rear to shrink back
first, and then to fly at last, after a quarter of an hours stand, they
turned faces, and so did all that Brigade fly, which that which was opposite
to Sir William Stewart seeing, did bear their Contrymen Company, and so
fled confusedly, their troops (never so much as offering once to draw near, far
less to charge) took the same course the foot took, we had the chase and
execution of them for six or seven miles, killed as is thought five hundred,
took some Colors, and gained diverse Arms and Drums, besides the dead, many
we hear are dangerously, if not mortally wounded, This is now the second time
that the titular General Sir Phelim, with his far greater forces has been
beaten in the field by us, with an happy success, which I pray the Lord of
Hosts to continue to ours, and all other British forces in Ireland, that at
last we may see our desire upon our Enemies, and the Crown of this Monarchy
flourish upon our Kings head in peace.

Culmore 21 Iunij. 1642. Your Lo.ps most humble faithful and obedient Servant
Robert Stewart.


