PIOUS THOUGHTS VENTED In pithy Ejaculations. OR, THE WAY TO MAKE A RELIGIOUS
USE OF ordinary offered occasions.

By RICHARD GOVE.

2 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray continually. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. ROYSTON, at
the Angel in Ivie-lane.

1658.

TO ALL THOSE that are desirous to make a Religious use of ordinary offered
occasions: R. G. (Who desires to further the glory of God, and the everlasting
good of his peoples souls) Dedicateth this ensuing TREATISE.

Zacharias, cum loqui non potuit, scripsit. Luke 1. 20. and 63. Ambros. A WORD
OF Advise to the Reader.
READER,
ALl ordinary offered occasions should be to a Christian, as are Spectacles to
a weak or dim sight, which not only looks on them, but through them too, and
by their help sees that, that without them was hardly discernable. These
Spectacles I have made use of in this ensuing Treatise, and by the help of them
have discovered what Religious use may be made of such ordinary offered
occasions. If this like thee which I have done, thou may make use of the
same; and if not, let me see a better form of thine, and I shall gladly make
use of that, and be thy Debtor for it. Howsoever let us pray one for another,
which for his part he shall not cease to do, who is

Thine hearty well-wisher in what may be for thy Souls good, Richard Gove.

PIOUS THOUGHTS VENTED In pithy Ejaculations: OR, The way to make a Religious
use of ordinary offered occasions.
I.
Upon a man's first awaking in the morning.

LORD grant me thy grace, to awake To. 1. 11. Ephesians. 5. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 34.
out of the sleep of sin, that I may live righteously in thy sight.

II.
Upon the putting off of a foul shirt, and the putting on of a clean.

LOrd grant me thy grace, that I may Ephesians. 4. 22 24.
every day be more and more enabled to put off the old man, and to put on the
new.

III.
Upon a man's arising out of his bed.

LOrd grant me thy grace, that I may arise out of the bed of my carnal
security, Ephesians. 5. 14. Job 12. 6.
whereon I have so long layn.

IV.
Upon a man's putting on of his clothes.

LOrd, clothe thou me with the robes of Isa. 61. 10. To. 13. 14. Gal. 3. 27.
thy Sons righteousness, and let thy blessed Spirit every day more and more
put on upon my soul that new Man which after thee is created in holiness and
true righteousness. Ephesians. 4 24.


V.
Upon a man's kembing of his head.

LOrd, thy Word does assure me, that all the hairs of my head are numbered, and
Mat. 10 30 Act. 27. 34 Luke 21. 18
that not one of them does fall to the ground, or perish without thine
especial Providence: Oh grant me therefore thy grace, that I may still
remember this, and learn thereby more and more to depend upon thy fatherly
care, and gracious providence over me for greater matters, seeing Luke 12. 7.
thou art so providentially careful for me in these least things.

VI.
Upon the washing of a man's face and hands.

LOrd, wash thou me with the blood of Psa. 51. 2. 1 John 1. 7 Rev. 1. 5.
thy Son, and my Savior Jesus Christ, from the guilt of all my sins past: and
let thy blessed Spirit by his grace wash and 1 Cor. 6. 11.
cleanse my soul every day more and more from the power and pollution of them
for the time to come.

VII.
Upon a man's washing of his feet.

LOrd, my affections are the feet of my Ecel. 5. 1. Rev. 12. 2.
soul, and do carry that, as these other do my body: and passing through the
foul and filthy ways of sin, cannot but be much more defiled in thy sight,
then these are in mine. O wash them therefore every day more and more by Joh.
13. 5. Gal. 5, 24. Cant. 5. 3.
the powerful work of thy grace from all former pollutions, and being thus
washed, keep me from defiling them again.

VIII.
Upon a man's paring of his Nails.

THe captive Damsel under the Law, before she could be the wife of him Deuteronomy.
21. 12.
that took her in war, must first have her Nails pared. And therefore how
shall I ever hope to be espoused to my Savior 2 Cor. 11. 21
Jesus Christ, and be presented unto him as a pure Virgin, except I do cut off
those excrements of (...) proprie est sordes, quae in summis manuum ac
digitorum unguibus colligitur. Scapul.
naughtiness, Jam. 1. 21.
which are so loathsome to thee my God, and to all good men? which that I may
the better do, Lord give me thy grace to do it, and it shall be done.

IX.
Upon a man's looking his face in a Glass.

LOrd give me the grace, that as by looking in this Glass, I do see the
spots, and other deformities of my body, so by looking into thy word, I may see
the Jam. 1. 24, 25. Psalm. 119. 9.
spots, and other deformities of my Soul, and may learn to amend them.

X.
Upon a man's brushing of his Clothes.

OH that I were as careful to cleanse Psalm. 19* 12. and 51. 2
my Soul from my sins, as I am to cleanse my clothes from the spots and dust
which are on them.

XI.
Upon a man's putting on of some Upper-garment.

LOrd, my desire is not to be unclothed, 2 Cor. 5. 2. and 4.
but to be clothed upon, and that with that house which is from Heaven. And
that I may not fail of this my desire, Romans 13. 14. Gal. 3. 27.
Lord give me the grace to put on the Lord Jesus Christ; and that both by
believing in his merits, and by living according to his manners, whilst I am
here.

XII.
Upon the sight of a woman's spending much time in her neat and curious dressing
of her self.

OH that I were as careful to adorn and Pambo mentioned in Socrat. hist.
Eccles. li. 4 c. 18. has the like pious thought upon the like occasion.
trim my soul to make it pleasant in the sight of God, as this woman is to
adorn and trim her body to make that pleasing in the sight of men.

XIII.
Upon the hearing of a child crying after his father.

LOrd send forth the spirit of thy Son into my heart, that I may in all my
distresses Gal. 4. 4. Romans 8. 15.
cry Abba Father unto thee, as thy child should do.

XIV.
Upon the sight of one abhorring a filthy and nasty thing.

O Lord, that I might have thy grace Romans 12. 9. Job 42. 6. Psalm. 119. 101. and
418.
thus to abhor evil, both in my self and others!

XV.
Upon the sight of a Carvers cutting and framing of a curious Image out of
stone.

LOrd, my heart is stony, yet can thou Ezck. 11. 19. and 36. 26. Mat. 3. 9.
out of this stony disposition of mine with infinitely more ease make it an
heart of flesh, and me a child of Abraham; which my hearty desire and prayer
unto thee is, that thou will do for me.

XVI.
Upon the sight of the Sunne-rising.

LOrd, grant that Jesus Christ the Sun Mal. 4. 2. Acts 26. 18. Col. 1. 13. 1
Pet. 2. 9.
of Righteousness may also arise in my heart, and with his beams of saving
knowledge dispell more and more the darkness of ignorance in me.

XVII.
Upon the sight of one giving an account of moneys received.

LOrd, this will be one day my case, Romans 14. 12. Matthew. 25. 19. Luke 12. 46.
Mark 13 35.
and I know not how soon nor how suddenly I shall be called to make this my
account before thee. O give me thy grace therefore that I may live in a
continual expectation of it, and may accordingly provide for it.

XVIII.
Upon the sight of one teaching to cast account.

LOrd teach me to number my days Ps. 90. 12.
that I may apply my heart unto wisdom.

XIX.
Upon the locking and bolting of a door.

LOrd shut thou me in with the bolts of Genesis 7. 16.
thy fatherly providence and mercy, and then shall I be safe. Psalm. 4. 8.


XX.
Upon the sight of a lock hardly to be unlocked.

LOrd, how unwilling and unable am I of my self to open my mouth to speak to
thy praise; to open mine ears to hear thy word with profit and comfort, and to
open my heart to attend thereunto for my souls good! O do thou therefore which
have the key of David, and openest, Rev. 3. 7.
and no man shuts, and shuttest, and no man opens, open all these unto me
Ps. 51. 15. and 40. 6. Acts. 16. 14.
by the power and might of thy gracious help.

XXI.
Upon the sight of a hen with her chickens under her wings.

LOrd, how often would thou have gathered me as this Hen does her chickens
Matthew. 23. 37.
under her wings? but I would not: yet now seeing my former error and present
danger, I do run unto thee, beseeching thee to shelter me under the Psalm.
57. 1. and 6. 4.
shadow of thy wings, and to save me now and always for thy mercies sake.

XXII.
Upon the sight of a young lusty strong man taking a fall.

LOrd, this brings to my mind the falls 2 Samuel 11. Mat 26. 70. 1 Cor. 10. 12.
Romans 1. 24. Psalm. 51. 12. Esaias. 41. 10.
and sins of David, Peter, and others of thy children mentioned in Scripture:
and it does show me what the best of us all are, if thou do leave us to our
selves. Lord-therefore evermore support me with thy grace, and keep me in thy
fear.

XXIII.
Upon the hearing of one that had adopted another man's Son for his own.

LOrd, I do believe that thus thou have Ephesians. 1. 5.
dealt with me, and that thou have adopted me in Jesus Christ to be thy Son,
who am by nature the child of wrath. Ephesians. 2. 3. Romans 8. 15. 16. Gal. 4. 5, 6.
Lord, let thy holy Spirit, who is the Spirit of adoption, every day more and
more witness the same unto my spirit.

XXIV.
Upon the hearing of one knocking at a door.

LOrd, thou have knocked often at the door of my heart, and have called and
Rev. 3. 20. Cant. 5. 2. Ps. 38. 13. and 58. 4. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Joh. 15. 5. Phil.
2. 13. Rev. 3. 7.
cried often unto me to open unto thee, but I have hitherunto turned the deaf
ear, and not opened unto thee. Lord, forgive me this my great unkindnesse
past, and seeing I have neither will nor power of my self to do it, do thou
(which have the key of David, that opens, and no man shuts) open the door
of my heart and come in, and sup with me, and I with thee, and abide with me
for ever.

XXV.
Upon the sight of a Candle lighted with a Tinder-box.

LOrd, I see by this how prone and apt Ut pene extinctum cinerem si sulphur
tangas, Vivet, and ex minimo maximus ignis erit, etc. Ovid. de Remedio amoris.
l. 2. Jam. 1. 14, 15.
my corrupt nature is to commit sin upon every occasion offered, unless thou
by thy grace do prevent it, there being no speedier conjunction betwixt the
sparks of fire stricken amongst tinder, then there is betwixt my corrupt
nature and sin, when once an occasion is offered. Lord therefore keep me by
thy grace from all such offered occasions, or from entertaining of them when
they are thus offered.

XXVI.
Upon the sight of a game at Tables.

When a man plays a game at Tables, I see the chance is not in his power,
but to play it well it is: so the chances and changes of this world which do
betide me, were not in my Eccles. 9. 11. Jam. 1. 4, 12. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
power to prevent them, but having betided me, I must manage, and bear them as
well as I can; and that I may do it as I should do, Lord do thou by thy
grace enable me.

XXVII.
Upon the sight of a Scullions taking off of a pot full of good meat from the
fire.

LOrd, here I see mine own, and many other men's infirmity, how easy a matter
it is for any base fellow, to take any Dan. 11. 32.
of us, even the best, and most accomplished with grace and goodness, and by
his soothing talk, and insinuating flatteries, to transport and carry us (as it
were by the cares) whether he pleases, if thou by thy grace prevent it not.
Lord therefore Pro. 2. 16. and 6. 23, 24.
strengthen me by thy grace against all such miscarriages.

XXVIII.
Upon the hearing of the Relation of a Merchant-Adventurers dangerous Voyage.

THis man's case and mine are very like; for with vain hopes (as with a
prosperous gale of wind) I have often been allured to hoise up the Sails of
my desires, and to enter into the perilous Sea of this world with worldly
minded men; but before that ever I could arrive unto the wicked Haven to which
in my setting forth I aimed, with how many desperate dangers have I encountered?
One while I have been tossed with tempestuous storms of troubles, crosses, and
vexations: sometimes lifted up with hopes, as if I should touch the Heavens;
sometimes dejected, and cast down with fear, is if I should be swallowed in the
gulf, and as it were in the hell of despair; now in danger to dash against the
rocks of viiolence and oppression; and soon after to split upon the unperceived
Quicksands of treachery and falsehood: sometimes I have been carried in an
uncouth vastness, in hazard to lose my self in the bypathes ^f error;
sometimes I have passed through the straits, having been beset with many
perils, here Scylla, there Charybdis; being ready to fall into the one, whilst
with my most provident care I have endeavored to escape the other. And if I
have chanced to escape these, (as who ever escaped them all?) with how many
wicked fiends have I been beset, as with so many Pirates, ready to rob me of all
those rich wares of Gods spiritual graces, and to enchain me in their galleys
of endless bondage? Nay, though I have missed of these too, and have had a
fair calm of prosperity, and a comfortable sunshine of worldly favors
throughout my whole passage, yet my danger has not been any way abated, but
much more increased. For being thus becalmed, I have many times had neither
power nor will to go forward to the blessed Haven of Heaven: but contrary-wise
being bewitched with the Sirens songs of carnal alluring pleasures, I have
been so strongly taken with them, that I thought Heaven to be no where but
there, till I was in the end like to be devoured by them by whom I was first
allured. That therefore I may the better pass over this troublesome Sea, and
avoid all these dangers, and in the end come to my desired haven the kingdom
of Heaven, Lord let thy true Church be my ship, thy holy word Ps. 119. 9. Ps.
143. 10. Heb. 1. 14.
my Card and Compass, thy blessed Spirit my Pilot, thy good Angels my Convoy,
and do thou thy self always watch over me by the eye of thy special Ps. 34.
15.
providence.

XXIX.
Upon the sight of a fish taken with a Hook and Line.

LOrd, here is an Emblem of my simplicity, and the Devils subtilty; he like the
cunning fiisher hides the hook of his temptations under the bait of some
pleasing 2 Cor. 2. 11. 2 Timothy 2. 26. 2 Timothy 4. 18.
vanity, and I like the silly fish, whilst I am looking on his pleasing bait
and coveting that, am caught with his Souldestroying hook; from which good
Lord deliver me.

XXX.
Upon the sight of a stubborn and refractory Ox going under the Yoke.

LOrd, herein I see mine own folly; for Lam. 3. 27. Luke 21. 19. Romans 5. 3.
Luke 22. 41.
whereas thy yoke of affliction, which thou have put upon my neck, might be
carried by me, if not with ease, yet without any great pain, if I would go
quietly and patiently under it, submitting my self therein to thy divine will
and pleasure; Job 1. 21. 2 Samuel 16. 10. Ps. 39. 9. Isai. 38. 13. Levit. 10. 3.
1 Samuel 3. 18.
I see that by my much striving and struggling, it does both offend others and
hurt my self, as the refractory Ox does both wrong his fellow, and wring his
own neck by this his reluctance. Lord give me grace therefore in all mine
afflictions to look up to thy visiting hand therein, and patiently to submit
thereunto.

XXXI.
Upon the sight of one rowing a boat against the stream.

LOrd, herein I see what I am by nature, and what Iam by grace. This boat (were
there no Oars to set it forward) would go down the stream and go backward of
his own accord, but to go forward against the stream I see there is no
possibility longer then the boat-man with his Oars does enforce it, and set it
forward. And so Lord it is with me, of mine own accord Iam apt to go backward
Isai. 1. 4. Romans 7. 18
in grace and goodness, but to go forward therein (it being against the
stream and tide of mine affections and natural corruption) I cannot without
the assisting Oars of thy grace, which Lord I beseech 1 Cor. 15. 10. Phil. 4.
13. 2 Pet. 1. 5.
thee to grant unto me, and give me grace to ^ply them for that end, as thy
child should do.

XXXII.
Upon the sight of Fire raked up under the Ashes.

HEre is no token of fire to be seen, neither light, nor heat, nor so much as
any smoke: and yet when the ashes are taken away, there will fire appear, which
with blowing, and the supply of new fuel will soon kindle again, and become a
great flame. And why (Lord) may not this be my case, in whom for the present
there is so little appearance of grace, and goodness? Oh remove then from me
the ashes of my sinful corruption, and give me the grace to stir up the coals
of those gracious gifts which I 2 Timothy 1. 6.
have formerly felt in me, and let thy Cant. 4. 16 Joh. 3. 8.
blessed Spirit with the quickening gale of his gracious breath quicken and
revive them in me, that they may return to their wonted, or increase to a
greater flame.

XXXIII.
Upon the hearing of a Dog barking at strangers.

THis Dog does not use to bark at any of the household, but fawneth on them all;
only I see if a stranger approach, or come near the house, he will bark at him,
and perhaps bite him too: so deal the wicked men of the world with me, they Ps.
22. 16.
be always barking at me, and many times by their slanders and back-bitings do
bite me too. But Lord here is my comfort, that this shows me to be a John 15.
19.
stranger to them, and to their sinful courses; and my hearty desire and prayer
is that I may continue still so to be.

XXXIV.
Upon the sight of one pounding Spices in a Mortar.

THis Spice being whole had little or no smell in it, but being bruised and
beaten, I perceive it makes a sweet and odoriferous smell throughout the whole
house: so it is with the graces of God in Romans 5. 3, 4.
my heart, as long as they remain therein whole and sound without disturbance,
little good comes by them to my self or others, but being well beaten, and
pounded in the Mortar of affliction, they afford a sweet smell in the nostrills
of God and all good men, and become advantageous 2 Cor. 4. 16. Job 33. 15. 16.
to Gods glory, and to mine own and others good. Lord therefore evermore so
beat and pound me in this Mortar, rather then that I should continue whole, and
useless for these ends.

XXXV.
Upon the sight of a Lanthorn and Candle carried before one.

OH that thy word O Lord might be a Ps. 119. 105.
Lanthorn unto my feet, and a light unto my steps, to direct and guide me in
the ways of thy Commandments.

XXXVI.
Upon the sight of one wearing a Seal at his Hand-wrist.

SWeet Jesus my Lord and Savior, set Cant. 8. 0.
me (I pray thee) on thine heart as a Seal, and as a Signet on thine arm, that
I may never be forgotten of thee, or removed out of thy love and favor.

XXXVII.
Upon the sight of one drawing another after him.

Lord, I know that none can come unto Joh. 6. 44. Cant. 1. 3.
thee, except thou draw him: oh draw me therefore I beseech thee, and I will
run after thee.

XXXVIII.
Upon the hearing of one enquiring after a lost Sheep.

LOrd, I have gone astray like a lost sheep, oh seek thy servant, and bring
Luke 15. 4. Ps. 119. 176. Luke 15. 6, 7. Ps. 35. 9.
me home again to the rest of thy flock, that thou may joy in me, and I in
thy Salvation.

XXXIX.
Upon the sight of one carrying an heavy Burden.

LOrd, mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are as an heavy burden too
Psalm. 38. 4.
heavy for me to bear: oh do thou therefore (which have promised to ease all
Mat. 11. 28.
those that are heavy laden with the burden of their sins when they come unto
thee) give ease and rest to my wearied foul, which now comes unto thee for
ease and comfort.

XL.
Upon a Temptation to strain ones Conscience for a little extraordinary gain.

LOrd, here (I see) I may enrich my self by unjust gain; but alas what shall I
be advantaged, if for this gain I must Luke 9. 25. Mat. 16. 29 Mar. 8. 36.
lose my soul for ever? Lord therefore keep me from this, and from all other
means and ways of enriching my self by ill and unjustly gotten goods.

XLI.
Upon the hearing of a Lawyer pleading at the Bar for his Client.

LOrd, I am greviously accused by the Devil and mine own Conscience for Rev.
12. 10 Tit. 3. 11. Job 9. 20. 30. 31. 1 John 2. 1. Heb. 9. 24. To. 8. 33, 34.
being a grievous sinner in thy sight: and the truth is, I am so indeed, and
have nothing to answer, or say for my self. Oh sweet Jesus be thou therefore my
Advocate, and appear thou for me, and plead thou my cause, and so shall I be
justified in the sight of God, and all mine enemies mouths shall be stopped.

XLII.
Upon the hearing of an Alien made a free Denizen.

LOrd, I am by nature, and in the state Ephesians. 2. 3, 12. 13.
of unregeneration, an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, and a stranger
from the Covenant of promise: but thou which can make those that be afar off
to become near by the blood of Christ; by that same blood, do thou, of an Alien
Phil. 3. 20.
and Forrainer make me a free Denizen of * Graece (...). hoc est, nos gerimus
ut municipes caelorum.
thy Heavenly Kingdom, and give me the the grace to lead my life, and to have
my Conversation in Heaven, as it becomes those that be Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God.

XLIII.
Upon the hearing of the coming and entertainment of a great Ambassador.

LOrd, what a do is here to entertain the Ambassador of an earthly prince! and
what privileges have they for the security of their persons and honors! and
yet how are the Ministers of thy 2 Cor. 5. 20. Zech. 3. 8. 1 Cor. 4. 9, etc.
Act. 7. 60.
word, (who are thy Ambassadors) every where slighted, scorned, and contemned?
Lord lay not this to their charge, but in mercy look upon it, and amend it.

XLIV.
Upon the sight of a laborious Ant or Pismire.

OH Lord, this poor silly creature labors Pro. 6. 6 and 30. 25.
hard in Summer to provide for Winter, and that only by the instinct of
nature: Oh added unto my nature, grace, that I may much more in the Summer of
my life, health, and prosperity think of the Winter of death, sickness, and
adversity, and make provision for them.

XLV.
Upon the sight of a shooting match at Buts.

Here I see some shooting above the Mark, others under it; some on the right
hand, others on the left; at last comes one and hit's the mark it self: and
just so deals Death with us; sometimes it shoots above us, and takes away
our Superiors and Elders; sometimes beneath us, and takes away our Inferiors,
and younger; sometimes on the right hand, and takes away our dear friends, and
sometimes on the lefthand, and takes away our deadly foes; and happy were we
if we could take these as warning arrows shot from a loving 1 Samuel 20. 20.
Esa. 28. 15 1 These. 5. 7 Luke 17. 26, etc. Mat. 25. 3. 11. 12.
hand, to warn us to look to our selves: but such is our improvidence, that we
will not lay these fair warnings to heart, but go on still in our carnal
security, till at last (and it may be when we look least for it) it shoots also
to us our selves; and woe be unto us if it find us unprovided. Lord give us
therefore the grace, so to think of Death every day, as if it were to be our
dying day.

XLVI.
Upon the sight of a man felling, or cuiting down a Tree.

LOrd, here I see the Axe laid to the root of this tree, to cut it down: This
tree Mat. 3. 1
is a refemblance of me; his root of my heart and conscience, and the Axe of
thy word, which has struck me, and pierced Act. 2. 37. Heb. 4. 12. Luke 13. 7.
me often, and that to the very heart by the Ministry thereof: But because
there has followed upon it no amendment of life, Lord, what can I now expect
Luke 23. 31
(if thou should deal with me in justice) but that thou should now also
lay to me the axe of thy judgments, and cut me down therewith, and cast me
into hell fire? To prevent which, Lord make me more and more sensible of the
strokes of thy former Axe, and give me grace to amend my life thereby.

XLVII.
Upon the sight of a new born babe seeking after, and sucking the Nurses breast.

LOrd give me the grace that I may as a newborn babe desire the sincere milk
1 Pet. 2* 2.
of thy word, that I may grow thereby.

XLVIII.
Upon the sight of Balm put into a wound.

LOrd, I am a poor wounded Soul, wounded in spirit with the sight of my sins,
and the sense of thy wrath due unto me for them. Oh do thou therefore pour
into Pro. 18. 14.
my Soul the precious Balm of thy Jer. 8. 22.
soul-saving word, that this poor wounded soul of mine, may by the comforts
thereof be also comforted and cured.

XLIX.
Upon the sight of two parties betrothed.

LOrd betroth thou me unto thy self for Hos. 2. 19.
ever, and that in righteousness and in judgment, and in loving kindness and in
mercies.

L.
Upon the sight of one that had a bone out of joint.

LOrd, this is my case as long as I am out of that place and calling wherein
Ps. 22. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 20.
thou have placed me. I may be still of the body, but am neither for use, nor
ease, and neither that to my self, nor to my fellowmembers; and so I must
continue till thou shall be pleased to set me right again, which I beseech thee
for thy son Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2. 19.
Christ Jesus sake to do for me.

LI.
Upon the sight of a Bone-setters binding up and splintering of a broken bone.

THis man has done a great work in bringing every part and piece of this
broken bone into his right place, but (I see) except he do also bind them up,
and splinter them, they will not so continue, nor grow together again. Lord I
have taken many a grievous fall, and by means of it I am heart-broken. O sweet
Jesus do thou (whose office it is to bind up Isa. 61. 1. Luc. 4. 18. Ps. 147. 3.
the brokenhearted) bind up this broken heart of mine, that it may continue
firm, and grow in grace and goodness.

LII.
Upon the sight (...) something blotted out in a Book. Hos. 7. 2. Jer. 17. 1.
Rev. 20. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 10.


LOrd, my sins are all written in the book of thy remembrance, and in the book
of my conscience; and at the last day (when the books shall be opened) they
will manifestly appear to God, Angels, and men, as so many evidences Isa. 43.
25. and 44. 22. 1 John 1. 7. Heb. 9. 14.
against me, except thou in thy mercy shall blot them out for thine own sake
with the blood of thy Son and my Savior Jesus Christ; which that thou will do
Psalm. 81. 9.
for me, it is my hearty desire and prayer.

LIII.
Upon the hearing of certain Captives redeemed.

LOrd, do thou redeem me with the precious blood of thy Son and my Savior 1
Cor. 6. 20. and 7. 23. 1 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
Jesus Christ from the Captivity, thraldom, and slavery of Satan, wherein I
have been so long held to do his will.

LIVE.
Upon the sight of one breathing out his last breath.

LOrd, here I see that my life is but a breath, which as ths^ ^vest me at
first, Gen 2. 7. Isai. 2. 22. Ps. 146. 4. Job 12. 10. and 24. 14. Job 27. 3, 4.
so thou may take from me again when thou please. Oh give me grace
therefore that I may make such good use of this transitory and uncertain life
of mine, that I may be prepared for death whenever or wheresoever it shall in
like manner happen unto me.

LV.
Upon the sight of a bruised Reed.

LOrd, I am of my self as weak as this bruised reed, having been so much and so
often bruised, both with outward afflictions and inward temptations: yet seeing
thou have promised not to break such a bruised reed, in confidence therefore
Mat. 12. 20. Isai. 41. 10
of this thy mercy, and gracious promise made unto me in thy word, I do now
come unto thee, beseeching thee so to Ps. 6. 2, and* 68. 28.
support my weakness by thy power, and so to heal me thus miserably bruised by
thy grace, that though I be weak in my 1 Cor. 12. 10. Ephesians. 6. 10.
self, yet I may be strong in thee, and in the power of thy might.

LVI.
Upon the sight of a shield.

LOrd, give me the grace to put on the Ephesians. 6. 16.
shield of faith, that I may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked.

LVII.
Upon the sight of one that was buffeted.

LOrd, I am often, and grievously buffeted by Satan, and his messengers: 2 Cor.
12. 7, 8, 9.
Oh that I were freed from these their buffetings, or that I might have some
comfortable assurance that thy grace shall be sufficient for me, either to keep
me from being overcome by them, or (if I am at any time overcome) to pardon my
weakness and failing therein, and to restore me to thy mercy and favor in
Jesus Christ.

LVIII.
Upon the sight of a surety arrested, and made to pay the debt of the
principal.

THus do I believe that my Savior and surety Jesus Christ was by death
arrested for my debt of sin, and that he Heb. 7. 22. Rom 4. 25. Heb. 2. 14, 15.
Col. 2. 14. Ps. 143. 2. Ephesians 1. 7.
has satisfied it to the full, concealing the handwriting that was against
me. Lord therefore enter not into Judgment with me for any of my sins past,
but accept of thy Sons active and passive obedience as a full satisfaction for
them all.

LIX.
Upon the sight of Snow.

LOrd, thou have promised that though my sins were as crimson double-dyed,
Isai. 1. 18.
dyed in the wool of my original corruption, and dyed afterward again in the
many threads of my actual transgressions, yet if I will but consent and obey,
thou will make them as white as snow: Make Psalm. 51. 7. Mat. 36. 41. Isai. 26.
9. 1 Cor. 15. 10.
good this thy promise to me thy servant, who is both willing and desirous to
obey thee in all things, as far as thy grace shall enable me.

LX.
Upon the sight of two wrestling together.

LOrd give me thy grace, that when I shall wrestle with thee by my prayers and
my tears (as thy servant Jacob did) that I may not let thee go till thou have
Genesis 32. 24. Hos. 12. 3, 4. Ephesians. 6. 12. Phil. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 12. 9.
blessed me: and when I shall wrestle with the Devil, to withstand his
temptations, do thou so assist me with thy grace, and let thy power be so seen
in my weakness, that he may not be able to prevail against me.

LXI.
Upon the sight of one winning a wager at running.

LOrd, this man has taken great pains to win this earthly wager: Oh that I 1
Cor 9. 24. Phil. 3. 12, 13. 2 Timothy 2. 5, and 4. 7, 8.
could take the like pains in running my Christian Race, that I might in the
end obtain the Crown of Glory.

LXII.
Upon the hearing of the wind rising.

ARise O North, and come O South, and all ye other Sovereign winds of Cant 4.
16.
the Spirit of God, do ye breath, and blow upon the garden of my soul, that the
sweet odours of Gods heavenly graces which are therein, may be dispersed, to
the glory of God, and to the benefit of other Christian Souls.

LXIII.
Upon the sight of a thirsty Traveller going to a Well to drink.

LOrd this man does not more thirst after the water of this Well to quench Ps
42. 1, 2.
his bodily thirst, then my Soul does after thee the fountain of ever-living
water. Joh. 4. 15. Joh 7. 37. Isai. 55. 1. Jer. 31. 25.
Oh give me therefore of this water, and do thou which biddest me to come unto
thee and drink, satiate my soul therewith when I am come!

LXIV.
Upon the sight of a weaver weaving in his looms.

LOrd, this man's work is to me a Remembrancer of my mortality, and that many
ways. His shuttle shows me Job 7. 6.
the swift passing away of my time, his weaving the addition of days to my
age: but so, as the more of his work is added to the cloth, the less is upon
the beam, and the more the one increases, the nearer the other approaches to
his end and cutting off; so the more days are added to my age, the more is
detracted from my life, and the nearer it draws to its end and cutting off.
Therefore Lord, give Ps. 90. 12. Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
me thy grace that I may make a right use of this my short and swift-passing
life; and be ever mindful (as I should be) of Eccl. 9 1^.
my mortality, and ever preparing for it, lest I be cut off before I look for
it.

LXV.
Upon the hearing of a Cock crowing.

LOrd, the crowing of a Cock was to Peter a means (with thy blessing) to bring
him to the sight of his sin, and to true repentance for it. Oh that thou Mat.
26. 74, 75. Luke 22. 60, 61, 62.
would so bless unto me the voice of thy Spiritual Cocks (the Ministers of
thy word and mine own conscience) that they may also (by thy blessing) be a
means to bring me to the like sight of my sins, and to true repentance for the
same!

LXVI.
Upon the sight of a Malefactors arraignment.

LOrd, this must one day be my case: for I must appear before the
judgment seat 2 Cor. 5. 10. 1 Pet. 4. 5.
of Christ, the Judge of quick and dead, that I may there receive the things
which have been done in my body, according to that I have done, whether it be
good or evil: and therefore good Lord give me the grace that I may in the mean
time ever think upon it, and use the means to have my sins put away by true
repentance for them, and by a Act. 9. 19. Joh. 3. 18.
lively faith in the merits of Jesus Christ, before that great and fearful day
shall come.

LXVII.
Upon the sight of one stooping and striving to go in at a strait passage.

LOrd, the way leading to thy Kingdom is through a low and a strait Mat. 7. 13.
passage, through which none can enter that are not lowly and humble, and Mat.
5. 3. 1 Pet. 5. 6. Mar. 10. 28. Heb. 12. 1.
can be content for the Kingdom of heavens sake to strip themselves of
whatsoever thing may be an hindrance to their entrance thereinto. O give me the
grace therefore to be truly humble in thy sight, as thy child should be, and to
cast away every thing that presses down, and my sins that hang so fast on,
that I may with the more speed and ease enter thereinto.

LXVIII.
Upon the sight of Reapers reaping down a close of corn.

THis field of corn being ripe, what wonder is it to see Reapers put into Joel.
13. Rev. 14. 15.
it to cut it down? And therefore Lord, when our sins are become so ripe, what
can be expected but that the sickle of thy wrath should be put in amongst us to
cut us down also. All that I can say for my self, or the people of this sinful
nation, is, Lord enter not into judgment Ps. 143. 2. Hab. 3. 2.
with us; or if our sins shall force thee so to do, Lord in justice remember
mercy, and repay us not according to our deserts.

LXIX.
Upon the sight of a Mower cutting down grass in a meadow.

THis meadow is the emblem of mankind; for as in this there is grass of Isa.
40. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 14
all sorts and sizes, ^^me longer, some shorter, some younger, and but newly
sprung, some elder, and othersome so ripe that it is ready to wither; yea, and
amongst these too, there are many flowers of a most gay and specious color,
and yet when the Mower comes with his sith, down they go all, neither one not
other is spared. And just so is it with mankind, some are taller and lifted up
higher than others in honors and worldly preferment, others are of a meaner
sort, rank and condition; some are infants, newly born, others of elder and
riper years; yea, some by reason of their old and decrepit age ready to wither;
yea, and amongst these too, there are some of a more beautiful and specious
show in the eyes of the beholders Ps. 89. 48. Heb. 9. 27. 1 King. 2. 1. Josh.
23. 14. Ps. 49. 10. Psalm. 146. 3, 4.
than others; yet when Death (Gods mower) once comes with his sith, he spares
neither young nor old, neither rich nor poor, nor any of any sort or condition
amongst mankind, but down they go all, one as well as another. Lord teach me
therefore so at all times to prepare for it, that when it shall come it may not
find me unprepared.

LXX.
Upon the sight of a Dog returning to, and eating up his own vomit.

THe stomach of this Dog, before he vomited, seemed to be very sick and much
pained, and yet being eased of that Pro. 26, 11 2 Pet. 2. 22. Ps. 32. 35.
pain, how ready and willing is he to return to this his vomit again, which
formerly pained him, and to eat it up? And if this be so odious a thing in my
sight, Lord, what shall I be unto thee, when after the confession of my sins
unto thee, whereby I have found ease and comfort, I shall return again to my
former sinful course of life, that so much dishonored thee and wronged mine
own soul? Therefore, Lord, I beseech thee so strengthen me with thy grace, that
having confessed my sins unto thee, and thereby found ease and comfort, I may
never wittingly nor willingly relapse and fall back again into those my sins,
that have so much dishonored thee and wronged my own soul.

LXXI.
Upon the sight of a mother putting mustard on her nipples to wean her child,
and to keep it from sucking.

LOrd, I have long sucked at the breasts of this world, and have drawn from
them much sweet and pleasing milk of sin, fensualness and other vanities,
whereby I am grown a greater child of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3 John 17. 12
Ps. 131. 2. Col. 3. 2. 1 John 2. 15. Ruth 1. 20
yea, even of wrath and utter perdirion too, without thy great mercy in Jesus
Christ. Oh therefore wean me, I beseech thee, and mine affections from all such
worldly vanities; and if nothing else will do it, Lord embitter the nipples
thereof with such a measure of thy fatherly chastisements, that I may in thy
good time be so weaned from them.

LXXII.
Upon the hearing of a wayfaring man enquiring after his way.

OH that I could be as careful to stand in thy ways, and to enquire after
Jer. 6. 16.
the old way, that I might walk therein! and that I. may be the better enabled
to do so, Lord Jesus do thou, which art the Way, the Truth, and the Life, make
me every day more and more willing to seek Joh. 14. 6.
after it; and having found it, assist me with thy grace that I may walk
therein as thy child should do.

LXXIII.
Upon the sight of a Soldiers putting on of his arms.

LOrd, this man (I see) will not venture to fight against his bodily enemies
without his arms; and shall I venture to fight against sin and Satan, and the
other spiritual enemies of my salvation unarmed? Oh that I might have thy
grace therefore to do as thou command, and to put on the whole armor of
God, that like a good Soldier Ephesians 6. i^. 2 Timothy 2. 3
of Jesus Christ I may be able to fight the good fight of faith against them
all, and 1 Timothy 6. 12.
in the end overcome them.

LXXIV.
Upon the sight of two walking together.

CAn two walk together except they be Amos 3. 3.
agreed? Lord, then how shall I ever look to walk with thee in white in another
world, except I be reconciled unto Rev. 3. 4.
thee by the blood of thy Son here in this world? which that I may the better
be, To. 5. 10.
and have the better assurance thereof, let 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19.
the Ministry of reconciliation, to whom thou have committed the word of
reconciliation, be every day more and more powerful toward me for the
effecting of it; and let thy blessed Spirit bear witness more and more unto my
soul and conscience To. 8. 16.
that it is thus effected for me.

LXXV.
Upon the sight of one paying workmen their wages.

HEre I see none but those that have labored, called to receive wages. Oh that
I might therefore have thy grace so to labor in thy Vineyard here, that when
the evening of my life shall come, Mat. 20. 8, 9.
I may receive the penny of eternal bliss, with the rest of thy laborers in
heaven.

LXXVI.
Upon the sight of one vomiting after the taking of lukewarm water.

LOrd, this man shows me what I must expect from thee, if Laodicea-like I am
neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm in the profession of thy true Religion; his
stomach lothing this lukewarm water, does not with more readiness cast and
vomit up that, then I must look to be spued out of thy mouth if I am such a
Rev. 3. 15, 16. Ibid. v. 19.
lukewarm person: Oh therefore give me the grace that I may be truly zealous
for the time to come, and may carefully and conscionably amend what is past.

LXXVII.
Upon the sight of one that was very careful not to spot or stain a new suit.

LOrd, give me the grace to keep my self unspotted of the world, and to hate
Jam. 1. 27.
even the garment spotted by the flesh; and not to have either spot or wrinkle
in Jude v. 23. Ephesians. 5. 27. 2 Pet. 3. 14.
me, that may be displeasing in thy sight; but that I may be found of thee in
peace without spot, and blameless.

LXXVIII.
Upon the sight of a room furnished with all variety of utensills.

LOrd, here I see vessels not only of Gold and silver, but also of wood, 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21.
and of stone, and some for honor, and some for dishonor; and such are men in
the visible Church. But Lord give me the grace, that I may be so purged from my
sins, that I may be a vessel to honor, sanctified, and meet for thee my
Masters use, and prepared unto every good work.

LXXIX.
Upon the sight of a mist rising out of the earth.

LOrd, this shows me what my life is; for what is it else but even a vapor
Jam. 4. 14.
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away? Oh give me the
grace therefore to make the best use of it whilst I have it.

LXXX.
Upon the sight of a Vine pruned.

MY Savior Jesus Christ, thou art the Vine, and I hope that through thy Joh.
15. 1, and 5.
grace I am a branch thereof. Oh that thy Father, who is the husbandman of it,
would so prune and purge me that I may bring forth more fruit then heretofore I
have done.

LXXXI.
Upon the sight of a dried Neats-tongue served in at a table.

OH that my speech might be always with grace, seasoned with the salt Col. 4.
6.
of wisdom and discretion, that I might know how I ought to answer every man
which whom I have to do!

LXXXII.
Upon the sight of one breaking up fallow ground.

OH that I might have thy grace (O Lord) to break up the fallow ground of my
heart, that the seed of thy word Jer. 4. 3. Hos. 10. 12. Mat. 13. 7, and 22.
might be no longer sown amongst the thorny cares of this world; lest they do
(as hitherunto they have done) grow up with it and choke it.

LXXXIII.
Upon the sight of one smiting himself upon the thigh, as being sorry and
ashamed for something which he had done.

OH that I might have thy grace, O Lord, so to smite upon my thigh, that Jer.
31. 19.
being ashamed of that which I have done amiss, I may unfeignedly repent of it,
and turn unto thee.

LXXXIV.
Upon the sight of a freath'd hedge of Thorns.

LOrd, I am apt to go astray and to wander from the ways of thy commandments;
Psalm. 119. 176.
and rather then I should continue so to do, Lord, do thou stop my ways with
thorns, and make an hedge thereof, that I may not be able to find my sinful
Hos. 2. 6.
ways and courses again.

LXXXV.
Upon the hearing of an house broken up and goods carried away.

LOrd, I see by this how vain and transitory the goods of this world are. Oh
give me therefore thy grace, that I may not seek to lay up treasure for my self
here on Mat. 6. 19, 20.
earth, where the moth and rust do corrupt, and thieves break through and
steal; but that I may lay up treasure for my self in Heaven, where neither moth
nor rust do corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal.

LXXXVI.
Upon the hearing of one telling a tale.

LOrd, suffer me not to spend my years as a tale that is told, which commonly
Ps. 90. 9. Luke 24. 11. Ezekiel. 22. 9.
are idle and of little use and profit, and many times do much hurt.

LXXXVII.
Upon the sight of a traveller wearing a sword.

OH that I were as careful in my journey to Heaven-wards, to put on the sword
of the Spirit which is the word of Ephesians. 6. 17.
God, to defend me from my spiritual enemies; as I see this traveller is
careful to put on his material sword to defend him from his bodily enemies.

LXXXVIII.
Upon the sight of a Sparrow lighting on the ground.

LOrd, thy word does assure me that this sparrow does not light, or fall on the
Mat. 10. 29, 31.
ground without thy providence: Oh give me the grace therefore that I may not
fear to fall from an higher to a lower estate (if thy will be to have it so)
seeing I am more worth then many sparrowes.

LXXXIX.
Upon the hearing of one that was gone to sojourn at another man's house.

LOrd, this man's estate and mine are much alike; he is a sojourner with man,
but I with thee my God; for I am a stranger Ps. 39. 12.
with thee, and a sojourner as all my fathers were. Oh give me the grace
therefore, that I may pass the time of this my 1 Pet. 1. 17.
sojourning here in fear.

XC.
Upon the sight of a snare baited.

LOrd, I cannot pass through any place in this world where the Devil has Job
18. 8. 1 Pet. 5. 8. 1 Timothy 3. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 26. 2 Timothy 4. 5. 2 Cor. 2. 11.
not his snares laid, and baited for me with some pleasure or profit pretended.
Oh give me the grace therefore to be always vigilant and watchful over him
and his designs, and enterprises, that for any worldly respect I may not fall
into any of his snares.

XCI.
Upon the sight of one smitten for his faults.

LOrd, let the righreous smite me, and and it shall be a kindness, and let him
Ps. 141. 1.
reprove me, and it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break mine head.

XCII.
Upon the sight of a Blackmoore.

LOrd, this Blackmoore cannot change his skin, no more can he do good that Jer.
13. 23.
is accustomed to do evil. Oh keep me therefore by thy grace, that I may not
get any evil custom, or delight in the practice of any known sin.

XCIII.
Upon the sight of a waiting Gentlewoman.

BEhold, as the eyes of servants look unto Ps. 123. 2.
the hand of their Masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her
mistress; so Lord grant that mine eyes may wait upon thee until thou have
mercy on me.

XCIV.
Upon the sight of a grain of mustardseed.

LOrd, this seed is the least of all seeds, yet when it is grown it is the
greatest Mat. 13. 31, 32.
among herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge
in the branches of it: So Lord grant that that little measure of grace (which
is yet to be seen in me) may in thy good time increase, and by thy blessing and
gracious assistance become so great, that thou thereby may be glorified,
others edified, and my own soul more and more comforted.

XCV.
Upon the sight of the Sea roaring and beating with his waves against the shore
in a great storm.

LOrd, Isee in this the truth of thy word, which tells me, that thou have set
bars and doors to the Sea, and have said Job 38. 10, 11.
unto it, hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall thy proud
waves be stayed. Lord deal so with the rage and fury of thine and mine enemies,
and suffer it not to proceed any further, then it may make for thy glory, and
for the Ps. 76. 10.
good both of my self and others.

XCVI.
Upon the sight of a most loving fathers correction of his child.

I Know that there cannot be a more loving and tenderhearted father toward a
child then this father is; and yet for the amendment of something that he
knows to be amiss in him, see how severely Pro. 13. 24.
he does correct him. Lord therefore keep me from doubting of the love toward
me, when thou shall be pleased in never Rev. 3. 19. Heb. 12. 6.
so grievous a manner at any time to afflict me.

XCVII.
Upon the sight of footmen running a Race.

LOrd, enlarge my heart that I may run the way of thy commandment; and that
with that patience, confidence, and Ps. 119. 32. Heb. 12. 1 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25,
26. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
perseverance, that I may in the end obtain the incorruptible crown of glory.

XCVIII.
Upon the sight of water running out of a rock.

LOrd strike my hard and stony heart Number. 20. 11. Jer. 9. 1. Psalm. 6. 6. Luc.
7. 38. and 22. 62.
with due remorse for my sins, that my head may be as waters, and mine eyes
as a fountain of tears, to weep, mourn, and lament for them, as thy child
should do.

XCIX.
Upon the sight of a Snakes or Adders skin.

LOrd, I see that nature has taught this Serpent to renew his age by casting
his old skin: Oh that grace might teach me Ephesians. 4. 22, 23.
in like manner to put off the old man, that I might be renewed in the spirit
of my mind, and become a new man in thy sight.

C.
Upon the sight of one starting back at the sudden sight of a Serpent.

OH that I might have the grace to flee from sin, as I see this man to flee
Ecclus. 21. 2.
from this Serpent!

CI.
Upon the sight of an old weak man leaning on, and going by a staff.

THis staff I see is this old man's stay, without which he can neither stand nor
go. Lord, I am as weak in spiritual strength as this old man is in bodily: Oh
be thou therefore my stay, that I fall not, 2 Samuel 22. 19. Isa. 26. 3.
and keep thou me in perfect peace, because my mind is stayed on thee.

CII.
Upon the sight of the Day Star.

LOrd, this Star assures me that it is not far to day, and that ere long the
Sun will arise. Oh that the day of Salvation would dawn unto me, and that the
day star of saving knowledge would arise in my heart, to assure me that the
dayspring Luke 19. 9 2 Cor. 6. 2 2 Pet. 1. 19 Luc. 1. 78 Mal. 4. 2.
from on high will shortly visit me, and that the Sun of righteousness Jesus
Christ will arise unto me.

CIII.
Upon the sight of one sowing his ground when it rained.

LOrd give me the grace to sow to the Gal. 6. 8. Ps. 126, 5.
Spirit, though it be in tears, that I may one day reap in joy.

CIV.
Upon the sight of one slinging a stone out of a sling.

LOrd, do thou thus sling the souls of 1 Samuel 25. 29.
thine enemies, as out of the middle of a sling; but do thou bind up the souls
of thy servants in the bundle of life with thee the Lord their God.

CV.
Upon the hearing of a master calling up his servants.

LOrd, it is as high time for me to awake out of the sleep of my sins, as it is
for Romans 13. 11.
these servants to awake out of their bodily sleep: Oh therefore call me by thy
Word and blessed Spirit, that I which have Ephesians. 5. 14.
so long slept in sin, may at last awake and arise out of the bed of my carnal
security.

CVI.
Upon the hearing of a Countrey-mans joy for his good crop of corn.

I Confess, Lord, that the Husbandmans joy in harvest for his good crop Isa.
9. 3. Ps. 4. 6, 7.
of corn is great; but Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me,
and then shall I have more gladness in my heart, then such men have when their
corn, and wine, and oil increases.

CVII.
Upon the sight of one running to a tree for shelter in a storm.

IN like manner Lord do I desire to run unto thee: Lord be thou my shelter Isa.
25. 4.
from the storm of my potent adversaries, that the blast of these terrible ones
may be as a storm against the wall.

CVIII.
Upon the sight of April showers.

OH let thy word drop down into my heart, as these showers do descend Deuteronomy.
32. 2
upon the earth, that (like good ground) it may bring forth the fruits of Isa.
55. 10, 11. Heb. 6. 7, 8 Phil. 1. 11
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.

CIX.
Upon the sight of a quiver of Arrows.

LOrd make me as a polished shaft, and do thou hide me in thy Quiver from Isa.
49. 2.
the face and fury of thine enemies and mine.

CX.
Upon the sight of one quenching out of fire.

LOrd, thy Spirit within me is as fire, Mat. 3. 11. Prove. 9. 17 1 These. 5. 19.
and my sins are as water: Oh strengthen me therefore with thy grace, that
these sins of mine may never be so prevalent in me as to have the power to
quench any good motion of thy blessed Spirit within me.

CXI.
Upon the sight of a great load of Corn.

LOrd keep me from pressing thee down Am. 2. 13.
with my sins, as I see this cart is pressed down with sheaves.

CXII.
Upon the sight of one making preserves.

OH thou which art the preserver of men, do thou preserve me in Jesus Job. 7.
20. Jude v. 1. 2 Timothy 4. 18.
Christ unto thy heavenly Kingdom.

CXIII.
Upon the sight of one overjoyed for having gotten into the presence of an
earthly Prince.

LOrd, let me come into thy presence in heaven, who art the King of Rev. 17. 14
1 Pet. 1. 8. Ps. 16. 11.
Kings and Lord of Lords, and then shall I have infinitely more joy then this
world can afford, even joy unspeakable and glorious, and such pleasures as
never shall have end.

CXIV.
Upon the sight of one that endeavored to save his child by pulling of him out
of the fire into which he was fallen.

LOrd, I am thine, Oh save me for thy Ps. 119. 94 Jude v. 23.
mercies sake from the fire of hell.

CXV.
Upon the sight of one striving to take something out of another hand.

LOrd, I am one of thy sheep, and John 10. 28, 19.
therefore never suffer any of thine and mine enemies to pluck me out of thy
hands.

CXVI.
Upon the sight of a great preparation made for the entertainment of a great
personage.

LOrd, who is greater then thou art? Psa. 77. 13. Luke 1. 17 Am. 4. 12
Oh that I could with as much care and with as great preparation seek to
entertain thee in my soul, as this man does this great personage into his house!

CXVII.
Upon the sight of one that was at plough.

LOrd, thou have said, that no man putting Luc. 9. 62.
his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God. Oh
that I might therefore have thy grace 1 Cor. 1. 8 Mat. 10. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 9.
Rev. 2. 10. and 3. 11.
to persist and to go on in that Christian course that I have begun, that I may
not in the end be bereaved of thy heavenly Kingdom.

CXVIII.
Upon the hearing of a Counselor or Advocate pleading for his Client.

LOrd Jesus be thou my Advocate with 1 John 2. 1. Heb. 9. 24. Psalm. 35. 1. Romans
8. 33
thy Father, and do thou appear in his presence for me, and plead thou my cause
before him against all the enemies of my salvation, when they shall seek to lay
any thing to my charge.

CXIX.
Upon the sight of a Gardener watering his garden.

LOrd, this Gardener may water his garden to make it fruitful, and the things
in it to grow; but when he has done all that he can, there will be neither
fruit nor growth without thy blessing; for Paul may plant, and Apollos 1 Cor.
3. 6
may water, but it is thou ouely must give the increase: Lord therefore let thy
blessing Pro. 10. 22
second my endeavors in all that I shall undertake in thy fear.

CXX.
Upon the sight of a Physician giving physic to his patient.

LOrd heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee, and heal all mine other
infirmities, for thou Lord only Psalm. 41. 4 Ps. 103. 2. Mat. 9. 12. Job 13. 4.
can do it, and without thee all other are Physicians of no value.

CXXI.
Upon the hearing of one that was cut and cured of the stone.

THe stone whereof this man complained, and wherewith he was so grievously
vexed, was only in his body; but I, Lord, have a stony heart within me: Oh do
thou therefore, according to thine own gracious promise made unto me in thy
Word, take this stony heart out of my flesh, and give instead thereof Ezech.
11. 19. and 36. 26.
an heart of flesh.

CXXII.
Upon the sight of a pattern to work by.

LOrd give me the grace to show my self a pattern of good works to all those
with whom I live, that thou may Tit. 2. 7. Mat. 5. 16.
be glorified thereby.

CXXIII.
Upon the sight of one slipping and taking a fall.

LOrd, it is thy charge that he that thinks he stands should take heed lest
1 Cor. 10. 12. Psalm. 17. 5.
he fall: Oh do thou therefore hold up my goings in thy paths, that my feet
slip not.

CXXIV.
Upon the hearing of Partridges to call.

THese Partridges being severed, do by this their call come together, but
commonly for their hurt, because hereby they discover, to the Partridge-taker
where they are, and so make themselves his prey: Lord give me grace to avoid
the company, and not to hearken to the Prove. 1. 10, 11, etc. and 9. 14, 15 Rev.
18. 4.
call of wicked men, lest being in their company, and being made partaker of
their sins, I do also partake of their punishments.

CXXV.
Upon the sight of money tied up in a napkin.

LOrd keep me from being like that unprofitable servant in the Gospel, who Luke
19. 20.
laid up his masters talent in a napkin, lest that be taken from thee, and I
for not employing it to thine advantage be cast Mat. 25. 28, 30.
into utter darkhess, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever.

CXXVI.
Upon the sight of a naked Infant.

LOrd, thus naked came I out of my mothers Job 1. 21. Eccl. 515.
womb, and thus naked shall I return thither again: O give me grace therefore
to seek for that true clothing Isa. 61. 10. Rev. 6. 11. and 7. 9, 13. and 16.
15.
(the robes of thy Sons righteousness) that howsoever it fares with my body,
yet my soul may not appear naked in thy sight.

CXXVII.
Upon the sight of a Carpenter driving a nail into a piece of timber.

LOrd, do thou fasten me in thy favor as a nail in a sure place; and let thy
Isa. 22. 23. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Eccles. 12. 11. Hebr. 2. 1.
soul-saving word be fastened in my heart by the Masters of the Assemblies (the
Ministers of thy Word) as a nail never to be pulled out from thence.

CXXVIII.
Upon the sight of one ear-marking his sheep.

LOrd grant me the true ear-mark of thy sheep, which is to hear thy voice Joh.
10. 27 and 8. 47.
(speaking unto me in thy Word) as thy child should do.

CXXIX.
Upon the sight of a Master beating his Servant.

LOrd give me the grace, that seeing I know the will of thee my Master so much
as Ido, I may endeavor to do it, by leading my life accordingly, lest for my
carelessness and neglect of my duty Jam. 4. 17. Lu. 12. 47.
therein, I be also beaten with many stripes in hel-fire hereafter.

CXXX.
Upon the sight of a choleric person, that was apt to take notice of, and to
be very angry for the least offense offered him.

LOrd, if thou should be thus extreme to mark every thing that I have done
amiss, and wherein I have offended thee, Ps. 130. 3. Job 9. 3.
I could not answer thee one thing of a thousand, neither should I be able to
stand in thy sight: Lord therefore enter not into judgment with me, neither
repay me according to my deserts, but deal Ps. 143. 2. Psalm. 119. 124.
with me according to thy wonted mercies.

CXXXI.
Upon the sight of a great house wherein were many rooms.

LOrd, this puts me in mind of heaven, which is an house wherein are many
mansions: Oh sweet Jesus, do thou prepare me a place there! and howsoever I
Joh. 14. 2.
am in this world, I shall be sure to be happy then.

CXXXII.
Upon the hearing of one caught with a lie.

LOrd, thy Word does tell me, that every Romans 3. 4.
one by nature is a liar; and I do find that I am as apt and prone to that as
to any other sin: O therefore remove from me (I beseech thee) vanity and Psalm.
30. 8. and 119. 129.
lies, and take from me the way of lying.

CXXXIII.
Upon the hearing of a woman that did long for something.

LOrd make me to long also for thy salvation, Psalm. 119. 174. and 107. 9.
and do thou in thy good time satisfy my longing soul.

CXXXIV.
Upon the sight of a weak stomach lothing meat.

OH that I could, O Lord, so loathe my self for my sins committed against Ezech.
6. 9
thee, as this weak stomach does meat!

CXXXV.
Upon the sight of a woman laying leaven.

THis leaven shewth the nature both of sin and grace, for a little of either
Matthew. 13. 33. 1 Cor. 5. 6 Gal. 5. 9.
will leaven the whole lump; Lord give me the grace therefore to take heed of
the leaven of sin, that I may not be sowred therewith; and give me such a
measure of the leaven of grace, that I may not be puffed up, and grow proud
therewith.

CXXXVI.
Upon the sight of two blind men, one leading the other.

I Find in the Gospel, that if the blind Luc. 6. 39.
do lead the blind, both will fall into the ditch. Lord, my body without my
soul Ephesians. 4. 18. Ephesians. 1. 18.
is blind, and so is my soul too without thy grace. Oh therefore give me thy
grace to enlighten the eyes of my soul, lest it lead my body where it should
not, and so at last both body and soul fall into the irrecoverable Lu. 16. 26.
ditch of hell fire.

CXXXVII.
Upon the sight of two kissing.

SWeet Jesus, my Lord and Savior, kiss Cant. 1. 1.
thou me with the kisses of thy mouth, and bestow on me such comfortable
testimonies of thy love here, that I may be sure to be beloved of thee for ever
hereafter.

CXXXVIII.
Upon the hearing of one upbraided with his former faults.

LOrd, remember not against me my former Ps. 79. 8. and 51. 9.
iniquities; but blot them all out of the book of thy remembrance.

CXXXIX.
Upon the sight of the keeper of the lions in the Tower of London, carrying the
keys of the grates in his hand.

LOrd Jesus, do thou which have the keys of hell and of death, never suffer the
Devil that roaring Lion of hell to come Rev. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
forth to hurt me.

CXL.
Upon the sight of one searing with an hot Iron.

LOrd, keep me by thy grace, that my conscience may never be seared (as it 1 Timothy 4. 2.
were) with an hot iron.

CXLI.
Upon the sight of a joyner glewing boards together.

LOrd, give us the grace that we may join our selves unto thee in a perpetual
covenant never to be forgotten, and that we may be joined one to another in
Jer. 50. 5. Col. 2. 2.
love never to be dissolved.

CXLII.
Upon the sight of one giving earnest upon a bargain.

LOrd, grant me the earnest of thy Spirit, that I may thereby have an assurance
2 Cor. 1. 22, and 5. 5. Ephesians. 1. 14.
of my right and title to thy heavenly Kingdom purchased for me by the blood
of thy Son.

CXLIII.
Upon the sight of incense burned.

OH that my prayer might be set forth before thee as incense. Ps. 141. 2. Rev.
8. 3, 4.


CXLIV.
Upon the sight of a precious Jewel.

LOrd, when thou make up thy Jewels let me be one of them. Mal. 3. 17.


CXLV.
Upon the sight of a Turtle-Dove flying from a Kite.

OH give not the soul of thy Turtle-Dove Ps. 74. 19.
unto the beast, and forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.

CXLVI.
Upon the sight of one that endeavored to maintain his right.

ARise, O God, maintain thine own Ps. 74. 22.
cause, remember thy daily reproach by the foolish man.

CXLVII.
Upon the sight of an hireling at work.

LOrd, thy word tells me that my days are as the days of an hireling. Oh give
me grace therefore to accomplish Job 7. 1.
the work which thou have set me about, as the hireling does his day; and when
Job 14. 6.
that is ended, I may with him look for that reward of my work, which thou in
thy mercy have promised me. Job 7. 2. Jam. 1. 12.


CXLVIII.
Upon the sight of one running to hide himself from his persecutors.

LOrd, there be many which seek after Ps. 119. 157. and 40. 14. Ps. 32. 7. and
119. and 114, and 71. 3.
my soul to destroy it; but Lord be thou my hiding place to which I may always
resort.

CXLIX.
Upon the sight of a soldier putting on his helmet.

LOrd, give me the grace to put on for an helmet, the hope of salvation. Ephesians.
6. 17. 1 These. 5. 8


CL.
Upon the sight of one girding on his coat.

O Lord, that I might have thy grace thus to grid up the loins of my mind 1
Pet. 1. 13. Ephesians. 6. 14.
with the girdle of sincerity and truth.

CLI.
Upon the sight of one washing at a fountain.

LOrd, open unto me that fountain which shall be for sin and for uncleanness,
Zech. 13. 1. 1 John 1, 7. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ps. 51. 2. 7.
even the blood of my crucified Savior Jesus Christ, and let thy blessed
spirit so wash me therein, that I may be cleansed from my sins, and appear
righteous again in thy sight.

CLII.
Upon the sight of a filthy cloth taken off from a running sore.

LOrd, give me the grace to hate even the garment spotted with the flesh. Jud.
v. 23.


CLIII.
Upon the sight of a natural fool.

LOrd, this man is a fool by nature: Oh that I might have thy grace to become 1
Cor. 3. 18.
such a one by grace, as he is by nature, that so I might be truly and
spiritually wise.

CLIV.
Upon the sight of one made clean that had fallen into the mire.

LOrd, make me as careful to cleanse my self from all filthiness both of the 2
Cor. 7. 1, 2.
flesh and Spirit, as this man is desirous to be made clean from this his
outward pollution.

CLV.
Upon the sight of two fighting.

LOrd, give me the grace to fight the 1 Timothy 6. 12.
good fight of faith against all thine and mine enemies.

CLVI.
Upon the sight of one anointed with eye salve that had sore eyes.

LOrd, the eyes of my understanding are Ephesians. 4. 18.
every way as unable to behold things spiritual, as the sore eyes of this man
are to behold things corporal: Oh do thou Rev. 3. 18.
therefore (sweet Jesus) anoint them with thy heavenly eye salve, that I may be
Ephesians. 1. 18.
better enabled to see them as I should do.

CLVII.
Upon the sight of a tree that was deeply rooted.

LOrd grant that I may be rooted and Ephesians. 3. 17. Col. 2. 7.
grounded in love, in faith, and all other saving graces, as thy child should
be.

CLVIII.
Upon the sight of a Well.

LOrd grant that thy grace may be in me Joh. 4. 14.
a well of water springing up to eternal life.

CLIX.
Upon the sight of one planting trees.

LOrd, give me some comfortable assurance, that I am one of those trees which
thou my Heavenly Father have Mat. 15. 13.
planted, that so I may not be rooted up.

CLX.
Upon the sight of an old aged servant cast off by his master.

LOrd, cast me not off in the time of age, forsake me not when my strength
Psalm. 179.
fails.

CLXI.
Upon the sight of one that held up his hand to defend his eye from a stroke.

LOrd, keep thou me as the apple of thine eye. Ps. 17. 8.


CLXII.
Upon the sight of one levelling and making plain a way.

LOrd, make thy way plain before my face. Psalm. 5. 8.


CLXIII.
Upon the sight of one that was cast out of favor, and was desirous to be
received into favor again.

O God, thou have for my sins deserved ly Psalm. 60. 1.
cast me out of thy favor, thou have been justly angry with me; oh return
again unto me!

CLXIV.
Upon the sight of one rescued out of his enemies hands.

O My God, deliver me I beseech Psalm. 59. 1.
thee from out of the hands of all my spiritual enemies.

CLXV.
Upon the sight of one that earnestly petitioned a friend to help him.

HEar my prayer, O God, and hide Psalm. 55. 1.
not thy self from my supplication.

CLXVI.
Upon the sight of pigeons flying from a Hawk.

OH that I had wings like a Dove! then should I likewise flee away, and be Ps.
55. 6.
at rest from my persecutors.

CLXVII.
Upon the sight of a Sow wallowing in the mire.

LOrd, I have been washed both in my Baptism (the laver of regeneration) and
Tit. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 11.
(I trust) by thy blessed Spirit. I am sure I have with many a tear washed and
bathed my soul in hearty sorrow for my filthy sins past. Oh never suffer me
to return and to wallow in those my filthy sins 2 Pet. 2. 22.
again, as this sow (which has been washed) does now wallow again in the mire.

CLXVIII.
Upon the sight of night drawing on.

LOrd, thy word does tell me, that when the night comes no man can work. I see
Joh. 9. 4.
the night of death is coming on upon me: Oh give me therefore the grace to
work so whilst the day of my life does last, that when the night of death shall
come, I may not have that work to do which may be for the everlasting good of
my soul.

CLXIX.
Upon the sight of one that was dumb.

LOrd, I see in this dumb person wherein I have been so often faulty in thy
sight, not daring to speak of thee, or for thee when I should have done it.
Lord Mat. 9. 33. Ps. 51. 15.
pardon this my sin past; and do thou which have and still can open the mouth
of the dumb, open my mouth which has been so often dumb, that it may speak
both to thy glory and my own souls comfort.

CLXX.
Upon the sight of a Mill-wheel driven about with the water.

HEre I see that the more this wheel is driven away by the water, the faster it
returns unto it again. So Lord give me the grace, that when thou shall by the
water of affliction seem to drive me at Psalm. 69. 2. 2 Chr. 30. 9.
any time from thee, I may with the more speed return unto thee for ease and
comfort.

CLXXI.
Upon the sight of a field that was white and ready for the harvest.

LOrd, this field shows me how ready I am for the sickle of thy wrath to cut
Joel 3. 13.
me down for my many and manifold sins, if thou should deal with me according
Ps. 130. 3. Psalm. 51. 1.
to my deserts: But Lord in mercy look down upon me, and withhold the hand of
thy sin-revenging Justice from me, that I may by thy grace live more to thy
glory than hitherto I have done.

CLXXII.
Upon the sight of a candle put out.

LOrd put not out the candle of my life in utter darkness, as thou usest to put
out the candle of the wicked. Job 18. 6.


CLXXIII.
Upon the sight of Bees laboring in the summer.

LOrd, these little creatures (I see) will not neglect any time or season
wherein they may gather food to preserve them alive in winter: Oh that I had
but the like care in the summer of my life, health, and strength, to provide
for the good of my soul against Matthew. 24. 20. Eccl. 9. 12.
the winter of death, sickness, or weakness.

CLXXIV.
Upon the sight of one stung with a Be.

LOrd, I see in this party that is stung, what hurt the sting of so little a
creature (as the Be is) may do: Oh give me therefore the grace to take heed of
the sting of death, which is sin, and the sting 1 Cor. 15. 56. Pro. 18. 14
of conscience, which is for sin; for these will put me to far more pain than
this stinging of the Be can do him.

CLXXV.
Upon the sight of Bees fighting with strange Bees that came to rob them of
their honey.

LOrd, here I see that even these little creatures cannot endure to be robbed
of what they have labored for, but will fight for the preservation of it, even
unto death: Oh that I might have the like care and courage to fight against,
and to withstand all those my 1 Timothy 6. 12. Luke 10. 30.
spiritual enemies which seek to rob my soul of thy spiritual graces.

CLXXVI.
Upon the sight of a dead man's coffin decked with flowers.

LOrd, here I see the love of the living to the dead, how careful they are to
deck even that which shortly must be put into the earth: Oh give me the grace
that I may show so much love to my poor soul, which is dead in trespasses and
sins, that I may every day more and more seek Ephesians. 2. 1. 1 Pet 5. 5. 1 Pet. 4.
4. Ephesians. 5. 2. Ephesians. 1. 6.
to deck it with the spiritual flowers and herbs of grace, that it may appear
lovely in thy sight, and may smell sweet unto thy nostrils through my Savior
Jesus Christ.

CLXXVII.
Upon the hearing of sweet music.

LOrd, if this music here on earth be so sweet, how needs must that music in
heaven be sweet, where there are perpetual Hallelujahs sung unto thee by the
heavenly Rev. 5. 8, 9. Rev. 19. 1.
quire of Saints and Angels! into which quire Lord in thy good time admit me to
bear a part.

CLXXVIII.
Upon the sight of an old ruinous house fallen down.

LOrd, here I see in this house the very picture and pattern of man's frailty,
whither he must at last, when all is done to support him. Oh give me therefore
the grace, that before this earthly house 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
of my body be dissolved, I may be provided of a celestial habitation wherein
I may dwell with thee for ever.

CLXXIX.
Upon the sight of the shadow on a Dial.

LOrd, here I see this shadow passes on though I cannot discern it; and just
so it is with my life, it passes away like a shadow, though I do not discern
and Job 14. 2. Ps. 102. 11 and 144. 4. Col. 4. 5. Joh. 9. 4.
take notice of it. Oh give me therefore the grace that I may improve my time
to the best uses whilst I have it; lest when it is past it be too late to
recall it, or to make that use of it that we would or should do.

CLXXX.
Upon the sight of a Mole heaving.

LOrd, I see in this creature my own earthly mindedness, and how apt and prone
I am to settle my affections on earthly things: Oh help me therefore with thy
grace to seek those things which are above, and to settle my affections on Col.
3. 1, 2.
them, and not on the things which are in the earth, lest heaving and heaping
up these earthly things in hope to make further way for my greedy desires, I be
in 1 Timothy 6. 10 2 Timothy 2. 26.
the end pierced through with many sorrows, and become a prey to Satan.

CLXXXI.
Upon the sight of a Marriage.

LOrd do thou marry me unto thee for Hos. 2. 19.
ever, and that in righteousness and in judgment, and in mercy, and in
compassion.

CLXXXII.
Upon the sight of a virgin trimmed up and going to be married.

LOrd grant, that as this virgin going to be married has adorned her self, and
made her self ready for her husband; so I being clothed with the robes of
Christ's Isa. 61. 10. Rev. 19. 78 and 2 Cor. 11. 2.
righteousness, may be always in a readiness for him, and to be presented
unto him as a chaste virgin, when the marriage day of the lamb shall come.

CLXXXIII.
Upon the sight of the stars in a clear starry night.

LOrd give me the grace to do what I can in my place and calling to turn Dan.
12. 3
many unto righteousness, that so I may one day shine as the stars for ever and
ever.

CLXXXIV.
Upon the sight of a Raven.

LOrd, thou were pleased to feed thy 1 King. 17. 4, etc.
servant Eliah by the ministry of those unclean birds the Ravens: Oh give me
therefore the grace nor to refuse the food of my soul, although brought unto me
by one that is as unclean in my sight as the Ravens were in the sight of Elias.
Mat. 23. 2, 3.


CLXXXV.
Upon the hearing of young Ravens crying in the nest.

LOrd, thy word does tell me, that thou feedest the young Ravens when Ps. 147.
9.
they cry: Oh let me therefore never despair of thy providence toward me for
Mat. 6. 16.
the feeding of me, and the supplying of my wants, who am in thy sight much
better than they.

CLXXXVI.
Upon the sight of an Anchor.

SEafaring men use the Anchor to stop and stay their ships, that they may not
be carried away, and tossed up and down with the violence of the waves: Lord,
my soul is tossed up and down in the sea of this world amongst the several
changes and chances thereof, as much as any ship can be on the sea, and I have
no help nor hope in my self or any other creature, to avoid the ship-wrecking
thereof; therefore Lord do thou give me the grace to fasten the Anchor of my
Heb. 6. 19. 2 Cor. 1. 20
hope on the firm ground of thy gracious promises made unto me in Jesus Christ,
and then shall I be safe.

CLXXXVII.
Upon the sight of a Rainbow.

LOrd, this Rainbow is an Emblem of thy mercy, which like the Rainbow, Genesis 9.
13. Rev. 4. 3. John 9. 4. Mat. 25. 10 Luke 19. 42 2 Cor. 6. 2. Heb. 3. 13.
is not to be seen when once the night of death is come; and as that, so this,
terminates on the earth, the ends of it reaching no further. Oh give me the
grace therefore to make use of thy mercy in this time of mercy, that my soul
may never be drowned more in the deluge of sin here, nor in the deluge of thy
wrath for my sins hereafter.

CLXXXVIII.
Upon the sight of one winnowing of corn.

LOrd, I see in this how Satan would serve me if thou should leave me to his
will; for thy word does tell me that he would winnow me as wheat: But sweet
Jesus do thou for me what thou did promise to do for Peter, do thou pray for
me that my faith may not fail, and then all Satan's winnowing of me shall not be
Luke 22. 31, 32.
able to hurt me.

CLXXXIX.
Upon the sight of a piece of Scarlet.

LOrd, my sins (like Scarlet) have been twice died, died in the wool by my
original corruptions, and died in the cloth by my many actual transgressions;
but yet here is my comfort, that thou can, yea and wilt (for so thou have
promised) make these my sins that be as Scarlet, to become as white as snow,
upon Isai. 1. 18. Isai. 55. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 25.
my true repentance, which I beseech thee for thy mercy sake to grant unto me.

CXC.
Upon the sight of a foundation laid.

LOrd give me the grace that I may lay a good and sure foundation for my self 1 Timothy 6. 19
against the time to come, that in the end I may obtain eternal life.

CXCI.
Upon the sight of one that pleaded hard against his Adversary.

PLead thou my cause O Lord with them that strive with me. Ps. 35. 1.


CXCII.
Upon the sight of a bunch of dried Hysop hanging up in an house.

LOrd, purge me with Hysop, and I shall Ps. 51. 7.
be clean, and give me the grace that both my soul and body may with a bunch of
Hysop (that is my faith) dipped in the blood of the true paschall lamb my Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, be sprinkled 1 Cor. 5. 7. Exodus 12. 22, 23.
therewith, that the destroying Angel of Gods wrath may pass over me.

CXCIII.
Upon the sight of worms in a dead carcass.

LOrd, these worms show me what Job 19. 26
must become of my dead body, the worms will destroy it; but when they Mark 9.
44 46, 48.
have done this they will die themselves: but there is another worm which I
more fear, the worm of conscience, which will never die; Lord of thine infinite
mercy keep me from that.

CXCIV.
Upon the sight of a curious piece of workmanship.

LOrd, I am thy workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, but Ephesians.
2. 10.
I have not answered that end for which I was created; Lord pardon my failings,
and enable me to do it better in the time to come.

CXCV.
Upon the sight of a linsie-woolsie garment.

LOrd, I see by thy forbidding of this unto thy people under the old law, that
Lev. 19. 19 2 Cor. 6. 14.
thou would not have them mingle diverse Religions together. Oh therefore
give me the grace that I may never offend in this kind, but that I may choose
the true, and refuse all false Religions.

CXCVI.
Upon the sight of one that had a withered hand.

LOrd, this man (I see) cannot stretch forth this hand of his to do any thing
Romans 3. 12. Mat. 12. 10, 13.
therewith; no more can I stretch forth either of mine to do any thing that is
good. Oh therefore do thou, sweet Jesus, which tookest compassion on the man
which had the withered hand in the Gospel, and did heal that, do thou by the
same power and grace also heal mine, that Phil. 1. 11.
I may be able to do that good which thou expectest at my hands.

CXCVII.
Upon the hearing of the word (withdraw) at a Committee.

LOrd, give me the grace that I may 2 These. 3. 6 1 Timothy 6. 5.
withdraw my self from every brother that walks inordinately, and which does
think that gain is godliness.

CXCVIII.
Upon the hearing of an hard and dangerous service of a soldier.

LOrd give me the grace that I may fuffer affliction as a good soldier of
Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 2. 3


CXCIX.
Upon the sight of a mother wiping the tears from her child's face.

LOrd, in thy good time bring me to thy heavenly Kingdom, where thou Rev. 7.
17. and 21. 4. Isa. 25. 8.
have promised to wipe all tears from my eyes.

CC.
Upon the sight of a wide and spacious gate.

LOrd, thy word tells me, that it is the Mat. 7. 13.
wide gate and broad way that leads to destruction: Oh keep me therefore by
thy grace, that I may neither enter into this gate, nor go forward in this way.

CCI.
Upon the beholding of the apple of ones eye.

LOrd, I see how careful every one is to keep off all hurt from this part of
the body, the eye, and especially from this part of the eye, the apple of it:
Oh do thou in like manner keep me as the Psalm. 17. ^. Zech. 2. 8.
apple of thine eye, and let him that touches me be as he that touches the
apple of thine eye.

CCII.
Upon the sight of one putting off and laying aside his cloak.

LOrd give me the grace that I may also put off the cloak of maliciousness 1
Pet. 2. 16 1 These. 2. 5
and covetousness, and of all my other sins, wherewith I have thought at any
time to cover and hide my mischievous designs.

CCIII.
Upon the sight of a fox taken in hunting.

LOrd, take us the foxes, even the little foxes, that is, all those enemies of
thy Cant. 2. 15 Romans 16. 17. 1 Timothy 1. 10.
truth, even the least of them which by their Heretical or Schismatic
doctrine, or their profane conversation, do hinder the course of the Gospel
amongst us.

CCIV.
Upon the sight of a whirlwind.

LOrd, do thou so keep me in thy fear that destruction shall not come upon me
as a whirlewind, and I be carried away Pro. 1. 27. Ps. 58. 9.
as with a whirlewind in thy wrath.

CCV.
Upon the sight of wheat put into a Garner.

LOrd, grant that when thou shall come with thy fan in thine hand, and Mat. 3.
12.
thoroughly purge thy floor at the last day, I may not be as the chafe, which
thou will burn up with unquenchable fire, but as the wheat which thou will
gather into thy Garner.

CCVI.
Upon the sight of a well without water.

LOrd, so empty would my heart be of grace, for all my goodly outward shows 2
Pet. 2. 7.
except thou shall be pleased by the work of thy blessed Spirit to cause the
waters of Joh. 7. 38, 39.
life to flow thereunto; which I beseech thee for thy mercy sake to do for me,
that Joh. 4. 14.
it may be in me a well of living water springing up to eternal life.

CCVII.
Upon the sight of gold weighed which proved too light.

LOrd, weigh me not in the balance of thy Justice, for then I am sure I shall
Ps. 130. 3, 4. Dan. 5. 27. Neh. 13. 21.
be found too light, except thou shall suffer me to have the allowance of those
grains of mercy, which in thy Son thou have promised me.

CCVIII.
Upon the sight of one much weakened with sickness.

LOrd, I have been long and dangerously sick of sin: It was an hereditary Psalm.
41. 4. Psalm. 51. 5. Romans 5. 12 Ps. 38. 48. Psalm. 6. 2. 2 Co. 12. 9. Phil. 4.
13. Ephesians. 1. 6.
disease which I drew from the infected loins of my first parents, and I have
much aggravated and increased the malignity of it by mine own distempers since,
so that with both, and my long continuance in them, I am so weakened that I can
do nothing that good is: Oh do thou therefore (whose power is made perfect in
weakness) make perfect this thy power in my weakness, and so strengthen me
with thy grace, that though I cannot do what I should, yet I may find grace in
thy sight to have that accepted in thy Son which I would do.

CCIX.
Upon the sight of one that was weary with doing that he was set about.

LOrd grant that I may never be weary of well-doing, but that I may hold out
Gal. 6. 9. 1 These. 3. 13. Rev. 2. 10.
to the end, and in the end reap that which thou have promised to those that
faint not.

CCX.
Upon the sight of a gibing fellow sitting in a chair.

LOrd, keep me that though (through the violence of temptation, and mine Ps. 1.
1.
own frailty) I may at times walk in the counsel of the wicked, and stand in
the way of sinners, yet that I may never have power to sit down in the chair
of the scornful.

CCXI.
Upon the sight of one making a sick man's Bed.

LOrd, when thou shall in like manner visit me with sickness, do thou make Ps.
41. 3.
my bed in all my sickness.

CCXII.
Upon the sight of a water-pot of stone filled with water.

Sweet Jesus, there was a time when thou turnedst the water that was in the
Joh. 2. 1, etc. Isai. 50 2. Ps. 69. 1.
six water-pots of stone into wine: thy power is the same still that it was
then; Oh do thou turn then by that same power of thine the water of mine
afflictions into the wine of consolation, when thy will and pleasure shall be
to do it Prove. 31. 6
for me.

CCXIII.
Upon the sight of watchmen at a cross way.

LOrd, here I see what watching and warding there is to prevent bodily dangers
from corporal enemies: Oh that I could have the grace in like manner Matthew.
26. 41. 2 Timothy 4. 5 1 Pet. 5. 8.
to watch (as I should do) against my spiritual enemies, the enemies of my
salvation.

CCXIV.
Upon the sight of one blowing the fire under a great deal of wood.

LOrd, this minds me of Tophet mentioned Isa. 30. 33.
in Scripture, which is a representation of Hell, where the burning thereof is
fire and much wood, and thy breath like a river of Brimstone does kindle it:
from which place I do beseech thee of thine infinite mercy, and by thy Lam. 3.
22. 1 These. 1. 10.
Sons merits to free me.

CCXV.
Upon the observation of the growth of corn.

LOrd, here I see that this corn which Mar. 4. 28.
has been sowed, brought forth first the blade, then the ears, after that full
corn in the ears: And just so is it with thy graces in my heart, they come not
Phil. 3. 12. Ephesians. 4. 13.
to perfection at first, but proceed on by degrees, and will do so still,
until I become a perfect man in Christ Jesus; unto which measure of grace Lord
in thy good time bring me.

CCXVI.
Upon the sight of a ground well closed with hedges.

LOrd, thou did make an hedge about thy servant Job (by Satan's own
confession) Job 1. 10.
and about his house, and about all that he had, so that he was not able to
come in to do him any hurt, until thou were pleased (for his trial and our
example) to pull down the hedge and to let him in. Good Lord make the like
hedge about me, and about all that which is mine, that neither Satan nor any of
his instruments may be able to hurt me or mine. And if thou shall at any time
be pleased to pull down this hedge, and to let Satan, or any of his
instruments in upon me, Lord give me the grace with patience to bear it, and to
expect that happy end which thou in thy mercy gave unto thy servant Job. Job
42. 12 Jam. 5. 11.


CCXVII.
Upon the sight of some standing in a breach to hinder the enemies from entering.

LOrd, do thou stir up some chosen Moses or other which may stand in the breach
before thee, to turn away thy Ps. 106. 23 Ezech. 22. 30.
wrath, lest thou should destroy us.

CCXVIII.
Upon the sight of one wandering and out of his way.

LOrd, assist me with thy grace continually, that I may never wittingly or Ps.
119. 10. Ps. 143. 8.
willingly wander from thy commandments, the way wherein thou have appointed
me to walk.

CCXIX.
Upon the sight of one cast off by his Master for his lewd courses.

LOrd, give me thy grace, that I may never so wait on any lying vanity, that I
should for the sake thereof forsake mine Jon. 2. 8.
own mercy.

CCXX.
Upon the sight of one going up a ladder.

THis man shows me that the way to heaven is not like an easy staircase, on
which a man may go up with his hands in his hose; but I see by this that he
that will come thither must make use of his hands as well as of his feet. Lord
give me the grace therefore that I may 1 Timothy 6. 12. Heb. 6. 18. Ephesians. 4 28.
Heb. 12. 13. Ps. 119. 59.
by the hand of faith lay hold on the merits of my crucified Savior, and
stretch forth my hands to the doing of good works, as well as have the feet of
my soul (my affections) carrying me forward in the way that leads unto thee,
and to thy heavenly kingdom.

CCXXI.
Upon the sight of one whom another did uphold as he went.

LOrd, do thou which upholdest all things by thy mighty word, uphold me with
thy free spirit and with the right hand Heb. 1. 3. Ps. 51. 12. Isai. 41. 10 Ps.
17. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 9. Jam. 5. 12.
of thy righteousness in all my going, that my footsteps slip not, and I fall
into some dangerous temptation, and from thence into condemnation.

CCXXII.
Upon the sight of an empty house swept and garnished.

LOrd, this house shows me what I have been in thy sight, when I have
heretofore received the holy Communion of Mat. 12: 44, etc.
the blessed body and blood of my Savior Jesus Christ. I have (I must
confess) been like this house, emptied of all good works, swept with an overly
repentance, and garnished with an outward show of a seeming sanctity which was
not in me in deed and in truth. Lord keep me from being ever so again, lest
Satan take unto him seven devils worse then himself, and enter into me, and so
make my last estate far worse then was my Luc. 11. 26.
first.

CCXXIII.
Upon the sight of fire seizing upon an house which could not be quenched.

LOrd, keep me from that fire of Hell which shall never be quenched. Mat. 3. 12
Mark 9. 43


CCXXIV.
Upon the sight of two coals lying together, whereof the one kindled the other.

LOrd, here I see the benefit of unity and concord, for where that is, one (I
see) may do much good unto another, either by enkindling the graces of Gods
Spirit in him, or by preserving them Ephesians. 4. 3.
already enkindled. Oh give me therefore the grace that I may keep the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace.

CCXXV.
Upon the sight of one that came to visit his friend that was in great
perplexity.

LOrd, I am grievously perplexed; oh Ps. 106. 4.
visit me with thy salvation.

CCXXVI.
Upon the sight of one that by violence took something from another.

LOrd, thy word does tell me, that the Mat. 11. 12
Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and that the violent take it by force:
Oh that I might have thy grace to use this holy violence, that in the end I
might obtain thy heavenly Kingdom.

CCXXVII.
Upon the sight of one writing very swiftly.

LOrd, make me a Scribe prompt in the Ezr. 7. 6. Psalm. 45. 1.
law of thee my God, and let my tongue be as the pen of a ready writer, to
express the comforts that I find therein.

CCXXVIII.
Upon the sight of vapors rising out of the earth.

LOrd, these vapors show what my life is, for what indeed is my life but a
vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away? Oh that
Jam. 4. 14.
I might therefore have the grace so to redeem this short time of my life, and
to improve it to such holy and sanctified uses, Ephesians. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 17.
that when this short life of mine shall have its end, I may live with thee in
life everlasting.

CCXXIX.
Upon the sight of one binding of sheaves in a corn-field.

LOrd, the work that this man is now Mat. 13. 30.
about, shows me what will be my case in the great and general harvest of the
world at the worlds end; for then I shall be found either to be of the number
of the tares, which must be bound in sheaves to be burnt, or be good wheat,
which must also be bound in sheaves to be carried into thine everlasting barn
in Heaven. Oh give me therefore the grace that whilst I am in this field of
the world, I may spring up, and bring forth Romans 7. 4. Romans 6. 22
fruit unto thee in holiness, like the good seed which thou thy self sowedst,
that so I may have some comfortable assurance, that after this life I shall
enjoy life everlasting Matthew. 13. 38, 39.
in heaven, and not be like the tares of the Devils sowing, which must be burnt
in hellfire for ever.

CCXXXI.
Upon the sight of an Ewe that brought two Lambs.

LOrd, thou have been pleased in thy Word to compare thy people to a Cant. 4. 2.
flock of sheep, every one of which brings forth twins; that I may then have
the more comfortable assurance that I am one of thy sheep, and of this thy
flock, Lord give me the grace to bring forth those blessed twins of holiness
and Luc. 1. 75.
righteousness which thy word requires in all those that are thine.

CCXXXII.
Upon the coming on of the twilight.

LOrd, this is the time that the Adulterer Job 24. 15 Prove. 7. 9.
waits for, and the Adultresse makes use of for the accomplishing of their
uncleanness, thinking now that no eye shall see them: Lord keep me from having
any fellowship with these unfruitful works, but give me grace rather to
reprove them. Ephesians. 5. 11.


CCXXXIII.
Upon the sight of two Turtle-doves kept tame in a house.

LOrd, thou were pleased of thy gracious goodness and mercy, under the law, to
accept of two turtle Doves, or two Levit. 5. 7.
young Pigeons from the poor, that were not of ability to bring a Sheep for a
sinoffering: Oh be thou as gracious a God to my poor soul, and accept at my
hands what I am able to do, though much less than that others do do, or I
should 2 Cor. 8. 12.
do.

CCXXXIII.
Upon the sight of a brand taken out of the fire.

LOrd, this brand shows me the estate wherein I was, and wherein I might Zech.
3. 2. Amos 4. 11.
have been, had not thy mercy prevented it. I was in the very midst of the fire
of affliction, and therein I was likely to have continued till I had been
utterly consumed, had not thou in thy mercy prevented it. Oh be thou still my
gracious God, as to deliver me from the danger Lam. 3. 22.
wherein I am at present, so to keep me from the like danger in the time to
come, lest I be consumed in thy wrath. Ps. 90. 7.


CCXXXIV.
Upon the hearing of a little boy that crope in at a window and opened the
doors to let in greater thieves.

LOrd, this little theefs entrance, and making way for greater thieves, shows
Mar. 5. 28. Joel. 2. 9. Jer. 9. 21. Genesis 3. 6. Genesis 6. 2.
into what danger my soul may come by wanton looks; for if I let but these once
into my heart through the windows of mine eyes, they will quickly let in many
another foul sin that will wholly rob me of thy grace. Oh turn away therefore
Josh. 7. 21. 2 Samuel 11. 2. Ps. 119. 37. Job 31. 1^
mine eyes from such vanities, and give me the grace to make a covenant with
mine eyes, that they may not admit any such lustful objects.

CCXXXVI.
Upon the sight of one going up a slippery hill, where though he had many
slips, and some falls, yet recovered the top of the hill at last.

LOrd, Heaven is thy holy hill, and the way thither is very slippery, and Psalm.
3. 4. Psalm. 19. 12 Jam. 3. 2. As David, Peter, etc.
none can ascend thither without many a slip and fall in his passage, yet he
that has slipped oftenest, and most grievously fallen, may in thy mercy recover
thither at last. Lord vouchsafe this thy mercy then unto me; and though I
cannot but slip and fall in my passage toward Heaven, which is thy holy hill,
yet by the grace of true repentance rising again, I may at last through thy
mercy and thy Sons merits recover thither.

CCXXXVII.
Upon the hearing of an horse neighing after a mare.

LOrd keep me from neighing after my Jer. 5. 8.
neighbors wife like a fed horse in the morning.

CCXXXVIII.
Upon the turning of the wind from North-east to North-west.

HEre I see a sensible turning of the wind from one point of the North unto
another, and yet is the wind still in the North, and as far from the South as
before: And such is the course of many a man in his repentance, he turns from
one Jer. 34. 14, 15, 16.
sin to another, as from covetousness to prodigality, from Atheism or Judaism
to Popery, or the like; remaining still as much under the power of sin, and as
far from God as before. From which course Amos 4. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 1 These. 5. 23.
Lord evermore keep me by thy grace, and make my repentance more perfect than
so, for thy greater glory and my souls greater comfort.

CCXXXIX.
Upon the sight of one whose face being toward the West, turned himself toward
the North.

THis is also a lively resemblance of a false and feigned penitent, who turns
from his sins, just as if a man whose face is toward the West should turn to
the North; for of turning he may look both ways, both to the West, whereon his
face was set, and to the East, whereon his back was turned: so many turn from
their sins, not directly, but side-wayes, so that with one eye they may look to
Mar. 6. 23. 2 Kings 17. 23.
God, and with the other to some sin: from which false and feigned kind of
repentance good Lord do thou also deliver me.

CCXL.
Upon the hearing of a Trumpet in the night to call Soldiers to horse.

LOrd, this trumpet puts me in mind of 1 Corin. 15. 52. 1 These. 4. 16.
the trumpet that shall sound at the last day, to call me with all mankind to
judgment: Oh give me therefore the grace that whether I eat or drink, sleep or
wake, or whatsoever else I am doing, I may always think that I hear this
trumpet sounding in mine ear, and calling me to judgment, and that therefore
I may still be in a readiness to make my appearance with comfort when that
time Mat. 24. 44. 2 Pet. 3. 14
shall come.

CCXLI.
Upon the sight of one pouring oil into a lamp, and trimming of it.

LOrd grant me the grace to be of the number of those wise Virgins which had
oil in their lamps, and were ready Mat. 25. 1, etc.
and prepared for the coming of the Bridegroom, that so I may enter into the
Bride-chamber of Heaven with him when he comes; and not be like those foolish
Virgins, which never thinking of providing oil for their lamps till the
Bridegroom was coming, were for want of it shut out of Heaven.

CCXLII.
Upon the sight of one that sued his neighbor upon an action of Trespass.

LOrd, if he did remember how often he has trespassed against thee, he would
not thus sue his neighbor for trespassing against him; for the wrong Mat. 18.
24, 28.
that his neighbor has done to him, is but as an hundred pence to those ten
thousand talents which he owes thee. Lord therefore open his eyes and mine,
that we both taking notice of our trespasses against thee, may learn to show
that Luc. 6. 36.
mercy to others, which we our selves hope for from thee.

CCXLIII.
Upon the sight of a great deal of treasure which one had laid up.

LOrd, give me the grace that I may not treasure up unto my self wrath against
the day of wrath. Romans 2. 5.


CCXLIV.
Upon the hearing of a woman that fell in travail before she looked for it.

LOrd grant that when I shall say peace and safety, sudden destruction may not
1 These. 5. 3.
come upon me, as travail upon a woman with child.

CCXLV.
Upon the sight of one that trampled another under his feet.

LOrd trample me not in thy fury as my sins have deserved, but deal with me
Isa. 63. 3. Hab. 3. 2.
in mercy for thy Son Christ Jesus sake.

CCXLVI.
Upon the sight of a strong Tower.

LOrd, thy name is a strong Tower, and thou have promised that whatsoever Pro.
18. 10.
righteous person shall run into it he shall be safe: Oh that I might have thy
grace to be one of those righteous persons, that running with them thither, I
might be safe also from the rage and fury of thine and mine enemies.

CCXLVII.
Upon the hearing of one that brought glad tidings.

LOrd, what joy is there here upon the hearing of the glad tidings which this
Isa. 63. 3.
messenger has brought, though it be but for a temporal blessing? Oh how much
more thankful and joyful should I be for that blessing of blessings, the
birth of my Savior Christ, the joyfullest tidings that ever any heard? And
that I may be so Luc. 2. 10.
indeed, Lord give me the grace to remember it, and to ponder it aright.

CCXLVIII.
Upon the hearing of a fearful clap of thunder.

LOrd, this is thy great and terrible voice Ps. 77. 18. Ps. 104 7.
which I now hear; and if this be so full of terror, oh then how fearful will
thy presence be when thou come in thy 2 These. 1. 7, 8.
glory, showing thy self from heaven with thy mighty Angels in flaming fire!
Lord give me therefore the grace, that what I now hear may by thy blessing work
in me such an awe of thy Maj. that I may by it admire thy mercy, fear thy
power, and prepare for thy coming as thy child should do.

CCXLIX.
Upon the sight of one asking his Fathers blessing.

LOrd, thy word tells me, and experience shows, how powerful and prevalent
Genesis 9. 26. Genesis 27. 27.
the Fathers blessing has been; and if the blessing of an earthly Father has
been so, how much more powerful and prevalent will thy blessing be (O heavenly
Ps. 127. 1, etc. Pro. 10. 22. 1 Cor. 3. 6.
Father) which give a blessing to all other blessings? Oh bless me, even me
then, O Father I beseech thee, and then shall I be blessed.

CCL.
Upon the sight of two cocks set together to fight, to know which was of the
hardest kind.

LOrd, here I see the policy of my subtle Adversary the Devil, who sets me and
my neighbors at discord, of purpose that he may have our souls, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
when in this world and Cockpit of contention we have made him pastime and
sport. Lord keep me therefore by thy grace, that to pleasure the Devil, I may
not be so in hatred or contention with Gal. 5. 20. 21.
any, that thereby I may endanger mine own or any other man's soul.

CCLI.
Upon the sight of one that died suddenly.

LOrd, here I see in this man what what might have betided me, if thou had
not been the more merciful unto me, for my breath was in my nostrils as well
as his, and thou might as well have Isa. 2. 22.
taken away my breath as his, and have caused me as suddenly to have returned
Ps. 104. 29 Ps. 146. 4.
to the earth from whence I came as he has done. Oh give me the grace
therefore to magnify thy mercy for the favor which thou have showed me in
preserving my life thus long; and teach me so to numbet my days that be to
come, Ps. 90. 1^.
that I may apply my heart unto wisdom, and may spend the residue of them in
thy fear, that dying never so suddenly I may die in thy favor through Jesus
Christ.

CCLII.
Upon the hearing of the sentence of death pronounced against a malefactor.

LOrd, here I see in what a fearful agony this poor soul is upon the Judges
pronouncing of the sentence of Death against him. And if this sentence of Death
pronounced by an earthly Judge be so terrible, how much more terrible must
needs be that sentence which the Judge of the quick and the dead shall
pronounce against sinners at the last day? Act. 10. 42 ^ These. 1. 7, 8. Mat.
25. 41. 1 Cor. 11. 31.
Oh give me therefore the grace that I may so judge my self here, that I may
not be thus judged of thee with the Judgment of condemnation hereafter.

CCLIII.
Upon the sight of one bending his bow to shoot.

LOrd, how often have thine and mine enemies bent their tongues like bows to
shoot out bitter words like arrows Jer. 9. 3. Ps. 64. 3. 2 Samuel 22. 36.
against me? But Lord, as thou have ever been, so still be thou my shield, and
then I shall be safe.

CCLIV.
Upon the sight of a shepherd breaking the teeth of his sheep-dog.

LOrd, do thou thus break the teeth of thine and mine enemies, that they Ps.
58. 6. Ps. 22. 16. Ezech. 34. 14. Joh. 10. 16 Isai. 53. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 25
may by their barking at me and my good name, and not biting or hurting me,
hasten me in the way to that blessed field, and fold of thine in heaven
hereafter, and fetch me in when I am strayed and stragled from thee here.

CCLV.
Upon the sight of one teaching a child to read.

LOrd, I am a very child in understanding, 1* Cor. 14 20.
and can no more spell or read any thing in thy book (the holy Scriptures) for
Act. 8. 31.
my souls present comfort here, or everlasting good hereafter, then this child
can do, unless I have one to teach me. Oh do thou then by the ministers of thy
word which thou have appointed to be teachers of thy people, and by the
cooperating Ephesians. 4. 11. Romans 2. 20. Joh. 14. 26 1 John 2. 27
and assisting grace of thy blessed Spirit, which thou have promised shall
teach us all things, teach me every day better and better to spell, read, and
understand what may be for my souls good.

CCLVI.
Upon the sight of swine eating acornes under an Oak.

HEre I see these swine greedily grouzing up the Acornes which they find under
this tree, but I see not one of them lifting up so much as half an eye toward
the tree that sned them down unto them. And just so Lord have I too often done;
for how many blessings have I received from thy bounteous goodness, for which I
have been so far from giving Ps. 68. 19.
thee deserved thanks, that I have scarce ever looked up with an acknowledging
Ps. 116. 7.
eye to that bountiful hand of thine from whence they all have come? Lord
pardon Isa. 22. 11.
this my great unthankfulness past, and make me every day more and more
thankful as thy child should be. Jam. 1. 17.


CCLVII.
Upon the sight of a boy which had a bird tied by one leg in a string.

LOrd, herein I see how the Devil deals with me. This poor bird having his
wings at liberty may flutter up and down, and sometimes seem to take his wings
and to fly away; but being fast tied by but one of his legs, he is still in
the boys possession, and do what he can he cannot fly from him: and just so it
is with me, if the Devil have gotten hold of me, though it be by the voluntary
entertainment of but any one lust or sin, he cares for no more, for he knows
that I am Jam. 2. 10. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
thereby in his possession, and that he may when he pleases (if I shall at any
time offer to fly from him) call me back to his obedience again. Good God
therefore 2 Pet. 2, 19, 20.
give me the grace that I may mortify and subdue all my vile lusts and sinful
affections every day more and more, and that Col. 3. 5. Ps. 199. 104. and 128.
I may not willingly continue in any one of them, to thy dishonor, and the
wronging my of own soul.

CCLVIII.
Upon the sight of one tasting of sweetmeats.

LOrd give me thy grace to taste, and Psalm. 34. 8. Ps. 119. 103 Ps. 19. 10.
see how gracious thou art; and that thy word may be as sweet to my taste as
this that he has now tasted feems to be unto his.

CCLIX.
Upon the hearing of one blamed for tarrying longer then was expected.

LOrd, I have been long in misery, and Psalm. 77. 2. 2 Corin. 12. 7, 8.
I have sent my prayers as messengers unto thee for release therefrom; but yet
I see little or no appearance of any such release: Oh my God, make no longer
tarrying, if it be thy blessed Ps. 40. 17. Psalm. 70. 5.
will, but rid me out of this misery under which I have so long groaned; or if
thy will be that I shall continue in it, then Lord give me the grace to submit
to thy Matthew. 26. 39.
blessed will therein, and with patience to attend thy deliverance therefrom;
when thy will and pleasure shall be to have it, and in the mean time not to
murmr and repine against thee, though to flesh and blood thy tarrying seem
longer then ordinary.

CCLX.
Upon the hearing of some that were taken captives by the Turks.

LOrd, these poor souls are like to undergo much misery in the place to which
they are carried captives, and must remain in the same, except they be redeemed
from thence by some ransom paid for them: And this just is my case; for Lord I
have been taken captive by the 2 Timothy 2. 26 Heb. 2. 15. Matthew. ^0. 28. 1 Timothy
2. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Rom 8. 16 1 Cron. 6. 20.
Devil to do his will, and am like still so to continue, except thou, O sweet
Jesus, the Savior and Redeemer of mankind, shall by the ransom which thou
have paid for me, redeem me from thence; which I do believe thou have done for
me, and wilt in thy good time give me the comfortable assurance thereof; which
Lord hasten to do for thy mercies sake, I do beseech thee.

CCLXI.
Upon the sight of a post riding by.

LOrd, this post I see rides apace, but my days (if I had the grace to take
Job 9. 25. Ps. 90. 12. Gal. 6. 10. Heb. 8. 5. Joh. 12. 35
notice of it) do post away with a far greater speed. Lord give me the grace to
take notice of it as I should do, and to make the best use of it whilst time
serves.

CCLXII.
Upon the sight of a swallow.

LOrd, this bird I see observes the time of his returning to us. Oh that I
might have the grace to observe in like manner Jer. 8. 7.
the time of my returning unto thee by true and sound repentance.

CCLXIII.
Upon the sight of one that stumbled at a stone in his way.

LOrd, how many stumbling blocks does the Devil continually cast in my way Rev.
2. 14. 1 Cor. 10. 12.
toward Heaven! from all which good Lord deliver me: But above all other, keep
me I beseech thee so by thy grace, that neither Jesus Christ, my crucified
Savior may be unto me a stumbling block 1 Cor. 1. 23. 1 Pet. 2. 8.
as he was unto the Jews: nor thy word, as it has been unto other disobedient
persons.

CCLXIV.
Upon the sight of stubble burnt in a field.

LOrd, let not the fire of thy wrath and fierce indignation devour me, as this
Exodus 15. 7 Isa. 5. 24. Joel. 2. 5* Hab. 3. 2.
fire does the stubble that is cast into it, but in wrath remember mercy.

CCLXV.
Upon the sight of Rookes in a corn-field newly sown.

LOrd, these fowls are not more desirous Mat. 13. 4.
to eat up, and devour this newly sown corn, then is the Devil (that
master-fowl of the air) to catch away that precious Ephesians. 2. 2.
seed of thy word sown in my heart by Mat. 13. 19.
the ministers and preachers thereof. Lord give the grace therefore, that I may
not be like the ground by the highway side, on which whatsoever seed was sown,
the fowls presently devoured it, because it was not covered with earth; but
that I may rather be like the good ground, wherein Ps. 119. 11 Mat. 13. 8. 23.
the seed sown was so hid and covered, that it brought forth fruit in abundance.

CCLXVI.
Upon the hearing of a strong castle or fort taken by force.

LOrd, my heart the Devil has for a long time fortified, hoping to keep Luc.
11. 21 22.
it for himself for ever. But Lord thou art stronger then he; oh do thou
therefore overcome him for me, and take me Ps. 50. 15.
out of his possession, that I may live to glorify thee for this thy
wonderful deliverance of me, and for all thy other mercies which thou have
showed toward me in Jesus Christ. Ps. 116. 12


CCLXVII.
Upon the sight of one that trod in the steps of another that went before him.

LOrd Jesus, thou have suffered for me, and in thy sufferings have left me an 1
Pet. 2. 21
example that I should follow thy steps. Oh that I might have thy grace so to
do it, that following thee here in this world, Joh. 10. 27 Mat. 19. 28 Matthew.
16. 24, 25.
I may in the next attain to that happiness in Heaven, which thou have
promised to all those that follow thee in sincerity and truth.

CCLXVIII.
Upon the sight of one that was sent to reconcile two that were at variance.

LOrd, thou and I have been long at variance by reason of my many and Isa. 59.
2.
manifold sins committed against thee, yet thou art willing (I see) to have me
reconciled unto thee again, and for that end have sent the ministers of thy
word (as thy Ambassadors) to pray me in 2 Cor. 5. 20
Christ's stead to be reconciled unto thee. Lord let not their pains taken
herein be fruitless, and to none effect, but give me the grace to accept of
the conditions offered, and to bless thy name for the mercy vouchsafed me
therein.

CCLXIX.
Upon the sight of chafe driven away with the wind when one was winnowing.

LOrd, let thine and thy Churches enemies be as chafe before the wind, and
Psalm. 35. 5. Psalm. 1. 4. Isa. 17. 13.
let thine Angel scatter them.

CCLXX.
Upon the sight of one dipping a sop in wine, and eating it.

LOrd grant that after the taking of thy holy Sacrament, I may not be like
Judas, into whom, after the taking of the sop, Satan entered, lest being filled
with Joh. 13. 27 Joh. 6. 70. Joh. 17. 12
iniquity, I be brought to destruction both of body and soul as he was.

CCLXXI.
Upon the hearing of some that had suffered shipwreck.

LOrd, keep me from making shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. 1 Timothy 1.
19


CCLXXII.
Upon the hearing of a shepherd that watched his flock by night.

LOrd, be thou my shepherd, and do thou (which never slumbrest nor sleep)
Psalm. 23. 1.
watch over me with the eye of thy fatherly providence, that neither the Ps.
121. 4. Ps. 34. 15. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Devil (which goes up and down like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour)
nor any of his wicked instruments may be able to hurt me.

CCLXXIII.
Upon the sight of a mastive lying before a door.

LOrd, here I see in this mastive lying before this door, what I must expect if
I shall boldly enter into any known sin: for as this mastive lying before the
door Genesis 4. 7. Pro. 18. 14. 2 Samuel 24. 10.
of this house is ready to fly upon those that shall enter therein; so will my
conscience fly upon me, if I shall enter into the ways of sin; Oh help me
therefore with thy grace, and keep me by Act. 2. 37. 1 Pet. 1. 5.
thy power from all such courses, that I may neither offend thee my God, nor
draw upon my self any such sad inconvenience.

CCLXXIV.
Upon the sight of a crab-stock grafted with good fruit, which yet sent forth
many shoots of his own kind.

LOrd, here I see what I am, and what I must expect to be as long as I live in
this world. I may have thy word engrafted in me, and may seem thereby to Jam.
1. 21.
grow in grace and goodness, but yet still (do what I can) there will some
Romans 7. 21.
shoots of my natural corruption be sprouting forth, savouring of the old
stock, Adams sinful loins, from whence Romans 5. 12.
we all came. Oh do thou therefore so assist me with thy grace, that though
such Romans 6. 12. Joh. 15. 1.
sins may be in me, yet they may not reign in me, but do thou (like a good
husband) cut and prune them off, so as that they 2 Pet. 1. 8.
may not hinder the growth of thy word in me, nor make me unfruitful in the
acknowledging of our Lord Jesus Christ.

CCLXXV.
Upon the sight of one that sheltred himself under a tree in the time of a
storm.

LOrd, the times wherein we live are stormy times, and we know not whether to
run for shelter in these sad times Isa. 4. 6.
but only unto thee, who have promised to be a place of refuge, and a covert
from the storm to all those that be thine. Psalm. 61. 3.
Oh be thou then such a shelter for us, and we will glorify thy name for this
thy merciful deliverance of us.

CCLXXVI.
Upon the sight of diverse men's sheep put into one and the same sheepfold.

LOrd Jesus, thou have other sheep which are not yet of this thy fold wherein
we Joh. 10. 16
are; Oh do thou then (which art the good sheph erd) in thy good time bring
these also into this thy fold, that so there may be one sheepfold and one
shepherd.

CCLXXVII.
Upon the washing of mine own hands.

LOrd, give me the grace, that I may be as careful to wash my hands in
innocence Psalm. 26. 6.
before I do approach unto thine Altar, there to receive the body and blood of
my Savior Jesus Christ.

CCLXXVIII.
Upon the sight of a cart laden with corn.

LOrd, I have by my many and manifold sins often pressed thee, as a cart is
pressed that is full of sheaves. Oh Amos 2. 13.
be merciful unto me for what is past, and give me thy grace that I may never
do so again hereafter.

CCLXXIX.
Upon the sight of one taking larks in a field.

HEre I see nets spread, here I see larks flittering up and down with their
wings, though tied by their legs; here I see a turning glass against the Sun,
with the radiant and shining brightness whereof those silly birds are so
taken, that without fear they hasten to the place: here I also see the
bird-catcher himself sitting a good way off, watching to cast his net over
them, when he thinks they are within the reach of them. And Lord, what is this,
but a lively representation Psalm. 91. 3. Job. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 8. 1 Timothy 3. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Joh. 8. 44. Act. 13. 16. 2 Pet. 2. 19. Pro. 1. 11, etc. Pro. 7. 10,
etc. Luc. 8. 14.
of the Devils (that grand fowlers) dealing with me? For where can I go in this
wide field of the world, where he has not spread his nets, where he has not
many of his instruments, which are in his possession, though they seem to be at
liberty, puposely there set to tempt and toll me into their company, and be
partaker with them of their sins, and sinful courses? where he has not
also many vain pleasures and delights to draw me to his lure; and he himself
always ready Luc. 16. 25. 1 Timothy 5. 6. Jam. 5. 5.
at hand to surprise me, and to catch me, and to make me his here, and
eternally his in hell fire hereafter, except thou by thy grace shall ptevent
it; which I beseech thee for thy Son and my Savior Jesus Christ his sake to
grant unto me.

CCLXXX.
Upon the sight of a lamb.

OH sweet Jesus, the eternal Son of the eternal God, thou which art the lamb
of God, that takes away the sins of the world, do thou so take away my sins,
that they may neither terrify my Joh. 1. 29.
conscience here, nor condemm my soul hereafter.

CCLXXXI.
Upon the sight of a sheep shearing.

OH sweet Jesus, my only Lord and Savior, which in thy sufferings were like a
sheep dumb before his shearer, and openedst not thy mouth to revile or Act. 8.
32. Isa. 53. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 23
threaten those that thus wronged thee, but committedst thy cause to him that
judges righteously; and therein did 1 Pet. 2. 21
leave me an example that I should follow thy steps: give me the grace (I
beseech thee) that I may do the like whenever I shall be called to suffer
with thee, or for thee.

CCLXXXII.
Upon the hearing of one that had wronged his neighbor, and for it being to
appear before a Justice of peace, procured some friends in the way thitherwards
to take up the matter, and to end it for him.

LOrd, I have wronged thee my God and mine own conscience many ways by my
sins, and have often injured my neighbors, by means of which both thou and
they are become mine Adversaries. Oh give me the grace therefore that whilst I
am in the way, and do live here, I may so agree with you all, that hereafter I
be not delivered to the judge Mat. 5. 25. Luc. 12. 58 Act. 10. 42 2 Timothy 4. 8.
Mat. 25. 41
of quick and dead, the Lord Jesus Christ, that righteous judge, and be by him
delivered to the Devil (the Jailer of hell) who will cast me into that
easelesse and Mark 9. 45
endless prison of Hell, never to come forth thence again.

CCLXXXIII.
Upon the sight of a painted and curiously wrought sepulcher.

LOrd, keep me that I may not be like unto this sepulcher, to appear beautiful
and righteous outwardly to the eyes Mat. 23. 27 28.
of men, and be in the mean time as full of sin and wickedness within, as
this is of dead men's bones and all filthiness.

CCLXXXIV.
Upon the sight of one that sought for a thing lost.

LOrd, I have so long erred from the ways of thy commandments, that I have at
last lost my self and thy favor: Ps. 119. 21. Luc. 15. 32 Ps. 119. 176 Joh.
17. 12
Oh seek thy servant therefore, and in thy good time find me again, lest I be
lost for ever.

CCLXXXV.
Upon the sight of a pot boiling and not skummed.

LOrd, here I see how much skumme and filthiness is apt to arise out of my
heart, when once my choler that is within me does begin to boil, and if it be
not skummed and taken away by thy grace, Psalm. 79. 8.
how soon it will intermix it self with my best actions. Oh help me therefore
by thy preventing grace, that it may not so any more arise in me, or if it do,
that by the same grace assisting me I may speedily repent me of it, and skumme
it and Hos. 14. 2. Ez. 24. 6, 11, 12, 13.
take it away as it does arise, lest thy wrath lighting upon me, both I and it
be in the end consumed with the fire of this thy wrath and just indignation.

CCLXXXVI.
Upon the sight of one that was corrected by his master for his bad writing,
and withal taught how to amend it.

LOrd, thy word does assure me that he is in a happy condition whom thou
chastisest, Ps. 94. 12.
and withal teach him by thy word how to amend. That I may then be so
happy, Lord let me not only be Ps. 119. 67 Ps. 119. 12 Joh. 14. 26
chastised by thee for what I have done amiss, but be taught also by thy
blessed word and Spirit how to amend it.

CCLXXXVII.
Upon the sight of a Smith at work upon his Anvile.

THey say, that the more the Anvile is beaten upon the harder it grows: Lord
keep me from being so, that I may not be the more hardened in my sins by 2 Chr.
28. 22. Amos 4. 6, etc.
the strokes of thy judgments inflicted on me for them, lest not being amended
by them, I either cause thee to inflict on me or mine some more heavy Joh. 5.
14. Isa. 1. 5. Hos. 4. 14. Ez. 16. 42.
judgments, or to cease punishing of me, which will prove in the end the
heaviest judgment of all.

CCLXXXVIII.
Upon the sight of a Dog flying upon the stone that hit him, without regard to
the throwers hand.

LOrd, how often have I done the like by flying upon those with bitter
reproaches, Amos 3. 6. 2 Samuel 16. 10.
which were but the secondary causes and instruments of my wrong, without ever
looking at thy hand, which set them on work? Lord be merciful unto me for what
is past, and give me the grace to look up to thy hand better for the time to
come, that I may with the more patience and comfort undergo Mic. 6. 9. Psalm.
39. 9. Isa. 38. 13.
what thou by them shall think meet to lay upon me.

CCLXXXIX.
Upon the sight of a glass of distilled water stirred and shaken.

AS long as this glass of distilled water stood still, and unshaken, there was
nothing to be seen in it but fair and clear water; but now being stirred and
shaken, what a mood and muddy residence does there arise in it? And just so,
Lord is it with me; as long as I am not stirred, moved and provoked by any, 2
King. 8. 12, 13.
I seem a Saint, and as if I had in me nothing of spleen and gall at all; but
being once moved and provoked, how much Romans 1. 26 Ps. 81. 11, 12.
impatience, techinesse, frowardness, and other like corruptions do there
manifest themselves in me? Lord give me grace therefore rightly to know my self
2 Cor. 13. 5. Luc. 18. 11
and mine own heart, that I may neither conceive too well of my self, nor judge
too ill of others, when I am exempted, Gal. 6. 1.
and they are suffered to fall in any gross sin.

CCXC.
Upon the sight of one skillful in Chymistrie that extracted salt out of herbs.

CHymicks are of opinion, that there is almost nothing but salt may be drawn
out of it; and that there is no man but has salt in him. Lord give me the
grace that I may also have salt in my Mark ^. 49 Col. 4. 6.
self, the salt of true spiritual wisdom and discretion, that I may by the
same so season all my actions, and so temper all my affections, that both by
the one and other I may bring glory to thy name, good to others, and comfort to
my own soul.

CCXCI.
Upon the sight of a burning firebrand which was soon extinguished when cast
into water.

LOrd, here I see how great a measure Ps. 106. 35, 36. Pro. 22. 14 Ps. 141. 4.
Pro. 4. 24, 15. Rev. 18. 4.
of zeal may be soon quenched amongst wicked company. Oh give me therefore the
grace to keep out of such company, which are so prejudicial to thy glory, and
to my souls good.

CCXCII.
Upon the sight of a stone cast into a pool of water.

AT the first casting in of this stone I see but a few, and those little
circles too, which did arise upon the face of the water into which it was cast,
but staying a while (and that no long time neither) behold the circles were
multiplied, and grew bigger and bigger till they came home to the very banks
of the pool. And so Lord will it be with me in the willing admission of any one
known sin; Mat. 26. 70, etc. 2 Samuel 11. 2, etc.
For though at first it be but one, and may seem but a small sin unto me, yet
being willingly admitted and entertained, will soon cause more and greater sins
in me, till I become beyond measure sinful, unless the grace of God prevent
it. Lord therefore evermore by thy grace keep me that I may not wittingly or
willingly admit of any sin.

CCXCIII.
Upon the sight of one lighting a great fire with a match of brimstone put to a
little cole on the hearth.

LOrd, I see in this mine own case, for when I have by thy grace, and the daily
exercise of the work of mortification almost subdued my sins, yet if I be not
still careful to avoid the occasions of sin, they will by means of them soon
break out again, and come to as great an height Jam. 1. 14. Pro. 1. 15. and 5.
8. and 4. 15. Isa. 52. 11. Ephesians. 5. 11.
of impiety as before. Lord therefore give me thy grace that I may with all
care and diligence avoid all such occasions as may lead me into any sin.

CCXCIV.
Upon the sight of one drawing water out of a well.

LOrd, give me the grace to draw waters out of the wells of salvation. Isa. 123.


CCXCV.
Upon my sitting down at a well-furnished table.

LOrd, give me the grace soberly and thankfully to make use of these thy good
blessings, that this table may not become a snare unto me here, nor I for my
intemperance and other sins (whereby I have so often offended thee in my Ps.
69. 22. Pro. 23. 1, 2. Luc. 21. 34
eating and drinking heretofore, I am likely still to do so again, except I
have thy fear before mine eyes) be shut out and not suffered to sit down with
Abraham, Jude v. 12 Mat. 8. 11.
Isaac, and Jacob, at thy table in the kingdom of heaven hereafter.

CCXCVI.
Upon the fight of dogs eating of the crumbes that fell from their Masters
table.

LOrd, I confess that it is not fit that the childrens bread should be given to
Mat. 15. 26, 27.
whelps, yet seeing the dogs may eat of the crumbes that fall from their
masters table, and I in mine own eyes am such a Dog, and in thine eyes far
worse, if thou should look upon me as I am in my self; Lord suffer me, though
every way thus unworthy, yet to gather up some crumbes of comfort from under
thy holy table, whenever I shall approach thereunto.

CCXCVII.
Upon my lying down in my bed after a wearisome journey.

LOrd, I have long wearied my self in the ways of wickedness, and now would
fain be at rest from them. Oh do Isa. 47. 13. Isa. 57. 10.
thou then (which call all such wearied souls unto thee, and have promised
rest unto them) grant that I (being thus weary Mat. 11. 28, 19.
of my sins here) may rest with thee hereafter in those eternal beds which 2
These. 1. 7 Isa. 57. 2.
thou have prepared for thine in Heaven.

CCXCVIII.
Upon the hearing of one that directed a man in his way.

Show me likewise thy ways O Lord, and teach me thy paths, that I may not err
Psalm. 25. 4. Ps. 119. 5. 21.
from the ways of thy commandments.

CCXCIX.
Upon the hearing of one that was delivered out of prison.

OH bring my soul also out of this prison Ps. 142. 7. Luc. 2. 29. Rev. 5. 12.
Heb. 12. 12 23. Romans 8. 17
of my body when thy will and pleasure is, that I with the rest of thy Saints
may glorify thee, and be glorified by thee eternally in heaven.

CCC.
Upon the hearing of a blind man bemoning his case.

LOrd, if it be so heavy a case to want our bodily eyes, and to be but bodily
Mark 10. 46. Mat. 62. 3. 1 John 2. 11.
blind, what is it to want the eyes of our soul, and to be spiritually blind?
Lord then whatsoever becomes of the eyes of my body, let me never (I beseech
thee) be deprived of the eyes of my soul, nor let the God of this world so
blind my mind, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ may not shine
unto me. 2 Cor. 4. 4.


The end.
Published by this Author,
The Saints Honeycomb, full of Divine Truths, touching both Christian belief,
and a Christians life. In two Centuries.

The Communicants Guide, directing the younger sort which have never yet
Received, and the Elder, and ignorant sort, which have hitherto Received
unworthily, how they may Receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to their
souls comfort.

Both sold by R. Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane.

A Catalogue of some Books printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivy-lane, London.
Books written by Mr. Tho. Pierce Rector of Brington.
THe Sinner impleaded in his own Court, wherein are represented the great
discouragements from sinning, which the Sinner receives from Sin it self. 2.
Correct Copy of some notes concerning Gods Decrees, especially of Reprobation.
The 3 Edition with some Additionals, in 4. new. 3. The Divine Philanthropie
defended, in answer to Mr. Barlce, in 4. new. 4. The Self-revenger, to which is
added an Appendage touching the judgment of the late L. Primate of Armagh. in
4. new. 5. A Vindication of Grotius from Mr. Baxter. of Mr. Baxter from Mr.
Barlce. of Episcopal Divines from Both together.

To which is added an Appendage Touching the judgment of the right Honorable
and right Reverend Father in God, James Lord Primate of Armagh, and
Metropolitan of Ireland, irrefiagably attested by the Certificates of Dr.
Walton, Mr. Thorndike, and Mr. Gunning, sent in a Letter to Doctor Bernard. By
Tho. Pierce in 4. new.

6. The Divine Purity defended in answer to Dr. Reynolds, in 4. new.

