CHRIST SET FORTH In his Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Sitting at Gods right
hand, Intercession,
As the CAUSE of Justification. OBJECT of Justifying Faith.
Upon ROMANS 8. VER. 34.

TOGETHER WITH A TREATISE DISCOVERING The Affectionate tenderness of CHRIST'S
HEART now in Heaven, unto Sinners on Earth.

By THO: GOODWIN, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by W. E. and J. G. for Robert Dawlman. MDCXLII.

TO THE READER.
WHat the scope of this treatise it self is, the Title Page and the Table that
follows, will sufficiently inform you: I shall only here acquaint you, with
what was mine, in a few words. I have by long experience observed many holy and
precious souls, who have clearly and wholly given up themselves to Christ, to
be saved by him his own way; And who at their first conversion (as also at
times of desertion,) have made an entire and immediate cloze with Christ alone
for their Justification, who yet in the ordinary course and way of their
spirits, have been too much carried away with the Rudiments of Christ in their
own hearts, and not after Christ himself: The stream of their more constant
thoughts and deepest intentions running in the channel of reflecting upon, and
searching into the gracious dispositions of their own hearts, so to bring
down, or to raise up (as the Apostles words are, Romans 10. 8.) and so get a
sight of Christ by them. Whereas Christ himself is nigh them (as the Apostle
there speaks) if they would but nakedly look upon himself through thoughts of
pure and single faith.

And although the use of our own graces by way of sign and evidence of Christ
in us be allowed us by God, and is no way derogatory from Christ, if
subordinated to faith; and so as that the heart be not too inordinate and
immoderate in poring too long, or too much on them, to fetch their comfort from
them, unto a neglect of Christ: yet as pleasures that are lawful, are
unlawfully used, when our thoughts and intentions are too long, or too
frequent, or too vehement in them, so as to dead the heart; either to the
present delighting in God, or pursuing after him, with the joint strength of
our souls, as our only chiefest good: so an immoderate recourse unto signs,
(though barely considered as such) is as unwarrantable, when thereby we are
diverted and taken off from a more constant actual exercise of daily thoughts
of faith toward Christ immediately, as he is set forth to be our righteousness;
either by the way of Assurance, (which is a kind of enjoyment of him,) or
Recumbency and renewed Adherence in pursuit after him.

And yet the minds of many are so wholly taken up with their own hearts, that
(as the Psalmist says of God) Christ is scarce in all their thoughts: But let
these consider what a dishonor this must needs be unto Christ, that his train
and favorites (our graces) should have a fuller Court and more frequent
attendance from our hearts then himself, who is the King of Glory. And
likewise what a shame also it is for believers themselves, who are his Spouse,
to look upon their Husband no otherwise but by reflection and at second hand,
through the intervention and assistance of their own graces, as Mediators
between him and them?

Now to rectify this error, the way is not wholly to reject all use of such
evidences, but to order them; both for the season, as also the issue of them:
For the reason, so as that the use of them go not before, but still should
follow after an address of faith first renewed, and acts thereof put forth
upon Christ himself. Thus whenever we would go down into our own hearts,
and take a view of our graces, let us be sure first to look wholly out of our
selves unto Christ, as our justification, and to cloze with him immediately;
and this as if we had no present, or by past grace, to evidence our being in
him. And if then whilst faith is thus immediately clasping about Christ, as
sitting upon his Throne of Grace, we find either present or fore-past graces
coming in as Handmaids, to attend and witness to the truth of this adherence
unto Christ, (as after such single and absolute acts of faith, it oftentimes
falls out.) The Holy Ghost (without whose light they shine not) bearing
witness with our spirits, that is, our graces, as well as to our spirits. And
then again, for the issue of them, if in the closure of all, we again let fall
our viewing and comforting our selves in them, or this their testimony, and
begin afresh (upon this encouragement) to act faith upon Christ immediately
with a redoubled strength: if thus (I say) we make such evidences to be
subservient only unto faith, (whilst it makes Christ its Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and end of all) this will be no prejudice at all to Christ's glory or
the workings of faith it self; for by this course the life of faith is still
actually maintained, and kept upon wing in its full ure, and exercise toward
Christ alone for justification. Whereas many Christians do habitually make
that only but as a supposed or taken for granted principle, which they seldom
use, but have laid up for a time of need: But actually live more in the view
and comfort of their own graces, and the gracious workings thereof in duties
toward Christ.

The Reason of this defect among many other I have attributed partly to a
Barrennes (as Peter's phrase is) in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
of such things revealed about him, as might be matter for faith to work and
feed upon: As also to a want of skill (whilst men want assurance) to bend and
bow, and subjugate to the use of a faith of mere adherence, all those things
that they know and hear of Christ as made justification unto us. It being in
experience a matter of the greatest difficulty, (and yet certainly most
feasible and attainable) for such a faith, as can yet only rely and cast it
self upon Christ for justification, yet rightly to take in, and so to make use
of all that which is or may be said of Christ his being made righteousness to
us, in his Death, Resurrection, etc. as to quicken and strengthen it self in
such acts of mere Adherence, until Assurance it self comes, for whose use
and entertainment all such truths lie more fair and directly to be received by
it. They all serve as a fore-right wind to assurance of faith, to fill the sails
thereof, and carry it on with a more full and constant gale, (as the word used
by the Apostle for Assurance imports) whereas to the faith of a poor
recumbent, they serve but as a halfe-side-wind, unto which yet, through skill,
the sails of such a faith may be so turned and applied toward it, as to carry
a soul on with much ease and quietness unto Christ, the desired Haven; It
notwithstanding waiting all that while, for a more fair and full gale of
assurances in the end.

Now to help or instruct believers in that latter, namely the use of such a
skill, is not so directly the drift of this Treatise, I having reserved that
part (if God assist me and give leisure, and this find acceptance) unto another
about the acts of justifying Faith, wherein this art now mentioned is to be the
maine scope. That which I have here endeavored, is, to set forth to all sorts
of believers (whether they have assurance or not) Christ as he is the Object of
our faith as justifying, and as the cause of justification to us; and so I send
forth this as a premise and preparatory to that other. And to that purpose I
have run over some few Articles of our Faith or Creed, as I found them put
together in one bundle by the great Apostle, namely Christ, in his Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, Sitting at Gods right hand, and Intercession, and have
handled these no further, then as in all these he is made Justification unto
us, therein having punctually kept unto the Apostles scope. By all which you may
(in the mean time) see, what abundant provision God has laid up in Christ (in
the point of Justification) for all sorts of believers to live upon: Every
thing in Christ, whatsoever he was, or whatsoever he did, with a joint voice
speaking justification unto us. You may see also that God has in Christ
justified us over and over; and thereby come to discern what little reason you
have to suffer your hearts to be carried aside to other comforters, and so be
spoiled and bereft of these more immediately prepared, and laid up for us in
Christ himself. To have handled all those considerations, which his obedience
unto death affords unto the justification of a believer, and his comfort
therein, in this small tractate, would have made that part too disproportioned
to the rest: it alone deserves, and will require a distinct Tract, which
therefore I have cast into another method; and so in this Treatise have touched
only upon what may for the present be sufficient to furnish that part, to keep
company with its fellows. Only when I had thus presented Christ along from his
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, unto his Sitting in Heaven, and there
performing that great part of his Priesthood, the work of Intercession, I
judged it both homogeneall to all these, and conducing to the greater
encouragement of believers in the exercise of their faith, to subjoyne that
other Treatise, How Christ's Heart now he is in Heaven stands affected to us
sinners here below. And a better token, (take the Arument it self, if I could
have fully represented it) how to present unto his Spouse I know not, then a
true character of her Husbands heart now he is in glory: And (but for methods
sake) I would have placed it first, it being more suited to vulgar capacities,
whose benefit I aim at. Now in that discourse I confess I have not aimed to
keep so strictly unto the matter of justification only, as in the other I have
done; But have more generally discussed it, and shown how his heart stands
toward us, under all sorts of infirmities whatsoever, either of Sin or misery,
yet so as it will serve for the matter of justification also. The Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, grant us according to the riches of his glory, that Christ
may dwell in our hearts by faith, and that we may know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge. Amen.

THO. GOODWIN.

THE TABLE: OR, Series of all the Materials in this TREATISE.
SECT. I.
A general Introduction to the whole: Christ the Object of Justifying Faith.
CHAP. I.
The scope of the words of the Text: That they were Christ's originally. Christ
the highest example of believing. Encouragements to our faith from thence. Page
1 Christ an example of Faith, explained by two things. 2 1. He had a faith for
the justification of himself. 3 2. A faith for the justifying of us. 4 Use. To
draw us on to faith, and encourage us therein. 5 Especially against the
greatness of sins. 6
CHAP. II.
The scope and argument of this whole Discourse. 1. A Direction unto Christ, as
the Object of faith. 2. Encouragements to Believers in their faith, from these
particulars in the Text. 9
Christ's
1. Death. 2. Resurrection. 3. Being at Gods right hand. 4. Intercession.
CHAP. III.
DIRECTIONS to Christ as the object of Faith. How in a threefold
consideration, Christ is the Object of Justifying faith. 12 1. As in joint
commission with God the Father. Faith is to eye both God and Christ in seeking
Justification. 12 Yet God the ultimate object of it. ibid. Yet Christ under the
New Testament the more immediate Object. 13 2. Christ the object of faith in
opposition to all things in our selves. 15 As 1. To Humiliation. We are not to
rest therein. ibid. 2. To Duties and Graces. We are not to rest in them. 16 3.
Christ's Person is the object of Faith, in distinction from the Promises. ibid.
How the Promises are the Object of Faith, and how Christ in the Promises. 18
Three sorts of promises: and how Christ's person is the object of faith in
applying them all. 20
SECT. II.
Christ in his DEATH the Object and support of Faith for Justification.
Chap. I.
How not Christ's Person simply, but Christ as Dying is the object of faith as
Justifying. 22 Explained,
1. By two Directions, 1. That in seeking forgiveness, Christ as dying, Christ
as crucified is to be eyed by faith. 23 How not Christ's Person singly
considered in the excellencies thereof; but as dying is the object of
justifying faith as such. 24
Chap. II
2. Direct. That faith is principally to look unto the end and intent of God
and Christ in his sufferings; namely, that sinners might have forgiveness. 28
Without this, the meditation of the story of Christ's Passion is unprofitable.
ibid.
Cap. III
2. By showing the ENCOURAGEMENTS or matter of triumph that Christ's death
affords unto faith in point of justification. 34 The fullness of Christ's
satisfaction in his DEATH. 35 How Christ's satisfaction may be opposed to the
guilt of any sins whatever. 36 1. Against the heinousness of sin (in the
general.) 37 2. Against any aggravation of particular sins: As ibid. 1.
Against the greatness of the act of any particular sin. 38 2. Against the
corruption or of the heart in sinning. ibid. 3. Against delight and greediness
in sinning. ibid. 4. Against deliberatenesse in sinning. 39 5. Against
presumption in sinning. ibid. 6. Against the aggravating circumstances of Time,
Place, Persons, etc. ibid. The conclusion of this Section. 40
SECT. III.
Christ in his RESURRECTION the object and support of faith in point of
Justification.
CHAP. I.
Two general Heads propounded: That Christ's Is an EVIDENCE of Has an
INFLUENCE into Justification. Resurrection 42 1. An Evidence. Christ's
Resurrection a a visible sign that God is satisfied by his death. 44 2. Has
an Influence. Though the matter of our justification be the price of Christ's
Death, yet the act of pronouncing us righteous depends on Christ's Resurrection.
ibid.
CHAP. II.
A digression. Wherein for the explanation of both these, is shown how Christ
sustained a double relation, 46 1. Of a Surety for us. 2. Of a Common person in
our stead. 47 The difference of these two; and the usefulness of these two
considerations for the explaining what follows throughout this Discourse. 48,
49
Chap. 3.
( The first Head.) The EVIDENCE of Justification which Christ's Resurrection
affords to Faith explained by two things. 1. How Christ was made a Surety for
us. 2. How his Resurrection as he was a Surety holds forth this evidence. 50
sect. 1. How Christ became a Surety for Debt, Punishment. ibid. The Covenant of
Grace made with Christ alone as a Surety for us. 52 Whereby God requires
payment of Christ first. 53
sect. 2. How the consideration of this becomes an evidence to Faith through
Christ's Resurrection. 54 The Resurrection an evidence, 1. That the debt is
paid. ibid. 2. That God will never claim it from the sinner. 55

Chap. 4.
( The second Head) The INFLVENCE that Christ's Resurrection has into our
Justification. The Demonstration of this has two branches. 1. Bran. The Christ
was a Common Person representing us in all that he did, did suffered (Handled
at large.) but more especially in his Resurrection. 56 This is proved, 1. In
general, By a Parallel with Adam, Christ's Type herein. 57 2. Particularly,
Adam and Christ were common Persons. 1. In their Qualification and estates. 58
2. In what they did, and in what befell them. 59 Christ a common Person in his
Death, we dying in him, as in Adam his Condemnation, we were condemned in. 60
That Christ was more especially a Common Person in his Resurrection, we being
considered as rising in him. 64



Chap. 5.
The second Branch. How Christ's representing us as a Common Person in his
Resurrection, has an Influence into our Justification, made forth by two
things. 66 1. That Christ himself was justified from our sin at his
Resurrection, made forth by three things. ibid. 1. There was a solemn Act
passed from God toward Christ, of justifying him from our sins. 67 2. There
was some special time or season wherein this was done. 68 3. That this was
first past upon him at his Resurrection. 69
2. That all Believers were then justified by God in this Justification of
Christ as a Common Person representing them. 72 Proved. 1. From the Common and
like analogy this holds with the former instances of our dying in his death,
etc. ibid. All things which God does to us were first done to Christ for us.
ibid. 2. From the equity of that Law that in Adams condemnation we were
condemned. 74
Chap. 6.
How our Faith may from hence raise matter of Triumph for its justification.
Together with an explanation how we are justified by Faith, although justified
in Christ at his Resurrection. 76
Chap. 7.
How all this, both our justification at Christ's Resurrection, and the support
of our faith there from, are sealed up to us in Baptism. The Conclusion. How
faith may make use of Christ's Resurrection in its going to God for pardon of
sin. 82


SECT. IV.
Faith supported by Christ's being at Gods Right hand.
Chap. 1. A connection of this third Head with the two former. Two things
involved in it: 1. Christ's Ascension: 2. Christ's power and authority in Heaven.
87
Chap. 2. Showing 1. What EVIDENCE for our Justification, 1. Christ's ASCENSION
into Heaven affords unto our faith, upon that first forementioned
consideration of his being a SVRETY for us. 91 And this, 1. By considering what
was the last action he did, when he was to ascend, namely, blessing his
Disciples. ibid. For in blessing them, he blessed all Believers. 92 2. From the
very act of ascending 93 3. From the first entertainment that God gave Christ
when he made his entry into heaven. 97
Chap. 3. 2. What EVIDENCE Christ's SITTING AT GODS RIGHT HAND (he having been
our Surety,) affords to our faith for Justification. 99 In showing, 1. That
CHRIST had completely performed all the work that was to be done by him for
our justification. 100 2. That God accepted his satisfaction, and was
infinitely well pleased with it. 101
Chap. 4. Demonstrating 2. What INFLVENCE, 1. Christ's ASCENSION has into a
believers noncondemnation upon that second premised consideration, of Christ's
being a Common Person for us. 102 By considering two things, 1. The great end
of his Ascending, and entering into Heaven, that it was to prepare a place for
us, and to bring us thither. 103 2. That he entered into Heaven, and took
possession of it in our very names and stead. 104 So that, we may by Faith
behold our selves as in Heaven already. 105
Chap. 5. Demonstrating 2. What INFLVENCE Christ's SITTING AT GODS RIGHT HAND
has into our justification, upon that second consideration of his being a
Common Person. 106 And this by considering, 1. The prerogatives imported in
that his sitting at Gods right hand. As, 1. Sovereignty of power, all things
being subdued to him. 107 2. Sovereignty of Judgment, all judgment and
authority being committed to him. 109. 2. That these Prerogatives mentioned are
his, as he is considered an Head, and so sits representing us, and therefore
all his elect shall one day come up to him. 111 In what sense we are said to
sit with him: and in what sense it is Christ's privilege alone to sit at Gods
right hand. 112 The Triumph of Faith from this. ibid.

SECT. V.
The Triumph of Faith from Christ's INTERCESSION.
Chap. 1. A connection of this with the former. And how this adds a further
support to faith. Two things propounded to be handled out of the Text: 1. The
concurrency of Influence that Christ's In tercession has into our Salvation: 2,
The Security that Faith may have therefrom, for our Justification. 114
Chap. 2. The first Head: The concurrencie of influence Intercession has into
our salvation, explained by two things: 1. Intercession one part of Christ's
Priesthood, and the most excellent part of it. 116 Two parts of Christ's office
of Priesthood, (as there was of the Highpriests office under the Old Law) 1.
To offer up himself, 2. To intercede. 117 Without Intercession Christ had not
been a perfect High Priest. 119 His Oblation would otherwise have been
ineffectuall. 124
Chap. 3. 2. The special peculiar influence that Intercession has into our
Salvation and Justification; And the Reasons why God appointed it to be added
unto all the former. 125 Which are of three sorts 126 1. Respecting God. 1. In
general: God will be dealt with like himself. ibid. 2. Particularly: 1. In
that it is for the glory of his free grace. 127 Which looks to be entreated.
128 2. In that Gods justice stood upon such a respect to be performed to it. 130

2. Respecting us. Intercession being requisite to, and the best way to effect
our salvation. ibid. This demonstrated, 1. In general: God would have us saved
all manner of ways. 131 And the application of Redemption unto us is from
Christ's Intercession. ibid. 2. More particularly. Our justification depends
upon it: as 1. The first Act of our conversion and justification depends on it.
133 2. The continuance of our justification depends on it. 134 3. A full
security thereby given that we shall be justified for ever. And this, 1.
Against sins past. 135 2. Against our being condemned by new sins. 137
Intercession principally intended for sins after conversion. 138


3. Respecting Christ. Intercession ordained, 1. That none of Christ's offices
should lie vacant. 139 2. That Christ might have a continual hand in every
work of our salvation, unto the last. 140


Chap. 4. The second Head. The great security that our faith may have for our
Justification, from Christ's interceding for us, Showed 1. By way of EVIDENCE,
And this by two things. 142 1. The end of Intercession is actually and
completely to save; so as if Christ did not actually and completely save those
that believe in him through his Intercession, he were not a perfect Priest. 143
2. Christ's honor as a Surety, is deeply engaged by his Intercession to save
us. 147 Christ a Surety in his Intercession, as well as in his death. ibid. 2.
The difference between these two Surety-ships. 148
Chap. 5. By that powerful INFLVENCE into our Salvation, and prevalencie which
Christ's Intercession has with God for us. Demonstrated, 1. From the greatness
of the person who Intercedes, and his greatness with God. 151 And this shown
by two things. 1. His neerenesse of Alliance, he being Gods natural Son.
153 2. His filial obedience, he being Gods Obedient Son. 159 Two things in
Christ's Obedience, which make his Intercession prevalent. 161


Chap. 6. 2. From the righteousness of the cause he pleades, and that in
justice. And how forcible the cry of his blood is, especially himself
appearing to intercede with it. 163 Explicated by two things. 1. How an
Intercession, and appeal to justice, is attributed to Christ's blood. 164
Illustrated by the cry of Abels blood, and how far this exceeds that. 166 In
what sense Christ's blood is said to cry. 168 2. Christ himself being alive,
and following the cry of his blood, how prevalent this must needs be. ibid.

Chap. 7. 3. From the absoluteness of his power, he being able to do what
ever he asks of his Father. 172 Though Christ as he is a King, can command
all things, yet to honor his Father, he intercedes for what himself commands.
173 An Inference from the prevalencie of our Prayers, how forcible Christ's
Prayers much more must needs be. 176
Chap. 8. 4. From the graciousnesse of the Person with whom Christ Intercedes.
For 1. Christ Intercedes with his Father. 181
Chap. 9. 2. He intercedes with him who is Our Father also. 186 Gods heart is
as much inclined to hear Christ for us. as Christ's heart is tointercede. ibid.
The summing up of all. 192
Chap. 10 The Use, containing some encouragements unto weak believers, from
Christ's Intercession; out of Heb. 7. 25.



ERRATA.
PAge 37. line 30. for there, read thee. p. 47. l. 1. for who is, read As.
line 7. for thereby the Influence, read thereby both the Evidence and the
Influence. p. 61. l. 8 shook hands, add, with the Testatour. p. 59. l. 6.
Adam who came after, read, Adam who came before. p. 62. l. 19. we conclude,
add, or argue by reason. p. 69. l. 20. for that this God-man was justified,
read, that God being thus made man is said to have been justified. p. 73. l.
3. blot out in us, or. p. 77. l. 31. unto which he has, read, unto which
faith, or upon which believing he has. p. 94. l. 11. for whereof this was the
intended type, read, which was the intended type of Christ's triumph at his
Ascension. p. 120. l. 14. for should share, read should yet share. p. 122. l.
24. for before then Aaron, read, by far then Aaron. p. 125. l. 8. for all the
owed, read, we owed. p. 147. l. 5. read perfect work. ibid. l. 20. read, the
reason is, because that. p. 149. l. 2. each, read either. p. 158. as for
which, read as that which. p. 167. l. 20. besprinkled, read sprinkled. p. 196.
l. 6. of, read to. p. 200. l. 25. competitours, read competitioners.

SECT. I.
SHEVVING BY WAY of INTRODUCTION, that CHRIST is the EXAMPLE, and OBJECT of
Justifying Faith.
ROMANS 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed; yea rather,
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us.
CHAP. I.
The scope of these words: That they were Christ's originally. Christ the
highest example of Believing. Encouragements to our faith from thence.
THese words are a triumphing challenge, uttered by the Apostle in the name of
all the [ Elect;] for so he begins it in the 33. ver. foregoing, Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods [Elect?] It is God that justifies, And then
follow these words, Who shall condemn? (namely, Gods elect,) It is Christ that
dyed, etc. This challenge we find first published by Jesus Christ himself,
our only Champion, Esaias 50. (a Chapter made of, and for Christ) ver. 8. He is
near that justifies me, who will contend with me? They were Christ's words
there, and spoken of Gods justifying him; and these are every Believers words
here, intended of Gods justifying them. Christ is brought in there uttering
them as standing at the High Priests Tribunal, when they spat upon him, and
buffeted him, as ver. 4, 5. when he was condemned by Pilate, then he exercised
this faith on God his Father, He is near that justifies me. And as in that his
condemnation he stood in our stead, so in this his hope of his Justification he
speaks in our stead also; and as representing us in both. And upon this the
Apostle here pronounces, in like words, of all the Elect, It is God that
justifies, who shall accuse? Christ was condemned, yea, has dyed, who
therefore shall condemn? Lo here the communion we have with Christ in his
death and condemnation, yea, in his very faith: if he trusted in God, so may
we, and shall as certainly be delivered. Observe we first from hence by way of
premise to all that follows,

That Christ lived by faith as well as we do. Obser.


In the first of John ver. 16. Christ an example of believing.
we are said to receive of his fullness grace for grace: that is, Grace
answerable and like unto his; and so (among others) Faith.

For Explication hereof. Exlplained.


First, 1. He had a faith for the justification of himself.
in some sense he had a faith for Justification like unto ours, though not a
Justification through faith, as we have. He went not, indeed, out of himself,
to rely to another for righteousness, for he had enough of his own (he being
The Lord our righteousness:) yet he believes on God to justify him, and had
recourse to God for justification: He is near (says he) that justifies me. If
he had stood in his own person merely, and upon his own bottom only, there
had been no occasion for such a speech; and yet consider him as he stood in
our stead, there was: for what need of such a Justification, if he had not been
some way near a condemnation? He therefore must be supposed to stand here (in
Esaias) at Gods Tribunal, as well as at Pilates, with all our sins upon him: And
so the same Prophet tells us Chapter 53. 6. God made the iniquities of us to meet
on him. He was now made sin, and a curse, and stood not in danger of Pilates
condemnation only, but of Gods too, unless he satisfied him for all those
sins. And when the wrath of God for sin came thus in upon him, his faith was
put to it, to trust and wait on him for his Justification, for to take off all
those sins, together with his wrath from off him, and to acknowledge himself
satisfied, and him acquitted. Therefore in the 22. Ps. (which was made for Christ
when hanging on the Cross, and speaks how his heart was taken up that while)
he is brought in as putting forth such a faith as here we speak of, when he
called God his God, [ My God my God] then, whe^as to his sense, he had forsaken
him, [why have thou forsaken me?] Yea he helped his faith with the faith of the
Forefathers, whom upon their trust in him God had delivered: Our Fathers,
(says he) trusted in thee; they trusted and thou did deliver them: Yea, at
the 5. v. we find him laying himself at Gods feet, lower then ever any man
did, [ I am a worme] (says he) (which every man treads on, and counts it a
matter of nothing for to kill) [ and no man] as it follows; and all this,
because he bare our sins. Now his deliverance and justification from all these,
to be given him at his resurrection, was the matter, the business he thus
trusted in God for, even that he should rise again, and be acquitted from them.
So Psalm. 16. (a Psalm made also for Christ, when to suffer, and to lie in the
grave) ver. 8, 9, 10. The Lord is at my right hand, I shall not be moved:
Therefore my heart is glad, my flesh also rests in hope, Or (as in the
Original) [ dwells in confident surenesse] thou will not leave [my soule] in
hell, that is under the load of these sins, and thy wrath laid on me for them)
neither will thou suffer thy holy One (in my body) to see corruption. This is
in substance all one with what is here said in this one word, He is near that
[justifies] me, for Christ's Resurrection was a Justification of him, as I shall
hereafter show.

Neither 2. 2. A faith for the justifying of us.
did he exercise faith for himself only, but for us also; and that more then
any of us is put to it, to exercise for himself: for he in dying, and emptying
himself, trusted God with the merit of all his sufferings aforehand, there
being many thousands of souls to be saved thereby a long while after, even to
the end of the world. He dyed and betrusted all that stock into his Fathers
hands, to give it out in Grace and Glory, as those for whom he dyed should have
need. And this is a greater trust (considering the infinite number of his
elect, as then yet to come) then any man has occasion to put forth for
himself alone. God trusted Christ before he came into the world, and saved
many millions of the Jews upon his bare word: And then Christ, at his death,
trusts God again as much, both for the salvation of Jews and Gentiles, that
were to believe after his death. In Heb. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. it is made an
Argument, that Christ was a man like us, because he was put to live by faith
like as we are (which the angels do not) and to this end, the Apostle brings
in these words prophesied of him, as spoken by him of himself, [ I will put my
trust in him] as one proof that he was a man like unto us. Now for what was it
that he trusted God? By the Context it appears to be this, that he should be
the salvation of his brethren and children, and that he should have a seed and
a generation to serve him, and raise up a Church to God to praise him in. For
this is made his confidence and the issue of his sufferings in that forecited
Psalm. 22. from ver. 22. to the end.

How should the consideration of these things both draw us on to faith, Use. To
draw on to faith, and encourage us therein.
and encourage us therein, and raise up our hearts above all doubtings and
withdrawings of spirit in believing! For in this example of Christ we have the
highest instance of believing that ever was. He trusted God (as we have seen)
for himself, and for many thousands besides, even for all his elect; and have
not thou the heart to trust him for one poor soul? Yea Christ thus trusted
God, upon his single Bond; but we for our assurance, have both Christ and God
bound to us, even God with his surety, Christ, (for he is Gods Surety as well
as ours.) A double Bond from two such Persons, whom would it not secure? If God
the Father and God the Son thus mutually trusted one another for our salvation,
whom would it not induce to trust them both, for ones own salvation, when as
otherwise they must be damned that will not? 1. This example of Christ may
teach and incite us to beleve: For did Christ lay down all his glory, and
empty himself, and leave himself worth nothing, but made a Deed of
Surrendering all he had into his Fathers hands, and this in a pure trust that
God would justify many by him, (as it is in Esaias 53. and shall not we lay
down all we have, and part with what ever is dear unto us before hand, with
the like submission, in a dependence and hope of being our selves justified by
him? Especially against the greatness of sins.
And withal 2. it may encourage us to believe: Have thou the guilt of
innumerable transgressions coming in, and discouraging thee from trusting in
him? Consider but what Christ had, (though not of his own:) Christ was made
(as Luther boldly (in this sense that we speak of him) speaks) the greatest
sinner that ever was; that is, by imputation: for the sins of all Gods chosen
met in him: And yet he trusted God to be justified from them all, and to be
raised up from under the wrath due of them. Alas, thou art but one poor
sinner, and thy faith has but a light and small load laid upon it, namely, thy
own sins, which to this sum he undertook for, are but as an unite to an
infinite number: God laid upon him the iniquities of us all. Christ trusted God
for his own Acquitance from the sins of all the world, and when that was give^
him, he yet again further trusted him, to acquit the world for his satisfaction
sake.

But thou will say, Christ was Christ, one personally united to God, and so
knew that he could satisfy him; but I am a sinful man. Well, but if thou
beleevest, and so art one of those who are one with Christ, then Christ
speaking these words in the name both of himself and of his Elect, (as has
been showed) thou have the very same ground to utter them that he had, and all
that encouraged him, my embolden thee, for he stood in thy stead. It was only
thine, and others sins that put him in any danger of condemnation; and thou
see what his confidence beforehand was, that God would justify him from
them all: And if he had left any of them unsatisfied for, he had not been
justified; and withal in performing his own part undertaken by him, he
performed thine also, and so in his being justified, thou were justified also:
His confidence then, may therefore be thine now: only his was in and from
himself, but thine must be on him: yet so, as by reason of thy communion with
him in his both condemnation and justification, thou may take and turn all
that emboldned him to this his trust and confidence, to embolden thee also in
thine, as truly as he did for himself. Yea in this thou have now a farther
prop and encouragement to thy faith, then he then had; for now (when thou art
to believe) Christ has fully performed the satisfaction he undertook; and we
now see Jesus crucified, acquitted, yea crowned with glory and honor, as the
Apostle speaks: But he, when he took up this triumph, was (as Esaias here
foretold and prophesied it of him) but as then entering upon that work. The
Prophet seeing the day of his arraignment and Agony, utters these words as
his; showing what thoughts should then possess his heart, when Pilate and the
Jews should condemn him, and our sins come in upon him, God is near that
justifies me, who therefore shall contend with me? But now this comes to be
added to our challenge here, that Christ HAS dyed, and is also risen again;
that he WAS condemned and justified, who therefore shall condemn? may we say,
and say much more.

But thou will yet say, He knew himself to be the Son of God, but so do not
I. Well, do thou but cast thy self upon him, to be adopted and justified by
him, with a giving up thy soul to his saving thee his own way, and (though
thou know it not) the thing is done. And as for that (so great and usual)
discouragement unto poor souls from doing this, namely, the greatness and
multitudes of sins, this very example of his faith, and the consideration of
it, may alone take off, and help to remove it, more then any I have ever met
with: for He in bearing the sins of his Elect, did bear as great and
infinitely more sins then thine, yea, all sorts of sins what ever, for some one
of his elect or other, (for he said upon it, that All (that is, all sorts of)
sins shall be forgiven unto men, and therefore were first born by him for them)
and yet you see how confident aforehand he was, and is now clearly justified
from them all: And by virtue of his being justified from all sorts of sins,
shall all sorts of sinners in and through him be justified also: and therefore
why may not thou hope to be from thine? certainly for this very reason our
sins simply and alone considered can be supposed no hinderance.

Thus we have met with one great and general encouragement at the very Portall
of this Text, which comes forth to invite us ere we are entered into it, and
which will await upon us throughout all that shall be said, and have an
influence into our faith, and help to direct it in all that follows.

CHAP. II.
The Scope and Argument of this Discourse, is either Direction to Christ as the
Object of Faith, or Encouragement to Believers, from all those particulars in
Christ mentioned in the Text.
FAith and the supports of it, or rather Christ, as by his Death and
Resurrection, etc. he is the foundation of Faith, and the cause of our
Justification, is the main subject of these words: All which therefore to
handle more largely, is the intended subject of this Discourse. And therefore
as we have seen Christ's faith for us, so now let us see what our faith is to
be toward him: Only take this along with you, for a right bounding of all
that follows; That the Faith (the object and support of which I would discourse
of) is only, Faith as justifying; for Justification was properly here the
matter of Christ's faith for us, and is also answerably here held forth by Paul,
as that faith which Believers are to have on him. Now faith is called
justifying, only as it has Justification for its object, and as it goes out
to Christ for Justification: So that all that shall be spoken must be confined
to this alone, as the intendment of the Text. And concerning this, the Text
does two things: Two things in the Text.


1. It holds forth Christ the object of it, [ Who shall condemn? [Christ] has
dyed, 1. Christ the object of faith for justification.
etc.] And he being the sole subject of those four particulars that follow, as
encouragements to faith, must needs be therefore the object here set forth unto
our faith.

2. In Christ we have here all those four made things matter of triumph to
Believers, 2. His Death, Resurrection, etc. matter of triumph unto faith.
to assure them that they shall not be condemned, but justified. In that Christ
1. Dyed. 2. Rose again. 3. Is at Gods right hand. 4. Intercedes.



So that (for the general) I am to do two things: and therein I shall fulfill
the Texts scope.

1. Direct your faith to Christ, as to its right object.

2. To encourage your faith, from these several actions of Christ for us, and
show how they all contain matter of triumph for faith in them, and also teach
your faith how to triumph from each of them: and herein I am to keep close to
the argument propounded, namely, faith as justifying; or to shewhow faith,
seeking justification in Christ, may be exceedingly raised from each of these
particulars, and supported by them, as by so many pillars of it. So as although
Christ's Death, Resurrection, etc. may fitly serve to encourage our faith in
many other acts it uses to put forth, (as in point of Sanctification to be had
from Christ, into which his Death and Resurrection have an influence) yet here
we are limited to the matter of Justification only, [ It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn, seeing Christ has dyed?] and herein to show how
his Death, Resurrection, etc. may, and do afford matter of comfort and
triumphing in point of Justification, from all these. And thus you have the
sum of these words, and of my scope in this ensuing Treatise.

CHAP. III.
First, Directions to Christ as the object of faith. How in a threefold
consideration Christ is the object of justifying faith.
BUt ere I come to encourage your faith from these, let me first direct and
point your faith aright to its proper and genuine object, Christ the object of
faith three ways.
Christ. I shall do it briefly, and only so far as it may be an Introduction
to the Encouragements from these four particulars, the things mainly intended
by me.

1. Christ is the object of our faith, in joint commission with God the Father.
2. Christ is the object of faith, in opposition to our own Humiliation, or
Graces, or Duties. 3. Christ is the object of faith, in a distinction from the
Promises.
First, 1. As in joint commission with God the Father.
Christ is the object of faith, in joint commission with God the Father. So
here, It is God that justifies, and Christ that dyed: They are both of them set
forth as the foundation of a Believers confidence. So elsewhere, Faith is
called a believing on him (namely, God) that justifies the ungodly, Romans 4. 5.
and a believing on Christ, Acts 6. Wherefore faith is to have an eye unto both,
Faith to eye both God and Christ in seeking justification.
for both do alike contribute unto the justification of a sinner. It is Christ
that paid the price, that performed the righteousness by which we are
justified; and it is God that accepts of it, and imputes it unto us: Therefore
Justification is ascribed unto both. And this we have, Romans 3. 24. where it is
attributed unto them both together, [ Being justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ:] Where we see, that Gods free
grace, and Christ's righteousness, do concur to our justification. Christ paid
as full a price, as if there were no grace shown in justifying of us; (for
mercy bated Christ nothing) and yet that it should be accepted for us, is as
free grace, and as great, as if Christ had paid never a farthing. Now as both
these meet to justify us, so faith in justification is to look at both these:
So it follows in the next ver. of that 3. Yet God the ultimate object.
Romans 25. [ Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation [through faith] in his
blood.] And though it be true, that God justifying is the ultimate object of
our faith, (for Christ leads us by the hand (as the word is, Ephesians. 2. 18) unto
God: and 1 Pet. 1. 21. we are said by Christ to believe on God who raised him,
that so our faith and hope might be on God) Christ, under the New Testament,
the more immediate object.
yet so, as under the New Testament, Christ is made the more immediate object
of faith; for God dwelling in our nature is made more familiar to our faith
then the Person of the Father is, who is merely God. Under the Old Testament,
when Christ was but in the Promise, and not as then come in the flesh, then
indeed their faith had a more usual recourse unto God, who had promised the
Messiah, of whom they then had not so distinct (but only confused) thoughts;
though this they knew, that God accepted, and saved them through the Messiah:
But now under the New Testament, because Christ, as Mediator, exists not only
in a promise of Gods, but is come, and manifest in the flesh, and is set forth
by God, (as the Apostles phrase is) to tranfact all our businesses for us
between God and us. Hence the more usual and immediate address of our faith
is to be made unto Christ; who as he is distinctly set forth in the New
Testament, so he is as distinctly to be apprehended by the faith of believers.
Ye believe in God, (says Christ to his Disciples, whose faith and opinion of
the Messiah was till Christ's Resurrection, of the same elevation with that of
the Old-Testament-beleevers) believe also in me: Make Me the object of your
trust for Salvation, as well as the Father. And therefore when Faith and
Repentance come more narrowly to be distinguished by their more immediate
objects, it is Repentance toward God, but Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ,
Act. 20. 21. not but that God and Christ are the objects of both, but that
Christ is more immediately the object of Faith, and God of Repentance: So that
we believe in God through believing in Christ first, and turn to Christ by
turning to God first. And this is there spoken, when they are made the sum of
Christian doctrine, and of the Apostles preaching: And therefore the faith of
some being much enlarged to the mercies of God and his free grace, and but in
way of supposition unto Christ, or in a taking for granted, that all mercies
are communicated in and through Christ, yet so, as their thoughts work not so
much upon, nor are taken up about Christ; although this may be true faith under
the New Testament, in that God and his free grace is the joint object of faith,
together with Christ and his righteousness, and the one cannot be without the
other, and God oft-times does more eminently pitch the stream of a man's
thoughts in one channel rather then in another, and so may direct the course of
a man's thoughts toward his free grace, when the stream runs less toward
Christ, yet it is not such a faith as becomes the times of the Gospel; it is of
an Old-Testamentstraine and Genius: whereas our faith now, should in the more
direct and immediate exercises of it, be pitched upon Jesus Christ, that through
him (first apprehended) our faith might be in God, (as the ultimate object of
it) as the Apostle speaks. And so much for the first.

The second is, 2. Christ the object of faith in opposition to all in our
selves.
that Christ is to be the object of our faith, in opposition to our own
Humiliation, or Graces, or Duties.

1. We are not to trust, 1. Not to rest in humiliation.
nor rest in Humiliation, as many do, who quiet their consciences from this,
that they have been troubled. That Promise, [ Come to me you that are weary and
heavy laden, and you shall find rest] has been much mistaken; for many have
understood it, as if Christ had spoken peace and rest simply unto that
condition, without any more ado; and so have applied it unto themselves, as
giving them an interest in Christ: Whereas it is only an invitement of such
(because they are most apt to be discouraged) to come unto Christ, as in whom
alone their rest is to be found. If therefore men will set down their rest in
being weary and heavy laden, and not come to Christ for it, they sit down
besides Christ, and will lie down in sorrow. This is to make John (who only
prepared the way for Christ) to be the Messiah indeed, (as many of the Jews
thought) that is, to think the eminent work of John's Ministry (which was to
humble, and so prepare men for Christ) to be their attaining Christ himself.
But if you be weary, you may have rest indeed, but you must come to Christ
first: For as, if Christ had dyed only, and not arose, we had been still in
our sins, (as it is 1 Cor. 15. 17.) so though we dye by sin, as stain by it,
(as Paul was, ( Romans 7. 11, 12, 13.) in his humiliation) yet if we attain not
to the resurrection of faith, (so the work of faith is expressed, Col. 3. 12,
13.) we still remain in our sins.

Secondly, 2. Not in Duties or Graces.
we are not to rest in graces or duties; they all cannot satisfy our own
consciences, much less Gods Justice. If Righteousness could have come by
these, then Christ had dyed in vain, as Gal. 2. ult. What a dishonor were it
to Christ, that they should share any of the glory of his righteousness? were
any of your Duties crucified for you? Graces and Duties are the Daughters of
Faith, the Offspring of Christ; and they may in time of need indeed nourish
their mother, but not at first beget her.

In the third place, 3. Christ's person the object of faith, in a distinction
from the Promises.
Christ's Person, and not barely the Promises of forgiveness is to be the
object of faith. There are many poor souls humbled for sin, and taken off
from their own bottom, who, like Noah's Dove, fly over all the Word of God, to
spy out what they may set their foot upon, and eying therein many free and
gracious Promises, holding forth forgiveness of sins, and justification, they
immediately close with them, and rest on them alone, not seeking for, or
closing with Christ in those Promises: Which is a common error among people;
and is like as if Noah's Dove should have rested upon the outside of the Ark,
and not have come to Noah within the Ark; where though she might rest for a
while, yet could she not ride out all storms, but must needs have perished
there in the end. But we may observe, that the first Promise that was given,
was not a bare word simply promising forgiveness, or other benefits which God
would bestow; but it was a Promise of Christ's Person as overcomming Satan, and
purchasing those benefits, [ The Seed of the woman shall break the Serpents
head.] So when the Promise was renewed to Abraham, it was not a bare Promise of
blessedness and forgiveness, but of that Seed, that is, Christ, (as Gal. 3.
16.) in whom that blessedness was conveyed, [ In thy Seed shall all the
Nations of the earth of blessed.] So that Abraham's faith first closed with
Christ in the Promise, and therefore he is said to see Christ's day, and to
rejoice in embracing him: And so all the succeeding Fathers (that were
Believers) did, more or less, in their Types and Sacraments, as appears by 1
Cor. 10. 1, 2. And if they, then much more are we thus to look at Christ, unto
whom now he is now made extant, not in Promises only, but is really incarnate,
though now in heaven. Hence our Sacraments (which are the seals added to the
word of faith) do primarily exhibit Christ unto a Believer, and so (in him)
all other Promises (as of forgiveness, etc.) are ratified and confirmed by
them. Now there is the same reason of them, that there is of the Promises of
the Gospel, (for they preach the Gospel to the eye, as the Promise does to the
ear) and therefore as in them the soul is first to look at Christ, and
embrace him as tendered in them, and then, at the Promises tendered with him in
them, and not to take the Sacraments as bare seals of pardon and forgivenes: So
(in like manner) in receiving of, or having recourse to a Promise, (which is
the word of faith) we are first to seek out for Christ in it, as being the
foundation of it, and so to take hold of the Promise in him. Hence Faith is
still expressed by this its object, Christ, it being called Faith on Christ.
Thus Philip directs the Eunuch, Acts 6. How the Promises are the object of
faith. How Christ in the Promises.
31. Believe on the Lord Jesus. The Promise is but the casket, and Christ the
jewel in it; the Promise but the field, and Christ the Pearl hid in it, and
to be chiefly looked at. The Promises are the means by which you believe, not
the things on which you are to rest. And so, although you are to look at
forgiveness as held forth in the Promise, yet you are to believe on Christ in
that Promise, to obtain this forgiveness. So Act. 26. 18. it is said of
Believers by Christ himself, [ That they may obtain forgiveness of sins, by
faith which is on me.]

And to clear it farther, we must conceive, that the Promises of Forgiveness
are not as the Pardons of a Prince, which merely contain an expression of his
royal word for pardoning, so as we in seeking of it, do rest upon, and have
to do only with his word and seal which we have to show for it: but Gods Promises
of pardon are made in his Son, and are as if a Prince should offer to pardon a
Traitor upon marriage with his child, who^ in, and with that pardon he offers
in such a relation; so as all that would have pardon, must first seek out for
his child: and thus it is in the matter of believing. The reason of which is,
because Christ is the Grand Promise, in whom all the Promises are Yea and Amen,
2 Cor. 11. 29. and therefore he is called The Covenant, Esaias 49. 8. So that, as
it were folly for any man to think that he has an interest in an Heiresse
lands, because he has got the writings of her estate into his hands, (whereas
the interest in the lands goes with her person, and with the relation of
marriage to her; otherwise, without a title to her self, all the writings will
be fetched out of his hands again) so is it with all the Promises; they hang
all upon Christ, and without him there is no interest to be had in them: He
that has the Son, has life, John 1. 5, 12. because Life is by Gods
appointment only in him, as ver. 11. All the Promises are as Copyhold land,
which when you would interest your selves in, you enquire upon what Lord it
holds, and you take it up of him, as well as get the Evidences and Deeds for it
into your hands; the Lord if it will be acknowledged for such in passing his
right into your hands: Now this is the tenure of all the Promises; they all
hold on Christ, in whom they are Yea and Amen; and you must take them up of
him. Thus the Apostles preached forgiveness to men, Acts 13. 38. Be it known
that through this man is preached to you the forgiveness of sins. And as they
preached, so we are to believe, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15. 11. And
without this, to rest on the bare Promise, or to look to the benefit promised
without eying Christ, is not an Evangelical, but a Jewish faith, even such as
the Formalists among the Jews had, who without the Messiah closed with
Promises, and rested in Types to cleanse them, without looking unto Christ the
end of them, and as propounded to their faith, in them. This is to go to God
without a Mediator, and to make the Promises of the Gospel to be as the
Promises of the Law, Nehushtan, (as Hezekiah said of the Brazen Serpent) a
piece of brass, vain, and ineffectuall: like the waters of Bethesda, they
heal not, they cleanse not, till this Angel of the Covenant come down to your
faith in them: Therefore at a Sacrament, or when you meet with any Promise, get
Christ first down by faith, and then let your faith propound what it would
have, and you may have what you will of him.

There are three sorts of Promises, Three sorts of Promise, and how Christ's
Person is the object of faith in applying them all.
and in the applying of all these, it is Christ that your faith is to meet with.

1. There are absolute promises, made to no Conditions; as when Christ is said
to come to save sinners, etc. Now in these it is plain, that Christ is the
naked object of them: so that if you apply not him, you apply nothing, for the
only thing held forth in them is Christ.

2. There are Inviting Promises; as that before mentioned, [ Come to me you
that are weary] The promise is not to weariness, but to coming to Christ;
they are bidden Come to him, if they will have rest.

3. There are Assuring Promises; as those made to such and such qualifications
of sanctification, etc. But still what is it that is promised in them, which
the heart should only eye? It is Christ, in whom the soul rests and has
comfort in, and not in its grace; so that the sight of a man's grace is but a
back-doore to let faith in at, to converse with Christ, whom the soul loves.
Even as at the Sacrament, the elements of Bread and Wine are but outward signs
to bring Christ and the heart together, and then faith lets the outward
elements go, and closes, and treats immediately with Christ, unto whom these
let the soul in: So Grace is a sign inward, and whilst men make use of it
only as of a bare sign to let them in unto Christ, and their rejoicing is not
in it, but in Christ, their confidence being pitched upon him, and not upon
their grace; whilst men take this course, there is and will be no danger at all
in making such use of signs: and I see not, but that God might as well appoint
his own work of the new creation within, to be as a sign and help to
communion with Christ by faith, as he did those outward elements, the works of
his first creation; especially, seeing in nature, the effect is a sign of the
cause. Neither is it more derogatory to free grace, or to Christ's honor, for
God to make such effects, signs of our union with him, then it was to make
outward signs of his presence.

SECT. II.
CHRIST the object and support of faith for Justification, in his death.
ROMANS 8. 34. Who shall condemn? Christ has dyed.
CHAP. I.
How not Christ's Person simply, but Christ as dying is the object of Faith as
justifying.
TO come now to all those four particulars of or about Christ, as the object
of faith here mentioned; and to show both how Christ in each is the object of
faith as justifying; and what support or encouragement the faith of a Believer
may fetch from each of them in point of Justification, which is the Argument of
the maine Body of this Discourse.

First, Christ as dying is the object of justifying faith, [ Who shall
condemn? Christ has dyed.]

For the explanation of which, Explained, 1. By two Directions.
I will 1. Give a direction or two.

2. Show how an encouragement, or matter of triumph, may from hence be fetched.

1. 1. Direction.
The first Direction is this, That in seeking forgiveness, or justification in
the Promises, as Christ is to be principally in the eye of your faith, so it
must be Christ as crucified, Christ as dying, as here he is made. It was the
Serpent as lift up, and so looked at, that healed them. Now this direction I
give to prevent a mistake which souls that are about to believe, do often run
into: For when they hear that the person of Christ is the maine object of
faith, they thus conceive of it, that when one comes first to believe, he
should look only upon the personal excellencies of Grace and Glory which are
in Jesus Christ, which follow upon the Hypostaticall Union; and so have his
heart allured in unto Christ by them only, and close with him under those
apprehensions alone. But although it be true, that there is that radical
disposition in the faith of every Believer, which if it were drawn forth to
view Christ in his mere personal excellencies abstractively considered, would
close with Christ for them alone, as seeing such a beauty and suitableness in
them; yet the first view which an humbled soul always does, and is to take of
him, is of his being a Savior, made sin, and a curse, and obeying to the
death for sinners. He takes up Christ in his first sight of him, under the
likeness of sinful flesh, (for so the Gospel first represents him, though it
holds forth his personal excellencies also) and in that representation it is,
that he is made a fit object for a sinners faith to trust and rest upon, for
salvation, which in part distinguishes a sinners faith whilst here on earth,
toward Christ, from that vision or sight which Angels and the souls of men
have in heaven of him. Faith here views him not only as glorious at Gods right
hand, (though so also) but as crucified, as made sin, and a curse, and so rests
upon him for pardon; but in heaven we shall see him as he is, and be made like
unto him. Take Christ in his personal excellencies simply considered, and so
with them propounded as an Head to us, and he might have been a fit object for
Angels and men even without sin to have closed withal; and what an additon to
their happiness would they have thought it, to have him for their husband! but
yet, so considered, he should have been, and rather is, the object of love,
then of faith or affiance. It is therefore Christ that is thus excellent in his
person, yet farther considered, as clothed with his garments of blood, and the
qualifications of a Mediator and Reconciler; it is this that makes him so
desirable by sinners, and a fit object for their faith (which looks out for
justification) to prey and seize upon, though they take in the consideration of
all his other excellencies to allure their hearts to him, and confirm their
choice of him. Yea I say farther, that consider faith as justifying, that is,
in that act of it which justifies a sinner; and so, Christ taken only or
mainly in his Personal excellencies, cannot properly be called the object of
it: But the Formalis ratio, the proper respect or consideration that makes
Christ the object of faith as justifying, must necessarily be that in Christ,
which does indeed justify a sinner; which is, his obedience unto death. For
the act and object of every habit or faculty, are always suited, and similar
each to other; and therefore Christ justifying must needs be the object of
Faith justifying. It is true, that there is nothing in Christ with which some
answerable act of faith in us does not close; and from the differing
considerations under which faith looks at Christ, have those several acts of
faith various denominations: As, faith that is carried forth to Christ and his
personal excellencies, may be called uniting faith; and faith that goes forth
to Christ for strength of grace to subdue sin, may (answerably to its object)
be called sanctifying faith; and faith as it goes forth to Christ (as dying,
etc.) for justification, may be called justifying faith: For faith in that act
looks at what in Christ does justify a sinner; and therefore Christ considered
as dying, rising, etc. does in this respect become the most pleasing and
grateful object to a soul that is humbled; for this makes Christ suitable to
him as he is a sinner, under which consideration he reflects upon himself,
when he is first humbled. And therefore thus to represent Christ to Believers
under the Law, was the maine scope of all the Sacrifices and Types therein, All
things being purged with blood, and without blood there being no remission,
Heb. 9. Thus did the Apostles also in their Sermons. So Paul in his Epistle to
the Corinthians, seemed by the matter of his Sermon to have known nothing but
Christ, and him as [ crucified,] 1 Cor. 2. 2. as Christ above all, so Christ,
as crucified above all in Christ, as suiting their condition best, whom he
endeavored to draw on to faith on him. Thus in his Epistle to the Galatians,
he calls his preaching among them, the preaching of faith, Chap. 3. 2. And what
was the maine scope of it, but the picturing out (as the word is) of Christ
crucified before their eyes? ver. 1. so he preached him, and so they received
him, and so they began in the spirit, ver. 3. And thus also do the seals of
the Promises (the Sacraments) present Christ to a Believers eye; as they hold
forth Christ, (as was in the former direction observed) so Christ, as
crucified; their scope being to show forth his death till be come, 1 Cor. 11.
26. the Bread signifying Christ's body broken, in the sufferings of it; and the
cup signifying the sufferings of his soul, and the pouring of it forth unto
death. And hence likewise, as faith it self is called Faith on Christ, (as was
before observed) so it is called Faith on his blood, Romans 3. 24, 25. because
Christ as shedding his blood for the remission of sins, is the object of it:
So the words there are, [ Whom God has ordained to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins.]
And look how God has ordained and set forth Christ in the Promises, under that
picture of him does faith at first close with him. And one reason similar to
the former, may be grounded on the 24. ver. of that 3. to the Romans Being
justified freely by his grace, [through the redemption that is in Christ] And
as (I showed before, in the reason of the former direction, that) all Promises
hold of his Person, as being Heir of all the Promises; so the special Tenure
upon which forgiveness of sins does hold of him, is by purchase, and by the
redemption that is in him. So that, as the promise of forgiveness refers to
his person, so also to this redemption that is in him. Thus both in Ephesians. 1. and
Col. 1. [ In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins.] His person gives us title to all the promises, and his blood shows
the tenure they hold on; a purchase, and a full price, ((...), an adequate
price) 1 Timothy 2. 6. And as sin is the strength of the Law, and of the
threatenings thereof; so Christ's satisfaction is the strength of all the
Promises in the Gospel. In a word, an humbled soul is to have recourse to that
Christ who is now alive, and glorified in heaven, yet to him as once crucified
and made sin. He is to go to Christ now glorified, as the Person from whom
he is to receive forgiveness, etc. but withal, to him as crucified; as
through whom (considered in that condition he then was in) he is to receive all.

CHAP. II.
What in Christ's death, faith seeking justification, is especially to eye and
look at.
NOw then a second Direction for faith toward Christ as dying, end, Faith is
especially to look at Christ's end and mind in dying:
meaning, and intent of God and Christ in his sufferings, and not simply at the
Tragical story of his death and sufferings. It is the heart, and mind, and
intent of Christ in suffering, which faith chiefly eyeth, and which draws the
heart on to rest on Christ crucified. When a Believer sees that Christ's aim in
suffering for poor sinners, agrees and answers to the aim and desires of his
heart, and that that was the end of it that sinners might have forgiveness,
Namely, that sinners might have forgiveness.
and that Christ's heart was as full in it, to procure it, as the sinners heart
can be to desire it; this draws his heart in to Christ, to rest upon him: And
without this, Without this, the meditation of the story of his Passion,
unprofitable.
the contemplation and meditation of the story of his sufferings, and of the
greatness of them, will be altogether unprofitable. And yet, all (or the
chief) use which the Papists, and many carnal Protestants make of Christ's
sufferings, is to meditate upon, and set out to themselves the grievousnesse of
them, so to move their hearts to a relenting, and compassion to him, and
indignation against the Jews for their crucifying of him, with an admiring of
his noble and heroical love herein: and if they can but get their hearts thus
affected, they judge and account this to be grace; when as it is no more then
what the like tragical story of some great and noble personage, (full of
heroical virtues and ingenuity, yet inhumanely and ungratefully used) will
work, and uses ordinarily to work in ingenuous spirits, who read, or hear of
it: yea and this oft-times, though it be but in the way of a fiction: Which
when it reaches no higher, is so far from being faith, that it is but a
carnal and fleshly devotion, springing from fancy which is pleased with such
a story, and the principles of ingenuity stirred toward one who is of a noble
spirit, and yet abused. Such stories use to stir up a principle of humanity in
men, unto a compassionate love; which Christ himself at his suffering found
fault with, as being not spiritual, nor raised enough in those women who went
weeping to see the Messiah so handled; Weep not for me, (says he) that is,
weep not so much for this, thus to see me unworthily handled by those for whom
I dye.

And therefore accordingly as these stirrings are but fruits of the flesh, so
humane inventions, as Crucifixes, and lively representations of the story of
Christ's Passion unto the sight of fancy, do exceedingly provoke men to such
devotionall meditations and affections: but they work a bare historical faith
only, a historical remembrance, and an historical love, (as I may so call
them.) And no other then such does the reading of the story of it in the Word,
work in many, who yet are against such Crucifixes. But saving, justifying faith
chiefly minds, and is most taken up with the maine scope and drift of all
Christ's sufferings: for it is that in them, which answers to its own aim and
purpose; which is, to obtain forgiveness of sins in Christ crucified. As God
looks principally at the meaning of the Spirit in prayer, Romans 8. so does faith
look principally to the meaning of Christ in his sufferings. As in all other
Truths a Believer is said to have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. ult. so
especially he minds what was the mind and heart of Christ in all his
sufferings. And therefore you may observe, that the drift of all the Apostles
Epistles, is to show the intent of Christ's sufferings; how he was therein set
forth to be a prepitiation for sin; to bear our sins upon the tree; to
make our peace, etc. He was made sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. As in like manner, the scope of the Evangelists
is to set forth the story of them, (for that is necessary to be known also.)
And thus did that Evangelical Prophet Isaiah chiefly set forth the intent of
Christ's sufferings for justification, Esaias 53. throughout the Chap. as David
before had done the story of his Passion, Psalm. 22. And thus to show the use
and purpose of his sufferings, was the scope of all the Apostles Sermons,
holding forth the intent of Christ's passion to be the justification and
salvation of sinners: This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. and
they still set forth what the plot was, at which God by an ancient designment
aimed at, in the sufferings of Christ, which was an end higher then men or
Angels thought on, when he was put to death. And thus faith takes it up, and
looks at it. And upon this does Peter (in his Sermon, Acts 2.) pitch their
faith, where having first set forth the heinousness of their sin in murdering
the Lord of life, then to raise up their hearts again, (that so seeing Gods
end in it, they might be drawn to believe,) he tellls them, that All this was
done by the determinate counsel of God, ver. 23. and that for a farther end
then they imagined, even for the remission of sins through his Name, as in the
closure of that Sermon he shows. It was not the malice of the Jews, the
falsenesse of Judas, the fearfulness of Pilate, or the iniquity of the times
he fell into, that wrought his death, so much as God his Father complotting
with Christ himself, and aiming at a higher end then they did: there was a
farther matter in it; it was the execution of an ancient contrivement and
agreement, whereby God made Christ Sin, and laid our sins upon him. God was
in Christ, (not imputing our sins to us, but) making him sin, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Which Covenant Christ came (at his time) into the world to fulfill: Sacrifice
and burnt offering thou would not have, (Heb. 10. 5.) Lo, I come to do thy
will, and that will was to take away sins, ver. 4, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16. These
words Christ spoke when he took our nature, and when he came into the world,
clothed with infirmities like unto us sinners. Romans 8. 3. God sent his Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: Mark that
phrase [ for sin] [(...)] is there put for [ propter] as John 10. 33. (...),
not for a good work: That is, not because of a good work, or for a good works
sake. So here, [ For sinne] that is, because of sin; sin was the occasion of
his taking the likeness of sinful flesh: what, to increase it? no, but to
condemn it, as it follows: that is, to cast and overthrow it in its power and
plea against us; that instead of sins condemning us, he might condemn sin, and
that we might have the righteousness of the Law, ver. 5. This phrase [ for
sinne] is like unto that in Romans 6. 10. [ He dyed unto sinne] that is, for sins
cause; for so the opposition that follows, evinceth, [ In that he lives, he
lives unto God] that is, for God and his glory. So he dyed merely for sin,
that sin might have its course in Justice, and for its sake suffered death, so
putting to silence the clamor of it. The death of Christ was the greatest and
strangest design that ever God undertook, and acted; and therefore surely had
an end proportionable unto it. God that wills not the death of a sinner,
would not for any inferior end will the death of his Son, whom he loved more
then all creatures besides. It must needs be some great matter for which God
should contrive the death of his Son, so holy, so innocent, and separate from
sinners: neither could it be any other matter, then to destroy that which he
most hated; and that was, Sin: and to set forth that which he most delighted
in, and that was, Mercy. So Romans 3. 25, 26. And accordingly Christ demeaned
himself in it, not at all looking at the Jews, or their malice, but at his
Fathers command and intent in it. And therefore when he was to arise to go
unto that place where he should be taken, As the Father gave me commandment,
(says he) so do I: Arise; let us go hence, John 14. 31. And when Judas went
out at Christ's own provocation of him, What thou do, do quickly, (says
he) the Son of man goes as it was determined: he looked to his Fathers
purpose in it. When he went out to be taken, it is said, John 18. 4. Jesus
knowing all things that should befall him, went forth. And when he was in his
Agony in the Garden, whom does he deal with, but his Father? Father, (says
he) if it be possible, let this cup pass: and God made his Passion of so great
necessity, that it was even impossible that that cup should pass. Indeed, had
Christ stood in his own stead, it had been an easy request, and justice to
grant it; yea, so he tells Peter, that he could command millions of Angels to
his rescue; but he merely submits unto his Father, Not my will, but thy will be
done, (says he) for God had laid upon him the iniquities of us all, Esaias 53.

Let our faith therefore look mainly to this design and plot of God and of
Christ in his suffering, to satisfy for our sins, and to justify us sinners.
When we consider him as borne flesh and blood, and laid in a manger, think we
withal, that his meaning was to condemn sin in our flesh, Romans 8. 4. So when
we read of him fulfilling all, or any part of righteousness, take we his mind in
withal, to be, that the Law might be fulfilled in us, as it follows there, who
were then represented in him; and so the fulfilling of it is accounted ours.
Behold we him in his life time, as John the Baptist did, even as the Lamb of
God, bearing and taking away the sins of the world: and when upon the Cross,
let our faith behold the iniquities of us all met in him: [ Surely he has
borne our sorrows,] [bearing our sins in his body on the tree] and thereby
once offered to bear the sins of many, 1 Pet. 3.
Heb. 9. etc. This intent of Christ in all that he did and suffered, is that
welcome news, and the very spirit of the Gospel, which faith preys and seiseth
on.

CHAP. III.
What support or matter of triumph Christ's death affords to faith for
Justification.
NOw having thus directed your Faith to the right object, Christ, and Christ as
dying; let us secondly see what matter of support and encouragement faith may
fetch from Christ's death, for Justification. And surely that which has long
ago satisfied God himself for the sins of many thousand souls now in heaven,
The fullness of Christ's satisfaction.
may very well serve to satisfy the heart and conscience of any sinner now
upon earth, in any doubts in respect of the guilt of any sins that can arise.
We see that the Apostle here, after that large discourse of Justification by
Christ's righteousness, in the former part of this Epistle to the Romans and having
showed how every way it abounds, Chap. 5. he now in this 8. Chap. does as it
were sit down like a man over-convinced; as ver. 31. What then shall we say to
these things? He speaks as one satisfied, and even astonished with abundance of
evidence; having nothing to say, but only to admire God and Christ in this
work; and therefore presently throws down the Gauntlet, and challenges a
dispute in this point with all comers: Let Conscience, and carnal reason,
Law, and Sin, Hell and Devils bring in all their strength, Who is he shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? who shall condemn? Paul dares to
answer them all, and carry it with these few words, [ It is God that justifies,
It is Christ that dyed:] And (as in ver. 37.) [ We are more then conquerours in
all these.] It was this that brought in the Prodigal, that in his Fathers
house there was bread [enough.] And so likewise he (who ever he was) who was
the Author of the 130. Psalm. when his soul was in deep distress by reason of
his sins, ver. 1, 2. yet this was it that settled his heart to wait upon God,
that there was plenteous redemption with him. Christ's redemption is not merely
(...), a price or ransom aquivalent, or making due satisfaction according to
the just demerit of sin; but it is plenteous redemption; there is an
abundance of the gift of righteousness, Romans 5. 17. and unsearchable riches of
Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. Yea, 1 Timothy 1. 14. [ the grace of our Lord (that is, of
Christ, as ver. 12.) (...)] we translate it, [ was abundant] but the word
reaches farther, it was over-full, redundant, more then enough: And yet (says
Paul, ver. 13.) I had sins enough to pardon, as one would think that might
exhaust it, I was a blasphemer, etc. But I found so much grace in Christ, even
more then I knew what to do withal.

I shall not insist so largely on this first Head of Christ's dying, as upon
those three following, because it is the main subject of another Discourse,
(which, through Gods grace, I intend to publish, though in another method)
Only (for a taste) to instance in some few particulars, How Christ's
satisfaction may be set against the guilt of any, sins, and so made use of by
faith.
showing how Christ's satisfaction may be opposed, and set against the guilt of
a poor sinners offenses. What is there that can be said to aggravate sin in
the general, or any man's particular sins, that may not be answered out of
this, Christ has dyed? and something not be considered in it, which the
conscience may oppose thereto? So that what ever evil, which according to the
rules of spiritual reason, (which the righteous Law proceeds by, and
contains as the foundation of its righteousness in condemning or aggravating
sin) a man's conscience may suggest to be in sin; oppositely hereunto, may a
man's faith, according to the like rules of true spiritual reason, show a more
transcendent goodness to have been in Christ's death, (which the Gospel
reveals) and so may oppose the one to the other, and have as good reason to
show why sin should not condemn (from CHRIST'S death) as Conscience can have,
that the Law may condemn.

As first, 1. Against the heinousness of sin in the general.
Is sin the transgression of the Law? Christ dying, the Lawmakers, was
subjected to the Law; and will not that make amends? Is sin the debasement of
Gods glory, manifested in his Word and Works? Christ's dying was the debasement
and emptying of the brightness of his glory in the highest measure, being
personally manifested in the flesh. The one of them is but as the darkning the
shine or luster of the Sun upon a wall, but the other is as the obscuring of
the Sun it self. Sins highest evil lies in offending God; but Christ's
righteousness is (oppositely) the righteousness of God himself; or Jehovah
made our righteousness: So that God in our sin is considered but as the
object against whom; but God in this our righteousness, is the subject from
whom, and in whom this righteousness comes, and is feated: And so his Godhead
answerably gives a higher worth to it, by how much the alliance which the
subject has to an action of its own, that proceeds from it, is nearer then
that which an object has, against which the action is committed.

Or secondly, 2. Against any aggravation of. particular sins
what peculiar aggravations or circumstances are there in thy sins, to weigh
down; with which some circumstances in Christ's obedience and death may not be
paralleld, to lift thee up again?

As first, 1. Against the greatness of the act of any particular sin what ever.
Is it the greatness of thy sin in the substance of the fact committed? has
there been lewdness in thy wickedness? (as the Prophet speaks) Consider what
guilt of how heinous crimes God suffered to be laid to Christ's charge by
profane men, when he was made an offering for sin. He dyed as a Traitor to
his Prince, and a blasphemer of God in the highest kind of blasphemy, as making
himself equal with God; an Impostor, a Seducer, yea a Devil, yea a Prince of
Devils, then whom a murderer was esteemed more worthy to live. Which
imputations, though by men unjustly charged on him, yet by God were so ordered
as just, in respect of his bearing our sins. For him who was holiness it self,
to be made the greatest of sinners, yea to be made sin, and the worst of sins,
and accordingly to suffer from God and men; what greater satisfaction for the
taking of sins away can be desired or imagined?

Or secondly, 2. Against the badnesse of the heart in sinning.
do thou aggravate thy sins by the naughtiness of thy heart in sinning, and
say that the inward carriage thereof has been much worse then the outward?
Look thou into the heart of Jesus Christ dying, and behold him struggling with
his Fathers wrath, thou will find the sufferings of his soul more then those
of his body, and in them to lie the soul of his sufferings.

Thirdly, 3. Against the delight and greediness in sinning.
may thy sin be aggravated, in that thou did commit it with so great delight
and greediness, and pouredst out thy heart unto it? Consider that Christ
offered himself more willingly then ever thou did sin: Lo I come (says he,
Psalm. 40.) I delight to do thy will: and how am I straintned till it be
accomplished? Luke 12. 56. And though to show how great an evil and misery it
was in it self, he showed an averseness to it; yet as it was his Fathers will
for our salvation, he heartily embraced, and drank off that cup unto the
bottom.

Fourthly, 4. Against deliberatenesse in sinning.
did thou sin with much deliberation, and when thou might have avoided it?
There was this circumstance in Christ's sufferings to answer that, that he knew
all he was to suffer, and yet yielded up himself, as John 18. 4.

Fifthly, 5. Against presumption in sinning.
Have thou sinned presumptuously, and made a covenant with death and hell?
Christ in like manner offered up himself by a covenant and complot with his
Father so to do.

Sixthly, 6. Against aggravating circumstances of person, time, place, etc.
Are there any especial circumstances of time, and place, etc. that aggravate
thy sins?

As first, that so great a person in the Church should scandalize the Name of
God in sinning: Why, how great a Person was Christ? even equal with God the
Father; and yet how greatly humbled? even to the death; his offices of King,
Priest, and Prophet being debased with him: how great a name had he? as Heb. 1.
4. which notwithstanding was dishonored more then ever any man's.

Or 2. that thou sinnedst at such a time, or in such a company, which sometimes
serve to make a sin the more heinous: Consider how God contrived to have the
shame and affliction of his Sons death aggravated by all these circumstances:
It was of deaths the most accursed; At a time most solemn; In a place most
infamous; With company most wretched.

Thus might we find out that in Christ's sufferings and satisfaction made, that
would fitly answer to any thing in our sins; and so thereby we should be the
more relieved. And though the whole body of his sufferings do stand and answer
for the whole bulk of our sinnings; yet the consideration of such particulars
will much conduce to the satisfying of an humbled and dejected soul, about the
particulars of its sinnings.

Therefore (to conclude) get your hearts and consciences distinctly and
particularly satisfied in the all-sufficiencie of worth and merit which is in
the satisfaction that Christ has made. As it is a fault and defect in
humiliation, that men content themselves with a general apprehension and
notion that they are sinners, and so never become thoroughly humbled; so is it a
defect in their faith, that they content themselves with a superficial and
general conceit, that Christ dyed for sinners; their hearts not being
particularly satisfied about the transcendent all-sufficiencie of his death.
And thence it is, that in time of tentation, when their abounding sinfulness
comes distinctly to be discovered to them, and charged upon them, they are then
amazed, and their faith non-plust, as not seeing that in Christ, which might
answer to all that sinfulness: But as God saw that in Christ's death which
satisfied him; so you should endeavor by faith to see that worth in it which
may satisfy God, and then your faith will sit down as satisfied also. If a man
were to dispute for his life some hard and difficult controversy, wherein are
many great and strong objections to be taken away; he would be sure to view,
and study, and ponder all that might be said on that other part which he were
to hold, in way of answer to them, and to get such a clear and convincing
light, as might make the truth of his Position apparent and manifest through
those clouds of objections that hang in the way. Now you will all be thus
called one day, to dispute for your souls, (sooner or later) and therefore
such skill you should endeavor to get, in Christ's righteousness, how in its
fullness and perfection it answers to all your sinfulness; that your hearts
may be able to oppose it against all that may be said of any particular, in or
about your sins; that in all the conflicts of your spirits, you may see that in
it, which could clear your whole score; and that if God would but be pleased
to impute it to you, you might say, I durst presently come to an account with
him, and cut scores with his Law and Justice.

Thus much of the first thing made the object
of faith; namely, Christ as dying.
SECT. III.
FAITH supported by Christ's RESURRECTION.
ROMANS 8. 34. -- Yea rather, that is risen again.
CHAP. I.
Christ's Resurrection supporteth faith two ways: 1. By being an evidence of 2.
By having an influence into our Justification. The necessity of Christ's
Resurrection, for the procuring our Justification.
THe next thing to be looked at in Christ, as he is the object of justifying
faith, (and from whence our faith may seek and fetch support and comfort in the
matter of Justification) is Christ's Resurrection; upon which we see here, the
Apostle puts a [ rather] Yea rather that is risen again. Some special
thing in Christ's Resurrection for our Justification.
There must therefore be some special thing in the Resurrection of Christ,
which it contributes to our faith and justification, for which it should have a
[ rather] put upon it, and that comparatively to his death. Now to show wherein
this should lie, consider how the Resurrection of Christ serves to a double
use and end, in the matter of Justification.

First, It serves to a double use to support our faith.
as an evidence to our faith, that God is fully satisfied by Christ's death: his
Resurrection may give us full assurance of it.

Secondly, it had, and has an influence into our Justification it self; yea
and as great an influence as his Death had. In both these respects it deserves
a [ rather] to be put upon it, and Paul had them both in his eye, when he writ
these words. So as first, if you ask an account of his faith, and a reason of
his so triumphant assurance, he alleges his Resurrection to confirm it,
Christ is risen. Or

Secondly, if you would have a reason of the thing, how it comes to pass, that
we who are Believers cannot be condemned; Christ is risen, says he: He
alleges it as a cause, that has such an influence into Justification it
self, as it makes all sure about it.

1. 1. By way of Evidence.
By way of Evidence: Although Christ's obedience in his life, and his death
past, do alone afford the whole matter of our Justification, and make up the
sum of that price paid for us, (as has been shown) so as faith may see a
fullness of worth and merit therein, to discharge the debt: yet faith has a
comfortable sign and evidence to confirm it self in the belief of this,
from Christ's Resurrection after his death: It may fully satisfy our faith,
Faith has a visible sign of it, that God is satisfied.
that God himself is satisfied, and that he reckons the debt as paid: So that
our faith may boldly come to God, and call for the Bond in, as having Christ's
Resurrection to show for it, that the Debt is discharged. And hence the Apostle
cries Victoria over Sin, Hell, and Death, upon occasion of (and as the Coronis
and conclusion of that) his large Discourse about Christ's Resurrection, 1 Cor.
15. 55, 56, 57. O death, where is thy sting? that is, Sin, and the power of
it: for so it follows, The sting of death is sin: and O grave, where is thy
victory? Thanks be to God who has given us victory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord: namely, as risen again; for of his Resurrection, and of that chiefly,
had he spoken throughout that Chapter.

2. 2. By way of Influence.
But surely this is not all, that it should only argue our Justification by
way of Evidence: This alone would not have deserved such a [ rather] to be put
upon it, if Christ's Resurrection had not had some farther real causall
influence into Justification it self, and been more then simply an evidence of
it to our apprehensions. Therefore secondly, in Justification, although the
materiale, or matter of it, be wholly the obedience and death of Christ; Though
the matter of our Justification be the price of Christ's death, yet the act of
pronouncing us righteous, depends on the Resurrection.
yet the act of pronouncing us righteous by that his obedience, (which is the
formale of Justification) does depend upon Christ's Resurrection. Ordinarily
there has been no more expressed concerning this dependence, then that the
Resurrection of Christ justifies by working actual faith, to lay hold upon
what Christ has done in his life and death, which is called the applying of
it, (of which more anon.) But that speech of Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 17. seems to
import more, If Christ be not risen again, [ye are yet in your sins, [and your
faith is in vain:] That is, although you could suppose faith to be wrought in
you upon the merit of Christ's dying, yet it would be in vain, if Christ were
not risen again; for your title to Justification it self would be void: You
were yet in your sins. Which is said, because his Resurrection was it, whereby
sins (though satisfied for in his death) were taken off, and they acquitted from
them: Which I take to be the meaning also of that Romans 4. ult. He was delivered
for our sins, [and rose again for our Justification.] When the Apostle says,
for our sins he was delivered, he means, his laying down that which was the
price for them, a satisfaction for them, which his death was: And in that
sense, He dyed for our sins; that is, his death stands in stead of our death,
and so satisfies for sin. But yet still that upon which the act of Gods
justifying us, and his discharge given us from our sins, and whereby he
reckons us justified, that depends upon his Resurrection. He rose again for
our justification. Note that Justification there imports the act of imputation,
and reckoning us just, which he had spoken of in the verses immediately
foregoing, ver. 22, 23, 24.

In a word, to the full discharge of a Debt, and freeing the Debtour, two
things are requisite: 1. The payment of the debt: 2. The tearing or cancelling
the Bond, or receiving an Acquitance for the freeing of the Debtor. Now the
Payment was wrought by Christ's death, and the Acquitance to free from the debt,
was at, and by his Resurrection.

CHAP. II.
For the explanation of both these is shown, how Christ sustained a double
relation; First, of a Surety for us; Secondly, of a Common person in our stead:
The difference of these two, and the usefulness of these two considerations,
for the explaining all the rest that follows, in this whole Discourse.
NOw the better to explicate both these, you must consider, how that Christ in
almost all that he did [ for us] (as the phrase is here, and is to be annexed
to each particular) did stand in a double relation for us unto God.

1. Of a Surety, bound to pay the debt for us, and to save our souls.

2. Of a Common person, or as an Attorney at Law, in our stead. And both these
as they have a distinct and differing consideration in themselves, so those
several considerations of them will conduce to the understanding of those two
things forementioned, as ways and arguments to show how the Resurrection of
Christ may support our faith, both by way of evidence that the debt is paid,
and by way of influence that we are thereby acquitted, and cannot be condemned.
The notion of his being risen, who is our Surety, clears the first, and that of
his rising as a Common person, illustrates the other. And I shall here a little
the largelyer insist upon the explication of these two relations, because their
consideration will be of use through all the rest that follows, to illustrate
thereby the influence that his Ascension, and Sitting at Gods right hand, etc.
have into our Justification; and so I shall carry them along throughout this
Discourse.

1. 1. To be a Surety, what.
A Surety is one that undertakes, and is bound to do a thing for another: As,
to pay a debt for him, or to bring him safe to such or such a place, or the
like; so as when he has discharged what he undertook and was bound for, then
the party for whom he undertook is discharged also.

2. 2. A Common person, what.
A Common person with, or for another he goes for, is one who represents,
personates, and acts the part of another, by the allowance and warrant of the
Law: so as what he does, (as such a common person, and in the name of the
other) that other whom he personates, is by the Law reckoned to do: and in
like manner, what is done to him, (as being in the others stead and room) is
reckoned as done to the other. Thus by our Law, an Attorney appears for
another, and money received by him, is reckoned as received by him whom it is
due unto. Thus the giving possession of an estate, a re-entry made, and
possession taken of land, etc. if done by, and to a man who is his lawful
Attorney, it stands as good in Law unto a man, as if in his own person it had
been done. So Ambassadors for Princes represent their Masters: what is done to
them, is reckoned as done to the Prince; and what they do according to their
Commission, is all one as if the Prince, whose Person they represent, had done
it himself. In like manner also the marriages of Princes are transacted, and
solemnized by Proxy, as a Common person representing his Lord, and in his
name, is married to a Princess in her Fathers Court; and the Laws of men
authorize it, and the marriage is as good, as if both Princes themselves had
been present, and had performed all the Rites of it. The difference between
these two.
And thus to be a Common person, is more then simply to be a Surety for
another; it is a farther thing: and therefore these two relations are to be
distinctly considered, though they seem to be somewhat of a like nature. Thus
an Attorney is a different thing from a Surety: A Surety undertakes to pay a
debt for another, or the like; but a Common person serves to perform any common
act, which by the Law is reckoned, and virtually imputed to the other, and is
to stand as the others act, and is as valid, as is he had done it: So as the
good and benefit which is the consequent of such an act, shall accrue to him
whom he personated, and for whom he stood as a Common person. Adam was not a
Surety for all Mankind, Adam a Common person, but not a Surety.
he undertook not for them, in the sense forementioned; but he was a Common
person representing all Mankind; So as what he should do, was to be accounted
as if they had done it. Now the better to express and make sure our
Justification in and by Christ, according to all sorts of Laws, (the equity of
all which God usually draws up into his dispensations) God did ordain Christ
both to be a Surety for us, Christ ordained to be both, and the reason why.
and also a Common person representing us, and in our stead. That as Christ
took all other relations for us, as of an Husband, Head, Father, Brother,
King, Priest, Captain, etc. that so the fullness of his love might be set forth
to us, in that what is defective in any one of these relations, is supplied and
expressed by the other: Even thus did God ordain Christ to take and sustain
both these relations, of a Surety and a Common Person, in all he did for us,
thereby to make our justification by him the more full and legal; and justify
(as I may so speak) our Justification it self or his justifying of us, by all
sorts of legal considerations what ever, that hold commonly among men in like
case: and that which the one of these relations or considerations might not
reach to make good, the other might supply; what fell short in the one, the
other might make up; and so we might be most legally and formally justified and
made sure never to be condemned.

CHAP. III.
The first Head: The EVIDENCE of Justification which Christ's Resurrection
affords to faith; explained by two things: 1. By showing how Christ was made a
Surety for us. 2. How his Resurrection as a Surety holds forth this evidence.
COncerning the first of those two Heads at first propounded, namely, the
Evidence which Christ's Resurrection affords unto our faith in point of
non-condemnation: I have two things to handle in this Chap. to make this out:
First, how Christ was made a Surety for us, and what manner a Surety he did
become: secondly, what the consideration hereof will contribute to that
evidence which faith has from Christ's Resurrection.

For the first,. 1.
Christ was appointed by God, (and himself also undertook) to be our Surety.
1. How Christ was made and became a Surety for us.
This you have, Heb. 7. 22. He was made Surety of a better Testament, or
Covenant; namely, of the New. The Hebrew word for Covenant, the Septuagint still
translated [(...)] Testament: the word in the Hebrew being of a large
signification, and comprehending both a Covenant, and Testament; and so in the
New Testament it is used promiscuously for either: And indeed, this new
Covenant of Grace is both. Of this Covenant Christ is the (...), the plighter
of his troth for it, the Surety, the Promiser, the Undertaker. The Verb this
comes of, is (...), [ promittere] which comes form (...), [ in manibus]
striking hands, or giving ones hand, as a sign of a covenant; and so, to
bargain with, or make up a covenant. Prove. 22. 26. Be not thou one of them
that strike hands, or of them that are sureties for debts: Which whole verse
the Septuagint reads, Give not thy self (...), to Suretyship. The same word
that is here used by the Apostle. It was the manner both of the Jews and
Romans also, to make Covenants by striking of hands: And in Testaments, the
Heir and Executor shook hands, or the Executor gave his hand to fulfill it.
Suretiship not only used in matters of debt, but in criminal causes punished
with death; and is put for being a pledge for another.
And the word [(...)] is used, not only in promising to pay a debt for
another, but also in becoming a pledge for another, for to undergo death, or
a capital punishment in another room: as in that famous story of friends,
namely, Euephenus and Eucritus: Eucritus did [(...)] willingly become a surety
for Euephenus, when condemned to dye by Dionysius the tyrant. This very word is
used by Polyenus, the Historian of that fact. Now such a Surety every way did
Christ become unto God for us, Christ undertook as a Surety for both, to
satisfy God, and to work all in us also.
both to pay the debt, by undergoing death in our stead, and so to satisfy
God; and then as the Heir to execute his Will and Testament: He became a
Surety of the whole Covenant, and every condition in it, take it in the largest
sense; and this of all, both on Gods part, and on ours. For us he undertook to
God to work all our works, and undergo all our punishments; to pay our debts
for us, and to work in us all that God required should be done by us, in the
Covenant of Grace. And thus to be a Surety, is much more then simply to be an
Intercessour, or Mediator, (as Pareus well observes.) God did (as it were) say
to Christ, What they owe me, I require it all at your hands; and Christ
assented, and from everlasting struck hands with God, to do all for us that
God could require, and undertook it under the penalty that lay upon us to have
undergone. Yea, Christ became such a Surety in this for us, as is not to be
found among men. A strange difference between Christ's Suretiship, and that of
men for others on earth
On earth, Sureties are wont to enter into one and the same Bond with the
Creditors, so as the Creditour may seize on which of the two he will, whether
on the Debtour, or on the Surety, and so (as usually) on the Debtor first, for
him we call the Principal; but in this covenant, God would have Christ's single
Bond: and hence Christ is not only called the Surety of the Covenant for us,
but The Covenant, God makes the Covenant of Grace principally with Christ for
us.
Esaias 49. 8. and elsewhere. God making the Covenant of Grace primarily with
him, and with him as for us, thereby his single Bond alone was taken for all,
that so God might be sure of satisfaction: therefore he laid all upon Christ,
protesting that he would not deal with us, nor so much as expect any payment
from us, (such was his grace.) So Psalm. 89. 19. where the mercies of the
Covenant made between Christ and God, under the Type of Gods Covenant with
David are set forth, God requires payment of our debt from Christ first.
Thou spakest in vision to thy holy One, and said, I have laid help on one
who is [mighty.] As if God had said, I know that these will fail me, and
break, and never be able to satisfy me; but you are a mighty and substantial
person, able to pay me, and I will look for my debt of you. And to confirm
this, (then which nothing can give stronger consolation, or more advances Gods
free grace) when God went about the reconciling the world in and by Christ, and
dealt with Christ about it; the manner of it is expressed to have been, that
God took off our sins from us, and discharged us, (as it were) meaning never to
call us to an account for them, unless Christ should not satisfy him, and
laid them all on Christ, so as he would require an account of them all from him
first, and let him look to it; and this he did to make the Covenant sure. Thus
2 Cor. 5. 19. it is said, (the Apostle speaking of Gods transaction of this
business with Christ) that God was in Christ, namely, from everlasting,
reconciling the world (of Elect Believers) to himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them; and made him sin who knew no sin. Observe, that as he
laid our sins on Christ, so withal, he discharged us, in his compact
between Christ and himself, [ not imputing their trespasses to them.] So
then, all laid upon Christ, and he was to look to it, or else his soul was to
have gone for it. This is not the manner of other Creditours; they use to
charge the Debt on both the Surety and the Debtour; but in this Covenant (of
Grace namely) Christ's single Bond is entered, he alone is The Covenant: so as
God will have naught to say to us, till Christ fails him. He has engaged
himself first to require satisfactions at Christ's hands, who is our Surety.

Now then 2. 2. How the consideration of this is a strong evidence to faith, of
justification from Christ's Resurrection.
for to make use of this notion, for the clearing of the point in hand. It
might afford us matter of unspeakable comfort, only to hear of Christ's having
been arrested by God for our debt, and cast into prison, and his Bond sued, and
an Execution or Judgment served on him, as the phrases are, Esaias 53. 8. For
thereby we should have seen, how God had begun with our Surety, (as minded to
let us alone) and that it lay on him to discharge the debt, who was so able to
do it: And thereby we might also see, how he was made sin for us, and
therefore we might very well have quieted our hearts from fearing any arrests,
or for Gods coming upon us, till we should hear that our Surety were not
sufficiently able to pay the debt, (as you have heard he is.) But yet our
hearts would still be inquisitive (for all that) to hear whether indeed he has
perfectly satisfied God or no; and would be extremely solicitous, to know
whether he has satisfactorily performed what he undertook; and how he got
clear of that engagement, and of being made sin for us. And therefore the
Apostle comforts Believers with this, that Christ shall the next time appear
without sin. Heb. 9. 28.
Unto them that look for him he shall appear the second time without sin, It
declaring unto faith, that Christ that was in this death nale sin for us, has
now discharged all, and is without sin.
unto salvation. One would think it no great matter of comfort to us, to hear
that Christ should appear without sin; for who would imagine that it could
be otherwise with The holy One, The Lord of Glory? there is no wonder in that:
Ay, but (says the Apostle) your very salvation is interested in this; as
nearly as is possible: It is well for you that Christ is now without sin; for
he having as your Surety undertook to satisfy for sin, and having
accordingly been once made sin, when on earth, and arrested for it by God at
his death; in that now he is got clear of that engagement, (which could be no
way, but by satisfaction, which he undertook) this does plainly evince it, and
ascertain you, that you shall never be condemned for it: for by the Law, if the
Surety has discharged the debt, the Debtour is then free. And therefore no
news would or could be more welcome to sinners, And so that God will never come
upon the sinner.
then to have a certain and infallible evidence given, that their Surety were
well come off, and had quitted all, to satisfaction.

Now then to evidence this, serves his Resurrection; Christ is risen: How
strong an evidence Christ's Resurrection is, that the debt is paid, and God
satisfied.
Nothing so sure. Therefore certainly the debt is discharged, and he has paid
it to the full, and so is now without our sin, and fully got clear of it.
For God having once arrested Christ, and cast him into prison, and begun a
trial against him, and had him to judgment, he could not come forth, till he
had paid the very utmost farthing. And there is the greatest reason for it, to
ascertaine us that can be: For he was under those bonds and bolts, which if it
had been possible would have detained him in the grave, as Act. 2. 24. The
strength of sin, and Gods wrath, and the curse against sin, ( Thou shall die
the death) did as cords hold him, (as the Psalmists phrase is.) Other debtours
may possibly break their prisons; but Christ could not have broke through
this, for the wrath of the All-powerfull God, was this prison; from which there
was no escaping, no bail: nothing would be taken to let him go out, but full
satisfaction. And therefore to hear that Christ is risen, and so is come out of
prison, is an evidence that God is satisfied, and that Christ is discharged by
God himself; and so is now without sin, he walking abroad again at liberty: And
therefore the Apostle proclaims a mighty victory obtained by Christ's
Resurrection, over Death, the Grave, the strength of sin, the Law, 1 Cor. 15.
55, 56. and cries out, Thanks be to God who gives us the victory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, ver. 57. You may now rest secure indeed, Christ is
risen, who therefore shall condemn?

CHAP. IV.
The second Head propounded, the INFLUENCE CHRIST'S Resurrection has into
Justification. Two Branches of the Demonstration of this. First, that Christ
was a Common person, representing us in all he was, or did, or suffered,
handled at large. More especially a Common person in his Resurrection.
NOw secondly, to come to that other Head propounded, the Influence Christ's
resurrection has into our justification. The demonstration or making out of
which depends on two things put together: The first, how Christ was appointed
by God, and himself acted the part of a Common person, representing us in what
he did, and more particularly in his Resurrection. Of this in this Chapter.

The second is, how from that consideration arises, not only an evidence to
our faith, but a real influence into our justification, and non-condemnation.
So as, Who shall condemn? because CHRIST is risen again, as a Common person,
representing us therein.

For the first of these,. I.
to illustrate and prove it in the general, That Christ was a Common person,
proved.
that instance of Adam serves most fitly, and is indeed made use of in the
Scripture, to that end. Adam, as you all know, was reckoned as a common
public person, 1. In general, by a parallel with Adam,
not standing singly or alone for himself, but as representing all Mankind to
come of him: So as by a just Law, what he did was reckoned to his posterity,
whom he represented. And what was by that Law threatened, or done to him for
what he did, is threatened against his posterity also. Now this man was herein a
lively type of our Lord Christ, the Type of Christ herein.
as you have it, Romans 5. 14. [ Who was the type of him who was to come.] Unto
which purpose, the titles which the Apostle gives these two, Christ and Adam, 1
Cor. 15. 47. are exceeding observable; he calls Adam, The first man; and Christ
our Lord, The second man: and both for that very purpose and respect which we
have in hand: For, first, he speaks of them, as if there had never been any
more men in the world, nor were ever to be for time to come, except these two:
and why? but because these two between them, had all the rest of the sons of
men hanging at their girdle; because they were both Common persons, that had
the rest in like (though opposite) considerations included, and involved in
them. Adam had all the sons of Men borne into this world, included in himself,
who are therefore called earthly men, ver. 48. in a conformity to him the
earthly man, ver. 47. and Christ the second man had all his Elect, (who are the
firstborn, and whose names are written in heaven, and therefore in the same
ver. are oppositely called heavenly men) included in him. You see how he sums
up the number of all men in two, and reckons but two men in all; these two, in
Gods account, standing for all the rest. And farther observe, that because Adam
was in this his being, a common person unto his, the shadow and the lively Type
of Christ, who was to come after him; that therefore he is called The first
man, (of these two) and Christ The second man, as typified out by him.

Now if you ask, Particularly: In what things Christ was a Common person.
wherein Christ was a Common person, representing us, and standing in our
stead; I answer, If in anything, then in all those conditions and states
wherein he was, in what he did, Especially in what he was, or did upon earth
or befell him, whilst here on earth especially: For he had no other end to
come down into this world, but to sustain our persons, and to act our parts,
and to have what was to have, been done to us, acted upon him.

Thus first,. 2.
in their two several conditions, qualifications, 1. Adam and Christ Common
persons, in their conditions, and qualifications, and states.
and states, they both were Common persons: That is, look what state or
condition the one or the other was made in, is by a just Law to be put upon
those whom they represented. So the Apostle reasons from it, ver. 48. [ As] is
the earthly man, (namely, the first man, Adam) [such] are the earthly: namely,
to be earthly men as well as he; because he who was a Common person
representing them, was in his condition but an earthly man: And oppositely, by
the same Law, it follows, [ As] is the heavenly man, (namely, the second man,
Christ) [ such] are and must be the heavenly, who pertain to him, because he
also is a Common person, ordained to personate them: and Adam, who came after
him, was therein but his Type.

And as thus in this place to the Corinths the Apostle argues Christ to be a
Common person, in respect of his condition and state, by an argument of
parallels taken from his Type, Adam; So secondly, in that 5. to the Romans, he
argues Christ to have been a Common person, 2. Christ a Common person, in
respect of what he did, or what he suffered, illustrated by the parallel of
Adam.
in his actions which he did on earth; and this also from the similitude of
Adam, whom ver. 14. he therein makes to have been Christ's Type. And he speaks
of Adam there, as a Common person, both in respect of what he did, namely, his
[Sinne;] and also in respect of what befell him for his sin, namely, [ Death,]
and condemnation. And because he was in all these not to be considered as a
single Man, but as one that was All men, by way of representation: Hence, both
what he did, they are said to do in him; and what condemnation or death was
deserved by his sin, fell upon them all, by this Law of his being a public
person for them.

1. For what he did: He sinned, 1. Adam a Common person, in what he did.
you know; and ver. 12. All are said to have sinned, namely, in his sin; Yea,
and according to those words in the Greek, [(...)] which are added there, you
may render that sentence (and the Original bears it, and it is also varied in
the Margent) thus, [ In whom] all have sinned; namely, in Adam, as in a
public person. Their act was included in his, because their persons were
included in his.

And 2. 2. Adam a Common person in what beell him for what he did, as in death
and his condemnation threatened.
for what befell him for sin, that befell them also by the same Law of his
being a person representing them. Hence ver. 12. Death is said to pass upon
all men, namely for this, that Adams sin was considered as theirs, as it there
follows. It is said to pass, even as a sentence of death passes upon a
condemned Malefactor. And ver. 18. Judgment is said to come by that one man's
offense, upon all men, to condemnation. Now in Genesis 2. 17. the threatening was
spoken only to Adam, as but one man, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die: And Genesis 3. 19. that sentence seems only to pass upon him
alone, [ Unto dust thou shall return.] Yet in threatening Adam, God threatened us
all; and in sentencing Adam to death, he sentenced us also: The curse reaches
us too; Death passed upon all men then, and therefore by a just Law Death
raigns over all, as ver. 14. and 17. because Adam was in all this, Romans 5.
a Common person representing us, and so in our stead; and so all this concerns
us, as truly and as nearly as it did him. I say by a just Law; for indeed the
Scripture upon the equity of this Rule, pronounces a Statute out against all
men, that they should die, Heb. 9. 27. Statutum st, It is appointed by a
Statute Law, that all should die. Now if you search for this Statute, when and
where enacted, you will find, that the Original Record and Roll is that in
Genesis 3. 9. spoken only of Adam, but holding true of us, [ To dust thou shall
return.]

Just thus the matter stands in the point of our. 2.
justification and salvation, Answerably Christ ordained a Common person, both
in what he did, or was done to him.
between Christ and Elect Believers; for Adam was herein his Type. Christ was
considered and appointed of God as a Common person, both in what he did, and in
what was done to him: So as by the same Law, what he did for us, is reckoned or
imputed to us, as if we our selves had done it; and what was done to him,
tending to our justification and salvation, is reckoned as done to us. Thus
when Christ dyed, he dyed as a Common person, and God reckons that we dyed
also. When Christ arose, he rose as our Head, and as a Common person, and so
then God accounts that we rose also with him. And by virtue of that communion
which we had with him in all those actions of his, it is, that now when we are
born again, we do all rise both from the guilt of sin, and from the power of
it; even as by virtue of the like communion we had with (or being one in) Adam,
we come to be made sinful, when we begin first to exist as men, and to be
first borne.

Thus in his death he was considered as a Common person, Exemplified by one
instance in his dying.
and God reckoned us dying then, and would have us reckon so also. So Romans 6.
10. the Apostle speaking of Christ, says, In that he dyed, he dyed unto sin
once, but in that he lives, he lives unto God. Then ver. 11. speaking of us,
he says, [ Likewise reckon] you your selves to be dead unto sin, but alive
unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. The meaning whereof is plainly this,
that whereas regenerate men are for the present in the reality but imperfectly
mortified and dead to sin, as considered in themselves, and in respect of the
work of it, as wrought in them; yet that being considered in Christ as their
Head, and a Common person representing them, they may (...), they may truly by
a way of faith reason or reckon themselves wholly dead, in and through Jesus
Christ our Lord; in that he once dyed perfectly unto sin, as a Common person
representing them. So as what yet is wanting in the work of Mortification, in
their sense and experience of it, they may supply by faith, from the
consideration of Christ their Head, even themselves to have dyed, when he dyed.
The Apostle, I say, would have them by reason conclude or infer (for so the
word (...) signifies, as Chap. 3. 28. therefore we conclude, etc. it is the
same word) from Christ's death, that they are dead: which Conclusion cannot be
made, unless this be one of the Propositions in this Argument, That we dyed in
Christ, when he dyed; and so though in our selves we are not yet wholly dead
to sin, nor perfectly alive to God; yet through Jesus Christ your Lord and Head
(says he) reckon your selves so; in that (as ver. 10.) he dyed, and now lives;
and you were included in him. And indeed, this Consideration the Apostle
suggests unto our faith, both as the greatest encouragement against imperfect
mortification begun; that yet we may comfort our selves by faith, as reckoning
our selves wholly dead in Christ's death, and so may assure our selves, we shall
one day be perfectly dead in our selves by virtue of it; and withal, as the
strongest argument also and motive unto Mortification, to endeavor to attain
to the highest degree of it: which therefore he carries along in his Discourse
throughout that whole Chapter. He would have them by faith or spiritual
reasoning take in, and apprehend themselves long since dead to sin in Christ,
when he dyed; and so should think it the greatest absurdity in the world to
sin, even the least sin, we being dead long since, and that wholly, when
Christ our Head dyed: And how shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein? And ver. 7. He that is dead, is free from sin; and how then shall we
do the least service to it? Now all this he puts upon Christ's dying, and our
dying then with him: ver. 6. [ Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with
him, (even when he was crucified) that it might be destroyed] one day in us,
fully and perfectly: Christ's Body representing therein as a public person,
the Elect, and their body of sin conjunct with them. So as thus by faith they
are to reason themselves wholly dead to sin in Christ, and to use it as a
reason and motive to stir up themselves not to yield to the least sin. I use
this expression of being wholly dead, because if he had spoken merely of that
imperfect mortification begun in us, the argument would not have been a perfect
motive against the least sins. [ We who are dead, how shall we live in
sin,] or yield unto the least sin? For it might be said, Alas, we are but
imperfectly dead; and from an imperfect death could but an imperfect argument
have been drawn. But the Scripture elsewhere tells us, that Christ by his death
has [perfected] for ever all that are sanctified: so Heb. 10. So as in his
death they may reckon themselves perfectly dead by faith, and perfectly
sanctified, though yet the work be not actually and fully perfected.

And all this communion with Christ as a Common person, representing them in
his death, he there instructs them to be represented and sealed up to them by
their Baptism; so ver. 3, 4. How, I shall show afterward.

Now as this place holds forth Christ as a Common person in his Death
representing us;. 2.
so other places hold forth the like of his Resurrection. More particularly,
how Christ was a Common person in his Resurrection, and therein representing us.
In the 1 Cor. 15. 20. the Apostle argues, that Elect Believers must and shall
rise, because Now Christ is risen from the dead, and is become the first fruits
of them that sleep. See the force of this Argument founded upon this notion and
consideration, that Christ was a Common person representing all the rest; and
this strongly presented in that expression of his being the first fruits, in
allusion to the Rite in the Leviticall Law. All the sheaves in a field being
unholy of themselves, there was some one sheafe in the name and room of all the
rest, (which was called the first-fruit) which was lift up, and waved before
the Lord; and so all the sheaves abroad in the field, by that act done to this
one sheafe, were consecrated unto God, ( Levi. 23. 10. etc.) by virtue of that
law. The meaning of which Rite, the Apostle expounding; alleges Romans 11. 16.
[ If the first fruits be holy, all the lump is holy also,] Thus when we were
all dead, Christ as the First Fruits rises, and this in our name and stead,
and so we all rise with him and in him. And although the Saints departed are
not, it their own persons, as yet risen, (as we all who are now alive, are
not in our own persons yet dead) yet in the mean time, because thus they are
risen in Christ, as their First Fruits; hence, in the very words following, he
faith, they are but asleep, [ He is become the first fruits of them that
sleep,] because they remain alive in Christ their Head, and shall rise one
day: because [ in him] they virtually are already risen; and this in Gods
account in as true and just a sense, as we (though personally alive) are yet
all reckoned dead in Adam, because in as a Common person had the sentence of
death pronounced on him, by virtue of which we must dye; and this by the force
of the same Law, even of that which we have inclucated of being a Common
person, representing us. And indeed, so it follows, (which argues this to be
the Apostles meaning) ver. 21. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive. His argument lies thus: Adam was the first fruits of them
that dyed; Christ, of them that rise. Hence therefore we are elsewhere said
(though in respect to another life) to be rise with Christ, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. and
(which is yet more) to sit together with him in heaven: because he as a Common
person representing us, sits there in our name and stead, as you shall hear
when I come to in the Text, in the next Section.

CHAP. V.
The second branch: How Christ's representing us as a Common Person in his
Resurrection, has an Influence into our Justification, made forth by two
things: 1. How Christ at his Resurrection was justified from our sin: 2. That
we were all then justified in him as a Common person.
NOw then to come to the other branch of the Demonstration, namely, how this
relation to us as a Common Person representing us in his Resurrection, has a
real influence into our Justification: And this is the point I drive at; and
for the clearing of which that large and general discourse by way of digression
in the former Chapter was but to make way for.

I shall absolve and dispatch this Branch, by showing two things:

1. That Christ himself was justified, and that at his Resurrection.

2. That he was justified then as a Common person, representing us therein, as
well as that he rose as a Common person; and so that we were then justified in
him and with him; and by this means it is that by that Act then done to him,
our Justification is made irrepealable for ever.

For the explicating of the first:. 1.
As Christ was in his death made sin for us, 1. That Christ himself was
justified at his Resurrection.
and so sustained our persons in his satisfying for sin by his death, (which is
the matter of our righteousness) so in and upon his Resurrection he was
justified and acquitted from our sins by God, Made forth by three things laid
together.
as having now fully in his Death satisfied for them, which I make forthby
these three things put together:

First, in reason, 1. There must have been some Act pass from God, when Christ
was acquitted and justified from our sins by God.
if that Christ were made sin for us, and satisfied for it, there must then
some Act pass, whereby Christ should be pronounced acquit of our sins, and
fully clear of them, and so be himself formally justified, in respect of
those sins, for which he undertook to satisfy. For according to the course of
all Proceedings, if a charge of guilt be formally laid, there must be as
formal an Act of acquiting, and of giving a Quietus est: There is no man, but
for his own discharge and security would desire it. Nor is there any wise man
that pays a debt for which he is legally sued, that will not have upon the
payment of it, as legal an Acquitance. Paul, when he was cast into prison by a
public Act of Authority, he stood upon it to have a public Act of Release
from the same Magistrates, and would not go forth of prison privily, though
themselves sent to him so to go out, Acts 36. 37. Now God himself did lay the
iniquities of us all upon Christ, Esaias 53. 6. and had him to prison, and to
Judgment for them, ver. 8. There must therefore some Act pass from God,
legally to take them off from him, and declaring him discharged, to deliver him
from Prison and Judgment.

And De facto it is evident, That there was such an Act passed.
that there was some such Act passed from God; for as we read, that Christ
while he lived, and also in his Death, was made sin, and did bear the sin of
many, as the phrase is, Heb. 9. 28. So we read in the very next words, that he
shall appear the second time [without sin,] which must needs be spoken in a
direct opposition to his having born our sins, and appearing then with all our
sins laid to his charge. He appeared charged with them then, but now he shall
appear as apparently and as manifestly to be without those sins, (for of our
sins it must needs be meant) and so to be discharged of them as fully, as ever
he appeared charged with them: For it is said, He shall [appeare] without sin;
and therefore to the judgments of all it shall be made manifest, that that God
that once charged him with them, has now fully discharged him of them. The
Apostle speaks of it as of a great alteration made in this respect between
Christ as he was whilst on earth, and Christ as he is to appear the second
time, and is now in heaven. And this alteration or discharge must necessarily
be made by God; for he is the Creditour who followed the Suit, and therefore
he alone can give the Acquitance.

Now secondly, 2. There must be some season of time, when this discharge from
our sins was first made unto Christ.
from hence it will follow, that there must be some time when this alteration
was first made, and discharge given; when Christ from being sin, as he was
made, should become without sin, through Gods acquiting of him; and this, say
I, was at his Resurrection. It is not deferred as then to be first done, when
he is to appear the second time, though then it appears indeed, but it is
really done before; for he comes then to judge others for sin. Now in
reason, when should this Acquitance or Justification from our sins be first
given to Christ, and legally pronounced on him, but when he had paid the last
farthing of the debt, and made his satisfaction complete? which was then done,
when he began to rise: for his lying in the grave was a part of his
Humiliation, and so of his Satisfaction, as generally Orthodoxe Divines hold.
Now therefore when he began to rise, then ended his Humiliation; and that was
the first moment of his Exaltation. His Acquitance therefore bears Date from
thence, even from that very hour.

Hence thirdly, 3. That this must needs be, and was first made to him at his
Resurrection.
we read, as that Christ was condemned, so that he was justified. Thus 1 Timothy
3. 16. God is said to be manifest in the flesh, and then that this God-man was
justified in the spirit: That is, whereas God was manifest or appeared in flesh
to condemn sin in the flesh, as Romans 8. that same God-man was also justified
in the spirit from all those sins, and so received up to glory, as it follows
there. And not to go far, the very words of this my Text, [It is God that
justifies] are taken out of Esaias 50. 8, 9. and as there, they are first spoken
by Christ of himself, then, when he gave his back to the smiters, in his
death, (as in the verses before) and was put to death as a condemned man, he
comforts himself with this, [He is near that justifies me, who shall
condemn?] And when was that done, or to be done, but at his Resurrection? So
the phrase in Timothy imports, if you compare it with another in Peter, 1 Pet.
3. 18. Being put to death in the flesh, [and quickened in (or by) the spirit.]
Paul, he says, [ Justified in the spirit;] Peter, he says, [ Quickened in the
spirit:] both mean one and the same thing. By [Spirit] is meant the power of
his Godhead, and Divine nature, whereby he was at once both raised from the
grave, and from under the guilt of sin together. He was at once both quickened,
(or raised) and justified also. And that by [Spirit] they mean his Divine
nature, the opposition in both places evidently implies; for it is opposed to
his [Flesh] or humane nature. Now because he was quickened (or raised) by the
power of the Godhead, and at that raising him, he was justified also by God,
and declared justified by that Resurrection, (as he had been declared condemned
by his death) Hence, to [be justified] is put for his Resurrection; for that
was his justification, or declaration to all the world, that he was justified
from all the sins laid to his charge. And that other place I cited out of
Isaiah, has the same meaning also; for Christ there comforts himself against
the Jews condemning him, and putting him to death, with the hopes of Gods
justifying of him, when he should have gone through that work. And Christ's
meaning there is this, God will raise me up, and acquit me, though you condemn
and kill me. In the other Prophets you shall find Christ still comforting
himself against his condemnation at his death, with the thoughts of his
Resurrection which he foresaw as shortly to follow after it; as here in Esaias
he comforts himself with these hopes of his being justified after their
condemnation of him. For instance, Psa. 16. 9. My flesh shall rest in hope,
thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy One to see
corruption. Which words (you know) Peter in the Acts does twice interpret of
Christ's Resurrection. In like manner here in Esaias, against his death and
condemnation he comforts himself with the hopes of Gods justification of him at
his Resurrection, He is near who justifies me, (and he shall help me) who
shall condemn? And further, His Resurrection therefore called his first
begetting.
to confirm and strengthen this notion, because his Resurrection was the first
moment of this his justification from our sins, therefore it is, that God calls
it his first begetting of Christ, [This day have I begotten thee] speaking
manifestly of his Resurrection, Acts 13. 35. And the reason of his so calling
it, is, because all the while before he was covered with sin, and the likeness
of sinful flesh; But now having flung it off, he appears like Gods Son indeed,
(as if newly begotten.) And thus also there comes to be the fuller conformity
between Christ justification and ours: For as our justification is at our
first being born again, And therein a conformity between our Regeneration, and
his Resurrection.
so was Christ also at this his first glorious begetting. He was under an
Attainder before; here was the Act of Restitution first passed. And as at our
Conversion (which is to us a Resurrection) we pass from death to life; (that
is, from an estate of death and condemnation, unto justification of life) so
did Christ also at his Resurrection, (which to him was are begetting) pass
from an estate of death and guilt laid on him, to an estate of Life and Glory,
and justification from guilt; and so shall appear, as the word is, Heb. 9. ult.
(as he does now in heaven) without sin; for he became to be without sin from
that very moment. Thus I have shown how Christ was justified at his
Resurrection.

Now then in the 2.. 2.
place, 2. That Believers were all justified in Christ his justification, as a
Common person representing them.
I am to show that this his justification, and pronouncing him without sin,
thus done at his Resurrection, was done to him as the First Fruits, and as to a
Common person bearing our persons, and so, in our names. From whence will
necessarily follow, as the Conclusion of all, That the persons of all the elect
Believers, have been justified before God in Christ, as their Head, at, or
from the time of his Resurrection; and so that Act of Justification to have
been so firmly past, as it cannot be revoked for ever.

Now this is proved, Proved 1. (...) the common analogy of the former
instances.
first, by the very same reason or respect that he was said to be the
first fruits of them that sleep, as representing the rest in his Resurrection,
(which I showed at large in the former Chap. upon the same ground he is to be
so looked at also in this his Justification pronounced upon him at his
Resurrection, even as the first fruits also of them that are justified. And so
in the same sense, and by the same reason that we are said to be risen with
Christ, in his Resurrection; we must also be said to be justified with him, in
this his justification, at his Resurrection. And indeed, In all things which
God does unto us Christ is the first fruits, and God does them first upon him.
(to enlarge this a little,) as there is the same reason and ground for the one
that there is for the other, (he being a public person in both) so the rule
will hold in all other things which God ever does to us, or for us, which are
common with Christ, and were done to him; that in them all Christ was the
first fruits, and they may be said to have been done in us, or to us, yea by
us, in him, and with him. Yea, what ever God meant to do for us, and in us,
what ever privilege or benefit he meant to bestow upon us, he did that thing
first to Christ, and (some way) bestowed the like on him as a Common person,
that so it might be by a solemn formal Act ratified, and be made sure to be
done to us in our persons in due time, having first been done to him
representing our persons; and that by this course taken, it might (when done to
us) be effected by virtue of what was first done to him. Thus God meaning to
sanctify us, Thus in Sanctification Christ first sanctified, then we in him.
he sanctifies Christ first, in him as a Common person sanctifying us all: For
their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified through thy
truth, John 17. 19. He sanctifies the humane nature of Christ personal, that
he may sanctify Christ mystical, (that is, his body) and him first, as a
Common person representing us, that so we being virtually, and representatively
sanctified in him, may be sure to be sanctified afterward in our own persons,
by means of his sanctification. And so in like manner for our sakes he was
justified in the Spirit; because we were to be justified, and so to be
justified first in him, So in all blessings else.
and with him as a Common person. Now this rule holds in all blessings else
bestowed; for Paul pronounces of them all, that God has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. 3. which God did so order,
(that as he speaks of ordaining salvation to be by faith, Romans 4. 16.) that all
those blessings might be sure to all the seed. For this formal investiture of
estating us into all blessings by such solemn acts done to Christ as our Head
and Representer of us, makes what he intends to bestow, sure beforehand, by an
irrepealable act and sentence, which has its warrant in all Laws of men, as I
have shown, and shall anon again urge.

And secondly, 2. Proved by the equity of that in Adams condemnation we were
all condemned.
by the equity of the same Law that in Adam we were all condemned, (Adam being
a Type of him in this) by the same Law (I say) we were all justified in Christ
when he was justified, else the Type were not therein fulfilled. Now the
sentence of condemnation was first passed upon Adam alone, yet considered as a
Common person for us; therefore also this Acquitance and Justification was then
passed toward Christ alone, as a public person for us. Yea, in this his
being justified, Christ much rather a Common person in his being justified,
then Adam was in his condemnation.
Christ must much rather be considered as a Common person representing us, then
Adam was, in his condemnation: For Christ in his own person, as he had no
sin, so he had no need of any justification from sin, nor should ever have
been condemned: And therefore this must be only in a respect unto our sins
imputed to him; and if so, then in our stead. And so herein, he was more purely
to be considered as a Common person for us, then ever Adam was, in his being
condemned. For Adam, besides his standing as a Common person for us, was
furthermore condemned in his own person; but Christ in being justified from
sin, could only be considered as standing for others. Thus Romans 5. 18.
Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even [so] (or, in like manner) by the righteousness of that one
(man Christ) the free gift came upon all men (namely, in Christ) unto
justification of life. He parallels both with a [So,] only with this difference
between Adams being a Common person for us, (and so between the ground of our
being condemned in him) and Christ his being a Common person for us, (and our
Acquitance in him) that the condemnation came upon all by a necessary, natural
covenant, (for by such a covenant was Adam appointed a Common person for us)
but Christ his being appointed thus a Common person for us, it was by a free
gift of grace; and therefore in like manner by a free gift of grace it is that
the imputation of that which he did, or was done to him, is reckoned ours. As
then in Adam all dyed, when he sinned, (as the Apostle speaks) so in Christ
were all justified, when he was justified For as in his death Christ was a
public person for us, and in all that befell him; so in his Resurrection, and
in all that was then done to him; and so, in this his being then justified. And
as when he dyed, the Just was put to death for the unjust, (as Peter speaks) so
when he rose and was justified, the Just that needed no justification was
justified for the unjust, who else had been condemned; and so we were then
justified with him.

CAP. VI.
How our faith may raise from hence just matter of Triumph about our
Justification. An explication how we are justified by faith, although justified
in Christ at his Resurrection.
ANd hereupon is grounded this Triumph of Faith here, from Christ's
Resurrection, Who shall condemn? It is Christ that is risen: The meaning
whereof is, that was justified at his Resurrection, ([ Justified in the Spirit]
and [ Quickened in the Spirit] being all one) and we in him: Yea, and a [
rather] is put upon this, rather then upon his death; for this act was a
solemn discharge from all sin and condemnation; it was a legal Acquitance
given to Christ for all our sins, and so to us also considered as in him. His
Death was but the satisfaction and payment; but this is the first Act of
Absolution: Yea, and this is the Original Act, which is upon Record between
God and Christ; and our Justification and Atonement (when we are justified by
faith in Christ) is but a Copy fetched from this Roll, and Court sentence then
pronounced.

And such a way and course to ratify and make Acts good and legal, (even to
have them done by another representing ones person) is common among men, (as
those instances I formerly gave do show.) An Attorney at Law receives a debt,
or an Acquitance for a debt, paid or given for another man, and it is as
legal, as if the man himself, or Creditour had done it, and the Debtour had
received the Acquitance himself. Yea, Acts of the greatest and highest
concernment are oft-times no otherwise transacted; as the marriages of Princes
are by Proxy solemized, their Ambassadors representing their persons, and
contracting and marrying their wives in their stead, which acts are thereby
made as irrevocable, and irrepealable, as if themselves had in person done
them. And so if we were justified when Christ did rise and was justified, our
justification then cannot be reversed, but stands as legal and warrantable as
any act that God or man ever ratified or confirmed. And Who then shall condemn?

Only, A Caution.
for farther explication sake, (lest there be a mistake) let me add this, That
it is necessary that we be justified in our own persons by faith,
(notwithstanding this former Act thus legally passed) whereby we lay hold upon
what God did thus before for us in Christ, to the end that God upon our
believing may according to his own rules justify his justifying of us unto
all the world; which until we do believe, he could not do: For according
to the revealed Rules of his Word, (which he professes to proceed by at the
latter day) there is a curse and a sentence of condemnation pronounced against
us, under which we stand til he shall take it off, by giving us faith; unto
which he has, in the same Word made the promise of justifying us in our own
persons, as before he had done in Christ. Yet still notwithstanding, so, as,
although when we first believe, then only Justification is actually and
personally applied to us; yet at Christ's Resurrection, and in his being then
justified, this act and sentence was virtually pronounced upon us; and so does
necessarily require, and exact at Gods hands, the bestowing faith upon us; that
so by virtue of this former act passed, we come to be actually justified in our
own consciences, and before all the world: And so our Justification which was
but secretly wrought, and passed upon us in Christ, is never made void, but
stands irrepealable; and so ratified, that our personal justification by faith
does always infallibly second and succeed it. And (to illustrate it a little)
our condemnation in Adam, and this our justification in Christ, do in this
hold parallel together, That as in Adam we were all virtually condemned, ( In
Adam all dye) (and that legally enough too, for thereupon came out that
Statute Law, Statutum est, It is appointed that all should dye) and yet we are
not actually in our own persons condemned, till we are borne of him; nor do
we personally dye, until we lay down our flesh: Even so is it in the matter
of our Justification; it was done virtually in Christ, and afterward when we
believe, is actually passed in and upon our selves. Now I call this former but
a virtuall Justification, even as by the sentence of condemnation passed upon a
Malefactor, he is called a dead man, that is, he is so virtually and in Law,
(as we say) though naturally he dye not many days after, but in that respect
may be still alive: so by Christ's being justified, we are all virtually, and in
Law justified, through a secret, yet irrepealable Covenant between God and
Christ, who only did then know who were his.

And for a confirmation even of this also, That God accounts all the Elect
justified in his justifying of Christ, we shall not need to go any farther
then the words of this Text, if we do but diligently compare their standing
here, with that of theirs in that place out of which they are taken, and where
we find them first recorded and spoken, namely, in that 50. of Esaias, 7, 8. He
is near that justifies me, who is he that shall condemn? Now there (as
Interpreters agree, and as the Context shows) those words are spoken by Christ
himself: for ver. 5. he speaks of Gods boring his ear to do his will, (the
same expression that is used of Christ, Psalm. 40. 6.) and farther says, I gave
my b^ to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that pulled off the hair, and I
hid not my face from shame and spitting: (all which you may read in Christ's
sufferings, Mat. 26. 27. and 27. 26.) And he spoke before (in ver. 4.) of Gods
having given him the tongue of the learned, to speak a word in season to him
that is weary: (which you may read done by Christ, Mat. 11. 28.) Now those
words were spoken by Christ, to comfort himself against the Jews condemning
him, as considering that God would justify him; as at his Resurrection (you
have heard) he did. Now mark it, those very words which Isaiah brings in Christ
speaking as of himself alone, (those very words) Paul here boldly applies (in
the like triumph) to all the Elect of Christ, Who shall condemn? It is God
that justifies; and this, because Christ is dead, and risen, and acquitted by
God. Christ spoke those words as a public person, in the name of all his
Elect, whom he in his death, and in his justification represented; and for that
very respect Paul speaks the like words over again, of all Elect Believers, as
being as truly and really intended of them, when spoken by Christ, as of
himself, and his own person. He is near that justifies me, (says Christ) who
shall condemn? (namely) Me, or mine Elect, whose persons I sustain. And Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? (says Paul) It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? for Christ has dyed, and been condemned for
them, and Christ was justified from that condemnation, and they in him. And
because the justification of himself, which Christ spoke of as looked for from
God, was to be made at his Resurrection, (as has been said) therefore Paul
here puts a [ rather] upon his Resurrection.

And farther to establish this, as you heard before out of Romans 6. 10. that in
respect of Sanctification we were dead with Christ, even then when he dyed; so
in the 2. of Coloss. 13. we are said to be risen with him, in respect of our
justification, (which is the thing in hand.) The words are, And you being dead
in your sins, (namely, the guilt of your sins) and the uncircumcision of your
flesh, (that is, in respect of the power of corrupt nature) has he quickened
together with him, [having forgiven you all your trespasses.] See here, the
forgiveness of our sins, or our justification, is called a quickening, or a
raising up of us, (as the 12. ver. has it) together with him, in a conformity
and relation to that justification from our sins, which at his Resurrection he
received in our names. His meaning is, he was justified then, and in our names;
and so we are now justified through the virtue of that our communion with him
therein: For if you mark the connection of the words with what follows, ver. 14.
you will find this forgiving of their trespasses (ver. 13.) through their
being quickened together with him, not only to have been done when they
believed, and so when they had that justification personally first applied to
them, (of which, it is true, the words in the 12. ver. are to be understood)
but also then to have been done, when he having (as it follows in the 14. ver.)
blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances which was against us, nailing it to
his Cross, and having spoiled Principalities and Powers, and got the victory,
(namely, in his rising again) had made a show of them openly, (in his ascending
to heaven) triumphing over them [(...)] in himself, (as the Margent has it)
(of which words I shall farther speak in the next Head) So as then when Christ
did this in himself, then were our sins forgiven; then were we acquitted with
him, and triumphed with him; he doing all this in our stead, representing us.

CHAP. VII.
How all this, both the support of our faith, and our Justification by Christ's
Resurrrection, is sealed up to us in Baptism. The Conclusion. How faith may
make use of Christ's Resurrection in its pleas to God.
ANd all this our communion with Christ in his Resurrection, both in respect of
Sanctification, (which the 6. of the Romans holds forth) and of Justification,
(which this place in the Coloss. holds forth) is lively (as both places
declare) set out, and sealed up to us, in the Sacrament of Baptism. Romans 6. 3,
4. we are said to be buried with him in Baptism, etc. and Col. 2. 12. Buried
with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him. The ominent thing
signified and represented in Baptism, is not simply the blood of Christ as it
washes us from sin; but there is a farther representation therein of Christ's
Death, Burial, and Resurrection, in the Baptized's being first buried under
water, and then rising out of it; and this not in a bare conformity unto
Christ, but in a representation of a communion with Christ, in that his Death
and Resurrection: Therefore it is said, [ We are buried with him in Baptism:]
and, [ Wherein you are risen with him:] It is not simply said, like as he was
buried, and rose; but [ With him.] So as our communion and one-nesse with him
in his Resurrection, is represented to us therein, and not only our conformity
or likeness unto him therein. And so Baptism represents this to us, that
Christ having once in himself sustained the persons of all the Elect, in his
Burial and Resurrection, that now upon the party himself who is baptized, is
personally, particularly, and apparently re-acted the same Part again, in his
Baptism; thereby showing what his communion with Christ before was, in what
was then done to Christ; that he then was buried with Christ, and rose with
him: and upon that ground, is now in this outward sign of Baptism, (as in a
show or representation) both buried, and also rises again.

And moreover, hence it is, that the Answer of a good conscience, (which is
made the inward effect of this Ordinance of Baptism, 1 Pet. 3. 21.) is there
also attributed unto Christ's Resurrection, as the thing signified and
represented in Baptism, and as the cause of that answer of a good conscience:
Even Baptism (says he) does now also save us (as being the Ordinance that
seals up salvation) not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, or the
washing of the outward man; but the answer of a good conscience toward God,
[By the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.] To open these words: Our consciences are
that principle in us, which are the seat of the guilt of all the sins of the
whole man; unto whose Court they all come to accuse us, as unto Gods Deputy:
which Conscience is called Good or Evil, as the state of the man is. If his
sin remain unpardoned, then as his estate is damnable, so his conscience is
evil: If his sins be forgiven, and his person justified, his conscience is
said to be good: Conscience having its denomination from the man's state, even
as the Urine is called good or bad, as the state of the man's body is healthful
or unsound, whose Urine it is. Now in Baptism, forvivenesse of sins, and
justification, being sealed up to a believers faith and conscience, under that
lively representation of his Communion with Christ in his Resurrection: hence
this is made the fruit of Baptism, that the good conscience of a believer
sealed up in Baptism, has where withal from thence to answer all accusations
of sin, that can, or do at any time come in upon him; and all this as it is
there added, [ By virtue of the resurrection of Jesus Christ:] namely, in this
respect, that his Communion with Christ in his Resurrection, has been
represented in his Baptism as a ground of his faith, and of that Answer unto
all accusations. So that indeed, the same thing that Paul says by way of
triumph and defiance to all accusations, Who shall condemn? [Christ is risen]
the very same thing Peter here mentions, though not by way of Defiance, yet of
a Believers Answer and Apology, That if sins do come to condemn or accuse,
a good conscience is ready to say, Christ is risen, and I was then justified in
him; There is my Answer, which nothing in heaven nor hell is able to reply
unto. This is the answer of a good conscience, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ.

Now to crown this second Pillar of Faith with this Coronis or Conclusion,
Application.
by way of Application or Direction to a believers faith, How says is to make
use of this in pleading our Justification.
How to make use of Christ's Resurrection in point of non-condemnation. You
heard before, out of Romans 6. that in respect of Mortification (as the Apostle
there reasons) we may be truly said to have been perfectly dead to all sin
in Christ's dying unto sin once: and through his representing us therein as
dying unto sin, in and with him. So as although we be for the present but
imperfectly mortified in our selves, yet when corruptions arise, the Apostle
bids us help our selves against them by faith, [ reasoning] our selves to stand
wholly dead to sin, when Christ dyed; and so to conclude from thence, that we
shall one day be fully dead to sin, because we then did perfectly dye in Christ
unto it: which kind of reasoning also God would have us use as a motive (and
of all motives that are in the Gospel it is the strongest) against any
corruption when as it arises; Shall I that am dead to sin in Christ (and so am
freed from it) shall I live any longer therein? Ver. 2. Now as God would have
our faith make this use of our Communion with Christ in his death, in point of
sanctification; just so, when guilt of sin arises in thy conscience to accuse
or threaten condemnation, [ reason] thou thy self (as the Apostles word is in
that other case) or reckon thy self (as our translation has it) justified in
Christ, in his Justification, which was done at his Resurrection. Yea, and
seeing God would have thee use thy Communion with Christ in his Death, as an
argument to move thee to mortify sin, (bidding thee to reckon thy self dead to
sin in Christ) do thou desire him in like manner, to reckon thee as justified
at Christ's Resurrection (for the ground of both is the same) and return that as
an argument to him, to move him to justify thee. And this is that answer of a
good conscience which Peter speaks of; this is the meaning of Paul's challenge,
Who shall condemn? Christ is risen.

And should thy heart object, and say, But I know not whether I was one of
those that God reckoned justified with Christ when he arose: Then go thou to
God, and ask him boldly, whether he did not do this for thee, and whether
thou were not one of them intended by him; put God to it, and God will (by
virtue of Christ's Resurrection for thee) even himself [ Answer] thy faith this
question, ere thou art aware; He will not deny it: And to secure thee the more,
know, that however Christ will be sure to look to that, for thee; so as that
thou having been then intended, (as if thy heart be drawn to give it self up
to Christ, thou were) shall never be condmned.

SECT. IV.
FAITH supported by Christ's ASCENSION, AND Sitting at Gods right hand.
ROMANS 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ, [who is even at the right
hand of God.]
CHAP. I.
A Connection of this third Head, with the two former: Showing how it affords a
farther degree of Triumph. Two things involved in it: 1. Christ's Ascension: 2.
Christ's power and authority in heaven.
I Come next to this third great Pillar and support of Faith, Christ's Being at
Gods right hand: and to show how the view and consideration hereof may
strengthen faith seeking justification, and pardon of sin: Who is he that
condemns? Christ is even at Gods right hand.

In the opening of which, I shall keep to the begun method, both by showing how
Justification it self depends upon this, and the evidence thereof to us: both
which the Apostle had here in his eye, and from both which our faith may derive
comfort and assurance. And I mean to keep punctually to the matter of
Justification only, as in the former.

These two latter that remain here in the Text, ( Christ's sitting at Gods right
hand, and his interceding for us) are brought in here by the Apostle, as those
which have a redundant force and prevalencie in them, for the non-condemnation
of the Elect: that although the two former abundantly served to secure it; yet
these two added to the former, do make the triumph of faith more complete and
full, and us more then Conquerours, as it after follows. Nor does this place
alone make mention of Christ's sitting at Gods right hand (which I now am first
to handle) in this its relation, and influence into our Justification, and the
assurance of faith about it: but you have it to the same end, use, and purpose,
alleged by that other great Apostle, 1. Pet. 3. from the 18. to the 22. And
if the scopes of these two Apostles in both places be compared, they are the
same. Here the Resurrection of Christ and his sitting at Gods right hand are
brought in as the ground of this bold challenge and triumph of faith: and
there, is Peter, is mentioned the Answer or Plea of a good conscience, in a
believer justified, which it puts into the Court, and opposes against all
condemning guilts: (so it is called, ver. 21.) The Apostle alleging the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ as one ground of it, ( the answer of a good
conscience, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ:) And then further to back and
strengthen this Plea or Answer of a good conscience, the Apostle puts his
Ascension and sitting at Gods right hand into the Bill, as further grounds
confirming it, so it follows, [ who is gone into Heaven, and is at the right
hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and Powers, being made subject to him:]
All which the Apostle here expresses in one word (as enough to carry it) that
Christ is even at Gods right hand. The soul has a sufficient answer against
condemnation in Christ's death, and Resurrection, full enough, though it should
stop there; yea therein can faith triumph, though it went no further: for it
can show a full satisfaction given in his death, and that accepted by God for
us; and Christ acquitted, and we in him: Therefore faith (you see) comes to a [
rather] there. But then, let it go on, to consider Jesus sitting at Gods right
hand, and making intercession for us; and then faith will triumph and insult
over all accusers, be more then a Conqueror; then it comes not to a rather
only, (as here) but to a [ much more] shall we be saved by his life; thus Romans
5. 10. And the meaning thereof is, that if his death had power to pay all our
debts, and justify us at first; then much more has his life this power: So
that his death is but the ground and foundation of our faith herein, and the
lowest step of this ladder; but these other, are the top and full triumph of
faith therein. And our spirits should rise, as the Apostle herein rises: Faith
upon these wings may not only fly above the Gunshot of all accusations, and
condemners; but even clean out of their sight, and so far above all such
thoughts and fears, as it may reach to a security that sins are forgotten, and
shall be remembered no more. What joy was there in the Disciples, when they saw
Christ risen? Ioh. 20. Therefore in the Primitive times, it was used as a voice
of joy: and to this day the Grecian Christians s entertain each other, at that
time of the year, with these words, The Lord is risen: your Surety is out of
Prison; fear not. But (as Christ said in another case, so say I) what will you
say, if you see your Surety ascended up to Heaven, and that, as far above
Angels and Principalities (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1.) as the Heavens are
above the Earth? will you not in your faiths and hopes proportionably ascend,
and climb up also; and have thoughts of pardon, as far exceeding your ordinary
thoughts as the heavens are above the earth? Therefore first view him, as
ascending into Heaven, ere ever he comes to be at Gods right hand, and see
what matter of triumph that will afford you; for that you must first suppose,
ere you can see him at Gods right hand; and so is necessarily included, thought
not expressed here: But that place fore-quoted out of Peter (1 Pet. 3.) gives
us both these two particulars included in it: 1. His Ascension, [Who is gone
into Heaven;] And 2. his power and authority there, [Is at Gods right hand, and
has all power and authority subject to him] and prompts both these, as fit
matter to be put into a good conscience its Answer and Apology why it should
not be condemned: and therefore both may here as well come in into faiths
triumph; and that as being intended also by the Apostle, and included in this
one expression. He speaks with the least, to show what cause faith had to
triumph, for the least expression of it: his purpose being but to give a hint
to faith, of that which co^prehensively contains many things in it, which he
would have us distinctly to consider for our comfort.

CHAP. II.
Showing first what evidence for our justification, Christ's Ascension into
Heaven affords unto our Faith, upon that first forementioned consideration of
his being a Surety for us.
FIrst then to see what triumph his ascending into Heaven will add unto our
faith in matter of non-condemnation.

And herein, 1. By considering what was the last action he did when he was to
Ascend: Blessing his Disciples.
first there is not nothing in it to consider, what he then did, and what was
his last Act when he was to take his rise, to fly up to Heaven. He blessed his
Disciples, and thereby left a blessing upon earth with them, for all his elect,
to the end of the World: The true reason and mind of which blessing them was,
that he being now to go to execute the eternal office of his Priesthood in
Heaven, (of which God had sworn, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec,) As Melehisedec in the Type, blessed Abraham, and in him all the
faithful as in his loins, (therefore the Apostle said that Levi paid tithes
unto Melchisedec in Abraham's loins; therefore he was blessed in his loins) so
did Christ begin this new and second part of his Priesthood, with blessing the
Apostles, and in them, all the elect, to the end of the World. This was the
last thing that Christ did on earth, yea this he did, whilst ascending; he was
taken up, whilst he did it: So Luke 24. 50. 51. And thus solemnly he now did
this, to show that the curse was gone, and that sin was gone; and that action
speaks thus much, as if Christ himself had said; To show the curse was
removed, and their sins pardoned.
O my brethren (for so he styled his Disciples, after his Resurrection) I have
been dead, and in dying made a curse for you: now that curse I have fully
removed, and my Father has aquited me, and you, for it: and now I can be bold
to bless you, and pronounce all your sins forgiven, and your persons
justified. For that is the intendment and foundation of blessing, [Blessed is
the man whose sins are forgiven him] and therefore that was the true meaning of
his blessing them: which he reserved thus as his last Act, to show, how by his
death he had redeemed them from the curse of the Law, and now going to Heaven,
was able to bless them with all the spiritual blessings that are there, and
which Heaven can afford; for Heavenly they are called in that respect, And in
blessing his Apostles thus he blessed all that should believe in him.
Ephesians. 1. 4. And as in Abraham (blessed by Melchisedec,) all the faithful
were blessed: so, in these Apostles, all the elect to come are blessed. As when
God individually blessed Adam and Eve, at the first Creation, yet he in them,
blessed all that were for ever to come of them: so Christ in blessing them,
blessed us, and all that shall believe, through their word, to the end of the
World. And that they were thus then to be considered, as common persons,
receiving this blessing for us all; appears by Christ's words then uttered, [
I am with you to the end of the World] (i. e. with you, and all your
successors, both Ministers, and other believers) Mat. 28. ult. And Christ
herein did, as God did before him: When God had done his work of creation, He
looked upon all he had done, and saw that it was good, and he blessed it: Thus
did Jesus Christ; now that he had by that one offering, perfected for ever all
the elect, he comfortably vieweth, and pronounces it perfect, and them
blessed; and so goes to Heaven, to keep and enjoy the Sabbath of all there.

Now Secondly let us see him Ascending; A second support from the very Act of
Ascending.
and see what comfort that will also afford our faith, toward the persuasion
of Justification. The Apostles stood gazing on him; and so do you lift up your
hearts to gaze on him by faith; and view him in that act, as he is passing
along into Heaven, as leading sin, hell, death, and devil in triumph, at his
Chariot wheels. And therewith let your faith triumph, in a further evidence of
justification. Thus Ephesians 4. 8. out of the 68. Psalm ver. 18. the Apostle
says, How it was an act of Triumph over death, hell, sin, etc.
When he ascended up on high [he led captivity captive:] (to which Hebraisme
the Latin phrase [ vincere victoriam] to win a victory does answer) then He
led captive all our spiritual enemies, that would have captived us, they being
now captived. Now leading of captives is always after a perfect victory. And
therefore, whereas at his Death he had conquered them, at his Rising, scattered
them, now at his Ascension he leads them captive: And so that Psalm. in the
Type, begins, ver. 1. Let God [arise] and let his enemies [be scattered;] let
them flee before him: so at his Resurrection they did: And then he ascends in
triumph (ashere) in token of victory, [he is ascended up on high ver. 18.] he
ascends as David after his victory, up to Mount Sion (for the celebrating of
which that Psalm. seems to have been made by David) whereof this was the
intended Type. Two Acts of Triumph in it.
And two [ Actus triumphales] triumphing Acts there were, here mentioned; 1.
Leading the captives bound to his Chariot wheels; as the manner of the Roman
triumphs was, when the Conqueror went up to the Capitol; and other Heathens in
David's time: As Achilles led Hector captive, who tied his feet to his Chariot
wheels, and dragged him dead round about the walls of Troy: Now thus did Christ
then deal with our sins, and all other enemies. The Second act is casting
abroad of gifts, [He gave gifts to men.] It was the custom at their triumphs
to cast new Coins [missilia] abroad among the multitude; so does Christ throw
the greatest gifts for the good of men, that ever were given. Therefore, who
shall condemn? sins and devils, are not only dead, but triumphed over.
Compare with this, that other place, Colos. 2. 15. Having spoiled
Principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly [triumphing] over them
[in himself:] So I read it, and the Greek bears it, and so it is in the
margent varied: it is a manifest allusion unto the manner of Triumphs after
victories among the Romans; even unto two of the most notable parts thereof;
the first of spoiling the enemy, upon the place, ere they stirred out of the
field: and this was done by Christ on the Cross, [ Having spoiled them first]
as ver. 14. has it. He speaks it of the devils our enemies, and accusers;
they had all Gods threatenings in his Law, and the Ceermoniall Law (the Bond for
our debt unto the Moral Law) to show for it; in these lay the power of the
Devil over us, that he could boldly come to God and accuse us, and sue our
bond; And therefore Heb. 2. 14. he is said to have the power of Death. Now
Christ first took away all his power, and spoiled him of all his ensigns,
weapons, and colors; which he did on the place where the battle was fought,
namely, on the Cross; and nailed our bond thereto, and having paid the debt,
left the bond canceld, ere he stirred off the Cross. But then having thus
spoiled these enemies on the Cross; he further makes a public triumphall
show of them in his own person, which is a second Act; as the manner of the
Roman Emperors was, in their great triumphs, to ride through the City in the
greatest state, and have all the spoils carried before them, and the Kings and
Nobles whom they had taken, they tied to their Chariots, and led them as
Captives: And this did Christ at his ascension: (for of his triumphing at his
Ascension, I take this Triumph in this Epistle to the Colos. to be understood;
and so to be interpreted by that forecited 4. of the Ephesians:) He plainly
manifesting by this public open show of them at his Ascension, that he had
spoiled, and fully subdued them on the Cross. That which has diverted
Interpreters from thinking this of 2. Col. to have been the triumph of his
Ascension, has been this, That the triumph is said to have been made [(...)]
which they interpret [ in it] as if it referred to the Cross, (mentioned ver.
14.) as the place of it; when as it may as well be translated [ in himselfe] i.
e. [ in his own power and strength;] noting, how he alone did this, which other
Conquerours do not; they conquer not in themselves, and by themselves, which
Christ did. And yet it was the Law, that if the Roman Emperors or Generals
themselves took any thing in War, they had a peculiar honor to dedicate it in
triumph more peculiarly: Now Christ conquered in himself, and therefore
triumphed in himself, and himself alone. And thus it became our Redeemer
(like another Sampson) not only to break Sins bars, and fling off Hell-gates,
and come out of that Prison he was in; but as in sign of a Trophie, to take
them on his back, and carry them up the hill, (as Sampson (the Type of him) did
the gates of the City to an high hill) himself triumphantly carrying them on
his own shoulders.

Now did Christ then, who was your Surety, thus triumph? then let your faith
triumph likewise; for this was not only done by your Surety, but in your
stead; seeing this [ for us] here, is to be put to each thing mentioned. The
Apostle calls for this at our hands here, We are more then Conquerors, says he,
ver. 37.

Then, A third support to faith from Gods first entertainment of Christ when he
came first to Heaven.
thirdly, see him entering into Heaven; when he comes first to Court after this
great undertaking; how does God look on him? is God satisfied with what he
has done? As (you know) when a General comes home, there uses to be great
observing how the King takes his service, as performed according to commission;
Christ as a Surety undertook for sinners, fully to conquer all our enemies; and
God bade him look that he did it perfectly, or never see his face more: Heb. 5.
He was to be perfect through sufferings, and those sufferings to be such as to
perfect us also; Heb. That this is a further evidence that God is satisfied for
sin.
10. Now behold your Surety is like a Conqueror entered Heaven: let that
convince you; that he has satisfied the debt, and performed his commission to
a tittle: God would never have suffered him to come thither else; but as soon
as ever his head had peept into Heaven, have sent him down again to perform
the rest; But God lets him enter in, and he comes boldly, and confidently, and
God lets him stay there: therefore be convinced, that he has given God full
satisfaction. Christ himself uses this argument, as the strongest that could
be brought to convince the World, that his righteousness (which he had in his
Doctrine taught them,) was the righteousness which men were only to be saved
by, the true Righteousness of God indeed. John 16. 9, 10. He shall convince
the world of righteousness: that is, work faith in the hearts of men, to
believe and lay hold on my righteousness, as the true righteousness that God
has ordained: and this because (says he) I go to my Father, and you shall see
me no more: That is, by this argument and evidence it is, and shall be evinced,
that I who undertook to satisfy for sin, and to procure a perfect
righteousness, have perfectly performed it: and that it is a righteousness
which Gods justice does accept of, to save sinners by; In that I after my
death, and finishing this work, will ascend up to my Father, into Heaven, and
keep my standing there, and you shall see me no more: Whereas, if I had not
fulfilled all righteousness, and perfectly satisfied God, you may be sure
there would be no going into Heaven for me, nor remaining there: God would
send me down again, to do the rest, and you should certainly see me with
shame sent back again; but I go to Heaven and you shall see me no more.

CHAP. III.
Showing what evidence also Christ's sitting at Gods right hand, having been
our Surety, affords to our faith for justification.
NOw then in the next place, for his being, or sitting at Gods right hand,
which is the second particular to be spoken of. As soon as Christ was carried
into Heaven, look, as all the Angels fell down and worshipped him; so his
Father welcomed him, with the highest grace that ever yet was shown; The
words which he then spoke, The welcome God gave Christ when he came to Heaven.
The words he first spoke to him.
we have recorded Psalm. 110. Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footestoole. You may by the way observe, for the illustration of
this: how upon all the several parts of performance of his office, either God
is brought in speaking to Christ, or Christ to his Father. Thus when he chose
him first to be our Mediator, he takes an oath, Thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec. Again, when Christ came to take upon him our
nature, the words he spoke are recorded, Lo I come to do thy will, a body
have thou fitted me: so Heb. 10. out of the 40. Psalm. Likewise when he hung
upon the Cross, his words unto God are recorded, Psalm. 22. 1. My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? In like manner when he rose again, Gods words used
then to him are recorded, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee,
Psalm. 2. (which place is expounded of the Resurrection, Acts 13. 33.) which is
as much as if he had said, Thou never appearedst like my Son till now; for
whereas I chose a Son to be glorified with power and Majesty, hitherto thou
have appeared only as a Son of man, [Enosh, sorry man] hitherto thou have been
made sin, and a curse; not like my Son; but have appeared in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and of a servant all besmeared with blood; therefore this is the
first day wherein I make acount I have begotten thee; even now when thou first
beginnest to appear out of that sinful hue, and likeness of sinful flesh:
now I own thee for my Son indeed. And in him, he owned us all, thus at his
Resurrection. And then last of all when he comes into Heaven, the first word
God speaks to him is, Son, sit thou at my right hand; thou have done all my
work, and now I will do thine; (he gives him a Quietus est) rest here; sit
here till I make all thy enemies thy foote-stoole.

And now, what say you, are ye satisfied yet, that God is satisfied for your
sins? What superabundant evidence, must this Christ's sitting at Gods right
hand, His sitting down at Gods right hand, afford a double evidence.
give to a doubting heart? It argues, First that Christ for his part has
perfectly done his work; and that there is no more left for him to do by way
of satisfaction: This the word [ sitting] implies. Secondly, It argues that God
is as fully satisfied on his part: this his sitting [at Gods right hand]
implies.

For the first; 1. That he had perfectly and completely performed all his work
that was to be done by him for our justification.
The phrase of [ Sitting] does betoken rest, when work is fulfilled, and
finished: Christ was not to return, till he had accomplished his work. Heb.
10. The Apostle comparing the force and excellency of Christ's Sacrifice, with
those of the Priests of the old Law, says, that Those Priests [stood] daily
offering of Sacrifices, which can never take sins away. Their standing employed,
that they could never make satisfaction so, as to say, We have finished it: But
Christ (says he, ver. 12.) after he had offered up one sacrifice for ever,
[sate downe] etc. Mark how he opposes their standing, to his sitting down. He
sat as one who had done his work. Thus Heb. 4. 10. He that is entered into his
rest, (speaking of Christ, as I have elsewhere shown) has ceased from his
work, as God from his.

Secondly, 2. That God also accepted it, and was infinitely well pleased with
it.
this his being at Gods right hand, as strongly argues that God is satisfied:
for if God had not been infinitely well pleased with him, he would never have
let him come so near him; much less have advanced him so high as his right
hand. And therefore in that place even now cited, ( Heb. 10. ver. 10, 11, 12.
compared with the former verses) this is alleged as an evidence that Christ
had for ever taken sins away, (which those Priests of the Law could not do,
who therefore often offered the same Sacrifice, as ver. 11.) That this man,
after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever, [sate down on the
right hand of God] as thereby showing (and that most manifestly) that he had at
that once offered up such a satisfactory Sacrifice, as had pleased God for
ever; and thereupon took up his place at Gods right hand, as an evidence of it;
so possessing the highest place in Court. This setting him at Gods right hand,
is a token of special and highest favor. So Kings whom they were most pleased
with, they did set at their right hands, as Solomon did his Mother, 1 Kings 2.
19. and so Christ the Church his Queen, Psalm. 45. 9. and it was a favor which
God never after vouchsafed to any. Heb. 1. To which of all the Angels did he
say, Sit thou on my right hand? Therefore Phil. 2. it is not only said that he
exalted him, but [ superexaltavit] he highly exalted him, so as never any was
exalted: for he was made thereby higher then the heavens. Thus much for the
first Head.

CHAP. IV.
Demonstrates in the second place what influence Christ's Ascension has in a
believers non-condemnation, upon that second premised consideration of Christ's
being a Common person for us. The security that Faith may have from thence.
WE have thus seen what triumphing evidence and demonstration, both Christ's
Ascension, and sitting at Gods right hand, do afford us for this, that Christ
being considered as our Surety, has therefore undoubtedly subdued our enemies
and sins, and satisfied God. Let us now consider further, what force,
efficacy, and influence these two (both his Ascending and fitting at Gods
right hand as an Head, and Common person for us) have in them toward the
assured working and accomplishment of the salvation of believers, his Elect;
And from the consideration of this which is a second Head, our faith may be yet
further confirmed and strengthened in its confidence. Who shall condemn? it is
Christ, that is at Gods right hand. I shall take in (as in the former) both his
Ascension and sitting at Gods right hand.

1. By considering,
And first for his Ascending; consider these two things in it which may uphold
our confidence. 1. That the great end and purpose of that his Ascending, the
errand, 1. That the great end of his Ascending and entering Heaven, was to
prepare a place for us and bring us thither.
the business he Ascended for, was to prepare and provide a place for us, and
to make way for our coming thither. This he assures his Disciples of, John 14.
2. In my Fathers house are many mansions: I go to prepare a place for you: as
Joseph was secretly sent before by Gods intendment to prepare a place in Egypt
for his Brethren, whom Gods providence meant to bring after him: so more openly
does Christ Ascend to Heaven, professedly declaring that to be his business; [
I go to prepare a place for you] and it is my Fathers house (says he) where I
can provide for you and make you welcome. You heard before, what welcome God
gave Christ, when he first arrived there; and what he said to him, and Christ
said (as it were) again to God: I come not alone, I have much company, many of
my brethren, and followers to come after (for it was the declared and avowed
end of his coming to prepare a place for them) I prayed when I was on earth,
that where I am they might be also; (John 17.) and now I am come hither, my
train must come in too; I am not complete without them, If you receive me you
must receive them also, and I am come to take up lodgings for them. Thus the
Captain of our salvation, (being made perfect through sufferings, and then
crowned with glory and honor, in bringing of many Sons to Glory; as Heb. 2.
10.) of which company he was Captain) is brought in saying to God, ver. 13.
Behold I and the Children which God has given me, (he speaks it, when brought
to glory) I am their Captain, and they must follow me; Where I am they must
be: Lo I am here, and am not to come alone, but to bring to glory, all the
Children which thou have given me. They shall be all welcome (says God) there
is room enough for them: [ many mansions] so that we need not fear, nor say
in our hearts doubting and despairing, Who shall ascend up to Heaven for us, to
bring us thither? (as Romans 10.) Christ has done it, That is the first thing,
but that is not all.

2. 2. That he entered in our very names and stead, took possession in our right.
He entered into Heaven in our very names, and so is to be considered in that
act as a Common person, (as well as in his Death and Resurrection) and so
representing us, and also taking possession in our right, and we in him; as a
guardian takes possession for Heirs under age: Heb. 6. 20. the forerunner is
for us entered into Heaven, the [ forerunner for us] that is, our forerunner.
A forerunner is a forerunner of followers, and of such as stay not long
behind, and usually goes before as a harbinger, to provide, and take up
lodgings for them that are to come, and writes the names of those who are to
come, over the doors of such and such rooms, that they may not be taken up by
any other. And so Heb. 12. 23. the names of the first borne are said to be
written in Heaven, or enrolled there; And 1. Pet. 1. 5. their places or
mansions in Heaven are said to be [ reserved for them]: they stand empty as it
were, yet taken up, so as none shall take them from them; their names and
titles to them being entered, and superscribed. And so he truly entered [pro
nobis] for us, that is, in our stead, and in our names, as a Common person: and
therefore the High Priest (in the Type) entered into the Holy of Holies, with
all the names of the Tribes on his Breast: even so does Christ with ours; even
as a Common person in our names, thereby showing that we are likewise to come
after him: and this is more then simply to prepare a place; it is to take
possession of a place, and give us a Right thereto.

So that your Faith through this consideration; What comfort faith may derive
from this. We may behold our selves in heaven already.
may see your selves as good as in Heaven already: For Christ is entered as a
Common Person for you. Justification has two parts, First, Acquitance from
sin, and freedom from condemnation: as here, Who shall condemn? And Secondly,
Justification of life, as it is called Romans 5. 18. that is, which gives title
to eternal life: Now dying and rising as a Common person for us, procures the
first, sets us perfectly enough in that state of freedom from condemnation;
But then, this Christ his entering into Heaven, as a Common Person, sets us
far above that state of Noncondemnation: It places us in Heaven with him.
You would think your selves secure enough, if you were ascended into Heaven. As
Heman said of his condition, that he was free among the dead, that is, he
reckoned himself (in his despair) free of the company in Hell, as well as if
he had been there; thinking his name enrolled among them, and his place taken
up: so you may reckon your selves (as the word is, Romans 6.) free of the company
of Heaven, and your places taken up there; so that when you come to die, you
shall go to heaven as to your own place, by as true a title, though not of your
own, as Judas went to Hell (which is called his own place, as ( Act. 1.) the
Apostle speaks) What a start is this? how far have you left below you pardon of
sins and non-condemnation? you are got above. How securely may you say, Who
shall condemn? Christ has ascended, and entered into Heaven. This is the
first branch of the second Head: The influence that Christ's Ascension has into
our justification and salvation.

CHAP. V.
Demonstrateth in like manner what influence Christ's sitting at Gods right hand
has into our justification, upon that second consideration, of his being a
Common person. And the security faith may have from thence.
THe consideration of his sitting at Gods right hand may in respect of the
influence, security unto our Faith; if we either consider the power and
authority of the place it self, By considering two things.
and what it is to sit at Gods right hand; Or secondly, the relation, the
person he bears and sustaines in his sitting there, even of a Common person,
in our right. And both these being put together will add strength mutually
each to other, and unto to our faith; both to consider, how great a prerogative
it is to sit at Gods right hand, and what such a one as sits there has power
to do; and then that Christ (who is invested with this power, and advanced to
it,) he possesses it all as our Head, and in our Right, as a Common person
representing us. And

1.. 1. 1 The prerogatives of the place, which are two.
Consider the prerogatives of the place it self; they are two:

1. Sovereignty of power, and Might, and Majesty.

2. Sovereignty of authority and judgment: either of which, may secure us from
non-condemnation.

1. 1 Sovereignty of Majesty and power.
Sovereignty of power and might: this the phrase [ sitting at Gods right hand]
implies, Mat. 26. 64. where Christ himself expounds the purport of it:
Hereafter you shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand [of power:]
And so, 1 Ephesians. 20. 22. this is made the privilege of Gods setting him at his
right hand, All things committed to him.
ver. 20. that he has put all things under his feet, ver. 22. A phrase
importing the highest sovereignty and power, not used of any Creatures, Angels,
or Men: none of them have other things under their feet, (i. e.) in so low a
subjection as to be their vassals; especially, not [ all] things; and therefore
by that very phrase, the putting all things under his feet, the Apostle argues
in that second to the Heb. that that man of whom David in the 8. Psalm (there
cited by him) had spoken, was no other but Christ; not Adam, nor the Angels;
for to neither of these has God subjected all things, ver. 5. but to Christ
only ver. 8. who sits in the highest Throne of Majesty: And to make his seat
the easier, has a world of enemies made his foote-stoole, even all his
enemies; (so Psalm. 110.) which is the highest triumph in the world. Now to what
end has God committed this power to him, Which power God has committed to him
to save his Elect.
but that himself may be his own Executor, and Administrator, and perform
all the Legacies which he made to those whom he died for? as the expression is
Heb. 9. 15, 16, and 17. verses. that none of his heirs might be wronged.
Fairer dealing then this could there ever be, nor greater security given to us.
This to have been Gods very end of investing Christ with this sovereign
power, is declared by Christ himself, John 17. 2. Thou have given him power
over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given
him: And accordingly at his Ascension, to comfort his Disciples, in the fruit
of their Ministry, Mat, 21. 18. he says, All power is given to me in Heaven.
and in Earth. What holy confidence may this breed in us? He is at Gods right
hand, and we are in his hands, John 10. 28. and all his Enemies are under his
feet, who then can pull us out? Revel. 1. 18. says Christ, I have the Keys of
Hell and Death. The Key is still in the Scripture phrase the Ensign of Power
and authority. Now Christ has, both, the Keys of Death, What security this
affords.
the postern gate out of this world; and of Hell, even of the broad gates of
that eternal prison; So as none of his can be fetched out of this world by
Death, but Christ he must first open the door; much less, can any go to Hell
without his warrant. Yea Matthew. 16. 19. He has the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven also, to open to whom he will. By his Resurrection, we may see and rest
assured, that he has the Keys of Death and Hell, (for he unlockt the doors,
and came out from thence) and by his Ascension and sitting at Gods right hand,
that he has the Keys of heaven, whose door he has unlockt, and now set
open. What need we then fear Hell, when Christ our Redeemer has the keys of
it?

Secondly, 2. Prerogative. All judgment and authority committed to him.
to sit at Gods right hand, imports all judgment to be committed to him: for
sitting was a posture of Judges; a phrase used to note out their authority. So
Prove. 20. 8. A King that [sitteth] on the throne of judgment, scatters the
wicked with his eyes: and so does Christ his and our enemies. See what Christ
says, John 5. 21, 22. The Son of man raises up whom he will; for the Father
[judgeth] no man, but [hath committed all judgement] to the Son. Now if he
who loved us so, and dyed for us, be the Judge himself, then Who shall
condemn? Christ sits on Gods right hand. This is the very inference that after
follows, ver. 24. of that 5. Chap. of John, He that believes, shall not come
into condemnation: Christ utters it upon his having said he had all judgment
committed to him, in the foregoing ver. 22. on purpose that he might from that
consideration, ascertaine Believers of their non-condemnation. For what need we
fear any Underofficers,. 2.
when we have the Judge thus for us? 2. Particular. Both which being his, as he
is an Head to his Elect.


But then (in the last place) add that second particular mentioned to all
these, that Christ sits there as an Head, as a Common person, for us. First as
an Head; so Ephesians. 1. when the Apostle had so hyperbolically set forth his power,
of being advanced unto Gods right hand, ver. 21. far above all Principalities
and powers, and above every name that is named, not only in this world, but
that which is to come; and how God has put all things under his feet: he adds,
and [ has given him to be head over all things to the Church.] Observe now, he
is said to sit there over all things, not in his own pure personal right
simply, as it is his inheritance, as he is the Son of God, (as Heb. 1. ver. 3,
4, 5. it is affirmed of him) but he sits thus over all as a Head to the Church.
That same [ over all things] comes in there, between his being a [ Head] and [
to the Chuch,] on purpose to show, that he is set over all, in relation to his
Church: So that we see, that our relation is involved, and our right included
in this exaltation of his, and so put into his commission; for this prerogative
is there said to be given him. He sits not simply as a Son, but as an Head; and
he sits not as an Head without a Body, and therefore must have his Members up
to him: Wherefore in the next ver. Therefore he must have all his members up
to him.
it is added, Which is his body, yea, his fullness: so as Christ is not
complete without all his Members, and would leave heaven, if any one were
wanting; It were a lame, maimed body, if it wanted but a toe. Christ is our
Element, and he being ascended, we are sparks that fly upwards to him. He took
our Flesh, and carried it unto heaven, and left us his Spirit on earth, and
both as pawnes and earnests that we should follow.

Nay farther yet, Especially seeing he sits as representing them, and they sit
together with him.
he is not only said to sit as our Head, but we are also said to sit together
with him: That is, made the up-shot of all in the next Chapter, Ephesians. 2. 6. So
that as we arose with him, (he being considered as a Common person) and
ascended with him, as was said; So yet farther, we sit together with him in the
highest heavens, (as there) (...) [ in supercoelestibus] in his exalted estate
above the heavens, (as is the meaning of that phrase): not that Christ's being
at Gods right hand (if taken for that sublimity of power) is communicable to
us; How to sit at Gods right hand is Christ's prerogative alone.
that is Christ's prerogative only: So Heb. 1. 5. To which of all the Angels
did he ever say, Sit thou at my right hand? Yet so, as his sitting in heaven,
as it is indefinitely expressed, is understood to be as in our right and stead,
and as a Common person; and so is to assure us of our sitting there with him,
And yet, How we may be said to sit in his Throne.
in our proportion. So Rev. 3. 21. it is expressly rendered as the mind and
intendment of it, Him that overcommeth, I will grant to sit with me in my
throne, even as I also am set down with my Father in his throne. There is a
proportion observed, though with an inequality: we sit on Christ's Throne, but
He only on his Fathers Throne: that is, Christ only sits at Gods right hand;
but we, on Christ's right hand: And so the Church is said to be at Christ's right
hand, And represents our sitting at the latter day as Judges with him.
Psalm. 45. 9. Yea further, (and it may afford a farther comfort to us in the
point in hand) this represents, that at the latter day we shall sit as
Assessors on his Iudgementseat, to judge the world with him. So Mat. 19. 28.
and Luke 22. 30. When the Son of Man shall sit in his glory, ye shall sit
upon twelve thrones, judging the Tribes of Israel. So as this our sitting with
him, it is spoken in respect to Judgment, and to giving the sentence of it;
not a sentence shall pass without your votes: So as you may by faith not only
look on your selves, as already in heaven, sitting with Christ, And so if we be
condemned, it must be with our own votes and consent.
as a Common person, in your right; but you may look upon your selves as Judges
also: So that if any sin should arise to accuse or condemn, yet it must be
with your votes. And what greater security can you have then this? for you must
condemn your selves, if you be condemned: you may very well say, Who shall
accuse? Who shall condemn? for you will never pronounce a fatal sentence upon
your own selves.

As then Paul triumphed here, The triumph of faith thereupon.
so may we; for at the present we sit in heaven with Christ, and have all our
enemies under our feet. As Ioshuah made his servants set their feet on the
necks of those five Kings; so God would have us by faith to do the like to all
ours; for one day we shall do it. And if you say, We see it not; I answer, as
Heb. 2. the Apostle says of Christ himself, [ Now we see not yet] all things
put under him, ver. 8. [Now not under him] (for he now sits in heaven, [and
expects] by faith, when his enemies shall be made his footstool, as Heb. 10,
12, and 13. ver.) [ but we see] (for the present) Jesus crowned with glory and
honor, ver. 9. and so may be sure that the thing is as good as done; and we
may, in seeing him thus crowned, see our selves sitting with him, and quietly
wait and expect (as Christ himself does) till all be acomplished, and our
salvation finished and fully perfected.

His Intercession now remains only to be spoken of, which yet will afford
further considerations to strengthen our Faith. His sitting at Gods right hand
notes out his power over all, from God: but his Intercession, all power and
favor with God for us; so as to effect our salvation for us, with Gods highest
contentment and good will, and all yet further to secure us. Who shall
condemn? etc.

SECT. V.
The Triumph of faith from Christ's INTERCESSION.
ROMANS 8. 34. Who also makes intercession for us.
CHAP. I.
A connection of this with the former: and how this adds a further support. Two
things out of the Text propounded to be handled. First, The concurrencie of
influence that Christ's intercession has into our Salvation. Secondly, The
security that Faith may have therefrom for our Justification.
WE have seen Christ sitting at Gods right hand as a Judge and King, having
all authority of saving or condemning, in his own hands; and having all power
in Heaven and Earth, to give eternal life to them that believe: And the
confidence that this gives us.

Let us now come to his Intercession, and the influence which it has into our
Justification and salvation; which as it strikes the last stroke to make all
sure; so, as great a stroke as any of the former: therefore (as you have heard)
that there was an Allsufficiencie in his Death [Who shall condemn? it is
Christ that dyed:] a Rather in his Resurrection: [ yea rather is risen again,]
a much rather [(...)] that he lives and is at Gods right hand; Romans 5. 10. The
Apostle rises yet higher to an (...) [ a saving to the utmost,] put upon his
intercession; Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able to save to the utmost, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession. So that if you could suppose there were any
thing which none of all the former three could do or effect for us, yet his
intercession could do it to the utmost: for it self is the uttermost and
highest. If Money would purchase our Salvation, his Death has done it, which
he laid down as a price and an equivalent ransom, (as it is in 1. Tim. 2. 6.)
If Power and authority would effect it, his sitting at Gods right hand,
invested with all power in Heaven and Earth, shall be put forth to the utmost
to effect it. If favor and entreaties added to all these (which often times does
as much as any of those other) were needful, he will use the utmost of this
also, and for ever make intercession. So that if Love, Money, or Power (any of
them, or all of them) will save us, we shall be sure to be saved, saved to the
utmost [(...)] all manner of ways, by all manner of means; saved over and
over.

For the clearing of this last general head, The Intercession of Christ, (and
the influence and security it has into our faith and justification) I shall
handle two things, and both proper to the Text.

First, Show how unto all those other forementioned Acts of Christ for us, this
of Intercession also is to be added by him for the effecting our salvation, and
the securing our hearts therein. This that particle [ Also] in the Text calls
for: Who also makes Intercession for us.

Then Secondly to show the security that faith may assume and fetch from this
Intercession of Christ: or his praying for us in heaven; Who shall condemn? it
is Christ, that makes intercession for us.

CHAP. II.
The first Head explained by two things. First, Intercession one part of
Christ's Priesthood, and the most excellent part of it.
Toward the Explanation of the first of these, two things are to be done.

First, To show how great, and necessary, and how excellent a part of Christ's
Priesthood, his Intercession, and praying for us in heaven is.

Secondly, To show the peculiar influence, that Intercession has into our
salvation: and so the reasons for which God ordained this work of Intercession
for us, and that in heaven, to be added to all the former.

For the first, I will proceed therein by degrees.

First, It is one part of his Priesthood. You must know, that Christ is not
entered into heaven simply, as a forerunner (which has been explained) to take
up places for you, but as a Priest also: Made a Priest, after the order of
Melchisedec; which is more then simply a Forerunner. Yea, his sitting at Gods
right hand is not only as a King armed with power and authority to save us;
but he sits there as a Priest too: Thus Heb. 8. 1. We have such an High Priest
who is set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.

In the old Leviticall Priesthood, Two parts of the Highpriests office.
the Highpriests office had two parts, both which concurred to make them
Highpriests.

First, Oblation, or offering the Sacrifice.

Secondly, Presentation of it in the Holy of Holies, with Prayer and
Intercession unto God, to accept it for the sins of the people. The one was
done without, the other within the Holy of Holies. This you may see in many
places; especially Levit. 16. 11, 15, 16. where you have the Law about the High
Priests entering into the Holy of Holies; he was not to come into the holy
place, till first he had offered a Sacrifice for himself and the people, ver.
11. and 15. and this without. Then secondly, when he had killed it, he was to
enter with the blood of it into the Holy of Holies, and sprinkle the
Mercie-seat therein with it, ver. 14, 17. and to go with Incense, and cause a
cloud to arise over the Mercie-seat: And this you have also, Heb. 13. 11. it is
said, that The blood of those beasts that were burnt without the Camp, was
brought into the Sanctuary by the High Priest: And in that 16. of Levit. you
shall find the Atonement made as well by the blood, when brought into the Holy
place, ver. 16. as by the killing of the beast, ver. 11. Both these were acts
of the High Priesthood for Atonement.

And this was done in a Type of the Priestly office of Christ, and the parts
thereof: So Heb. 9. 23. he calls all those transactions under the Ceremonial
Law, the [ patterns] of things heavenly; instancing in this part of Christ's
office, ver. 24. For Christ (says he) is not entered into the Holy places made
without hands, (as that was) which are [the figures of the true,] but into
heaven it self, to appear in the presence of God for us. Now then in answer to
this Type, there are two distinct parts of Christ's Priesthood:

First, 1. Christ's offering up himself.
the offering himself a Sacrifice up to death, as Heb. 9. 26. which answers to
the killing of the Sacrifice without the Holy of Holies: for answerably he was
crucified without the City, Heb. 13. 12.

Secondly, 2. Entering into the Heavens to Intercede.
he carried this his blood into the Holy of Holies, namely, the Heavens, Heb.
9. 12. where he appears, ver. 24. and there also prays in the force of that
blood. And the Type of those prayers was that cloud of Incense made by the
High Priest; so it is expressly interpreted, Rev. 8. 3. etc. The Angel Christ is
said to have had much Incense, to offer it with the prayers of all the Saints:
Which Incense is his own prayers in heaven, which he continually puts up when
the Saints pray on earth, and so perfumes all their prayers, and procures all
blessings for them.

Both these parts of his Prist-hood the Apostle John mentions in his first
Epistle, Both proved.
Chap. 2. ver. 2. where, as he calls Jesus Christ a propitiation for our sins;
(that is, an Oblation, or Sacrifice offered up for us:) So likewise he calls him
our Advocate: both going to make up this his office. And indeed, this latter of
Intercession, and bringing his blood into the Holy of Holies, (or heaven) is
but the same action continued. That blood which he offered with tears and
strong cries on the Cross, (where he likewise interceded,) the same blood he
continues virtually to offer up with prayers in the heavens, and makes
Atonement by both; only with this difference: On earth, though he interceded,
yet he more eminently offered up himself; In heaven, he more eminently
intercedes, and does but present that Offering.

Secondly, this was so necessary a part of his Priesthood, that without it he
had not been a complete Priest. Without Intercession he had not been a perfect
Priest.
Thus Heb. 8. 4. If he were on earth, he should not be a Priest: That is, If he
should have abode on earth, he should not have been a complete Priest. Paul
says not, that if he had offered that his sacrifice on earth, he had not been
a Priest, for that was necessary; but that if he had staid still on earth,
after he had offered it, he had not been a Priest, that is, a perfect Priest;
for he had then left his office imperfect, and had done it but by halves,
seeing this other part of it (the work of Intercession) lay still upon him to
be acted in heaven. Thus the High Priest, his Type, if he had only offered
Sacrifice without the Holy of holies, had not been a perfect High Priest: For
to enter into the Holy of holies, and to act the part of a Priest there, This
the peculiar work of the High Priest, who was in this Christ's Type.
was the proper, peculiar work of the High Priest, as such. Which shows, that
Christ had not been an High Priest, if he had not gone to heaven, and Priested
it there too, (as I may so speak) as well as upon earth. Yea, if Christ had not
gone to heaven, and were not now become a Priest there, then the Leviticall
Priesthood were still in force, and should share the honor with him; and the
High Priest must continue still to go into the Holy of holies. To this purpose
you may observe, that so long as Christ was on earth, though risen, the Types
of the Law held in force, and were not to give way, till all the truth
signified by their Ministry, was fully accomplished; and so, not until Christ
was gone into heaven, as a Priest, and there had begun to do all that which
the High Priest had done in the Holy of holies, and as his Type foresignified.
And this is plainly the meaning of what follows (in that Heb. 8. ver. 4.) as
the reason or demonstration why that Christ should not have been a Priest, if
he had not gone to heaven, (not only as a King, but as a Priest too, as he had
affirmed, ver. 1.) Seeing (says he) that there are Priests upon earth, that
do offer gifts according to the Law. The force of the Reason lies thus: There
are already Priests, and that of a Tribe he was not of, that offer gifts on
earth, before he came into the world. And therefore if that had been all his
Priesthood, to be a Priest on earth, they would plead possession before him,
having been Priests before him. And then he further backs his reason by this,
that those Priests served (as it follows ver. 5.) unto the example and shadow
of heavenly things. And therefore it is only a real Priesthood in Heaven
which must put them out of place; and till such a Priesthood comes, they must
serve still, for the truth (which these served to shadow out) is not till then
fulfilled. This you have also, Chapter 9. 8. The first Tabernacle was to stand
until a Priest went into Heaven, and did act that office there: so that if
Christ will be a Priest alone, he must become a Priest interceding in heaven:
or else Highpriests must come up again, and share that office with him; and so
he should as good as fall from his office, and lose all that he had done.

Yea, thirdly, this part of his Priesthood, is of the two the more eminent,
yea, the top, the height of his Priesthood; And this is held forth to us, in
the Types of both those two orders of Priesthood that were before him, and
figures of him; both that of Aaron and Melchisedec: 1 This was typified out in
that Leviticall Priesthood of Aaron and his fellows: The highest service of
that office, was the going into the Holy of Holies, and making an atonement
there: yea this was the height of the High priests honor, that he did this
alone, and did constitute the difference between him (as he was High priest,)
and other Priests: For they killed and offered the sacrifices without as well
as he, every ordinary Priest did that: But none but the High Priest was to
approach the Holy of holies with blood, and this but once a year. Thus Heb. 9.
6, 7. The Priests (namely those inferior Priests) went always (that is,
daily, morning and evening) into the first Tabernacle, (or Court of Priests,
which was without the Holy of holies) accomplishing the service of God; namely,
that offering of the daily sacrifice: But into the second, (namely, the Holy of
holies) went the [Highpriests] alone every year: So then this was that high
and transcendent prerogative of that HighPriest then, and which indeed made him
Highpriest; and answerably the highth of our Highpriests office (although he
alone also could offer a satisfactory sacrifice, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 9.
and 10. yet comparatively) lay in this, that he entered into the heavens by his
blood, and is set down on the Majesty on high, and in the virtue of his
sacrifice there does intercede. I know but one place that calls him the Great
Highpriest, (higher before then Aaron) and that is, Heb. 4. 14, 16. And then it
is in this respect, that he is passed into the Heavens, as it follows there.

2. The excellency of this part of his Priesthood was likewise typified out by
Melchisedechs Priesthood, which the Apostle argues to have been much more
excellent then that of Aarons, in as much as Levi, Aarons Father, paid Tithes
to this Melchisedech in Abraham's loins. Now Melchisedech was his type, not so
much in respect of his oblation, or offering of Sacrifice, (that work which
Christ performed on earth) but in respect of that work which he [ for ever]
performs in Heaven: therefore that same clause ( for ever) still comes in, in
the quotation and mention of Melchisedechs priesthood in that Epistle; because
in respect of that his continual intercession in Heaven, Melchisedech was
properly Christ's type. And accordingly you may observe, Psalm. 110. when is it
that that speech comes in [ Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech] but then, when God had him sitting at his right hand, ver. 1. So
that as the transcendent excellency of Christ's Priesthood was typified out by
Melchisedechs rather then Aarons, as being the better priesthood of the two; so
this, the most excellent part thereof, was typified out thereby, namely, that
which Christ for ever acts in heaven.

And 3. This the chief argument of the Epistle to the Heb.
To confirm this, you shall find this to be made the top notion of this Epistle
to the Heb. and the scope of it chiefly to discourse of Christ's eternal
Priesthood in heaven; and to show how therein Melchisedech was a type of him.
This is not only expressed both in Heb. 7. 21. and 25. where this same [ for
ever] is applied to his Intercession, ver. 25. but more expressly in Chap. 8. 1.
where the Apostle puts the emphasis upon this part of his Priesthood, saying,
That of the things which we have spoken, or which are to be spoken, (for the
word (...). will bear either) this is (says he) the sum or argument of all:
the word is (...), and signifies as well The head, the chief, the top of all,
and above all, as it does the sum of all: And what is it that he thus
professes to be both the maine subject and argument of this Epistle, and the
top and eminent thing in Christ he intends to discourse of? It follows, That We
have [such an High-Priest] as is set down at the right hand of the throne of
the Majesty in the heavens. And of the Priestly office he alone discourses
both before and after; and in the following verses calls his Ministry or
office, (in respect to this) A more excellent Ministry, ver. 6. he being such
a Priest as was higher then the heavens, as he had set him out in the latter
part of the former Chap. And therefore you may observe, how in his Preface to
this Epistle to the Heb. in the first Chap. ver. 3. he holds up this to our
eye, as the argument of the whole, saying, When he had by himself purged our
sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.

Yea, His oblation else would have been ineffectuall.
to conclude this, All his Priesthood would have been ineffectuall, if he had
not acted the part of a Priest in heaven, by Intercession there: for by his
death he did but begin the execution of his office; in heaven he ends it: and
if he had not fulfilled his office in both, the work of our salvation had not
been fully perfected: it was therefore as necessary as oblation it self. Not
but that his Death was a perfect oblation: it was perfect for an oblation, to
which as such nothing can be added. There needed no more, nor anyother price to
be paid for us; by that one offering, he perfects us for ever; as Heb. 10. 14.
and became himself perfect thereby, Heb. 5. 9. And in the 9. Chapter ver. 12.
By his own blood he entered into the Holy place, [having obtained] eternal
redemption for us. Mark how before he entered by his blood into heaven, he had
fully [ obtained] a redemption, and that eternal, that is, for ever
sufficient; which done, he became through his Intercession in heaven an
applying cause of eternal salvation, a Heb. 5. 10, 11. has it. So that as in
his death he paid the full sum of all he owed: unto which payment nothing can
be added, (no not by himself; though he would come and die again, it was made
at that [ once] as perfect (that is, for an oblation) as ever himself could
make) But yet still by Gods ordination there remained another further action of
another kind that was to be added to this of oblation, and that is
Intercession, or praying for us in Heaven: otherwise our salvation by his death
were not perfected: for if his Priesthood be imperfect, our salvation then must
needs be so. The presenting of that his Sacrifice in heaven, was the
consummation of his Priesthood, and the performance of that part there, the
perfection of it.

CHAP. III.
The second: The special peculiar influence that Intercession has into our
Salvation and Justification, and the Reasons why God appointed it to be added
to the former.
TO come now more particularly to show that proper and special influence that
Intercession has into our Salvation, and what it adds to the Oblation of
Christ's death, (though in its kind perfect) in order, to the effecting our
salvation; and so show the more inward reasons why God ordained (for upon his
ordination alone this is to be put) this work of Intercession in heaven to be
joined with his death. And both these I shall put promiscuously together; for
in laying down the Reasons why God thus ordered our salvation to be brought
about by it, that influence also which Intercession has into our salvation,
will together therewith appear.

The Reasons either respect 1 God himself, who will have us so saved, as
himself may be most glorified; Or 2 respect us and our salvation: God [
ordering all] the links of this golden chain of the Causes of our salvation,
as should make [ our salvation most sure] and steadfast, (as David in his last
Song speaks, First sort of reasons respect God.
2 Samuel 23. 5.) Or 3 respect Christ himself, whose glory is to be held up, and
throughout continued as the Author and Finisher of our Salvation, Beginner and
Ender of our Faith and Justification.

The first sort of Reasons respect God himself.

1. 1. In general. God will be dealt with like himself.
In general: God will be dealt withal like himself, in and throughout the
whole way of our salvation, from first to last, and carry it all along as a
Superior wronged, and so keep a distance between himself and sinners; who
still are to come to him by a Priest, and a Mediator, (as Heb. 7. 25. has it)
upon whose mediation and intercession for ever, (as there) (at least till the
day of Judgment) their Salvation does depend: and therefore though Christ in
his dispensation of all to us downward, does carry it as a King, as one having
all power to justify and condemn, (as has been shown) yet upward, toward
God, he carries it as a Priest who must still intercede to do all that which he
has power to do as a King: Therefore in the second Psalm. after that God had
set him up as King upon his holy hill, ver. 6. namely, in heaven, and so had
committed all power in heaven and earth to him; then he must yet ask all that
he would have done; Ask of me, and I will give thee, etc. ver. 8. says God to
him: For though he be a King, yet he is Gods King; I have set [My King] etc.
and by asking him, God will be acknowledged to be above him. But more of this
hereafter.

But 2. 2. More particularly, for the glory of Gods Free grace.
more particularly. God has two Attributes which he would have most eminently
appear in their highest glory by Christ's effecting our salvation, namely,
Justice, and Free grace; and therefore has so ordered the bringing about of
our salvation, as that Christ must apply himself in a more especial manner
unto each of these, by way of Satisfaction to the one, of Entreaty to the
other: Justice will be known to be Justice, and dealt with upon its own
terms; and Grace will be acknowledged to be Free grace, throughout the
accomplishment of our salvation. You have both these joined, Romans 3. 23, 24,
25. Being justified [freely through his grace] by the [Redemption] that is in
Christ Jesus: That he might be [just] and the justifier of him that believes.
Here is highest Justice, and the freest Grace both met to save us, and both
ordained by God to be declared and set forth, as ver. Which looks to be applied
unto in a way of entreaty and Intercession.
25. and 26. have it. I said before, that God justifies and saves us through
free grace, so absolutely, freely, as if his Justice had had no satisfaction.
Now therefore our salvation depending and being carried on, even in the
application of it, by a continuation of Grace in a free way, notwithstanding
satisfaction unto Justice; therefore this free grace must be sought to, and
treated with like it self, and applied unto in all, and the sovereignty and
freeness of it acknowledged in all, even as well as Gods Justice had the
honor to be satisfied by a price paid unto it, that so the severity of it
might appear and be held forth in our salvation. Thus God having two
attributes eminently to be dealt withal, his Justice and his free Grace, it
was meet that there should be two eminent actions of Christ's Priesthood,
wherein he should apply himself to each according to their kind, and as the
nature and glory of each does require. And accordingly in his death he deals
with Justice, by laying down a sufficient price; and in his Intercession, he
entreats Free grace, and thus both come to be alike acknowledged. In the 4.
Heb. 16. we are encouraged to come boldly [to the Throne of grace] because we
have an Highpriest entered into the Heavens: Observe how it is called [ a Throne
of grace] which our High Priest now in heaven officiates at: So called, because
his Priesthood there deals with free grace chiefly, it is a Throne of Grace,
and so to be sued unto; therefore he treats with God by way of Intercession.
Of this Throne of Grace in heaven, the Mercie-seat in the Holy of holies was
the Type. And as there the High Priest was to bring the blood and Mercie-seat
together, he was to sprinkle the blood upon it; so Christ. And as the
High Priest was to go into the Holy of holies by blood, so with Incense also,
(that is, Prayer:) To show, that Heaven is not opened by mere Justice, or
bringing only a price in hand for it; but by Grace also, and that must be
entreated; and therefore when the Priest was within that holy place, he was to
make a Cloud over the Mercie-seat, (which cloud of Incense is Prayer, whereof
Incense was the Type, Rev. 8. 3.) And thence it is, that Christ has as much
work of it still in heaven as ever, though of another kind: He dealt with
Justice here below, to satisfy it, and here got money enough to pay the debt;
but in heaven he deals with Mercy. Therefore all the Grace he bestows on us, he
is said first to receive it, even now when in heaven. Acts 2. 33. it is said of
him, after his going to heaven, and that he was exalted, etc. that he received
the promise of the Spirit, which Ioh. 14. 16. he told them he would pray for.
And this is part of the meaning of that in Psalm. 68. 18. He ascended up on
high, and [received] gifts for men, says the Psalmist: The Apostle renders it,
Ephesians. 4. [ gave] but you see, it was by receiving them first, as fruits of his
Intercession and asking after his ascending; He is said both to give, as being
all of his own purchase; and as having power as a King also both to do and
bestow all he does, and yet withal he is said to receive all that he gives,
because as a Priest he intercedes for it, and asks it. Free grace requires
this. This is the first thing.

Yea, 2. Gods justice stood upon it.
Secondly, Justice it self might stand a little upon it, though there was
enough in Christ his death to satisfy it; yet having been wronged, it stood
thus far upon it, (as those to whom a debt is due, use to do) namely, to have
the money brought home to Gods dwelling house, and laid down there. God is
resolved not to stoop one whit unto man, no nor to Christ his Surety. Justice
will not only be satisfied, and have a sufficient ransom collected and paid,
as at Christ's death; but he must come and bring his bags up to heaven: justice
will be paid it upon the Mercie-seate: For so in the Type the blood was to be
carried into the Holy of holies, and sprinkled upon the Mercie-seat. And
therefore his Resurrection, Ascension, etc. were but as the breaking through
all enemies, and subduing them, to the end to bring this price or satisfaction
to the Mercie-seat; and so God having his money by him, might not want
wherewithal to pardon Sinners: so as the blood of Christ is current money, not
only on earth, but in heaven too, whither all is brought, which is for our
comfort, that all the treasure which should satisfy God, is safely conveyed
thither, and our Surety with it.

The second sort of reasons why God ordained Christ's intercession to be joined
to his Death, Second sort of reasons, it was best for the effecting our
Salvation.
are taken from what was the best way to effect and make sure our salvation,
and secure our hearts therein: and these reasons will show the peculiar
influence that Intercession has into our Salvation, and therein as in the
former.

First in general, God would have our salvation made sure, and us saved all
manner of ways, over and over. 1. In general, God would have us saved all
manner of ways.
By ransom and price, (as Captives are redeemed) which was done by his Death,
which of it self was enough; for it is said, Heb. 10. to perfect us for ever.
2. The Application of Redemption to us from Christ's Intercession.
By power and rescue; so in his Resurrection, and Ascension, and sitting at
Gods right hand which also was sufficient, Then 3. More particularly our
justification depends on it.
again by Intercession, a way of favor and entreaty; and this likewise would
have been enough, but God would have all ways concur in it; whereof
notwithstanding not one could fail; a three fold cord, whereof each twine were
strong enough, but all together must of necessity hold.

Secondly, The whole Application of his redemption, both in justifying and
saving of us first and last, has a special dependence upon this his
Intercession. This all Divines on all sides do attribute unto it whilst they
put this difference between the influence of his death, and that of his
intercession into our salvation; calling his death Medium impetrationis; that
is, the means of procurement or obtaining it for us; But his intercession,
Medium applicationis, the Means of applying all unto us. Christ purchases
salvation by the one, but possesses us of it by the other: Some have
attributed the Application of Justification to his Resurrerection; but it is
much more proper to ascribe it to his Intercession; (and what causall influence
his Resurrection has into our Justification, has been before in the third
Section declared.) But that his eternal Priesthood in heaven, and the work of
its Intercession, is the applying cause of our eternal salvation, in all the
parts of it, first and last, seems to me to be the result of the connection of
the 8, 9, and 10. verses of the 5. Chap. to the Hebrews: For having spoken of
his obedience and sufferings unto death, ver. 8. and how he thereby was made
perfect, ver. 9. he says, And being (thus first) made perfect, he became [the
Author] (or applying cause, (...)) of eternal salvation, unto all them that
obey him; and this by his being become an eternal Priest in heaven, after he
was thus perfected by sufferings: for so it follows, ver. 10. Called of God an
High Priest, after the order of Melchisedech: And Melchisedechs Priesthood was
principally the type of his Priesthood in heaven, as was before declared. One
leading instance to show that his Intercession was to be the applying cause of
salvation, was given by Christ, whilst he was on earth, thereby manifesting
what much more was to be done by him in heaven, through his Intercession there:
when he was on the Cross, and as then offering that great sacrifice for sin,
he at that time also joined prayers for the justification of those that
crucified him, Father, [forgive] them, for they know not what they do: So
fulfilling that in Esaias 53. ult. He bare the sins of many, and made
Intercession for the transgressors. And the efficacy of that prayer then put
up, was the cause of the conversion of those three thousand, Acts 2. whom ver.
35. the Apostle had expressly charged with the crucifying of Christ, whom ye by
wicked hands have taken, crucified, and slain. These were the first fruits of
his Intercession, whose prayers still do reap and bring in the rest of the
crop, which in all ages is to grow up unto God on earth.

3. And more particularly, as the whole Application in general, so our
Justification, in the whole progress of it, depends upon Christ's Intercession.
As

1. 1 The first act of our justification and our conversion depends upon it.
Our first actual or initiall Justification, (which is given us at our first
conversion) depends upon Christ's Intercession: Therefore in the forementioned
prayer on the Cross, the thing he prayed for was Forgivenes, Father forgive
them. You heard before that Christ's death affords the matter of our
justification, as being that which is imputed, the ransom, the price, the
thing it self that satisfies: And that his Resurrection was the original act
of. Gods justifying us in Christ; We were virtually justified then in Christ
his being justified as in a Common Person. But besides all this, there is a
personal or an actual Justification to be bestowed upon us, that is, an
accounting and bestowing it upon us in our own persons; which is done when we
believe, and it is called ( Romans 5. 1.) a being justified by faith, and ( ver.
10.) receiving the atonement: now this depends upon Christ's Intercession; and
it was typified out by Moses his sprinkling the people with blood, mentioned
Heb. 9. 19. which thing Jesus Christ as a Mediator and Priest does now from
Heaven: For Heb. 12. 24. it is said, You are come to Heaven, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant, and (as it is next subjoyned) to the blood of
sprinkling: he shed his blood on the Cross on earth, but he sprinkleth it now
as a Priest from Heaven: For it is upon Mount Sion, to which (he had said first
in the former verse) ye are come; and so to Christ as a Mediator standing on
that mount, and sprinkling from thence his blood: and so therein there is an
allusion unto Moses, Christ's Type, who sprinkled the people with the blood of
that ceremonial covenant, the type of the covenant of grace. Now in the 1 Pet.
1. 2. The sprinkling of Christ his blood, as it is there made the more proper
work of Christ himself, in distinction from the other persons, (and therefore
was done by Moses, who was his type) so is it also put for our first
justification. And this sprinkling (as it is there mentioned) is from the
virtue of his intercession: And therefore in that place of the Heb. forecited,
he attributes an intercession unto it, as the phrase that follows, which
[speaks] better things, etc. does imply, of which more hereafter. Yet
concerning this first Head, let me add this by way of caution, (which I shall
presently have occasion to observe) that though this our first justification is
to be ascribed to his Intercession, yet more eminently Intercession is ordained
for the acco^plishing our salvation, and this other more rarely in the
Scripture attributed thereunto.

Secondly, 2. The continuance of our justification depends upon it.
The continuation of our Justification depends upon it. And as his Intercession
is the virtuall continuation of his Sacrifice; so is it the continuing cause of
our justification: which though it be an act done once, as fully as ever, yet
is it done over every moment, for it is continued by acts of free Grace, and so
renewed actually every moment. There is a standing in Grace by Christ spoken of
Romans 5. 2. as well as a first access by Christ, and that standing in grace,
and continuing in it, is afterward ver. 11. attributed to his life, that is,
as it is interpreted Heb. 7. 25. his living ever to intercede. We owe our
standing in grace every moment, to his sitting in Heaven, and interceding every
moment; There is no fresh act of justification goes forth, but there is a fresh
act of intercession. And as though God created the World once for all, yet
every moment he is said to create, every new act of providence being a new
creation; so likewise to justify continually, through his continuing out free
grace to justify as at first; and this Christ does by continuing his
Intercession: he continues a Priest for ever, and so we continue to be
justified for ever.

3. A full security of our justification given thereby forever.
There is hereby a full security given us of justification to be continued for
ever. The danger either must lie in old sins coming into remembrance, or else
from sins newly to be committed. Now first, God hereby takes order, 1. Against
the remembrance of sins past.
that no old sins shall come up into remembrance, to trouble his thoughts, (as
in the old Law, after the Priests going into the Holy of holies, their sins are
said yet to have done, Heb. 10. 3.) and to that end it was that he placed
Christ as his Remembrancer for us, so near him, to take up his thoughts so
with his obedience, that our sins might not come into mind: not that God
needed this help to put himself in mind, but only for a formality sake, that
things being thus really carried between God and Christ for us, according to a
way suiting with our apprehensions, our faith might be strengthened against all
suppositions and fears of after reviving our guilts. Look therefore, as God
ordained the Rainbow in the heavens, that when he looked on it, he might
remember his Covenant, never to destroy the world again by water; so he has
set Christ as the Rainbow about his Throne. And look as the Bread and Wine in
the Lords Supper are appointed on earth to show forth Christ's death, as a
Remembrancer to us; so is Christ himself appointed in heaven to show forth his
death really, as a Remembrancer thereof to his Father; and indeed, the one is
correspondent to the other: Only the Papists have perverted the use of the
Lords Supper, by making it on earth, a commemorative sacrifice to God, when as
it is but a Remembrancer thereof to men: and besides, their Priests therein do
take upon themselves this very office of presenting this sacrifice to God,
which is proper only to Christ in Heaven; But God when he would make sure not
to be tempted to remember our sins any more, nor trouble himself with them,
has set his Christ by him to put him in mind of his so pleasing an offering.
So the Highpriests going into the Holy of holies, was for a memorial, and
therein the Type of Christ. And this is plainly and expressly made the use of
this execution of his Priestly office in Heaven, Heb. 8. where the Apostle
having discoursed of that part of his office (as the chief thing he aimed at
in this Epistle, ver. 1. and of the necessity of it ver. 3, 4, and 5. and
excellency of it, in this respect, ver. 6.) he then shows, how from thence the
new Covenant of pardon came to be sure and steadfast, that God will remember our
sins no more, ver. 12. which he there brings in as the proper use of this
Doctrine, and of this part of his Priesthood.

2. 2. To prevent the accusing and condemning us by new sin; for times to
come.
As by reason of intercession, God remembers not old sins, so likewise he is
not provoked by new. For though God when he justifies us should forgive all old
sins past for ever, so as never to remember them more, yet new ones would break
forth, and he could not but take notice of them: and so, so long as sin
continues, there is need of a continuing intercession. Therefore for the
securing us in this, it is said, Romans 5. 10. That if when we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more, being reconciled,
we shall be saved [by his life.] Where we see, that his Death is in some more
special manner said to procure reconciliation at first for sins of
unregeneracie, and to bring us to Christ; but then his life and Intercession,
or living to intercede, is said to keep God and us friends, that we may never
fall out more. What Christ did on earth, does more especially procure
reconciliation for sins which we do in the state of nature; so as
notwithstanding them, God resolves to turn us from that state, Intercession
principally intended for sins after conversion.
and draw us to Christ: But sins which we commit after conversion, (though
pardoned also by his death) yet the pardon of them is more especially
attributed to his life and intercession, as a daily preservative, a continual
plaster (as some call it) to heal such sins. So that it would seem, that
God out of his eternal love does bring us to Christ, and draws us to him
through the beholding the reconciliation wrought by his death, and so gives us
at first conversion, unto Christ; and we being brought to him, he sprinkles us
with his blood; and then God says to him, Now do you look to them, that they
and I fall out no more. And to that end Christ takes our cause in hand by that
eternal Priesthood of his; and from that time begins more especially to
intercede for us. And thus sins after the state of grace, may be said more
eminently to be taken away by that part of his Priesthood, which he now in
heaven performs. That place also, 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. seems to make this the great
end of Intercession, [ If any man sin, (that is, if any of the company of
Believers, to whom alone he wrote) we have an Advocate which the Father:] so as
Intercession principally serves for sins to come, or committed after grace
received. Thus also in his prayer, Ioh. 17. which was left as a pattern of his
Intercession in heaven, he prays for his Elect as Believers, I pray for them
[that shall beleeve] through their word: Not but that sins after conversion
are taken away by his death; In what sense his Death does more eminently
prevail for the pardon of sins before conversion, and his Intercession for sins
after.
and sins before it, by his Intercession also: for Christ interceded for
those who crucified him, and by virtue of that Intercession, those three
thousand were converted, (as was observed.) But the meaning only is, that yet
more eminently the work of reconciliation for sins before conversion, is
attributed to his death; and for sins after conversion, to his Intercession:
Even as the Persons of the Trinity, though they have all a like hand in all the
works of our salvation; yet we see that one part is attributed more to one
Person, and another to another.

A third sort of reasons why God ordained this work of Intercession to
accomplish our salvation by, 3. Sort of Reasons from Christ.
do respect Christ himself, whose honor and glory, and the perpetuation of
it in our hearts, God had as well in his eye in the ordering all the workings
of our salvation, as much as his own, That all might honor the Son as well
as the Father, as Christ himself speaks. Now therefore for the maintaining and
upholding his glory, and the commings in thereof, did God ordain after all
that he had done for us here below, this work of Intercession in heaven, to be
added to all the rest, for the perfecting of our salvation. As

First, 1. That none of Christ's offices should lie vacant.
it became him, and was for his honor, that none of his offices should be
vacant or lie idle, and he want employment in them: All offices have work to
accompany them; and all work has honor (as its reward) to arise out of it.
And therefore when he had done all that was to be done on earth, as
appertaining unto the merit of our salvation, he appoints this full and
perpetual work in heaven, for the applying and possessing us of salvation, and
that as a Priest, by praying and interceding in the merit of that one oblation
of himself. God would have Christ never to be out of office, nor out of work.
And this very reason is more then intimated, Heb. 7. 24, 25. This man, because
he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, (or, as ver. 21. expounds
it) for ever. And the work of his Priesthood is interpreted, ver. 25. to be
ever to make intercession. The meaning is, that God would not have him continue
to be a Priest in title only, or in respect only of a service past, and so to
have only the honor of Priesthood perpetuated to him out of the remembrance
of what he once had done, (as great Generals have, even in time of peace, the
glory of some great battle fought continued to them in their titles, or
rewards for ever:) But God would have him have as the renown of the old, so a
perpetual spring of honor by new work, and employment in that office which he
is continually a doing, so to preserve the verdure of his glory ever fresh and
green, and therefore ordained a continual work for him. And the sum of the
Apostles reasoning is this, That seeing himself was to be for ever, so should
his work and Priesthood be, that so his honor might be for ever: So ver. 28.
concludes it, Consecrated or perfected for evermore.

Secondly, 2. That Christ might have a continual hand in each, and every work
of our salvation to the last.
for the same reason also, it became him that the whole work of our salvation
first and last, and every part of it, every step and degree of accomplishment
of it, should be so ordered as he should continue still to have as great and
continual a hand in every part, even to the laying of the top stone thereof,
as he had in laying the first foundation and corner stone thereof. And this you
have expressed, Heb. 12. 2. Looking to Jesus the beginner and perfecter of our
faith. Two things had been said of him, as two causes of two effects; and we
must look to him in both. 1. He is to be looked at, as Dying, (enduring the
Cross) as there he is set forth. 2. As sitting at Gods right hand, and
interceding; (as that whole Epistle had represented him.) We are to look at
these two as causes of a double effect: to look at his dying, as that which is
the beginning of our faith, (so according to the Greek, and the margent of our
translation) and at his sitting at Gods right hand, as an intercessor, for the
finishing of our faith thereby; and so of our final salvation. For as Christ's
work began in his life and death; (which is put for all his obedience here
below) so our first believing (as was said) begins by virtue of his death at
first: and as his work ends in his intercession, and sitting at God his right
hand; so answerably is our faith and salvation perfected by it, that thus he
might be left out in nothing, but be the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the
Ending, to whom be glory for ever. So that we are to look upon our Mediator,
CHRIST, as doing as much work for us in Heaven at this instant, as ever he
did on Earth: here suffering, but there praying, and presenting his sufferings.
All his work was not done, when he had done here: that work here was indeed
the harder piece of the two, yet soon dispatched; but his work in heaven,
though sweeter far, yet lies on his hands for ever: therefore let us leave out
none of these in our believing on him.

CHAP. IV.
The second Head. The great security the consideration of Christ's Intercession
affords to faith for our Justification, showed 1. By way of evidence. By two
things.
ANd so I come (as in the former I have done) to show what strong grounds of
security and triumph our faith may raise from this last act, namely, Christ's
Intercession for us, in the point of justification; Who shall condemn? it is
Christ that intercedes: And this was the second general propounded; and
therein to proceed also according to the Method taken up in the former.

1. What assurance by way of evidence this does afford unto faith of
non-condemnation.

2. What powerful efficacy and influence this must be of, that Christ
intercedes.

First,. 1.
to handle it by way of evidence.

That Christ intercedes, To evidence these two demonstrations.
is a strong evidence to our faith by two demonstrations.

1. From the very intent and scope of the work of intercession it self, and
what it is ordained by God to effect.

2. From the end of Jesus Christ himself, who lives in Heaven on purpose to
intercede for us. Our salvation it is both Finis operis, the end of the work,
and finis ipsius operantis, in some respect the end of Christ himself the
interceder; and both these do lay the greatest engagement that can be upon
Christ to accomplish our salvation through his intercession.

1. For the work it self, Intercession you have seen is a part of the office of
Christ's Priesthood, as well as his dying, and offering himself: now all the
works of Christ are and must be perfect in their kind, (even as Gods are, of
which says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. His work is perfect) for otherwise he should
not be a perfect Priest. Now the perfection of every work lies in order to its
end for which it is ordained; so as that work is perfect that attains to such
an end as it is ordained for, and that imperfect, which does not. Now the
immediate direct end of Christ's Intercession, is the actual salvation of
Believers, Elect, and persons whom he dyed for. The end of his death is Adoptio
juris, purchasing a right unto salvation; but of Intercession, procuratio
ipsius salutis, the very saving us actually, and putting us in possession of
Heaven. To this purpose, observe how the Scripture speaks concerning Christ's
death, Heb. 9. 12. He entered into heaven having obtained Redemption, or found
redemption, that is, by way of right, by procuring full title to it. But of his
Intercession, it says ( Heb. 7. 25.) that by it Christ is able to save to the
utmost, them that come unto God by him: that is, actually to save, and put them
in possession of happiness: that is made the end and scope of Intercession
there; and that phrase (...)] to the utmost, notes out a saving indeed, a doing
it (not by halves, but) wholly, and thoroughly, and completely: (...) is to save
altogether, to give our salvation its last act and complement, that is the true
force of the phrase, even to effect it, to the last of it, all that is to be
done about it. Thus also Romans 5. 9, and 10. We are justified by his death, but
[saved] (namely, completely) by his life, (that is,) his living to intercede.
So that the very salvation of Believers is it that is the work [the (...)] of
Christ's Intercession.

Now what security does this afford? What security this affords.
for to be saved is more then to be justified; for it is the actual possessing
us of heaven. So then, do but grant that Christ's Intercession is as perfect a
work in its kind as Christ's death is in its kind; and you must needs be saved.
The perfection of Christ's death, and the work thereof, wherein lay it (as on
Christ's part to be performed) but in this, that he should lay down a Ransom
sufficient to purchase salvation for such and such persons as God would save?
and so the perfection of it lies in the worth and sufficiency of it, to that
end it was ordained for: it being a perfect sacrifice in it self, able to
purchase eternal redemption for us, and to make us salvable against all sins
and the demerits of them, and to give us right to Heaven: and had it wanted a
grain of this, it had then been imperfect. Now then answerably, for
intercession, the comfort of our souls is, that the proper work that lies upon
Christ therein, is the complete saving those very persons, and the possessing
them of Heaven, this is the (...), the proper work thereof. To outvie the
demerits of our sins was the perfection of his death, but to save our souls is
the end and perfection of his Intercession; Our sins are the object of the one,
and our souls of the other. To that end was intercession added to his death,
that we might not have a right to Heaven in vain, of which we might be
dispossessed. Now therefore upon this ground if Christ should fail of our
souls salvation, yea, but of any one degree of glory (purchased by his death to
any soul) which that soul should want, this work of his would then want and
fall short so much of its perfection. That place in Heb. 7. says not only that
Christ will do his utmost to save, but save to the utmost.

You may say,

Well, If men shall believe etc. as we do here on earth; nor for propositions
only, but for persons; and therefore he prays to cure that very infidelity. Now
as if a Physician undertakes to cure a mad man (if he knows what he does) he
considers the madness of his Patient, and how he will tear off what is
applied, and refuse all Physic; he therefore resolves to deal with him
accordingly, and so to order him as he shall not hinder that help which he is
about to afford him; and so upon those terms he undertakes the cure: even so
does Christ when by intercession he undertakes to save us sinners; he
considers us what we are, and how it is with us, For Christ otherwise should
not be as perfect a Priest in interceding as he was in dying.
what unbelief is in us, yet undertakes the matter, and so to save us is the
scope and end of this his work, which if he should not accomplish, he after all
this should not be a perfect Priest. It was the fault that God found with the
Old Priesthood, that it made nothing perfect, Heb. 7. 19. and therefore ver.
12. the Law was changed, and the Priesthood was changed together with it, (as
there you have it.) Now in like manner Christ's Priesthood should be imperfect,
if it made not the elect perfect, and then God must yet seek for another
Covenant, and a more perfect Priest; for this would be found faulty, as the
other was. So then our comfort is, if Christ approve himself to be a perfect
Priest, we who come to God by him must be perfectly saved. It is in this office
of his Priesthood, and all the parts of it, as in his Kingly office: The work
of his Kingly office is to subdue all enemies, to the last man, even fully to
do the thing; and not only to have power, and to go about to do it: so as if
there should be any one enemy left unsubdued, then Christ should not be a
perfect King. The same holds in his Priestly office also; he should not be a
perfect Priest, if but one soul of the elect, or those he intercedes for, were
left unsaved. And this is indeed the top and highest consideration for our
comfort in this argument, that Intercession leaves us not till it has actually
and completely saved us; and this is it that makes the Apostle put a further
thing upon Intercession here in the Text, the^ upon that other his sitting at
Gods right hand. So as we are in this respect as sure of attaining unto the
utmost glory of our salvation, as Christ to have the full honor of his
Priesthood. A man saved is more then justified; and Christ cannot reckon his
work, nor himself a perfect Priest, until we are saved. Who shall condemn?
it is Christ that intercedes.

Besides,. 2.
the consideration of the nature and scope of this work it self, 2.
Demonstration: It is one end of Christ's life in Heaven.
which Christ upon his honor of acquiting himself as a perfect Priest, has
undertaken; There is in the second place a farther consideration that argues
him engaged by a stronger obligation, His honor engaged to effect.
even the loss of his own honor, his office and all, if he should not effect
salvation for those that come to God by him; so much does it concern him to
effect it. Of all the works that ever he did, he is most engaged in this; it
will not only be the loss of a business which concerns him, and of so much
work, but himself must be lost in it too: And the reason is, that he
intercedes as a Surety. He was not only a Surety on earth in dying, (and so
was to look to do that work thoroughly, That Christ is a Surety as well by
interceding, as by dying.
and to be sure to lay down a price sufficient, or else himself had gone for
it: he pawned in that work, not only his honor, but even his life and soul
to effect it, or lose himself in it) but he is a Surety now also in heaven, by
interceding. This you may find to be the scope of Heb. 7. 22. by observing the
coherence of that 22. ver. (wherein he is called a Surety) with ver. 23, 24,
25. that title and appellation is there given him, in relation unto this part
of his office especially. And although it holds true of all parts of his office
whatsoever; yet the coherence carries it, that that mention there of his being
a Surety, does in a more special manner, refer unto his Intercession, as
appears both by the words before, and after: In the words before, ( ver. 21.)
the Apostle speaks of this his Priesthood which is for ever, and then
subjoynes, ( ver. 22.) By so much was Jesus made a Surety of a better
Testament: and then after also he discourses of, and instanceth in his
Intercession, and his continuing a Priest for ever in that work: So ver. 23,
24, 25. Wherefore he is able to save to the utmost, seeing he ever lives to
make Intercession: Yea, he is therefore engaged to save to the utmost, because
even in interceding (for which he is said there to live) he is a Surety.

He was a Surety on earth, and is a Surety still in heaven; The difference of
these two Suretiships.
only with this double difference, which arises first from the different
things which he undertook for then, whilst on earth, and for which now he
undertakes in heaven: That on earth he was a Surety to pay a price so
sufficient, as should satisfy Gods justice; which having paid, he was
discharged (in that respect, and so far) of that Obligation, and his Bond for
that was cancelled, but so as still he remains a Surety, bound in another
Obligation as great, even for the bringing to salvation those whom he dyed for;
for their persons remained still unsaved, though the debt was then paid: and
till they be saved, he is not quit of this Surety-ship and engagement. And
secondly, these two Surety-ships do differ also by the differing Pawns which
he was engaged to forfeit, by failing in each of these works: for the payment
of our debt, his soul it self lay at the stake, which he offered up for sin;
but for the saving of the persons, all his honor in heaven lies at stake: He
lives to intercede; He possesses Heaven upon these terms, and it is one end
of his life; so that as he must have sunk under Gods wrath if he had not paid
the debt, (his soul standing in our souls stead) so he must yet quit heaven,
and give over living there, if he brings us not thither. It is true, he
intercedes not as a Common person, (which relation in all other forementioned
acts he still bore; thus in his death he was both a Common person, and a Surety
representing us, so as we died in him; so likewise in his Resurrection we arose
with him, and in his Ascension we ascended, etc. but yet he intercedes not
under that relation, namely, not as a Common person;) for we must not, cannot
be said to intercede in him, for this last work lay not upon us to do. He does
it wholly for us indeed, but not in our stead, or as that which we should have
done, though on our behalf; for it being the last, the crown of all his works
of mediation, is therefore proper to him as Mediator, and his sole work as
such. Thus in like manner the first work of Incarnation, and answerably the
last of Intercession, in neither of these was Christ a Common person
representing others, though a common Savior of others in these; for the one
was the foundation of all, the other the accomplishment of all, and so proper
only to himself, as Mediator. But although he intercedes not as a Common
person, as representing us in what we were to have done for our selves, yet so
as that other relation of a Surety is continued still in that work; he stands
engaged therein as an Undertaker for us, and so as a Surety, intercedes: Such
as Judah was for Benjamin, Genesis 43. 9. I will be surety for him; of my hand
shall thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee,
then let me bear the blame for ever: So says Christ for us. And therefore
Sponsio, or undertaking for us, is by Divines made a great part of this part of
his office. Now the consideration of this may the more secure us; for the more
peculiarly and solely it is his work, the more his honor lies at stake, and
the more he will set himself to effect it; yea, and being by way of
Suretiship, it concerns him yet more nearly, for he has engaged, (and if he
should fail,) might even lose that honor which he has now in heaven.

CHAP. V.
The prevalencie of Christ's Intercession, and the pwoerfull influence it has
into our salvation: Demonstrated, first, from the greatness of Christ, and his
favor with God.
THus we have heard what matter of support to our faith (by way of evidence)
this must needs afford, The prevalencie of Christ's Intercession, and the
influence of it into our Just fication.
that Christ intercedes. Let us consider now, what further assurance will arise
to our faith, from the influence which Christ's Intercession must needs have, to
effect and carry on our salvation to an assured issue. The work of Intercession
being effectually to procure our salvation, and to continue the pardon of our
sins, and hold us in favor with God: therefore the influence and energie it
has herein, must needs lie in that potencie and prevalencie which this
intercession of Christ has with God, to obtain any thing at his hands for us,
and so to continue his favor toward us. Demonstrated,
Now to raise up our apprehensions, how potent and prevalent this Intercession
of Christ must needs be, let us consider both the Person interceding, namely,
Christ; and the Person with whom Christ intercedes for this favor, which is,
God; the one the Son, the other the Father; and so the greatness of Christ
with God, and the graciousnesse of God to Christ; together with the one-nesse
of wills, and unity of affections in them both: So that Christ will be sure to
ask nothing, which his Father will deny; and his Father will not deny any
thing which he shall ask.

Now first for the greatness of Christ the Intercessor, 1. From the greatness
of Christ's person, and his interest in God who intercedes.
that is, his greatness with God the Father. This is often urged in this
Epistle to the Hebrews, to persuade confidence in us, in this very point in
hand: thus Heb. 4. 14, 16. Seeing we have a [great] High Priest, let us come
boldly: And whilst Great and Priest are thus joined together, the more comfort
and boldness we may have, the greater he is: For he is a Priest in relation
to his dealing with God for our pardon; as he is a Priest, he deals in nothing
else; and the greater the person is, who uses his interest herein, the better,
the sooner he will prevail. And he is there said to be Great, because great
with God, in prevailing with him; and indeed so great, as it is impossible but
he should prevail. It was the greatness of his person, which did and does put
such an influence into his death, that it was (as you heard) a price, more then
enough, to satisfy Justice, even to overflowing: And therefore Who shall
condemn? It is Christ that dyed. And the greatness of his person must needs
have as much influence to make Intercession prevalent. In a matter of
intercession, the person that intercedes prevails more then any other
consideration whatsoever. We see what great friends do procure oftentimes with
but a word speaking, even that which money, no nor any thing else could have
obtained. Demonstrated by three things:
Now Christ must needs be great with God in many respects.

First, 1. The neernes of his alliance, that he is Gods natural Son.
in respect of the neernesse of his alliance to him, He is the natural Son of
God, God of God, and therefore certain to prevail with him. This is
diligently still put in, almost in all places, where this part of his
Priesthood (his Intercession) is mentioned, in the Epistle to the Heb. So in
the 4. of the same Epistle, ver. 14. We have a great High Priest entered into
the heavens, Jesus, [the Son of God.] So Heb. 7. 25. and 28. ver. compared, the
Apostle having said, ver. 25. that He is able to save to the utmost, seeing he
ever lives to make Intercession) he does ver. 28. devolve this ability of his
to save (ultimately) upon his being the Son: thus in the 28. verse, in the
end of that discourse, this is made as the Basis of all: [ The Law (says he)
makes men Highpriests which have infirmity] (which infirmity or disability of
theirs, is mentioned in opposition unto what he had just before spoken of the
great ability of his our High Priest in his interceding, ver. 25. in those
words, He is [able] to save to the utmost.) Those Priests whom the ceremonial
Law made, ( Aaron and his sons) are unable to save, they have infirmity: Now
what is it in him that makes this difference, and him so able above what they
were? The word of the Oath makes the [Son] (says he) who is perfected (as you
have it in the Greek, and margent) for evermore. He mentions this his Sonship
principally in relation to his Intercession, which there he had discoursed of.
Intercession is a carrying on our salvation in a way of grace and favor, as
his death was by way of satisfaction. How great an influence this has into
Intercession to make it prevalent.
And answerably it may be observed in the Scripture, that as the
all-sufficiencie of the satisfaction of his death, is still put upon his being
God; and so upon the greatness of his Person considered in respect of his
nature or essence, namely, his Godhead: So in like manner, that the
prevalencie of his Intercession is founded upon the neernesse of his relation
unto God, his alliance to him, and the being his Son. Thus for the first.
When Redemption is spoken of, the sufficiency of the price is eminently put
upon his Godhead, [The blood of God.] Thus also Heb. 9. where when he had (
ver. 12.) shown how Christ had purchased and obtained a perfect redemption, he
then argues the sufficiency of it from his Godhead, ver. 13, 14. For if the
blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the
unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: How much more shall the
blood of Christ, who [through the eternal spirit] offered himself, etc. The
eternal spirit is his Godhead. Thus answerably when he speaks of the
prevailing of his Intercession in Heaven, he puts it upon his Sonne-ship [Iesus
the Son,] he mentions the neernesse of the relation of his person to God, as
being that which draws with it that great respect of favor and grace, he being
by this great with God, as great in himself. All matters of Intercession are
carried we know by way of favor: And therefore look how prevalent in a way of
merit, his being God makes his death in its kind; no less prevalent does his
being the Son of God, make his Intercession in its kind, namely, in a way of
obtaining grace and mercy: yea so prevalent of it self it is, that we might
build upon it alone, even as much as upon his death. And indeed, Christ
intercedes not only in the virtue and strength of his satisfaction, (though in
that also) and of his obedience to his Father: but also in the strength of his
relation as a Son who pleads his own grace and interest in God, as he is his
Son; which is a consideration that does always actually exist and abide:
Whereas his obedience (though perfect) was but once offered up, and its
existence is but virtuall; but he continues a Son for ever, not virtually
only, but actually. And therefore it is added in that seventh to the Hebrews,
ver. last, that the Gospel ordained the Son [perfected for ever.] The
meaning whereof is, that he is not only a Priest perfected in the time past by
that perfect offering once made, but in that he is the Son, he remains a
perfect Priest for ever, for time to come: whom therefore no imperfection in
his office, no failing or missing of his suits can befall. So as if it could be
supposed that his obedience (because past so long ago) might be forgotten: yet
never this, that he is a Son: That for ever abides, and of it self were
enough to prevail. And how effectual must the intercession of such a Son be,
who is so great a Son of so great a Father, equal with him, and the express
Image of his Person? never any Son so like, and in so peculiarly a
transcendent manner a Son, as the relation of Sonne-ship among men is but a
shadow of it! Christ is one with his Father, as himself often speaks; and
therefore if his Father should deny him any thing, he should then cease to be
one with him, he must then deny himself, which God can never do. He is in this
respect [ the Beloved] as he is called, Ephesians. 1. 6. as on whom (originally and
primarily) all the beams of Gods love do fall. Solomon (the type of Christ)
was the beloved of God, 2 Samuel 12. 24. and had his name from thence, (namely)
Iedidiah, that is, beloved of the Lord: And to show how beloved he was, God,
when he came first to his kingdom, bade him ask what he should give him, 1
King. 3. 5. Now the like God says to Christ when come first to his Kingdom
also, Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me and I will give thee; namely, when he had set him
as King on his holy hill, ver. 6. And of him he says, This is my well-beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. God bids us therefore and upon that
respect to hear him; and that speech was but the echo of his own heart, in
that he himself is so well pleased with him for this that he is his Son, as
he himself will hear him in every thing, yea, and is so pleased with him, as
that although Christ had never died, nor obeyed the Law; yet simply, because he
is his Son, he has so full an acquiescencie of all desires in him, and
complacencie of delights, that he could deny him nothing. How prevalent then
must Christ's intercession needs be, though there were nothing else to be
considered?

And that God had indeed this as one maine consideration, That God had this
consideration of his being his Son, when he ordained him a Priest to
intercede, as that which would fit him for this work.
upon which he made him a Priest thus to intercede, those words do testify,
Heb. 5. 5, and 6. He that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee; As he says also in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever,
after the order of Melchisedech: These latter words are not only a Paraphrase
(as some think) merely to show that [ He] that said, Christ was his Son, said
also, He was a Priest; but it is to show the foundation of his call to that
office. The great consideration that fitted him for it, was, that he was Gods
Son; especially that fitted him for that part of his Priesthood, which was
to remain for ever, (of which that 110. Psalm. and the Epistle to the Heb. do
especially speak.) Neither is the meaning of the forecited place only to show
that in that he was Gods Son, it was his birthright to be a Priest: so as if
God would have any Priest at all, it must be he: And so upon that
consideration, he that said to him, Thou art my Son, said, Thou art a Priest;
and that being his right, he therefore called him to it, because he was his
Son, (for according to the Law of Nature, the eldest in the family was to be
Priest; and so Christ, even as God-man, being the firstborn of every
creature, and the natural first begotten Son of God, had right to be the
prime leader of that great Chorus in that eternal worship in heaven:) That (I
say) is not all the meaning of those words, nor all that God considered in it,
when he thus ordained him to be a Priest; but he had a further and more
peculiar respect unto this especial part of his Priesthood, his Intercession,
(as that clause for ever imports) as for which, he being his natural Son, so
nearly allied to him, would transcendtly fit him, and give such an omnipotent
prevalencie and effectualnesse to his requests, that he would be the most
absolute perfect Priest for ever, (in this respect) that could be: That as God
himself is perfect, and his power irresistible, so his Priesthood through this
relation might be perfect also, and his requests undeniable. Thus did God order
it to strengthen our faith. And that indeed God did consider this relation of
his to him to this very end is evident by that of the 2. Psalm. (out of which
that saying [ Thou art my Son] is cited) ver. 7, and 8. Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee; and what follows? Ask of me and I will give thee,
etc. He connects both these together, namely, intercession, (that part of his
Priestly office of asking) with his Sonship, for that is it which moves God
to grant all that he asks. God loves Christ as he loves himself, and therefore
can deny him nothing, as he cannot deny himself. And so by the way, this
clears the ground of the Apostles quoting those words of the 2. Psalm. in the 5.
to the Hebrews as a proof of Christ's call to the Priesthood, which
Interpreters have been troubled how to make out; for (as you have seen) that
speech [ Thou art my Son, ask, etc.] is all one as if he had said, Thou art a
Priest; and so was as fit and full a place to prove his being a Priest in the
holy Ghosts intent, as is that other quoted with it, out of the 110. Psalm.
though uttered in more express words, Thou art a Priest for ever: Both
speeches come to one, in both places; the holy Ghost especially aiming in both
at that part of his Priesthood in heaven, his Intercession; in the one speaking
of him after he is set upon Gods hill, as King: (So Psalm. 2. ver. 6.) and in
the other, after he is set down at Gods right hand: (So Psalm. 110. ver. 1, 2.)
Yea, and this his favor with his Father, and Intercession alone, might have
procured pardon for us sinners, but that Gods will was to have Justice
satisfied.

And secondly, 2 His potency with God, from his having been so obedient a Son.
he intercedes not only as a Son, (and in that respect a Priest perfect
enough for ever) but also as a Son who has been obedient to his Father, and
has done at his request, and for his sake, the greatest service for him, and
the most willingly that ever was done: And you all know how much former
services done, do always forward suits. In the 5. of the Heb. ver. 8, 9, 10.
it is said, that though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience, and thereby
became perfect. The Apostle had said in the verses before, that in respect of
his being his Son, God had called him to this office, as one that was thereby
sufficiently qualifyed to be a Priest that might prevail; and yet in these
verses he further adds, that though he was a Son, (and in that respect a Priest
perfect enough) yet he was to be obedient also, and thereby yet to become in a
further respect a perfect Highpriest also, even in respect of service done, and
obedience performed. And so shows that he coms to have a further perfection and
power of prevailing in his priestly office added to that relation of
Sonne-ship, spoken of ver. 5. And therefore it follows, that he being thus
become perfect, namely, through his obedience, he became Author of eternal
salvation unto all them that obey him, called of God an High Priest for ever,
etc. That therefore which makes him yet more potent, (that he may be sure to
prevail) is his obedience, and service done; and this alone also were enough
to carry any thing. And both these considerations of his Sonne-ship and
obedience, as giving an efficacy to his Intercession, you have also in that
Heb. 7. from ver. 26. to 28. he had spoken of the power of Intercession, ver.
24, 25. how he was able to save to the utmost; and then in the following verses
he shows the ground of it, first in his fore-past obedience, ver. 26. 1.
Active, For such a High Priest became us, who was [holy, harmless, undefiled.]
And such a Priest he was, and therefore able thus to save by his Intercession:
For such an one who was holy, harmless, and no guile found in his mouth, what
requests come out of such lips, must needs be accepted. Then 2. he mentions his
Passive obedience, ver. 27. He offered up himself once, and thereby made so
full a satisfaction, as he needed not to do it but once; and in the strength
of both these he intercedes: for to that purpose does the mention of both these
there come in. And then he adds that other which we before insisted on, that
he is the Son, which follows in the next words, ver. 28. And accordingly you
shall find Christ himself urging this his obedience, as the foundation of all
those his suits and requests for us that follow after. So in that last prayer,
John 17. (which is as it were a pattern or instance of his Intercession for us
in Heaven) I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work thou
gave me: Two things to be distinctly considered in his obedience, and both
making it prevalent with God.
ver. 4. And whereas two things may be distinctly considered, in that his
obedience. 1. The worth of it, as a price in the valuation of Justice it self;
2. The desert of favor and grace with God; which such an obedience and service
done for his sake, might in a way of kindness expect to find at his hands:
you may for your comfort consider, that besides what the worth of it as a
price, which I shall urge in the next Chapter, might exact of Justice it self
between two strangers (as we use to say) he having well paid for all that he
asks; he has moreover deserved thus much grace and favor with his Father, in
that this obedience was done for his sake and at his request; and this it calls
for even in way of remuneration and requital as of one kindness with the like:
That therefore his Father should hear him in all the requests that ever he
should make, yea so transcendent was the obedience which he did to his Father,
in giving himself to death at his request, (and it was done at Gods sole
entreaty, Lo I come to do thy will) as he can never out-aske the merit of
this his service. And (which may yet further encourage us herein) he has
nothing at all left to ask for himself simply, for he has need of nothing.
So that all his favor remains entire, for to be laid forth for sinners, and
employed for them: and then add this thereto, that all he can ask for them,
is less, yea far less then the service which he has done to God comes to;
our lives, and pardon, and salvation, these are not enough; they are too small
a requital. So that besides his natural grace, and interest which he has
with his Father, as he is his Son, (which can never be lessened) this his
acquired favor by his obedience must needs make him prevail, seeing it can
never be requited to the full. Some Divines put so much efficacy in this, that
they say, Christ's very being in Heaven, who once did this service, and so
putting God in mind of it by his very presence, is all that intercession, that
the Scripture speaks of; so sufficient they think this alone to be.

CHAP. VI.
Secondly, the Prevalencie of Christ's Intercession, demonstrated from the
righteousness of the cause he pleades even in Justice: How forcible the cry of
his blood is, himself appearing to intercede with it.
BEsides favor and grace in all these respects, he can and does plead Justice
and righteousness, and is able so to carry it: so you have it, 1 John 2. 1.
and 2. ver. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ [the righteous.]
And Advocate has place only in a cause of Justice, and this Christ's
Advocateship is executed by pleading his own satisfaction: so it follows, Who
is a propitiation for our sins; and can plead his own righteousness so far,
that Justice it self shall be feign to save the worst of sinners. He can turn
Justice it self for them, and handle matters so, as Justice shall be as
forward to save them as any other Attribute. So that if God be said to be
righteous in forgiving us our sins, if we do but confess them, (as Chap. 1.
of this 1. Epist. of John, ver. 9.) then much more when Jesus Christ the
righteous shall intercede for the pardon of them, as he adds in the second ver.
of the ensuing Chap. and this if he will be just. The worst Case he will make a
good one; not with coloring it over, (as cunning Lawyers do) or extenuating
things; but with pleading that righteousness, which being put into the
opposite balance, shall cast it for thee, be there never so many sins
weighed against it: Yea, and he will be just in it too, and carry all by mere
righteousness and equity.

In the explication of this Branch, This explicated.
my purpose is not to insist upon the demonstration of that all-sufficient
fullness that is in Christ's satisfaction, such as may in justice procure our
pardon and salvation, (because it will more fitly belong to another Discourse)
but I shall absolve this point in hand by two things which are proper to this
head of Intercession.

First, By two considerations.
by showing how that there is even in respect to Gods Justice a powerful voice
of Intercerssion attributed unto Christ's blood; and how prevalent that must
needs be in the ears of the righteous God.

Secondly, especially when Christ himself shall join with that cry and
Intercession of his blood, himself in Heaven appearing and interceding in the
strength of it.

For the first, 1. How an Intercession and appeal to Gods justice is
attributed to Christ's blood.
the Apostle Heb. 12. 24. does ascribe a voice, an appeal, an Intercession unto
the blood of Christ in Heaven. The blood of sprinkling (says he) [ speakes]
better things then the blood of Abel. He makes Christ's very blood an Advocate
to speak for us, though Christ himself were silent; as he says in another
case, Abel, though dead, yet speaks, Heb. 11. 4. Many other things are said
to cry to Scripture, (and I might show how the cry of all other things do meet
in this) but Blood has the loudest cry of all things else, in the ears of the
Lord of Hosts, the Judge of all the world, as he is in the 23. ver. of that 12.
Chap. styled. Neither has any cry the ear of Gods justice more then that of
blood; The voice of thy brothers blood (says God to Cain) cries unto me from
the ground, Genesis 4. 10. Now in that speech of the Apostle forecited, is the
allusion made unto the blood of Abel, and the cry thereof: And he illustrates
the cry of Christ's blood for us, by the cry of that blood of Abel against Cain,
it speaks better things then the blood of Abel: And his scope therein is by an
Antithesis or way of opposition, to show, that Christ's blood calls for greater
good things to be bestowed on us for whom it was shed, then Abels blood did for
evil things, and vengeance against Cain, by whom it was shed. For look how
loud the blood of one innocent cries for justice against another that murdered
him; so loud will the blood of one righteous (who by the appointment and
permission of a supreme Judge, has been condemned for another) cry for his
release and non-condemnation, for whom he dyed. And the more righteous he was,
who laid down his life for another, the louder still is that cry, for it is
made in the strength of all that worth which was in him, whose blood was shed.
Now to set forth the power of this cry of Christ's blood with justice, let us
compare it with that cry of Abels blood in these two things, wherein it will be
found infinitely to exceed it in force and loudness.

First, This cry of his blood, illustrated by a twofold comparison, with the
cry of the blood of Abel, in all which it exceeds it.
even the blood of the wickedest man on earth, if innocently shed, does cry,
and has a power with Justice against him who murdered him. Had Abel murdered
Cain, Cains blood would have cried, and called upon Gods Justice against Abel:
but [ Abels bloud] (there is an emphasis in that) Abels, who was a Saint, and
the first Martyr in Gods Calendar; and so his blood cries according to the
worth that was in him. Now Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of
his Saints; and the blood of one of Them cries louder then the blood of all
Mankind besides. Now from this I argue, If the blood of a Saint cries so, what
must the blood of the King of Saints (as Christ is called, Revel. 15.) then
do? If the blood of one member of Christ's body, what will then the blood of
the head, far more worth then that whole body? how does it fill Heaven and
Earth with outcries, until the promised intent of its shedding be
accomplished? And (as the Antithesis carries it) look how the blood of Abel
cried for the ruin and condemnation of his brother Cain, so does Christ's blood
on the contrary for our pardon and non-condemnation; and so much the louder, by
how much his blood was of more worth then Abels was. This was the blood of God;
so Act. 20. Who therefore shall condemn?

But 2. Christ's blood has in its cry here a further advantage of Abels blood
attributed to it: For that cried but from earth, from the ground, where it lay
shed, and that but for an answerable earthly punishment on Cain, as he was a
man upon the earth; but Christ's blood is carried up to Heaven: for as the
High Priest carried the blood of the Sacrifices into the Holy of holies, so
has Christ virtually carried his blood into Heaven, Heb. 9. 12. And this is
intimated in this place also, as by the coherence will appear. For all the
other particulars, (of which this is one) whereto he says the Saints are come,
they are all in Heaven: You are come (says he ver. 22) to the City of the
living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels,
to the Church of the first borne who are written in Heaven, and to God the
Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect: All which things are
in Heaven; neither names he any other then such: And then adds [ And to the
blood of sprinkling which speaks, etc.] as a thing both speaking in Heaven,
and besprinkled from Heaven, yea, wherewith Heaven is all besprinkled, as the
Mercie-seat in the Holy of holies was, because sinners are to come thither.
This Blood therefore cries from Heaven, it is next unto God who sits Judge
there, it cries in his very ears; whereas the cry of blood from the ground is
further off, and so though the cry thereof may come up to Heaven, yet the blood
it self comes not up thither, as Christ's already is. Abels blood cried for
vengeance to come down from heaven, but Christ's blood cries us up into Heaven:
like to that voice Revel. 11. 12. [ Come up hither:] So John 17. 24. Where I
am, let them be, for whom this blood was shed.

But though this speaking, An explication in what sense Christ's blood is said
to cry.
this voice, and intercession, be attributed to his blood, yet it is but in a
Metaphorical and improper (though real) sense: as also that this blood is in
Heaven, is spoken, though in a real, yet not a proper sense. Some Divines of
all sides, both Popish and Protestant, would make the whole work of
Intercession, to be only Metaphorical. It is true indeed, the voice and
intercession of his blood apart considered, is but Metaphorical, (I grant) and
yet real; such a voice as those groans are that are attributed to the whole
creation, Romans 8. 22. But Intercession as an act of Christ himself, joined
with this voice of his blood, is most properly and truly such.

Therefore in the second place, 2. Consideration: Christ himself living and
joining with the cry of his blood, how prevalent it must needs be.
add to this Christ's own intercession also, which was the second thing
propounded, That Christ by his own Prayers seconds this cry of his blood: that
not only the blood of Christ does cry, but that Christ himself being alive
does join with it: how forcible and prevalent must all this be supposed to be?
The blood of a man slain does cry, though the man remain dead; even as of Abel
it is said, (though to another purpose) that being dead he yet speaks, Heb.
11. but Christ lives and appears: Vivit, and in coelum coelorum venit; He
follows the suit, pursues the Hue and cry of his blood himself. His being
alive, puts a life into his death. It is not in this as it was in that other,
the first Adams sin and disobedience. Adam although he himself had been
annihilated when he dyed, yet he having set the stock of our nature a going in
propagation of Children, his sin would have defiled and condemned them to the
end of the world, and the force of it to condemn is neither furthered nor
lessened by his subsisting and being, or his not being: it receives no
assistance from his personal life, one way or other. And the reason is,
because his sin condemns us in a na turall and necessary way: But the death
of Christ and his blood shed, these saving us in a way of grace and favor unto
Christ himself and for his sake, that very being alive of Christ, that shed
this blood, adds an infinite acceptance to it with God, and moves him the more
to hear the cry of it, and to regard it. In a matter of favor to be done for
the sake of another man, or in a suit or matter of justice that concerns
another, who is interested in it, that man's being in vivis, his being alive,
puts a life into the cause. If David would have respect to Jonathan (when dead)
in his children, he would much more if himself had been alive. God made a
Covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to remember their Seed after them; And
why? They are alive, and were to live for ever; and though dead, shall rise
again. So Christ reasons from it, Mat. 22. 32. I am the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: God is the God of the living, (says he) and not of the dead:
and so, though Abraham be ignorant of his children (as the prophet speaks) and
should not intercede for them, yet because Abraham's soul lives, and is not
extinct, (as the Sadduces thought) but shall live again at the Resurrection;
therefore God remembers, and respects his covenant with them; for he is a God
of the living, and so his Covenant holds with them whilst they live. The old
covenant of the first Testament ran in the names of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
[The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob] but this new covenant runs in the name
of Christ, The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; so Ephesians. 1. 3. and so he
becomes our God and our Father in him. And God being thus our Father, because
Christ's Father, and Christ (in whose name the Covenant runs) being alive, and
God by Covenant the God of a living, not of a dead Christ; This therefore works
effectually with him to respect his blood and hear the cry of it; and this,
though Christ were absent, much more then when he is present also, and on
purpose appears in the presence of God for us; as it is Heb. 9. 24. He is
alive, and so, able to follow his own suit, and will be sure to see to it, and
to second the cry of his blood, if it should not be heard.

To illustrate this by the help of the former comparison begun; If as Abels
blood cries, so also it proves that Abels soul lives to cry; that both his
cause cries and himself lives to follow it: So that the cry of Abels blood is
seconded with the cry of Abels soul that lives, how doubly forcible must this
needs be? And thus indeed you have it, Revel. 6. 9. where it is said that [
the soules] of them which were slain for the testimony which they held, [cryed]
with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not
avenge our blood? Yea, see that not only their blood cries, but their souls
live, and live to cry. And it is not spoken Metaphorically of their souls, but
what is truly done by them now in Heaven, it being mentioned to show how and by
what God was moved to bring vengeance on the Heathenish Empire of Rome that had
shed their blood. Now not only Christ's soul (as theirs) lives to cry, but his
whole person; for he is risen again, and lives to intercede for ever. In the
Revel. 1. ver. 18. Christ appearing to John, when he would speak but one
speech that should move all in him, he says but this, I am he that lives, and
was dead, and dyed for thee. And whose heart does it not move, to read it with
faith? and does it not move his Father (think you) who was the chief cause and
motioner of his death) to think, My Son that was dead, and dyed at my request
for sinners, is now alive again, and lives to intercede, and lives to see the
travail of his soul fulfilled and satisfied? God pronounces this upon it in
that 53. of Esaias, ver. 10. By his knowledge (or faith in him) shall he justify
many; even as many as he dyed for. Who then shall condemn? Christ that was
dead is alive, and lives to intercede.

CHAP. VIII.
Thirdly, The prevalencie of Christ's intercession, and of his grace with his
Father, demonstrated from the greatness and absoluteness of his power, to do
what ever he asks.
A Third demonstration both of Christ's greatness with God, 3. From the great
power over all things that God the Father has put into his hands, and
therefore will deny him nothing.
and his power to prevail for us, is taken from this, that God has put all
power into his hand, to do what ever he will, has made him his King to do
what pleases him either in Heaven, Earth, or Hell; yea to do all that God
himself ever means to do, or all that God desires to do: And certainly if
his Father has been so gracious to him as to bestow so high and absolute a
sovereignty on him, as to accomplish and effect what ever he means to do,
surely his purpose was never to deny Christ any request, that he should after
this make: he would never have advanced the Humane nature to that absoluteness
else. Those two great Monarchs made great grants and largesses, the one to
Esther, the other to Herodias daughter; but yet they were limited only to the
half of their Kingdoms: so Mar. 6. and Est. 5. 6. and the royal power in
their Kingdoms, they meant still to retain and reserve wholly to themselves:
But God having placed Christ on his Throne, bids him ask even to the whole of
his Kingdom, for God has made him a King, sitting on his Throne with him, not
to share halves, but to have all power in heaven and earth; He has committed
all judgment to the Son, to save and condemn whom ever he will; and so
far as the Kingdom of God goes, or is extended, he may do any thing. So
John 5. 21. As the Father raises up the dead, so the Son quickneth whom he
will; for as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to
have life in himself, ver. 26. and has in like manner given authority to
execute judgment also, as the Son of man, (namely, of himself) ver. 27. as
he had said, He had given him to have life in himself, ver. 26. (not
dependently, as we have, but independently) so to execute judgment also, ver.
27. So that Christ's will is as free, and himself as absolute a Monarch and
King of himself, as God himself is. He indeed has it not a seipso, but in
seipso; not a seipso originally, but from his Father; but in seipso
independently.

Now then, Though Christ as King can command all things, yet to honor his
Father he intercedes for what himself commands.
if he who is King, and may and does of himself command all that is done, as
absolutely as God himself does, (I speak in respect of the execution of things
downward, by second causes) if he, over and above, to honor his Father, will
ask all that himself has power to do, what will not be done? Qui rogat, and
imperare potest; He that can, and does command what ever he would have done,
and it is straight done; if he shall ask and entreat, what will not be done? As
a King who sues for Peace, backed with a potent Army which is able to win what
he entreats for, must needs treat more effectually: So does Christ sue for
every thing, with power to effect it. Remember that he is said here in the
Text, first to be at Gods right hand, and then to intercede. He treats the
salvation of sinners, as a mighty Prince treats the giving up some Town to
him, which lies seated under a Castle of his, which commands that Town: he
stands treating with the Governor, having his Ordnance ready for the battery,
and to bring all into subjection, That this is a consideration upon which God
denies him nothing.
as 2 Cor. 10. 4. And this is a consideration that God himself took, in that
2. Psalm. when he made him that promise, ( Ask and I will give thee) why he made
so large a grant: He had said before, ver. 6. I have set my King upon my holy
hill of Sion, (which made him (one would think) past asking) and above the
condition of an Intercessour. Now God says of him, He is My King, not in
respect of his commanding God, (that were blasphemy to think) but it is spoken
in respect of commanding all below him. God having set him in his Throne, to
do as much as he himself would (or means) to have done, says, He is my King
to rule all, not so much under me, as for me, and in my stead; yet absolutely,
and in himself, The Father judges no man. Now when the Father had first made
and constituted him thus great a King, then he bids him Ask, to whom he had
first given this absolute power to command. We may (without blasphemy) say of
this God-man, that God has (not only not the heart, as being his Father, but)
not the power to cross any thing he does. Thus fast has he God unto him.
Only he (who in respect of this his power is to be honored as the Father, as
John 5. 23. yet) to honor his Father, who gave this power originally to him as
Mediator; He is to ask for that which of himself he yet can do. And
therefore (says God) though thou art a King, (so ver. 6.) and all my Kingdom,
even the utmost ends of the earth are thine inheritance by a natural right,
now that thou art my Son, (as verse 8.) yet because thou art My King, of my
appointing, and I have set thee on the Throne, (as the word is, ver. 6.) and (
Thou art my Son, and I have begotten thee) therefore acknowledge my grant in
all, Ask of me, and I will give thee the utmost ends of the earth for thy
inheritance: I cannot deny thee, but I would have thee ask; And therefore
Christ asks. Yet still withal remember, that he asks, who can command the
thing to be done: and yet, as he must ask ere the thing be done; so if he ask,
it must needs be granted. These are the terms between this Father and this
Son; who (in a word) had not been so great a Father, if he had not had a
Son thus great, that himself could not deny what this Son would have done:
it is for his own honor, to have such a Son: So John 5. 23. That they might
honor the Son, as they honor the Father, therefore All judgment is
committed to him. Now then, if he who has so much power, will join the force
of entreaty with a Father that so loves him; if he who is The Word of his
Father, that commands, creates, and upholds all, as Heb. 1. [ He spoke, and it
was done] if he will become a Word to his Father, and speak a word for us, and
ask all that he means to do; how forcible will such words be?

Therefore observe Christ's manner of praying, How forcible Christ's prayers and
intercestion must needs be, by an inference from the prevalencie of ours.
John 17. (which Prayer is a platform of Intercession in Heaven) ver. 24. [
Father I will] that they whom thou have given me, be where I am. He prays like
a King, who is in joint commission with God. If God puts that honor upon our
Prayers, that we are said to have power with God, as Jacob, Hos. 12. 3. that if
God be never so angry, yet by taking hold of his strength, we hold his hands,
as Esaias 27. 5. that God cries out to Moses, like a man whose hands are held,
Let me alone, Exodus 32. 10. yea that he accounts it as a command and a
Mandamus, so he styles it, Esaias 45. 11. [ Command ye mee] so unable is he to go
against it. Then how much more does Jesus Christ's Intercession bind Gods hands,
and command all in heaven and earth? Therefore Zach. 1. you have Christ, the
Angel of the Covenant, brought in interceding with the Father for his Church,
and he speaks abruptly as one full of complaints, and in an expostulating way,
[ O Lord of Hosts, how long, will thou not be merciful to Jerusalem and the
Cities of Judah?] and ver. 13. Zachary says that he observed, that the Lord
answered the Angel with good words and comfortable. God was fain to give him
good words (as we use to say) that is, words that might pacify him as words of
comfort to us, so good words in respect to the Angels complaint. And you may
observe, how in the answer God returns upon it, (which he bade Zachary write)
God excuses it (as it were) to Christ, that his Church had been so long and
so hardly dealt withal; as if beyond his intention, he lays the fault on the
instruments, I was but a little displeased, but they helped forward the
affliction; ver. 15. This is spoken and carried after the manner of men, to
show how tender God is of displeasing Christ our Intercessor: that when Christ
has (as it were) been a long while silent, and let God alone, and his people
have been ill dealt withal; he on the sudden in the end intercedes and
complains of it, and it is not only instantly redressed, but excused for times
past, with good words, and comfortable words. Christ's Father will not displease
him, nor go against him in any thing.

Now that you may see a reason of this, A farther explication of this
demonstration.
and have all cavils and exceptions taken away, that may arise against this;
and how that there is an impossibility that it should be otherwise: know, that
this Father and this Son, though two Persons, have yet but one will between
them, and but one power between them, (though the Son ad extra outwardly
executes all) John 10. 30. My Father and I are one; that is, have but one and
the same power to save you, and one mind and will: So also, John 5. 19. the
Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do, and what
ever he does, the same the Father does also: they conspire in one, have one
power, one will: and then it is no matter though God commit all power to the
Son, and that the Son though he has all power, must ask all of the Father,
for to be sure what ever he asks, the Father has not power to deny; for they
have but one will and power. They are one; so as if God deny him, he must deny
himself, which the Apostle tells us he cannot do, 2. Tim. 2. 13. And so in the
same sense that God is said not to have power to deny himself; in the same
sense it may be said, he has not power to deny Christ what he asks. Therefore
God might well make him an absolute King, and betrust him with all power; and
Christ might well oblige himself, notwithstanding this power, to ask all that
he means to do; for they have but one will and one power, so as our salvation
is made sure by this on all hands. [ I come not to do my will, but the will of
him who sent me; and his will is, that I shall lose none of all those whom he
has given me,] John 6. 38, 39. And therefore who shall condemn? It is Christ
that intercedes. As who shall resist Gods will? (as the Apostle speaks) so who
shall resist or gainsay Christ's Intercession? God himself cannot, no more
then he can gainsay, or deny himself.

CHAP. VIII.
The potencie and prevalencie of Christ's Intercession, demonstrated from the
graciousnesse of the Person with whom he intercedes, considered first as he is
the Father of Christ himself.
WE have seen the greatness of the Person interceding, and many considerations
from thence, The readiness in God to hear Christ for us.
which may persuade us of his prevailing for us. Let us now in the next place,
consider the graciousnesse of the Person, with whom he intercedes, which the
Scripture for our comfort herein does distinctly set before us, to the end that
in this great matter, our joy and security may every way be full. Thus in that
1 John 2. 1. when for the comfort and support of Believers, agains the evil of
the greatest sins that can befall them after conversion, the Apostle minds them
of Christ's Intercession in those words, If any man sin, we have an Advocate,
Jesus Christ the righteous: mentioning therein the power and prevalencie of
such an Advocate, through his own righteousness: But yet over and above all
this, the more fully to assure us of his good success herein for us, he also
adds, [ An Advocate with the Father.] He insinuates and suggests the relation
and gracious disposition of him, upon whose supreme will our case ultimately
depends, [ The Father] as affording a new comfort and encouragement, even as
great as does the righteousness and power of the Person interceding. He says
not, [ With God onely] as elsewhere, but [ With the Father.] And that his words
might afford the more full matter of confidence, and be the more comprehensive,
and take in all, he expresses not this relation of God limitedly, as confined
to his Fatherhood, either unto Christ only, or us alone: He says not only [
An Advocate with his Father,] though that would have given much assurance, or [
With your Father,] though that might afford much boldness; but indefinitely he
says [ With the Father,] as intending to take in both; to ascertaine us of the
prevailing efficacy of Christ's Intercession, In that he is both the Father of
Christ, and also our Father.
from both. You have both these elsewhere more distinctly, and on purpose, and
together mentioned, John 20. 17. I go to my Father, and your Father, says
Christ there: And it was spoken after that all his Disciples had before
forsaken him, and Peter denied him; when Christ himself would send them the
greatest cordial that his heart could utter, and wrap up the strongest
sublimation of comforts in one pill; What was it? Go tell them, (says he) not
so much that I have satisfied for sin, overcome death, or am risen, but that
I Ascend: For in that which Christ does for us being ascended, lies the height,
the top of our comfort. And whereas he might have said, (and it had been matter
of unspeakable comfort) I ascend to heaven, and so where I am, you shall be
also; yet he chooses rather to say, [ I ascend to the Father,] for that indeed
contained the foundation, spring, and cause of their comfort; even that
relation of Gods, [his Fatherhood] with which Christ was to deal after his
ascending, for them. And because when before his death he had spoken of his
going to his Father, their hearts had been troubled, John 14. 28. they thinking
it was for his own preferment only, (as Christ's speech there implies they
did) therefore he here distinctly adds, I ascend to my Father and your Father,
to my God and your God. He had in effect spoken as much before, in the words
foregoing, Go tell my Brethren, but that was only implicitly; therefore
more plainly and explicitly he says it, for their further comfort, [ I go to
my Father, and your Father.] And consider, that Christ being now newly risen,
and having as yet not seen his Disciples, and being now to send a message, his
first message, a Gospel of good tidings to them, (and that in a brief
sentence) by a woman; he chooses out this as the first word to be spoken from
him now, when he was come out of the other world, at their first hearsay of
his return, he utters forth at once, the bottom, the depth of all comfort, the
sum of all joy; then which the Gospel knows no greater, nor can go higher: So
as if Christ should intend now at this day to send good news from Heaven to any
of you, it would be but this, I am here an Advocate, interceding with my
Father, and thy Father. All is spoken in that. Even [ He] could not speak more
comfort, who is the God of comfort. Now therefore let us apart consider these
two relations, which afford each of them their proper comfort and assurance;
both that Christ is ascended, and intercedes with his own Father; and also with
Our Father: and therefore how prevailing must this Intercession be?

First, 1. That Christ intercedes with his Father.
Christ intercedes with his Father, who neither will nor can deny him any
thing. To confirm this, you have a double Testimony, and of two of the
greatest witnesses in Heaven: both a Testimony of Christ's own, whilst he was
on Earth; and Gods own word also declared, since Christ came to Heaven. The 1.
in the 11. of John, whilst Christ was here on earth, and had not as then fully
performed that great service which he was to finish; which since he having
done, it must needs ingratiate him the more with God his Father. When Lazarus
was now four days dead, Martha, to move Christ to pity her, first tells him,
that if he had been there before her brother dyed, that then he had not dyed:
and then (as having spoke too little) she adds, yea thou can (if thou
please) remedy it yet. But I know (says she, ver. 22.) that even now
(though he be so long dead) what ever thou will ask of God, God will give it
thee. Here was her confidence in Christ's Intercession, though this were a
greater work then ever yet CHRIST had done any. And Christ seeing her faith in
this, he confirms her speech when he came to raise him, and takes a solemn
occasion to declare, that God had never denied him any request that he had ever
put up to him, first thanking God particularly that he had heard him in this,
ver. 41. Father, I thank thee, that thou have heard me: He had (it seems)
prayed for the thing at her entreaty; and now, before the thing was done, he
(being assured his prayer was heard) gives thanks; so confident was he of his
being heard. And then secondly, shows upon what this his confidence at this
time was grounded, his constant experience that God had never denied him any
request; for it follows, ver. 42. And I know that thou hear me always, (and
therefore was so bold, as to express my confidence in this, before the thing
was done) but because of them who stood by, I said it. As if he had said,
Though I gave this public thanks for being heard only in this one miracle,
and at no time the like so publicly; yet this is no new thing, but thus it
has been always hitherto, in all the miracles I have wrought, and requests I
have put up, which made me so to give thanks beforehand: and this is not the
first time that God has heard me thus; which I speak, that they might believe.
Thus he was never denied on earth, from the first to the last. For this was one
of his greatest miracles, and reserved unto the last, even a few days before
his crucifying.

And now he has performed the service designed him, and is come to heaven, let
us secondly hear God himself speak, what he means to do for him. You
heard before, when he came first to heaven, what God said to him, and how he
welcomed him with a [ Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
footstool:] And before Christ opened his mouth to speak a word, by way of any
request to God, (which was the office that he was now to execute) God himself
prevented him, and added, [ Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee:
Ask of me, and I will give thee, Psalm. 2. ver. 8.] He speaks it at Christ's
first coming up to heaven, when he had his King on his holy hill, as ver. 6.
Christ was new glorified, which was as a new begetting to him, To day have I
begotten thee: And this is, as if he had said, I know you will ask me now for
all that you have dyed for; and this I promise you beforehand, before you
speak a word, or make any request unto me, you shall ask nothing but it shall
be granted; and this I speak once for all, as a boon and a grace granted you
upon your birthday, as the solemnest celebration of it, (for such was his
Resurrection, and Ascensision, and sitting at Gods right hand) This day have I
begotten thee; Ask of me and I will give thee. So full of joy was his Fathers
heart, that he had his Son in Heaven with him, whom he had begotten from
everlasting, and ordained to this glory, who was lately dead, and in a manner
lost, and therefore now (as it were) new begotten. Gods heart was so full, that
he could not hold from expressing it in the largest favors and grants. And
whereas Kings upon their own birth-dayes, use to grant such favors to their
favorites: So Herod on his birthday to the Daughter of Herodias, promised
with an oath to give her whatsoever she would ask, Mat. 14. 7. God himself
having no birthday, nor being of himself capable of it, yet having a Son
who had, he honors him with that grace upon that day; and if Q. Esther (a
Subject, yea, a slave in her original condition) was so prevalent for the Jews
her People and Nation, when their case was desperate, and when there was an
irrevocable decree past (and that not to be altered) for their ruin and
destruction, then what will not Christ (so great a Son, even equal with his
Father) prevail for, with his Father, for his brethren? be their case, for the
time past, never so desperate, be there never so many threatenings gone out
against them, never so many presidents and examples of men condemned before for
the like sins, and in the like case, yet Christ can prevail against them all.

CHAP. IX.
The potencie of Christ's Intercession, demonstrated, in that he intercedes with
God, who is Our Father. How Gods heart is as much inclined to hear Christ for
us, as Christ's is to intercede.
SEcondly, Christ is an Advocate for us with Our Father: You may perhaps think
there is little in that; but Christ puts much upon it: yea so much, as if that
God would however grant all that Christ himself means to ask, whether Christ
asked it or no. This you have expressly in John 16. 26, 27. At that day (says
Christ) you shall ask in my name, and I say not to you, that I will pray the
Father for you; for the Father himself loves you. To open this place, where
he says [ at that day;] The day he means through this whole Chapter, is that
time when the holy Ghost should be shed upon them: for throughout his
discourse, he still speaks of the fruits of his Ascension, and of giving the
Comforter, which was done upon his ascending, and was the first fruits of
his priestly office in Heaven. Thus Peter informs us, Act. 2. 33. He being
(says he) exalted by the right hand of God, and having received (namely by
asking, Ask and I will give thee) of the Father the promise of the holy Ghost,
he has shed forth this, which you now see and hear. Now of that time, when
he shall be in Heaven, he says, I say not that I will pray for you: which is
not meant, that Christ prays not for us in heaven, but rather those very words
are the highest intimation, that he would and does pray for us, that can be.
When men would most strongly intimate their purpose of a kindness they mean
to do for one, they use to say, I do not say that I love you, or that I will
do this or that for you; which is as much as to say, I will surely do it, and
do it to purpose. But Christ's scope here is, as in the highest manner to
promise them that he would pray for them; so withal, further to tell them for
their more abundant assurance and security, that besides their having the
benefit of his prayers, God himself so loves them of himself, that indeed
that alone were enough to obtain any thing at his hands, which they shall but
ask in his name; so as he needs not pray for them, and yet he will too. But now
in this case, if he himself pray for them, and they themselves in his name,
and both unto a Father, who of himself loves them, and who has purposed to
grant all, before either he, or they should ask; what hope must there needs be
then of a good success? this is both the meaning of this place, and a great
truth to be considered on by us, to the purpose in hand: That it is the meaning
of the place, the manner of Christ's speech implies, [ I say not that I will
pray the Father for you, for the Father himself loves you.] It is such a
speech as Christ used upon a clean contrary occasion, John 5. 45. Do not
think (says he) that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one who
accuses you, even Moses, etc. He there threatens the obstinate and accursed
Pharisees with condemnation: Never stand thinking that it is I (says he) who
am your only enemy and accuser, that will procure your condemnation, and so
prosecute the matter against you merely for my own interest; no, I shall not
need to do it: though I should not accuse you, your own Moses in whom you
trust, he is enough to condemn you, he will do your errand sufficiently, you
would be sure to be damned by his words and sayings; I shall not need to
trouble my self to come in and enter my action against you too, Moses and his
Law would follow the suit, and be enough to condemn you to Hell. So as this
Speech does not implie that Christ will not at all accuse them; no, he means
to bring in his action against them too: for he after says, If he had not
spoke to them, they had had no sin, and therefore he meant to bring the
greatest accusation of all. Now in an opposite (though parallel) speech here,
to comfort his Disciples, he says [I say not that I will pray for you] that
God may save you, I who your selves shall see will dye for you, I say not that
I will pray for you, not I. But though I speak this to insinuate in the
highest manner, that I will; (for if I spend my blood for you, will I not spend
my breath for you?) yet the truth is, that the case so stands, that but for
Gods own ordination, I should not need to do it, for the Father himself
loves you: (that is) the Father of his own motion, and proper good will taken
up of himself toward you, and not wrought in him by me, does love you, and
bears so much love to you, as he can deny you nothing, for he is your Father
as well as mine. How much more then shall you be saved, when I shall strike in
too, and use all my interest in him for you? Christ on purpose uses this
speech, so to dash out of their hearts that conceit, which harbors in many
of ours, who look upon God in the matter of Salvation, as one who is hardly
entreated to come off, to save sinners, and with whom Christ (through the
backwardness of his heart) has so much ado; and we are apt to think that
when he does come off to pardon, he does it only and merely at Christ's
entreaty, and for his sake, having otherwise no innate motion in himself
sufficient to incline his heart to it; but that it is in this transaction by
Christ with him, as a Favorite procures a Pardon for a Traitor, whose person
the King cares not for; only at his Favorites suit and request he grants it,
which else he would never have done. You are deceived, says Christ, it is
otherwise: my Fathers heart is as much toward you, and for your salvations, as
mine is: Himself of himself loves you. And the truth is, that God took up as
vast a love unto us of himself at first, as ever he has borne us since: and
all that Christ does for us, is but the expression of that love which was taken
up originally in Gods own heart. Thus we find, that out of that love he gave
Christ for us: So John 3. 16. God so loved the world (of elect) that he gave
his only begotten Son to dye, etc. Yea, Christ's death was but a means to
commend or set forth that love of his unto us: So Romans 5. 8. it was God also
that did himself give the persons unto Christ, and underhand set him on work
to mediate for them: God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself: He
only used Christ as his instrument to bring it honorably about. All the
Blessings he means to give us, he first purposed and intended in himself: (so
Ephesians. 1. 3, 5, 9, 11. compared) out of the good pleasure of his will, yet [ in
Christ] as it is added there, as the means through which he would convey them:
yea Christ adds not one drop of love to Gods heart; only he draws it out, he
brocheth it, and makes it flow forth, whose current had otherwise been stopped.
The truth is, that God suborned Christ to beg them on our behalf for an
honorable way of carrying it, and to make us prize this favor of it the more;
but so, as his heart is as ready to give all to us, as Christ's is to ask, and
this out of his pure love to us.

The Intercession therefore of Christ must needs speed, when Gods heart is thus
of it self prepared to us. In Esaias 53. 10. it is said, The pleasure of the
Lord shall prosper in his hand: If our salvation be in Christ's hand, it is in a
good hand; but if it be the pleasure of the Lord too, it must needs prosper.
And it is said of our hearts and prayers, that He prepares the heart, and
hears the prayer; much more therefore when his own heart is prepared to
grant the suit, will he easily hear it. When one has a mind to do a thing,
then the least hint procures it of him: So a father having a mind to spare his
child, he will take any excuse, any ones mediation, even of a servant, a
stranger, or an enemy, rather then of none. Now when Christ shall speak for
us, and speak Gods own heart, how prevalent must those words needs be? David's
soul longing to go forth unto Absalom, (2 Samuel 13. ult.) whom notwithstanding
(for the honor of a Father, and a Kings State-policie, and to satisfy the
world) he had banished the Court for his Treason; when Ioab perceived it, that
the Kings heart was toward Absalom, (Chap. 14. 1.) and that the King only
needed one to speak a good word for him, he subornes a woman, a stranger (no
matter whom, for it had been all one for speeding) with a made tale to come to
the King; and you know how easily it took and prevailed with him, and how glad
the Kings heart was of that occasion: even so acceptable it was to him, that
Ioab could not have done him a greater kindness; and that Ioab knew well
enough. Thus it is with Gods heart toward us, Christ assures us of it, and you
may believe him in this case, for Christ might have took all the Honor to
himself, and made us beholding to himself alone for all Gods kindness to us;
but he deals plainly, and tells us that his Father is as ready as himself; and
this for his Fathers honor and our comfort; And therefore it is that, John 17.
in that this prayer so operated on this discourse, he pleads our election, John
17. 6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me; Thou commendedst them unto me,
and badest me pray for them, and I do but commend the same to thee again. In
the Highpriests breast plate when he went into the Holy of Holies, were set
twelve stones, on which were written the names of the twelve Tribes: the
mystery of which is this, Christ bears us and our names in his Heart, when he
goes to God: and moreover, we are Gods jewels, precious in his own account and
choice. So God calls them Mal. 3. 17. Made precious to him out of his love. So
Isai. 43. 4. So that God loves us as jewels chosen by him, but much more when
he beholds us set and presented unto him in the breast plate of Christ's heart
and prayer.

To conclude therefore, we have now made both ends of this Text to meet, Gods
love, and Christ's intercession. The Apostle began with that, Who shall accuse?
it is God that justifies, and he being for us, who can be against us? The
Father himself loves us as he is our Father: And then he ends with this, Christ
intercedes, namely, with our Father and his Father, Who then shall condemn?
Who, or what can possibly condemn, all these things being for us, the least of
which were alone enough to save us?

Let us now look round about, and take a full view and prospect at once, of
all those particulars that Christ has done and does for us, and their several
and joint influence which they have into our salvation.

1. In that Christ dyed, it assures us of a perfect price paid for, and a
right to eternal life thereby acquired.

2. In that he rose again as a common person, this assures us yet further, that
there is a formal, legal, and irrevocable act of Justification of us passed
and enrolled in that Court of Heaven between Christ and God: and that in his
being then justified, we were also justified him, so that thereby our
justification is made past re-calling.

3 Christ's Ascension into Heaven, is a further act of his taking possession of
Heaven for us, he then formally entering upon that our right in our stead; and
so is a further confirmation of our salvation to us. But still we in our own
persons are not yet saved, this being but done to us as we are representatively
in Christ as our Head.

4. Therefore he sits at Gods right hand, which imports his being armed and
invested with all power in Heaven and Earth to give and apply eternal life to
us.

5. And last of all there remains Intercession to finish and complete our
salvation; to do the thing, even to save us. And as Christ's death and
Reresurrection were to procure our Justification: so his sitting at Gods right
hand and Intercession are to procure salvation; and by faith we may see it
done, and behold our souls not only sitting in heaven, as in Christ a common
person sitting there in our right; as an evidence that we shall come thither:
but also through Christ's Intercession begun we may see our selves actually
possessed of heaven. And there I will leave all you that are believers by
faith possessed of it, and solacing your souls in it, and do you fear
condemnation if you can.

CHAP. X.
The use of all: Containing some Encouragements for weak Believers, from
Christ's Intercession, out of HEB. 7. 25.
NOw for a Conclusion of this Discourse I will add a brief Use of
Encouragement; and this, suited to the lowest Faith of the weakest Believer,
who cannot put forth any act of Assurance, and is likewise discouraged from
coming in unto Christ. And I shall confine my self only unto what those most
comfortable words (as any in the book of God) do hold forth, which the
Apostle has uttered concerning Christ's Intercession (the Point in hand;) [
Wherefore he is able to save to the utmost, those that come to God by him:
seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them,] words which I have had
the most recourse unto in this Doctrinall part, of any other, as most tending
to the clearing of many things about Intercession: And which I would also
commend to, and leave with poor Believers to have recourse unto for their
comfort, as a sufficient Abundary of Consolation unto their Souls, and as a
Catholicon or universal Cordial against all faintings and misgivings of
spirit whatsoever.

In the words observe,

1. A Definition of Faith by the lowest acts of it, for the comfort of weak
Christians:

2. Encouragements unto such a Faith, opposite to all misgivings and
discouragements whatsoever.

1. A Definition of Faith; and such, as will suit the weakest Believer. It is a
coming unto God by Christ for Salvation.

1. It is [ a comming] to be saved. Let not the want of Assurance that God will
save thee, or that Christ is thine, discourage thee, if thou have but a heart
to Come to God by Christ to be saved, though thou know not whether he will
yet save thee, or no. Remember that the Believers of the New Testament are here
described to be [ commers] to God by Christ; Such as go out of themselves, and
rest in nothing in themselves, do come unto God through Christ for Salvation,
though with trembling.

2. It is a Coming [ unto God.] For he is the ultimate object of our Faith,
and the person with whom we have to do in believing, and from whom we are to
receive Salvation, if ever we obtain it.

3. It is a Coming unto God [ by Christ:] which Phrase is used in this Epistle
in an allusion to the worshipers of the Old Testament; who when they had
sinned, were directed to go to God by a Priest, who with a Sacrifice made an
Atonement for them. Now Christ is the great and true High Priest, by whom we
have access to the Father; 2. Ephesians. 18. The word is (...), a leading by the
hand. Do thou not know how to appear before God or to come to him? come
first to Christ, and he will take thee by the hand, and go along with thee, and
lead thee to His Father.

4. It is a coming unto God by Christ [ for Salvation.] Many a poor soul is
apt to think that in coming to God by Faith it must not aim at it self, or
its own Salvation: yes, it may, for that is here made the errand or business
which faith has with God in coming to him; or which it comes for, and this is
secretly couched in these words: for the Apostle speaking of the very aim of
the heart in coming, he therefore on purpose mentions Christ's ability to save;
[He is able to save.]

Secondly, Here are many encouragements to such a Faith as is not yet grown up
unto assurance of Salvation.

1. Here is the most suitable object propounded unto it, namely, Christ as
Interceding; which work of Intercession because it remains for Christ as yet to
do for a soul that is to be saved, and which he is every day a doing for us;
therefore it is more peculiarly fitted unto a Recumbents Faith. For when such a
soul comes and casts it self upon Christ, That thing in Christ, which must
needs most suit that kind of Act, is that which is yet to be done by Christ for
that soul. Now for that soul to come to Christ to die for it, and offer up
himself a Sacrifice, (as Sinners did use to come to the High Priest to
sacrifice for them) this were bootlesse, for (as it is ver. 27.) he has at
once done that already. And as for what is already past and done, such a
believers faith is oftentimes exceedingly puzzled, what manner of act to put
forth toward Christ about it: as (for example) when it is about to come unto
God, and it hears of an Election of some unto salvation from all eternity made
by him; because this is an act already past by God, the soul knows it to be in
vain to cast it self upon God for Election, or to come unto him to elect and
choose it self. And so in like manner, when the soul looks upon Christ's
Death; because it is done and past, it knows not how to take it in in
believing, when it wants assurance that Christ dyed for it, (though it should
come to Christ to be saved by virtue of his death.) But there is this one
work that remains still to be done by him for us, and which he is daily a
doing; and that is, Interceding, for he lives ever to Intercede, or to pray for
us in the strength and merit of that his Sacrifice once offered up. This
therefore is more directly and peculiarly fitted unto a Faith of Recumbency,
or, of Coming unto Christ: the proper act of such a Faith (as it is
distinguished from Faith of Assurance) being a casting ones self upon Christ
for some thing it would have done or wrought for one. Hence Intercession
becomes a fit object for the aim and errand of such a Faith, in this its
coming to Christ, as also [ to be saved] is, it being a thing yet to be
wrought and accomplished for me by Christ, is therefore a fit mark for such a
Faith to level at in its coming to Christ. Those Acts of God and Christ which
are past, Faith of Assurance does more easily comply with: such a Faith takes
in with comfort that Christ has dyed for me, and risen again, and does now
Intercede for me, and so I shall certainly be saved: but so cannot this weak
faith do. Come thou therefore unto Christ, as to save thee through his Death
past, and by the merit of it, so for the present, and for the time to come, to
take thy Cause in hand, and to Intercede for thee: it is a great relief unto
such a Faith (as cannot put forth Acts of Assurance, that what has been done
by Christ has been done for it) that God has left Christ this work yet to do
for us. So as the Intercession of Christ may afford matter to such a Faith to
throw it self upon Christ, to perform it for us, and it may set him aworke to
do it.

2. Now if such a soul ask, But will Christ upon my coming to him for
salvation, be set avvork to intercede for me, and undertake my cause?

I answer it out of those words, [ He lives to intercede for them who come to
God by him.] He lives on purpose to perform this work; it is the end of his
living, the business of his life. And as he received a commandment to dye, and
it was the end of his life on earth; so he has received a command to
intercede, and to be a common High Priest for all that come to God by him. God
has appointed him to this work by an oath, He swear, and would not repent,
Thou shall be a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech; and this is
the end of his life in heaven. That as in the Old Law the High Priest (Christ's
type in this) ought to offer up the sacrifice of every one that came unto God
by him, (as HEB. 5. 5.) in like manner Christ; for it is his calling, (as you
have it, ver. 6.) Otherwise, as that woman said to Philip, when she came to him
for justice, and he put her off, Then cease (says she) to be a King: So if
Christ should deny any such soul to take its cause in hand, he must then cease
to be a Priest. He lives to intercede: He is a Priest called by God, as was
Aaron, ver. 6. Wherefore he ought to do it, in that it is his office.

3. And if thy soul yet fears the difficulty of its own particular case, in
respect of the greatness of thy sins, and the circumstances thereof, or any
consideration whatsoever which to thy view does make thy salvation an hard suit
to obtain: the Apostle therefore further adds, [ He is able to save to the
utmost] (what ever thy cause be) and this, through this his Intercession. That
same word [ to the utmost] is a good word, and well put in for our comfort.
Consider it therefore, for it is a reaching word, and extends it self so
far, that thou can not look beyond it. Let thy soul be set upon the
highest mount that ever any creature was yet set upon, and that is enlarged to
take in and view the most spacious prospect both of sin and misery, and
difficulties of being saved, that ever yet any poor humbled soul did cast
within it self: yea join to these all the objections and hindrances of thy
Salvation that the heart of man can suppose or invent against it self: lift up
thy eyes and look to the utmost thou can see, and Christ by his Intercession
is able to save thee beyond the Horizon and furthest compass of thy thoughts,
even to the utmost and worst case the heart of Man can suppose. It is not thy
having lain long in Sin, long under terrors and despairs, or having sinned
often after many enlightnings, that can hinder thee from being saved by Christ.
Do but remember this same word [ to the utmost,] and then put in what
exceptions thou will or can, lay all the bars in thy way that are
imaginable; yet know thou that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against thee.

4. Again, consider but what it is that Christ, who has by his death done
enough to save thee, does yet further for thee in Heaven. If thou thoughtest
thou had all the Saints in Heaven and Earth jointly concurring in promoving
thy salvation, and competitours unto God in instant and incessant requests and
prayers to save thee; how would thou be encouraged? (shall I tell thee?) one
word out of Christ's mouth (who is the King of Saints) will do more then all in
heaven and earth can do: and what is there then which we may not hope to
obtain through his Intercession?

And would thou know whether he has undertaken thy cause, and begun to
intercede for thee? In a word, Has he put his spirit into thy heart, and set
thy own heart on work to make incessant Intercessions for thy self with groans
unutterable? (as the Apostle has it, Romans 8.) This is the Echo of Christ's
Intercession for thee in Heaven.

5. (And lastly) If such a soul shall further object, But will he not give
over suing for me? may I not be cast out of his prayers through my unbelief?
Let it here be considered, that he lives [ ever] to intercede: And therefore if
he once undertake thy cause, and gets thee into his prayers, he will never
leave thee out night nor day. He Intercedeth ever, till he has accomplished and
finished thy salvation. Men have been cast out of good and holy men's prayers,
as Saul out of Samuels, and the People of Israel out of Ieremies; but never out
of Christ's prayers; the smoke of his Incense ascends for ever, and he will
intercede to the utmost, till he has saved thee to the utmost. He will never
give over, but will lie in the dust for thee, or he will perfect and procure
thy Salvation.

Only whilst I am thus raising up your Faith to him upon the work of his
Intercession for us; let me speak a word to you for him, so to stir up your
love to him, upon the consideration of this his Intercession also. You see you
have the whole life of Christ first and last, both here and in heaven laid out
for you: He had not come to earth but for you: he had no other business here;
Unto us a Son is born. And (to be sure) he had not dyed but for you: (for us a
Son was given) and when he rose, it was for your justification: And now he is
gone to heaven, he lives but to intercede for you. He makes your salvation his
constant calling. O therefore let us live wholly unto him, for he has, and
does live wholly unto us. You have his whole time among you; and if he were
your servant, you could desire no more. There was much of your time lost before
you began to live to him: but there has been no moment of his time which he
has not lived to, and improved for you. Nor are you able ever to live for him,
but only in this life, for hereafter you shall live with him, and be glorified
of him. I conclude all with that of the Apostle, The love of Christ it should
constrain us, because we cannot but judge this to be the most equal, that
they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who
dyed for them, and rose again; and (out of the Text I also add) sits at Gods
right hand; yea, and there lives for ever to make Intercession for us.

FINIS.
THE HEART OF Christ in Heaven, Toward SINNERS on Earth. OR, A TREATISE
DEMONSTRATING The gracious Disposition and tender Affection of Christ in his
Humane Nature now in Glory, unto his Members under all sorts of Infirmities,
either of Sin or Misery.

By THO: GOODWIN, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for R. DAWLMAN. M DC XLII.

THE TABLE OF The Heart of Christ in Heaven, toward Sinners on Earth.
1. Demonstrations of the gracious disposition of his Heart toward us.
Extrinsecall, showing the (...), that it is so. Part 1.
Intrinsecall showing the (...), the Reasons why it must needs be so. Part 2.

2. The Manner how his Heart is affected toward us; and the way how it comes
to pass that such affections are let into his heart. Part 3.

Part I.
Containing Demonstrations Extrinsecall.
. I.
Demonstrations from Christ's carriage at his last Farewell, and his last
Sermon; John, Chapters, 13, etc. and in his last prayer, John 17. the scope of
all which was to assure his Disciples of his being constant in his Affections
toward them. 5 1. From his carriage at his last Farewell, And this in four
things. 6 2. From many passages in that his last Sermon, in 5. things. 13 3.
From his last Prayer Joh. 17. which Prayer is a pattern of his Intercession in
Heaven, and so an expression of what his heart is there. 22
. II.
Demonstrations from many passages and expressions after his Resurrection. 24
This Resurrection his first step to his glory; and therefore this a certain
Demonstration. 25 1. From the first gracious message which Christ after his
Resurrection sent his Disciples, who yet had forsaken him. 26 2. From his
carriage and speech at his first meeting with them. 25
. III.
Demonstrations from passages at, and after Christ's Ascension into heaven: 1.
At his Ascension, his blessing his Disciples. 32 2. After he was come to
heaven, 1. Pouring out his Spirit on them, as in his last Sermon he had
promised, which Spirit is to this day in our Preaching, and an Argument of the
fulfilling of this. 33 2. All those works of Miracles, and conversions of
souls that accompanied the first preaching of the Gospel, do argue this, as
also the New Testament written since. 34 3. Christ's own words spoken to Paul,
since himself was in heaven, do confirm it. 35 4. The last words uttered in
Scripture, in the Book of the Revelation, which was more immediately given unto
John by Christ. 37


Part II.
Demonstrations Intrinsecall.
. I.
The first sort of Intrinsecall Demonstrations drawn from the Influence which
all the three Persons have into the Heart of the Humane nature of Christ in
Heaven. 48 1. From God the Father. Which Demonstration is made forth by two
things: 1. God has given Christ a perpetual command to love his Elect on
earth, and has written a Law of love in his heart. 49 2. This Law of love
remains for ever in his heart, which is proved by two things: 1. That it is a
Law, and that of Love. 52 2. That by observing that Law it is that Christ
continues in his Fathers love. 53

2. From God the Son, unto whom the Humane nature is united. This disposition
of grace is natural to him, as he is Gods natural Son. 54 Accordingly the
Humane nature framed on purpose with dispositions of mercy and meekness above
all other. 55 3. From God the Holy Ghost, who on earth filled him with
meekness and grace above all other dispositions, and now rests upon him in
Heaven, more abundantly then ever. 60
. II.
A second sort of Demonstrations from several engagements now lying upon
Christ in Heaven. 70 1. Engagement. The continuance of all his Relations and
Alliances to us, which no glory of his does any thing lessen or alter. ibid.
Which relations were made chiefly for the other world, and so must needs
continue there. 72 The Ground of this Engagement. 76 2. His love is engaged and
increased, by what he did and suffered for us. 77 What a great obligation this
is. 78 3. His office of Priesthood which continues in Heaven, does further
require all mercifulness and graciousnesse in him toward us sinners. This
Demonstration has two parts. 83 The 1. Showing that the office of Priesthood
was erected on purpose for grace and mercy. ibid. Which is argued, 1. By the
Ends of it. 2. By the Qualifications required for it. 85
The 2. Showing that by reason of this office, an eternal duty lies upon him
to show grace and mercy: and Christ is a faithful High Priest to perform that
duty. 90 Christ's advancement can make no alteration in his heart, for his
Priesthood is his highest advancement: And Grace did both Found, and now
upholds his Throne of Grace. 94

4. His own Interest puts him upon these Affections of heart toward us: His
own joy, happiness, and glory are increased by showing mercy to, and
comforting his children upon earth: and it is more for his glory then for our
good. 98 Christ has a double fullness of joy, 1. Personal, in his Father. 2.
Mystical, in his Members. 99 How Christ rejoiceth in Heaven at our well-doing
here on earth. 101
5. His having the nature of man, the same for substance in Heaven, that he had
on earth, obliges him to be merciful unto men. 104 The end of his Assuming
man's nature was to qualify him for mercy. 105 Though it adds not to the
greatness of mercy in God; yet it adds a new way of being merciful, even as
a man, 106
Part III.
. I.
Some Generals to clear, 1. How this is to be understood, That Christ's Heart
is touched with the feeling of our infirmities: 2. The way how our Infirmities
come to be feelingly let into his heart, 109 1. How this affection in Christ is
to be understood, This explained by these degrees: 1. This affection of
compassion is not wholly to be understood in a Metaphorical sense, as when God
is said to be afflicted, etc. that is, not merely after the similitude of men,
but in a true and real sense. 111 2. These affections in Christ's humane nature
are more like to ours then those which the Angels have, who notwithstanding
have affections analogicall to ours. 113 3 Christ having taken frail flesh ere
he went to Heaven, this fits him yet more for having affections of mercy like
unto ours. 115

3. For the way how our miseries are let into Christ's heart so as to affect it.
This explained by two things. 1, The Humane nature has the knowledge and
cognizance of all that can or does befall us here. 118 2, He remembers how
himself was once affected when he was under the like, 119

. II.
A more particular Disquisition what manner of affection this is. The seat
thereof, whether in his spirit or soul only, or in the whole humane nature.
Some Cautious added. 121 This affection (for our better conceiving it,) set
forth three ways. 1. Negatively, it is not in all things such as it was in the
days of his flesh. 2 Positively, It is yet for substance the very same
affection, and the seat of it is his bodily heart as well as his soul. 124
Four Cautions or Positions about this: 1. In what sense, or so far as his Body
is made spiritual, so far are these Affections spiritualized, as they are in
his body. 125 2. Hence, though they move his Bowels, yet they do not perturbe
or hurt him in the least. 126 3. All natural humane affections may be still in
him that are not unbecomming his state and glory. And how much the having such
affections are suitable to that state and relation wherein he is. 128 4. Though
a passionate suffering be cut off, yet these affections are now more large and
strong for the substance of them, then they were on earth. 130
3. Privatively. If his heart suffers not with us under our Infirmities, yet he
has less joy then his heart shall have when we are freed from all. 131 How
the Scripture attributes some kind of Imperfection to some affection in him,
and in what sense.
. III.
This Scruple satisfied, How Christ's heart can be feelingly touched with our
sins, (our greatest infirmities) seeing he was tempted [ without sin.] 133
Four answers given thereunto for our comfort. Uses of all. 137
FINIS.
THE HEART OF Christ in Heaven, TO Sinners on Earth.
I. PART.
HAving set forth our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST in all those great and most
solemn actions of his, his Obedience unto death, his Resurrection, Ascension
into heaven, his sitting at Gods right hand, and Intercession for us, (which of
all the other has been more largely insisted on) I shall now annexe (as next
in order, and homogeneall thereunto) this Discourse that follows, which lays
open The HEART of Christ, as now he is in heaven, sitting at Gods right hand,
and interceding for us; How it is affected, and graciously disposed toward
sinners on earth that do come to him; how willing to receive them; how ready
to entertain them; how tender to pity them in all their infirmities, both
sins and miseries. The scope and use whereof will be this, To hearten and
encourage Believers to come more boldly unto the Throne of Grace, unto such a
Savior and High Priest, when they shall know how sweetly and tenderly his
heart (though he is now in his glory) is inclined toward them; and so to
remove that great stone of stumbling which we meet with, (and yet lies unseen)
in the thoughts of men in the way to faith, that Christ being now absent, and
withal exalted to so high and infinite a distance of glory, as to sit at Gods
right hand, etc. they therefore cannot tell how to come to treat with him about
their salvation so freely, and with that hopefulnesse to obtain, as those
poor sinners did, who were here on earth with him: Had our lot been (think
they) but to have conversed with him (in the days of his flesh) as Mary, and
Peter, and his other Disciples did here below, we could have thought to have
been bold with him, and have been familiar with him, and to have had any thing
at his hands; For they beheld him before them, a man like unto themselves, and
he was full of meekness, and gentleness, he being then himself made sin,
and sensible of all sorts of miseries; but now he is gone into a far
Country, and has put on glory and immortality, and how his heart may be
altered thereby we know not. The drift of this Discourse is therefore to
ascertaine poor souls, that his Heart (in respect of pity and compassion)
remains the same it was on earth; that he intercedes there with the same heart
he did here below; and that he is as meek, as gentle, as easy to be entreated,
as tender in his bowels; so that they may deal with him as fairly about the
great matter of their salvation, and as hopefully, and upon as easy terms
obtain it of him, as they might if they had been on earth with him, and be as
familiar with him in all their requests, as bold with him in all their needs:
Then which nothing can be more for the comfort and encouragement of those, who
have given over all other lives but that of faith, and whose souls pursue
after strong and entire communion with their Savior Christ.

Now the Demonstrations that may help our faith in this, I reduce to two Heads:
The first more extrinsecall and outward; The second more intrinsecall, and
inward: The one showing the (...) of it, that it is so; the other the (...),
the reasons and grounds why it must needs be so.

First, for those Extrinsecall Demonstrations, (as I call them) they are taken
from several passages and carriages of his, in all those several conditions
of his; namely, at his last Farewell before his Death, his Resurrection,
Ascension, and now he is sitting at Gods right hand. I shall lead you through
all the same Heads which I have gone over in the former Treatise, (though to
another purpose) and take such observations from his speeches and carriages, in
all those states he went through, as shall tend directly to persuade our hearts
of the point in hand, namely this, that now he is in heaven, his heart remains
as graciously inclined to sinners that come to him, as ever on earth. And for a
Ground or Introduction to these first sort of Demonstrations, I shall take this
Scripture that follows; as for those other, another Scripture, as proper to
that part of this Discourse:

JOHN 13. 1. -- When Jesus knew that his hour was come, that he should depart
out of this world unto the Father, HAVING LOVED HIS OWN, HE LOVED THEM TO THE
END: (or) for ever.
. I.
Demonstrations from Christ's last Farewell to his Disciples.
IT was long before that Christ did break his mind to his Disciples, that he
was to leave them, and to go away to heaven from them, (for Ioh. 16. 4. he
says, he had forborne to tell it them from the beginning:) But when he begins
to acquaint them with it, he then at once leaves with them an abundance of his
heart, and that not only how it stood toward them, and what it was at the
present, but what it would be when he should be in his glory. Let us (to this
end) but briefly peruse his last carriage, and his Sermon at his last Supper
which he did eat with them, as it is on purpose penned and recorded by the
Evangelist John; and we shall find this to be the drift of those long
Discourses of Christ's, from the 13. to the 18. Chap. I will not make a Comment
on them, but only briefly take up such short observations, as do more
specially hold forth this thing in hand.

These words which I have prefixed as the Text, are the Preface unto all that
his Discourse that follows, (namely, unto that washing of his Disciples feet,
and his succeeding Sermon) which accordingly do show the argument and sum of
all. 1. Demonstration, from his carriage at his last farewell.
The Preface is this, [ Before the Feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that
his hour was come, that he should depart out of this world unto the Father,
having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. And
supper being ended, -- Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into
his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God, he then washed his
Disciples feet.] Now this Preface was prefixed by the Evangelist, on purpose to
set open a window into Christ's heart, to show what it was then at his
departure, and so withal to give a light into, and put a gloss and
interpretation upon all that follows: The scope whereof is to show what his
affections would be to them in heaven; He tells us what Christ's thoughts were
then, and what was his heart amidst those thoughts, (both which occasioned all
that succeeds.)

1. He premiseth what was in Christ's thoughts and his meditation: He began
deeply to consider, both that he was to depart out of this world, ( Jesus knew,
etc. (says the Text) that is, was then thinking of it) that he should depart
unto the Father, and how that then he should shortly be installed into that
glory which was due unto him; so it follows, ver. 3. Jesus knowing (that is,
was then actually taking into his mind) that the Father had given all things
into his hands, that is, that all power in heaven and earth was his, so soon
as he should set footing in heaven; then in the midst of these thoughts he
tells us, he went and washed his Disciples feet, (after he had first considered
whither he was to go, and there, what he was to be.)

But secondly, what was Christ's Heart most upon, in the midst of all these
elevated meditations? Not upon his own glory so much, (though it is told us
that he considered that, thereby the more to set out his love unto us) but upon
these thoughts his Heart ran out in love toward, and was set upon his own,
Having loved his own, says the 1. ver. [(...), his owne] (a word denoting the
greatest nearness, dearnesse, and intimatenesse founded upon propriety:) The
Elect are Christ's own, a piece of himself, not [(...)] as goods, ( John 1. 11.
He came unto [his own,] and [his own] received him not; [(...)] the word shows
that he reckon them his own but as goods, not as persons) but he calls these
here (...), his own by a nearer propriety, that is, his own children, his own
members, his own wife, his own flesh: and he considers, that though he was to
go out of the world, yet they were to be in the world; and therefore it is on
purpose added, which were in the world, that is, to remain in this world. He
had others of his own who were in that world unto which he was going, even the
spirits of just men made perfect, (whom as yet he had never seen.) One would
think, that when he was meditating upon his going out of this world, his heart
should be all upon Abraham, his Isaacs, and his Jacobs, whom he was going to;
no, he takes more care for his own, who were to remain here in this world, a
world wherein there is much evil, (as himself says, John 17. 15.) both of
sin and misery, and with which, themselves whilst in it, could not but be
defiled and vexed. This is it which draws out his bowels toward them, even at
that time when his heart was full of the thoughts of his own glory: Having
loved his own, he loved them unto the end. Which is spoken, to show the
constancy of his love, and what it would be when Christ should be in his
glory. [ To the end] that is, to the perfection of it, (...), says
Chrysostom: having begun to love them, he will perfect and consummate his
love to them. And to the end, that is, [ forever;] So in the Greek (...) is
sometimes used, and so by the Evangelist the phrase is here used in a
sutablenesse to the Scripture phrase, Psalm. 103. 9. He will not always chide,
nor reserve anger [for ever;] so we translate it, but in the Original, He
reserves not anger [unto the end.] So that the scope of this speech is to show
how Christ's heart and love would be toward them even for ever, when he should
be gone unto his Father, as well as it was to show how it had been here on
earth; they being his own, and he having loved them, he alters, he changes
not, and therefore will love them for ever.

And then thirdly, to testify thus much by a real testimony, what his love
would be, when in heaven to them, the Evangelist shows, that when he was in the
midst of all those great thoughts of his approaching glory, and of the
sovereign estate which he was to be in, he then took water and a towell, and
washed his Disciples feet. This to have bin his scope will appear, if you
observe but the coherence in the second verse, it is said, that Jesus knowing
that the Father had given all things into his hands, then (ver. 4.) he rises
from supper, and lays aside his garments, and took a towel and girded
himself; (ver. 5.) after that, he powered water into a basin, and began to wash
his Disciples feet, etc. where it is evident that the Evangelists scope is to
hold forth this unto us, that then when Christ's thoughts were full of his
glory, and when he took in the consideration of it unto the utmost; even
then, and upon that occasion, and in the midst of those thoughts, he washed his
Disciples feet; And what was Christ's meaning in this, but that, whereas when
he should be in heaven, he could not make such outward visible demonstrations
of his heart, by doing such mean services for them; therefore by doing this in
the midst of such thoughts of his glory, he would show what he could be
content (as it were) to do for them, when he should be in full possession of
it? (so great is his love unto them.) There is another expression of Christ's
like unto this, in Luke 12. 36, 37. which confirms this to be his meaning here,
and to be his very heart in heaven. At ver. 36. he compares himself to a
Bridegroom, who is to go to heaven unto a wedding-feast; who has servants on
earth that stand all that while here below, as without, waiting for him; at
which, because they wait so long, they may think much, Christ adds, Verily I
say unto you, that when the Bridegroom returns (refreshed with wine and
gladness) he shall gird himself, and make them sit down to meat; and will
come forth and [serve them.] The meaning is not as if that Christ served at the
latter day, or now in heaven, those that sit down there; but only it is an
abundant expression in words, as here, in a real instance to set forth the
overflowing love that is in his heart, and the transcendent happiness that we
shall then enjoy, even beyond what can be expected by us, (he utters himself
therefore by an unwonted thing not heard of, that the Lord should serve his
servants, and wait on them that waited for him) And it is to show his heart to
them, and what he could be contented to do for them. So that you see what his
heart was before he went to Heaven, even amidst the thoughts of all his glory;
and you see what it is after he has been in heaven, and greatned with all
his glory, even content to wash poor sinners feet, and to serve them that
come to him and wait for him.

Now fourthly, what was the mystery of this his washing their feet? It was, as
to give them an example of mutual love and humility, so to signify his washing
away their sins: thus ver. 8. and 10. himself interprets it. It is true
indeed, that now he is in heaven, he cannot come to wash the feet of their
bodies, but he would signify thus much thereby, that those sinners that will
come to him when in his glory, he will wash away all their sins: He loved his
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the [washing of water,] that he might present it to himself a glorious Church,
not having spot or wrinkle, etc. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.

This specimen or declaration of his mind, we have from this his carriage, at
this his last farewell. Let us next take a survey of the drift of that long
Sermon which he made at that his farewell, and we shall find the maine scope
of it to be further to assure his Disciples of what his Heart would be unto
them, and that will make a second Demonstration.

It were too long a work to insist upon each particular: 2. From many passages
in that last Sermon.
But certainly, no loving Husband ever endeavored more to satisfy the heart
of his Spouse during his absence, then Christ does his Disciples hearts, and in
them, all Believers: (For take that along, once for all, that what Christ said
unto them, he says unto us, as in that 17. of John that speech implies, I pray
not for them only, but for those also that shall believe through their word.)
And as what he prayed for them was for all Believers also; so what he then
spoke unto them.

First, he lets them see what his heart would be unto them, and how mindful of
them when in heaven, by that business which he professes he went thither to
perform for them: concerning which, observe first, that he lovingly acquaints
them with it aforehand what it is, which argued care and tenderness, as from
an husband unto a wife it does; And vvithall, how plain heartedly does he
speak, as one that would not hide any thing from them? Ioh. 16. 7. I tell you
the truth of it, (says he) it is expedient (and expedient) for you, that I go
away. And secondly, he tells them, it is wholly for them and their happiness; I
go to send you a Comforter, whilst you are in this world, and to prepare a
place for you, (John 14. 2.) when you shall go out of this world: There are
many mansions in my Fathers house, and I go to take them up for you, and to
keep your places for you till you come. And there again, how openly and
heartily does he speak to them? If it had been otherwise, (says he) I would
have told you: You may believe me, I would not deceive you for all the glory in
that place to which I am a going. Whom would not this opennesse and nakedness
of heart persuade? But then thirdly, the business it self being such as is so
much for us and our happiness; how much more does that argue it? And indeed,
Christ himself does fetch from thence an argument of the continuance of his
love to them. So ver. 3. If I go to prepare a place for you, (if that be my
errand) then doubt not of my love when I am there; All the glory of the place
shall never make me forget my business. When he was on earth, he forgot none
of the business for which he came into the World: Shall I not do my Fathers
business? (said he, when he was a child) yes, and he did it to the utmost, by
fulfilling all righteousness. Surely therefore he will not forget any of that
business which he is to do in heaven, it being the more pleasant work by far.
And (as I showed in the former discourse, out of Heb. 6. 20.) He is entered as a
Forerunner, an Harbinger, to take up places there for us, and if he could
forget us, yet our names are all written in heaven round about him, and are
continually before his eyes written there, not only by Gods election, so Heb.
12. 23. Ye are come to mount Sion, and to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the
Church of the firstborn [which are written in heaven;] and to Jesus, and to
the blood of sprinkling, etc. but Christ himself scores them up anew with his
blood, over every mansion there, which he takes up for any. Yea, he carries
their names written in his heart, as the High Priest did the names of the ten
Tribes on his breast, when he entered into the Holy of Holies. He sits in heaven
to see to it, that none other should take their rooms over their heads, (as we
say) And therefore, 1. Pet. 1. 4. Salvation is said to be reserved in Heaven
for them, that is, kept on purpose for them by Jesus Christ. The evil Angels
had places there once, but they were disposed of unto others over their heads,
as the Land of Canaan was from the Canaanites; the reason of which was,
because they had not a Christ there to intercede for them, as we have.

Then secondly, to manifest his mind fullness of them, and of all believers
else, when he should be in his glory, he tells them that when he has dispatched
that business for them, and made Heaven ready for them, and all the elect that
are to come, that then he means to come again to them: So Chap. 14. ver. 3. If
I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, which is a mere
expression of love, for he if he had pleased, he might have ordered it to have
sent for them to him, but he means to come for them himself, and this when he
is warm (as we speak) and in the height and midst of his glory in Heaven, yet
he will for a time leave it to come again unto his Spouse: And what is it for?
1. To see her; [ I will see you again,] and your heart shall rejoice. 2. To
fetch her; So John. 14. 3. I will come again and receive you to my self. He
condescends to the very laws of Bridegrooms; (for notwithstanding all his
greatness, no Lover shall put him down in any expression of true love) It is
the manner of Bridegrooms, when they have made all ready in their Fathers
house, then to come themselves and fetch their Brides, and not to send for them
by others, because it is a time of love. Love descends, better then ascends;
and so does the love of Christ, who indeed is Love it self; and therefore comes
down to us himself: I will come again and receive you unto my self, (says
Christ) that so where I am, you may be also. That last part of his speech gives
the reason of it, and withal bewrayes his entire affection: It is as if he had
said, The truth is, I cannot live without you; I shall never be quiet till I
have you where I am, that so we may never part again, (that is the reason of
it.) Heaven shall not hold me, nor my Fathers company, if I have not you with
me, my heart is so set upon you: And if I have any glory, you shall have part
of it. So ver. 19. Because I live, you shall live also. It is a reason, and it
is half an oath besides; [ As I live] is Gods oath; [ Because I live] says
Christ; He pawnes his life upon it, and desires to live upon no other terms;
[ He shall live to see his seed, etc. Esaias 53.] And yet further, the more to
express the workings and longings of his heart after them all that while, he
tells them, it shall not be long neither ere he does come again to them. So
John 16. 16. Again a little while and ye shall see me; a little while and ye
shall not see me, (says he.) Which [not seeing him] refers not to that small
space of absence whilst dead and in the grave; but of that after his last
ascending, forty days after his Resurrection, when he should go away, not to
be seen on earth again until the day of Judgment; and yet from that
Ascension but a little while (says he) and you shall see me again; namely, at
the day of Judgment. It is said, Heb. 10. 37. Yet a little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry. The words in the Greek are, [(...),]
A little little as may be: Though long for the time in it self, yet as little
while as may be in respect of his desire, without the least delaying to come:
He will stay not a moment longer, then till he has dispatched all our business
there for us. And then the doubling of the phrase, (...), ( Veniens veniet,
Coming he will come) implies vehemency of desire to come, and that his mind
is always upon it; he is still a coming; he can hardly be kept away. Thus the
Hebrew phrase likewise signifies an urgencie, vehemency, and intensenesse of
some act; as [ Expecting I have expected; Desiring I have desired;] so [
Coming he will come:] And as not content with these expressions of desire, he
adds over and above all these, [ And will not tarry,] and all to signify the
infinite ardencie of his mind toward his Elect below, and to have all his
Elect in heaven about him. He will not stay a minute longer then needs must; he
tarryes only till he has throughout all Ages by his Intercession prepared
every room for each Saint, that he may entertain them all at once together,
and have them all about him.

Thirdly, what his heart would be toward them in his absence, he expresses by
the careful provision he makes, and the order he takes for their comfort in
his absence. Ioh. 16. 18. I will not leave you as Orphans, (so the word is) I
will not leave you like father-lesse and friendlesse children at sixes and
sevens. My Father and I have but one only friend who lies in the bosom of us
both, and proceeds from us both, the holy Ghost, and in the mean time I will
send him to you. Doing herein as a loving Husband uses to do in his absence,
even commit his Wife to the dearest friend he has; so does Christ. Ver. 16. I
will pray the Father, (says he) and he shall give you another Comforter: And
Chap. 16. 7. he says, I will send him to you. Who

First, shall be a better Comforter unto you then I am to be in this kind of
dispensation, (which whilst I am on earth, I am bound up toward you in) So in
that 16. of John, ver. 7. he intimates, It is expedient (says he) that I go
away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come; who by reason of his
office, will comfort you bettet then I should do with my bodily presence. And
this Spirit, as he is the earnest of heaven, (as the Apostle speaks) so he is
the greatest token and pledge of Christ's love that ever was; and such a one as
the world cannot receive.

And yet secondly, all the comfort he shall speak to you all that while, will
be but from the expression of my heart toward you: For as he comes not of
himself, but I must send him, (Ioh. 16. 7.) so he will speak nothing of
himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, (ver. 13.) And
ver. 14. he says, He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. Him
therefore I shall send on purpose to be in my room, and to execute my place to
you my Bride, Spouse, and he shall tell you (if you will listen to him, and not
grieve him) nothing but stories of my love: So it is there, He shall glorify
me, namely, to you, (for I am in my self already glorified in heaven.) All his
speech in your hearts will be to advance me, and to greaten my worth and love
unto you; and it will be his delight to do it: And he can come from heaven in
an instant when he will, and bring you fresh tidings of my mind, and tell you
the thoughts I last had of you, even at that very minute when I am thinking of
them, what they are at the very time wherein he tells you them. (And therefore
in that 1 Cor. 2. by having the Spirit, ver. 12. we are said to have the mind
of Christ, ver. ult.) For he dwells in Christ's heart, and also ours, and
lifts up from one hand to the other what Christ's thoughts are to us, and what
our prayers and faith are to Christ.) So that you shall have my heart as surely
and as speedily as if I were with you; and he will continually be breaking your
hearts, either with my love to you, or yours to me, or both; and if either, you
may be sure of my love thereby. And whereas (says he) you have the Spirit now
in your hearts, so ver. 17. of Chap. 14. [ He now dwells in you,] yet after my
Ascension, he shall be in a further measure in you, as it follows there: And at
that day (ver. 20.) you shall know (namely, by his Dictate) that I am in my
Father, and you in me, and I in you: He will tell you when I am in Heaven, that
there is as true a conjunction between me and you, and as true a dearnesse of
affection in me toward you, as is between my Father and me; and that it is as
impossible to break this knot, and to take off my heart from you, as my
Fathers from me, or mine from my Father.

And then thirdly, you shall be sure, that what he says of my love to you, is
true; for he is the Spirit of truth, Chap. 16. ver. 13. as also Chap. 1. ver.
16, 17. (which Christ speaks of him as he is a Comforter.) And as you believe
me when I tell you of my Father, because I come from him, so you may believe
him in all that he says of me and of my love to you, for he comes from me.

Ay but might they say, Will not he also leave us for a time, as you have
done? No, says Christ, Chap. 14. 16. The Father shall give you another
Comforter, and he shall abide with you for ever: Christ speaks it in
opposition to himself; He himself had been a Comforter unto them, but he was
now to be absent, but not so the Spirit; He shall be with you for ever: and as
he is now with you, so he shall be in you, ver. 17.

In the fourth place, if this be not enough to assure them how his heart would
be affected toward them, he assures them he will give them daily experience
of it. Do but try me (says he) when I am gone, and that by sending me word
upon all occasions, what you would have me to do for you, (and I have left
my Spirit to be your Secretary, and the Enditer of all your Petitions) Hitherto
you have asked nothing (that is, little) in my name, (he blames them that they
have asked him no more to do for them) but now ask and you shall receive. And
if otherwise you will not believe, yet you shall believe your own eyes; ask
and you shall see your selves answered presently: and so Believe me (says he)
for the very works sake, Ioh. 14. 11. He speaks it of the works he would do for
them, in answer to their prayers when he was gone; which should be as so many
Epistles of his heart, returned in answer unto theirs: For it follows, ver. 12.
He that believes on me shall do greater works then I, because I go to my
Father. So that it is manifest, he speaks of the works done after his
Ascension. And how were they to get and procure them to be done? By Prayer; so
it follows, ver. 13. And whatsoever you shall ask in my name, that will I do.
He speaks it of the time when he is gone. And again he says in ver. 14. If
you shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. Let me but hear from you,
be it every week, every day, every hour, you shall be sure of an answer, (
Open your mouths wide, and I will fill them) And those your Prayers shall be
as continual tokens both of your hearts toward me, and my answers shall be
the like of mine to you. And because Christ bids them direct (their Letters)
their Prayers to the Father, only to send them in his name, as John 16. 23.
and so they might perhaps not so clearly know and discern that his heart was in
the answer to them, but his Fathers hand only, therefore he adds twice in the
14. of John, [I will do it, I will do it.] He speaks like one as forward to
do for them, as his Father is or should be; and as desirous to have them know
and take notice of his hand in it: And it is as if he had said, Though you ask
the Father in my name, yet all comes through my hands, and I will do it: there
must be my hand to the warrant for every thing that is done, and my heart shall
not be wanting.

In the fifth place, yet further to evidence his love, he not only bids them
thus to pray to him, and in his name upon all occasions, but he assures them,
that he himself will pray for them: and observe but the manner of his telling
them this; it is in the most insinuating, persuasive expressions to convey his
heart in to them, that men use to utter, when they would intimate the deepest
care and purpose to do a thing. Chap. 16. 26. At that day (namely, after his
Ascension) ye shall ask, etc. (says he) and I say not unto you, that I will
pray the Father for you; no, not I. (I mentioned it before, I will but add this
illustration to it.) It is such a speech as men use, when they would express
the greatest reason that another has, to rest confident and assured of their
love; [ I do not love you, no not I.] It is an expressing a thing by its
contrary, which is most emphaticall. As when we say of a man, that has the
greatest good turn done him that can be, [You are shrewdly hurt:] It is such an
expression as Paul used to the Corinthians: I converted your souls when you
thought not of it; I caught you with guile, [forgive me this wrong.] So says
Christ here, I say not that I will pray for you, when the truth is, that it is
the chiefest work that he does in heaven; He lives ever to intercede: as he
ever lives, so to intercede ever, and never to hold his peace till sinners are
saved. (But the work of Christ in heaven is a subject deserves and will take up
a distinct and large discourse; I will therefore speak no more of it now)
neither will I mention any more particulars out of this his Sermon. Read but
over those 3. Chapters, (the 14, 15, and 16.) for in them you have the longest
Sermon of his that is recorded; and he stood the longest upon this theme, of
any other, because indeed his heart was more in it, then in any point that he
ever preached on.

Only if any object and say, He spoke all this to his Disciples, to quiet and
pacify them, and so, more in respect to their trouble, then otherwise he would
have spoken.

In the sixth place, read but the next Chapter, (the 17.) and you shall see,
that he presently goes apart and alone to his Father, and speaks over all again
unto him, that which he had said unto them. He says as much behind their backs
of them, as he had said before their faces to them. Read it, and you will
find that he was the same absent, that present with them. He was therefore not
only hearty in what he had said, but his heart was full of it. That Chapter
(you know) contains a Prayer put up just before his suffering, and there he
makes his Will, and his last request, for in such a style it runs, [ Father, I
will] ver. 24. which Will he is gone to see executed in Heaven. And Arminius
said true in that, that this Prayer is left us by Christ, as a summary of his
intercession for us in Heaven; he spoke as he meant to do in Heaven, and as
one that had done his work, and was now come to demand his wages; [ I have
finished thy work, (says he, ver. 4) etc.] And whereas he speaks a word or
two for himself, (in the first 5. verses) he speaks five times as many for them
for all the rest of the Chapter is a Prayer for them. He uses all kind of
Arguments to move his Father for his children: I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do, (says he) and to save them is thy work, which remains
to be done for me by thee: and they are thine, and thou gave them me; and I
commend to thee but thine own. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; He
insinuates, that he of himself had not added a man, but uses all his interest
only for those that the Father had given him: (and what a motive is this?) and
he professes he will not open his mouth for a man more: I pray not for the
world, (says he) I will not open my lips for any one son of perdition; but I
employ all my Blood, my Prayers, and my whole interest with thee, but for those
thy self have given me. And (says he) though thou have given me a personal
glory which I had before the World was; yet there is another glory which I
account of almost as much; and that is in their being saved; I am glorified in
them, (says he, ver. 10.) and they are my joy; (ver. 13.) and therefore, I
must have them with me where ever I am: (ver. 24.) Thou have set my heart upon
them, and have loved them thy self, as thou have loved me, and thou have
ordained them to be one in us, even as we are one, and therefore I cannot live
long asunder from them: I have thy company, but I must have theirs too; I will
that they be where I am, ver. 24. If I have any glory; they must have part of
it: So it follows in the forenamed verse [ That they may behold the glory
which thou have given me,] he speaks all this as if he had been then in
Heaven, and in possession of all that glory, and therefore it is an expression
of his heart in Heaven, which you have very good ground to build upon.

. 2.
Demonstrations from passages and expressions after his Resurrection.
THese Demonstrations have been taken from his carriage and Sermon before his
death, even at his first breaking of his mind unto his Disciples concerning his
departure from them. Let us now take a view of our Savior in his behavior
after his Resurrection; whence a further Indicium of his heart, how it would
stand toward sinners when he should be in Heaven, may be taken, and his love
demonstrated. For his Resurrection was the first step unto his Glory, and
indeed an entrance into it; when he laid down his body, he laid down all
earthly weaknesses, and passions of flesh and blood. It was sown (as ours is)
in weakness; but with raising of it up again, he took on him the dispositions
and qualifications of an immortal and glorious body, It was raised in power.
And The days of his flesh (or frail estate) as the Author to the Hebrews, by
way of distinction speaks, were past and over at his Resurrection: and the
garment of his body was new dyed, and endowed with new qualities: and thereby
it was made of a stuff fit to bear and sustain Heavens Glory: and therefore,
what now his heart upon his first rising shall appear to be toward us, will
be a certain demonstration, what it will continue to be in heaven. And to
illustrate this the more, consider, that if ever there were a trial taken,
whether his love to sinners would continue or no, it was then at his
Resurrection, for all his Disciples (especially Peter) had carried themselves
the most unworthily toward him in that interim, that could be; and this then
when he was performing the greatest act of love toward them, (namely, dying
for them) that ever was shown by any. (And by the way, so God often orders it,
that when he is in hand with the greatest mercies for us, and bringing about
our greatest good, then we are most of all sinning against him; which he does,
to magnify his love the more.) You know how they all forsook him, and in the
midst of his Agony in the Garden, (in which he desired their company, merely
for a relief unto his sadded spirit) they slept, and lay like so many blocks,
(utterly senseless of his dolours) which had they had any friendly sympathy
of, they could never have done; [ Could you not watch with me one hour?] Then
you know, how foulely Peter denied him with oaths and curses; and after that,
when he was laid in the grave, they are giving up all their faith in him, We
trusted it should have been he (say two of them) that should have redeemed
Israel: They question, whether he was the Messiah or no, Luke 24. 21. Now when
Christ came first out of the other world, from the dead, clothed with that
heart and body which he was to wear in heaven, what message sends he first to
them? we would all think, that as they would not know him in his sufferings, so
he would now be as strange to them in his Glory: or at least, his first words
shall be to rate them for their faithlesnesse and false-hood: but here is no
such matter; for John 20. 17. his first word concerning them is, Go tell my
Brethren, etc. You read elsewhere, how that it is made a great point of love
and condescending in Christ so to entitle them; Heb. 2. 11. [ He is not ashamed
to call them Brethren] (surely his brethren had been ashamed of him:) Now for
him to call them so when he was first entering into his glory, argues the more
love in him toward them. He caries it as Joseph did in the height of his
advancement, when he first brake his mind to his brethren; I am Joseph your
brother (says he, Genesis 45. 4.) So Christ says here, Tell them you have seen
Jesus their Brother; I own them as brethen still. This was his first
compellation; but what was the message that he would first have delivered unto
them? that I (says he) ascend to my Father, and your Father. A more friendly
speech by far, and arguing infinite more love then that of Joseph's did, (though
that was full of bowels) for Joseph after he had told them he was their
brother, adds, [ whom you sold into Egypt,] he minds them of their unkindnesse,
but not so Christ, not a word of that, he minds them not of what they had done
against him. Poor sinners who are full of the thoughts of their own sins,
know not how they shall be able at the latter day to look Christ in the face
when they shall first meet with him: But they may relieve their spirits against
their care and fear, by Christ's carriage now toward his Disciples, who had so
sinned against him: Be not afraid, your sins will he remember no more. Yea
further, you may observe, that he minds them, not so much of what he had been
doing for them; He says not, Tell them I have been dying for them, or, That
they little think what I have suffered for them; not a word of that neither:
but still his heart and his care is upon doing more; he looks not backward to
what is past, but forgets his sufferings, as a woman her travail, for joy that
a man-child is borne. Having now dispatched that great work on earth for them,
he hastens to heaven as fast as he can to do another: And though he knew he
had business yet to do upon earth, that would hold him forty days longer;
yet to show that his heart was longing, and eagerly desirous to be at work for
them in heaven, he speaks in the present tense, and tells them, I ascend; and
he expresses his joy to be, not only that he goes to his Father, but also
that he goes to their Father, to be an advocate with him for them, of which I
spoke before. And is indeed Jesus our Brother alive? and does he call us
Brethren? and does he talk thus lovingly of us? (whose heart would not this
over come?)

But this was but a message sent his Disciples, before he met them; let us next
observe his carriage and speech at first meeting together. When he came first
amongst them, this was his salutation, Peace be to you, ver. 19. which he
reiterates, ver. 21. and it is all one with that former speech of his used in
that his parting Sermon, [ My peace I leave with you.] After this he breathes
on them, and conveyes the holy Ghost in a further measure into them, so to give
an evidence of what he would do yet more plentifully in heaven: and the
mystery of that his breathing on them, was to show that this was the utmost
expression of his heart, to give them the Spirit, and that it came from the
very bottom of it, (as a man's breath does) as well as that the holy Ghost
proceeds from him, as well as from the Father, (which was also the meaning of
it.) And to what end does he give them the Spirit? not for themselves alone;
but that they by the gifts and assistance of that Spirit might forgive men's
sins by converting them to him, [ Whose sins soever ye remit, (namely, by your
ministry) they are remitted to them:] His mind you see is still upon sinners,
and his care for the conversion of their souls. And therefore in another
Evangelist, (namely, Mark) his last words recorded are these: Go ye into all
the World, and preach the Gospel unto every creature, and he that believes
shall be saved, etc. Chap. 16. 15. And in Luke, Chap. 24. ver. 46, 47. his last
words on earth there recorded are, [ Thus it behoved Christ to suffer and to
rise, -- that repentance and remission of sins should be preached among all
Nations, And adds, beginning at Jerusalem, where he had been but a few
days before crucified. Of all places, one would have thought he would have
excepted that, and have charged them to pass by it, but he bids them begin
there: let them have the first fruit and benefit by my death, that were the
actors in it. And (to that end) he also says, Behold, I send you the Promise
of my Father, etc. ver. 49. Another time he appears to two of them, and then
indeed he rates them, saying, O ye fools, and slow of heart; but for what is
it? but only because they would not believe on him, for no other sin, not
for that they had forsaken him: so it follows, O ye fools, and slow of heart
to believe, etc. Luke 24. 25. and this because he is glad when we believe, as
John 11. 15. And after that, he appears to all the eleven, and upbraids them,
(the Text says) but with what? with their unbelief and hardness of heart;
still because they believed not, so ver. 14. No sin of theirs troubled him
but their unbelief: Which shows how his heart stands, in that he desires
nothing more, then to have men believe in him; and this, now when glorified.
Afterward he meets with Thomas, and scarce chides him for his gross
unbelief; only tells him, it was well that having seen, he believed; but
pronounces them more blessed, who though they have not seen, yet believe: and
so he is reproved, John 20. 29. Another time he shows himself to his
Disciples, and particularly deals with Peter, but yet tells him not a word of
his sins, nor of his forsaking of him, but only goes about to draw from him a
testimony of his love to himself, Peter, (says he) love thou me? Christ
loves to hear that note; full well do those words sound in his ears, when
you tell him, you love him, though he knows it already; as Peter tells him, Thou
know all things, thou know I love thee, John 21. 15. and this Christ puts
him thrice upon. And what was Christ's aim in drawing this acknowledgement of
love from Peter to him, but only to put an engagement upon Peter, that if he
loved him as he professed, and would ever show it, then to feed his lambs? This
is the great testimony that he would have Peter to show his love in, when he
should be in heaven; and this is the last charge he gives him: Which how great
a testimony is it, to show how his own heart was affected, and what his
greatest care was upon? His heart runs altogether upon his Lambs, upon souls
to be converted; He had said before, Sheep I have, John 10. 6. which are not of
this fold, them I must bring in: (and he left his Apostles to do it) but this
here was a more moving and affectionate expression; for sheep can shift for
themselves, but poor little Lambs cannot: Therefore Christ says unto Peter,
Feed my Lambs, (even as John, to express the more love unto those he writes
to, calls them My little children.) And to what end does the Evangelist record
these things of him after his Resurrection? One of the Evangelists that
recorded them, informs us; In the 20. of John, ver. 30. it is said, that Jesus
did many other signs, namely, after his Resurrection: (for in the midst of
the story of those things done after his Resurrection he speaks it,) which
are not written in this Book, (but partly recorded by other Evangelists, and
partly concealed) but these things are written that ye might believe that
JESUS is the CHRIST, that is, that so you might come to him as to the Messiah,
the Savior of the World: and therefore, the most of the things recorded tend
to show Christ's heart and carriage toward Sinners, that so we might believe
on him, and that believing we might have life through his Name.

. 3.
Demonstrations from passages at and after his Ascension into heaven.
LEt us view him next in his very ascending, his carriage then also will
further assure our hearts of this. Luke 24. 50. it is said, He lifted up his
hands and blessed them: and to put the greater emphasis upon it, and that we
might the more observe it, as having some great mystery in it, ver. 51. it is
added, [ And whilst he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up
into heaven.] This benediction Christ reserved to be his last act; and what was
the meaning of it, but (as I have before shown) to bless them, as God blessed
Adam and Eve, bidding them Increase and multiply, and so blessing all Mankind
that were to come of them? Thus does Christ in blessing his Disciples, bless
all those that shall believe through their word unto the end of the world. I
only add this to the illustration of it; this mystery is interpreted by Peter,
Acts 3. 26. when speaking to the Jews, he says, Unto you first, God having
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him [to bless you,] (and how?) in turning away
every one of you from his iniquities, and so, forgiving of them; (for, Blessed
is the man whose sin is forgiven.) Thus at his ascending.

In the next place, let us consider what Christ did when he was come to heaven
and exalted there: how abundantly did he there make good all that he had
promised in his last Sermon? For First, he instantly powered out his Spirit, and
that richly, (as the Apostle to Titus speaks,) and he being by the right hand
of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy
Ghost, he has shed forth this which you now see and hear, says the Apostle
in his first Sermon after, Acts 2. 33. he then received it, and visibly powered
him out. So Ephesians. 4. 8. it is said, He ascended up on high, and gave gifts
unto men, -- for the work of the Ministry, (ver. 15) and for the joynting in
of the Saints to the increase of the body of Christ, (ver. 16.) that is, for
the converting of elect sinners, and making them Saints. And the gifts there
mentioned (some of them) remain unto this day, in Pastors, and Teachers, etc.
And this spirit is still in our preaching, and in your hearts in hearing, in
praying, etc, and persuades you of Christ's love to this very day; and is in all
these, the pledge of the continuance of Christ's love still, in Heaven unto
sinners. All our Sermons and your Prayers are evidences to you, that Christ's
heart is still the same toward sinners, that ever it was, for the Spirit that
assists in all these, comes in his name, and in his stead, and works all by
commission from him. And do none of you feel your hearts moved in the
preaching of these things, at this and other times? and who is it that moves
you? it is the Spirit who speaks in Christ's name from heaven, even as himself
is said to speak from heaven, Heb. 12. 25. And when you pray, it is the Spirit
that endites your prayers, and that makes intercession for you in your own
hearts, Romans 8. 26. which Intercession of his is but the evidence and echo of
Christ's Intercession in heaven. The Spirit prays in you, because Christ prays
for you: he is an Intercessor on earth, because Christ is an Intercessor in
Heaven. As he did take off Christ's words, and used the same that he before had
uttered, when he spoke in and to the Disciples the words of life: so he takes
off Christ's prayers also when he prays in us: he takes but the words as it
were out of Christ's mouth, or heart rather, and directs our hearts to offer
them up to God. He also follows us to the Sacrament, and in that Glass shows
us Christ's face smiling on us, and through his face his heart; and thus helping
of us to a sight of him, we go away rejoicing that we savv our Savior that
day.

Then secondly, all those works both of miracles and conversion of sinners, in
answer to the Apostles prayers, are a demonstration of this. What a handsell
had Peter's first Sermon after Christ's Ascension, when three thousand souls
were converted by it? The Apostles (you know) went on to preach forgiveness
through Christ, and in his Name, and to invite men to him; and what signs and
wonders did accompany them, to confirm that their preaching? and all were the
fruits of Christ's Intercession in heaven: So that what he promised, ( John 14.
12.) as an evidence of his minding them in heaven, was abundantly fulfilled.
They upon their asking did greater works then he: so Acts 4. 29, 30. at the
prayers of Peter. And Heb. 2. 3, 4. the Apostle makes an argument of it, How
shall we escape (says he) if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard
him, God also bearing them witness both with signs and wonders, and with
diverse miracles? etc. Yea, let me add this, that take all the New Testament,
and all the Promises in it, and expressions of Christ's love, it was written all
since Christ's being in heaven, by his Spirit, and that by commission from
Christ, and therefore all that you find therein you may build on, as his very
heart; and therein see, that what he once said on earth, he repealeth not a
word now he is in heaven; his mind continues the same: And the consideration
hereof may add a great confirmation to our faith herein.

Thirdly, some of the Apostles spoke with him since, even many years after his
Ascension. Thus John, and Paul, (of which the last was in heaven with him) and
they both do give out the same thing of him. Paul heard not one Sermon of
Christ's (that we know of) whilst on earth, and received the Gospel from no man,
Apostle, or other, but by the immediate Revelation of Jesus Christ from heaven
(as he speaks, Gal. 1. 11, 12.) But he was converted by Christ himself from
heaven, by immediate speech and conference of Christ himself with him; and
this long after his Ascension. And in that one instance Christ abundantly
showed his heart and purpose to continue to all sorts of sinners to the end of
the world. Thus in two places that great Apostle tells us; the first is 1
Timoth. 1. 13. I was a persecuter, a blasphemer, (says he) but I obtained
mercy, and the grace of our Lord (namely, Jesus Christ) was exceeding
abundant: and upon this, he declares with open mouth (as it were) from Christ's
own self, who spoke to him from Heaven, that this is the faithfullest saying
that ever was uttered, that Christ came into the World to save sinners, whereof
I am chief, (says he) ver. 15. And to testify that this was the very scope
of Christ in thus converting of Paul, himself; and Paul's scope also in that
place to Timothy to show so much, appears by what follows, v. 16. For this
cause I obtained this mercy, that in me [first] Jesus Christ might show forth
all long-suffering for a pattern to all them that should hereafter believe on
him unto life everlasting. It is express (you see) to assure all sinners, unto
the end of the world, of Christ heart toward them: this was his drift: For
this very cause, (says Paul.) The second place I allege in proof of this, is
the story of Paul's conversion, where he diligently inserts the very words that
Christ spoke to him from heaven, ( Acts 26. 16.) which were these, [I have
appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a Minister and a witness, --
to send thee to the Gentiles, [to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by
faith that is in me.] Brethren, these are Christ's words since he went to
Heaven, and he tells Paul he appeared unto him to testify thus much. This for
Paul's conference with him.

Then again, sixty years after his Ascension, did the Apostle John receive a
Revelation from him, even when all the Apostles were dead, (for after all their
deaths was that book written) and that Revelation is said to be in a more
immediate manner, the Revelation of Jesus Christ, (so Chap. 1. 1.) then any
other of the Apostles writings: and you read that Christ made an Apparition of
himself to him, and said, I am he that was dead, and am alive, and live for
evermore, Chap. 1. 18. Now let us but consider Christ's last words, in that his
last book, (the last that Christ has spoken since he went to Heaven, or that
he is to utter till the day of Judgment) you have them in the last Chapter,
ver. 16. I Jesus have sent mine. Angel to testify unto you these things in the
Churches: I am the root and the offspring of David; -- [ and the Spirit and
the Bride say, Come: and let him that hears say, Come: and let him that is
athirst come: and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely.]
They are the latter words I cite this place for; The occasion of these words
was this: Christ was now in Heaven, and had before promised one day to come
again, and fetch us all to Heaven: And in the mean time, mark what an
ecchoing and answering of hearts and of desires there is mutually between Him
from heaven, and believing sinners from below: Earth calls upon Heaven, and
Heaven calls upon earth, as the Prophet speaks. The Bride from earth says unto
Christ, Come to me; and the Spirit in the Saints hearts below, says, Come unto
him also: and Christ cries out as loud from Heaven, Come, in answer unto this
desire in them; so that heaven and earth ring again of it. Let him that is
athirst come to me; and let him that will come, come, and take of the waters of
life freely: This is Christ speech unto men on earth. They call him to come
unto earth, to Judgment; and he calls sinners to come up to heaven unto him
for mercy: They cannot desire his coming to them, so much as he desires their
coming to him. Now what is the meaning of this, that upon their calling upon
him to come, he should thus call upon them to come? It is in effect as if he
had plainly uttered himself thus, I have a heart to come to you, but I must
have all you my Elect that are to be on earth, come to me first: You would have
me come down to you, but I must stay here, till all that the Father has given
me, be come to me; and then you shall be sure, quickly to have me with you:
Hereby expressing how much his heart now longs after them. This to be his
meaning, is evident by the words which he adds, ver. 20. He which testifies
these things, (namely, Christ) says, [Surely I come quickly.] And if we
observe how much by the by (as it were) these words of Christ's do come in, it
makes them the more remarkable to show his heart in uttering them. This Book
was intended merely as a Prophecy of the times of the Gospel until his
coming; unto which period of it, when John had brought that Prophetique story,
he brings in the Bride longing for that coming of Christ, [ The Bride says,
Come.] And no sooner says she so, but Christ by way of retortion does likewise
say, Come, unto her also; yea, it puts the more observation upon it, that he
had uttered the same words before, Revel. 21. 6. but notwithstanding he will
repeat them again, and have them to be his last words. All which shows how
much his heart was in this part of the Gospel, to invite sinners to him; that
now when he is to speak but one sentence more, till we hear the sound to
judgment, he should especially make choice of these words. Let them therefore
for ever stick with you, as being worthy to be your last thoughts when you come
to die, and when you are a going to him. He speaks indeed something else after
them; but that which he says afterward, is but to set a seal unto these
words, and to the rest of the Scriptures, whereof this is the chief. And
further to show, that these words were singled out to be his last, and that he
meant to speak no more till the day of judgment, therefore also he adds a
curse to him, who should add to them, or take from them. He adds indeed after
that another speech, but it is only to ingeminate his willingness to come
quickly, were all his elect but once come in to him, so ver. 20. And all this
tends to assure us that this is his heart, and we shall find him of no other
mind until his coming again.

And that you may yet the more consider them as thus purposely brought in by
him as his last words to make them stick with us, let me add another
observation about them, and that is this, that at another time when he was upon
earth, he in like manner singled out these very words (I mean the matter of
them) as the conclusion and shutting up of many days preaching. Thus John 7.
37. In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, [If
any man thirst let him come to me and drink.] These words were spoken on the
last day of the feast, after which he was to preach no more at that time, and
for a good while after unto them: (and he had preached upon all the former
days of that feast, as his manner was) and it was [the great] day of the
Feast, when he had the greatest audience: and you see he chooses this for his
last sentence, of tht his last Sermon then; and when he would give them
something at parting, as a Viaticum, which he would have them carry home with
them to feed upon above all the rest, these are his words, If any man thirst,
let him come to me, and [drinke:] (which himself interprets to be believing on
him, ver. 38.) and he stands up to speak this; yea, he cries, says the text,
with open mouth, with utmost vehemency, to the intent that all might hear
this above all sayings else. And thus in like manner at this time also, when he
is to speak no more, but to hold his tongue for ever till the day of Judgment,
(nor is to write any more Scriptures) he then sends his Angel to testify these
to be his last words; and this, although he had spoken them before: It was
therefore assuredly done, to show his heart in them. They were his last words
then, and they shall be mine in the closure of this Discourse, for what can
there be added to them?

THE HEART OF Christ in Heaven, TO Sinners on Earth.
II. PART.
HEB. 4. 15. For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities: but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
without sin.
THE only Use I shall make of these words is, to be a foundation unto that
second part of that head or point of Doctrine into which I have made an
entrance; which was to demonstrate the gracious inclination and temper of
Christ's he art toward sinners, now he is in Heaven.

The extrinsecall Demonstrations of this (which I make the first part of it)
are dispatched: And for a ground-word to these more Intrinsecall Demonstrations
(which make a second part) I have chosen this Text, as that which above any
other speaks his heart most, and sets out the frame and workings of it toward
sinners; and that so sensibly, that it does (as it were) take our hands, and
lay them upon Christ's breast, and let us feel how his heart beats, and his
bowels yerne toward us, even now he is in glory: The very scope of these words
being manifestly to encourage Believers against all that may discourage them,
from the consideration of Christ's heart toward them now in heaven.

To open them, so far as they serve to my present purpose.

First, all that may any way discourage us, he here calls by the name of
Infirmities, thereby meaning both 1. The evil of afflictions of what sort
soever, Persecutions, etc. from without. 2. The evil of sins which do most of
all discourage us, from within.


And that both these are menat,

1. That under [ Infirmities] he means persecutions and afflictions is
manifest, not only in that the word is often used in that sense, as 2 Cor. 11.
30. and Chap. 12. 5. but also it is plain, that the phrase is here so intended,
for his scope is to comfort them against what would pull from them their
profession, as that foregoing exhortation [ Let us hold fast our profession]
implies; Now that which attempted to pull it from them, were their persecutions
and oppositions from without: It appears also because his argument here of
comforting them against these infirmities, is drawn from Christ's example, In
that he was in all things tempted as we are.

Yet secondly, by [ infirmities] are meant sins also, for so in the process of
this discourse he uses the phrase, and makes them the main object of our
Highpriests pity; for in the next words, Chap. 5. 2. showing what the
qualifications of the High Priest under the Law were, (who were types of our
great High Priest) he makes this one, (suitable to this here mentioned) that he
was to be one that could have compassion on the ignorant, and those that were
out of the way; (that is, upon sinners, for sins are those ignorances and
goings astray from God;) and then adds, in that himself was clothed with
infirmities; that is, with sins. And although it is said here that Christ was
without sin in all, yet he was tempted by Satan unto all sorts of sins, even as
we are. And that by [ infirmities] sins are mainly here intended, is yet more
evident from the remedy propounded against them which they are here encouraged
to seek for at the throne of grace, namely, Grace and Mercy. Therefore let us
come boldly to the throne of Grace, that we may find [Grace and mercie] to
help in time of need: So it follows in the next words. Grace to help against
the power of sin, and Mercy against the guilt and punishment of it; both
which are the greatest discouragers to come boldly to that throne, and
therefore he must needs intend those kinds of infirmities chiefly in this his
encouragement and comfortory given.

Now secondly, for a support against both these, he lets us understand how
feelingly and sensibly affected the heart of Christ is to sinners under all
these their infirmities, now he is in Heaven, (for of him advanced into heaven,
he here speaks, as appears by ver. 14.) And if the coherence with that verse
be observed, we shall see that he brings in this narration of it setly, by way
of preventing an objection which might otherwise arise in all men's thoughts
from that high and glorious Description which he had given of him in that 14.
ver. [We have a great High Priest, who is passed into the Heavens, etc.] He
knew we would be apt from this presently to think, he may be too great to be
an High Priest for us to transact our affairs; and that this greatness of his
might cause him to forget us, or if he did remember us, and take notice of our
miseries, yet being passed into the Heavens, and so having cast off the
frailties of his flesh which he had here, and having clothed his humane
nature with so great a glory, that therefore he cannot now pity us, as he did
when he dwelt among us here below; nor be so feelingly affected and touched
with our miseries, as to be tenderly moved to compassionate and commiserate us,
so he is not now capable of a feeling of grief, and so, not of a
fellow-feeling, or sympathizing with us; his state and condition now is above
all such affections; which affections notwithstanding are they that should put
him upon helping us, heartily and cordially. And for him to be exposed to such
affections as these, were a weakness, an infirmity in himself, which heaven
has cured him of. His power and glory is so great that he cannot be thus
touched, even as the Angels are not: And he is advanced for above all
Principalities and powers, Ephesians. 1. 15.

This the Apostle carefully pre-occupates; and it is the very objection which
he takes away. We have not an High Priest who cannot, etc. Duplex negatio
aequipollet affirmationi; nay, two negatives do not only make an affirmative,
but affirm more strongly: they make an affirmation contradictory to a contrary
and opposite thought. Now this speech of his is as much as if he should have
said, Well, let heaven have made what alteration soever, upon his condition, in
glorifying his humane nature, which be it never so free from fleshly passions,
and in stead of flesh be made like Heaven; let him be never so incapable of
impressions from below: yet he retains one tender part and bare place in his
heart still unarmed, (as it were) even to suffer with you, and to be touched if
you be. The word is a deep one, [(...)] He suffers with you, he is as tender
in his bowels to you as ever he was: that he might be moved to pity you, he
is willing to suffer (as it were) one place to be left naked, and to be flesh
still, on which he may be vvounded with your miseries, that so he might be
your merciful High Priest.

And whereas it may be objected, that this were a weakness: The Apostle
affirms that this is his power, and a perfection and strength (of love surely)
in him, as the word (...) imports: that is, that makes him thus able and
powerful to take our miseries into his heart, though glorified, and so to be
affected with them, as if he suffered with us, and so to relieve us out of that
principle, out of which he would relieve himself.

There are two things which this Text gives me occasion to take notice of, and
apart to handle.

First, (more generally) That Christ's heart now in heaven, is as graciously
affected unto sinners, as ever it was on earth.

And secondly, (more particularly) the manner how. Or thus:

1. That he is touched with a feeling, or sympathizeth with us, (as the word
is.)

2. The way how this comes to pass; even through his having been tempted in
all things like unto us. In handling the first, I shall give those Intrinsecall
Demonstrations of it that remain; and in handling the other, further open the
Text. To come therefore first to those Intrinsecall Demonstrations of this
Doctrine, which I engraft upon these words, and shoots naturally from them,
namely, That the heart of Jesus Christ now he is in heaven, is as graciously
inclined to sinners, as ever it was on earth.

. 1.
The first sort of Intrinsecall Demonstrations drawn from the influence all the
three Persons have for ever into the heart of the Humane nature of Christ in
heaven.
THe first sort of Demonstrations shall be fetched from all the three Persons,
and their several influence they have into Christ's heart in heaven, to incline
it toward us.

The first shall be taken from God his Father, who has thus advanced him; and
it has two parts: 1. That God has given a perpetual command to Christ to
love sinners; 2. That therefore his heart continues the same for ever.

For the first, God the Father has given Jesus Christ a special command to
love sinners; and has withal implanted a merciful gracious disposition in
his heart toward them. This I mention to argue it, because it is that which
Christ alleges, John 6. 37. as the original ground of this disposition of
his, not to cast out those that come to him: For it is my Fathers will (says
he in the following verses) that I should perform that which I came down from
heaven for, ver. 38. And this lies now still upon him now he is in heaven, as
much as ever: for his will also is (says he, ver. 39, 40.) that I should raise
them up at the last day, so as it must needs continue the same till then. And
compare with this the 10. of John, from ver. 15. to 18. where having discoursed
before of his care and love to his sheep, to give his life for them, to know
and own them, and to bring them into the fold, etc. he concludes at ver. 18. [
This commandment have I received from my Father.] It is his will, says the 6.
of John, (and if a good son knows that a thing is his fathers mind and will,
it is enough to move him to do it; much more if it be his express command.)
And in this 10. of John he further says, that it is the command which he had
received from the Father. A command is a man's will peremptorily expressed; so
as there must be a breach, if it be not fulfilled: and such a command has God
given Christ concerning us. Out of both which places I observe three things to
be the matter of this will and command of Gods: First, that Christ should die
for his sheep; in respect to which command, he continued so to love them whilst
here, as to lay down his life for them: so John 10. 15. but then he took it
up again, and is ascended into heaven. Therefore those other two things
commanded him, do concern him when he is in glory; namely, to receive all
that come to him, which is the second; and the third, to look that he lose
none of those for whom he dyed, but to raise them up. And for these his Fathers
command lies as strictly on him, now he is in Heaven, as for dying for them
whilst he was on earth: [ This command have I received from my Father, and this
is his will.]

And together with this command, God did put into his heart (as where he
commands he ever uses to do) such an instinct of transcendent love toward
them, as shall so strongly incline him to perform it, that he shall need no
more commands. He has put such a (...), such an especial love into him, as he
has put into the hearts of parents toward their own children, more then to
all other men's children which they see besides, although more beautiful and
more witty then their own. And both this commandment, and this inclination of
love toward them, we have at once expressed Psalm. 40. 8. where giving the
reason why he became our Mediator, and sacrificed himself, he not only says,
I come to do thy will O God; but also, Thy law is in my bowels: In which
speech, both these two are mentioned:

1. That command I mentioned is there expressed, for it is called a Law.

And 2. it was a law wrought into suitable dispositions in his heart; and
therefore said to be a Law in his heart or bowels.

You may easily conceive what Law it was by the subject of it, his Bowels;
which are still put for the most tender affections; (Colos. 3. 12. Bowels of
mercy, kindness, etc.) It was no other then that law of love, mercy and pity
to poor sinners, which God gave him in charge, as he was to be Mediator. It
was that special law which lay on him as he was the second Adam; like that
which was given to the first Adam, Non concedendi, over and above the Moral
Law, not to eat the forbidden fruit; such a Law was this he there speaks of:
It was the law of his being a Mediator and a sacrifice, (for of that he
expressly speaks, v. 6, 7.) over and besides the Moral Law, which was common
to him with us. The word in the Original is, [ In the middest] of my bowels,
to show it was deeply engraven: it had its seat in the center, it sat nearest,
and was most inward in his heart.

Yea, and as that special Law of not eating the forbidden fruit, was to Adam,
Praeceptum Symbolicum, (as Divines call it) given over and besides all the ten
Commandments, to be a trial, a sign or symbol of his obedience to all the
rest; such was this Law given unto Christ, the second Adam; so as that God
would judge of all his other obedience unto himself by this: Yea it was laid
on him with that earnestness by God, and so commended by him, as that if ever
Christ would have him to love him, he should be sure to love us. Thus in that
place forecited, John 10. 17, 18. Christ comforts himself with this in his
obedience, [ Therefore does my Father love me:] It is spoken in relation unto
his fulfilling this his command formerly mentioned; and so withal imports, as
if God should love Christ the better for the love he should show to us; it
pleased him so well to see Christ love us. And so it is as if God when he gave
Christ that Commandment, ver. 18. had said, Son, as you would have my love
continue toward you, let me see your love toward me shown in being kind to
these I have given you, whom I have loved with the same love wherewith I have
loved you; (as you have it, John 17. 23.) As God would have us show love unto
him, by loving his children: so he would have Christ also show his love
toward him by loving of us.

Now for the second Branch of this Demonstration, namely, that that love
which Christ, when on earth, expressed to be in his heart, and which made
him die for sinners upon this command of his Father, that it does certainly
continue in his heart still, now that he is in Heaven, and that as quick and
as tender as ever it was on earth, even as when he was on the Cross, and
that because of his Fathers command. It is evidenced thus: For it being a Law
written in the midst of his bowels by his Father, it becomes natural to him,
and so indelible, and (as other Moral Laws of God written in the heart are)
perpetual. And as in us, when we shall be in heaven, though Faith shall fail,
and Hope vanish, yet Love shall continue, (as the Apostle speaks) so does this
love in Christ's heart continue also, and suffers no decay; and is shown as
much now in receiving sinners, and interceding for them, and being pitiful
unto them, as then in dying for them. And this love to sinners being so
commanded and pressed upon him, (as was said) that as he would have his Father
love him, he should love them; and so, being urged upon all that great love
that is between him and his Father; this as it must needs work and boil up a
strong love in him unto sinners, so likewise the most constant and
never-decaying love that could be: And this is argued from the analogy of that
principle upon which Christ urges us to love himself, John 15. 10. He moves
his Disciples to keep the Commandments he gave them, and uses this argument, [
For so shall you abide in my love;] and backs it with his own instance, [ even
as I have kept my Fathers commandments, and abide in his love.] Now therefore
this being the great Commandment that God lays on him, to love, and die for,
and to continue to love, and receive sinners that come to him, and raise them
up at the latter day, certainly he continues to keep it most exactly, as being
one of the great ties between him and his Father, so to continue in his love
to him. Therefore so long as he continues in his Fathers love, (and now he is
in heaven, and at his right hand, he must needs continue in highest favor with
him;) so long we may be sure he continues to observe this. And thus that he
should continue still to love us, both love to his Father, and love to himself
obliges him: we may therefore be sure of him that he both does it, and will
do it for ever. O what a comfort is it, that as children are mutual pledges
and ties of love between man and wife, so that we should be made such
between God the Father and the Son! And this demonstration is taken from the
influence of the first Person of the Trinity; namely, from God the Father.

Then (secondly) this his love is not a forced love, which he strives only to
bear toward us, because his Father has commanded him to marry us; but it is
his nature, his disposition: Which added to the former, affords a second
demonstration of the point in hand, and is drawn from God the Son. This
disposition is free and natural to him; he should not be Gods Son else, nor
take after his heavenly Father: unto whom it is natural to show mercy, but
not so to punish, which is his strange work, but mercy pleases him, he is
the Father of mercy, he begets them naturally. Now Christ is his own Son,
(...) (as by way of distinction he is called) and his natural Son; yea, his
humane nature being united to the second Person, is thereby become the natural
Son of God, not adopted, as we are. And if he be his natural Son in
privileges, then also his Fathers properties are natural to him; more
natural then to us, who are but his adopted sons. And if we as the elect of
God (who are but the adopted sons) are exhorted to put on Bowels of mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, etc. (as Col. 3. 12.) then much
more must these dispositions needs be found in Christ the Natural Son, and
these, not put on by him, but be as natural to him as his Sonship is: God is
love, (as John says) and Christ is love covered over with slesh, yea, our
flesh. And besides, it is certain, that as God has fashioned the hearts of all
men, and some of the sons of men unto more mercy and pity (naturally) then
others, and then the holy Spirit coming on them to sanctify their natural
dispositions, uses to work according to their tempers; even so it is certain,
that he tempered the heart of Christ, and made it of a softer mold and temper
then the tenderness of all men's hearts put together into one (to soften it)
would have been of. When he was to assume an humane nature, he is brought in,
saying, ( Heb. 10.) A body have thou fitted me: That is, an humane nature,
fitted as in other things, so in the temper of it, for the Godhead to work and
show his perfections in best. And as he took an humane nature on purpose to be
a merciful High Priest; as Heb. 2. 14. so such an humane nature, and of so
special a temper and frame as might be more merciful then all Men or Angles.
His humane nature was made without hands; that is, was not of the ordinary make
that other men's hearts are of: though for the matter the same, yet not for the
frame of his spirit. It was an heart bespoke for on purpose to be made a
vessel, or rather fountain of mercy, wide and capable enough to be so
extended, as to take in and give forth to us again, all Gods Manifestative
mercies, that is, all the mercies God intended to manifest to his elect: and
therefore Christ's heart had naturally in the temper of it, more pity then all
men or Angles have, as through which the mercies of the great God were to be
dispensed unto us; and this heart of his to be the instrument of them. And
then, this man and the heart of this man so framed, being united to God, and
being made the natural Son of God, now natural must mercy needs be unto him?

And therefore continue in him now he is in Heaven: For though he laid down
all infirmities of our nature, when he rose again; yet no graces that were in
him whilst he was below: they are in him now as much as ever, and being his
nature, (for nature we know is constant,) therefore still remains. You may
observe, that when he was upon earth, minding to persuade sinners to have good
thoughts of him, as he used that argument of his Fathers command given him; so
he also lays open his own disposition: Mat. 11. 28. Come to me you that are
weary and heavy laden, -- for I am meek and lowly of heart. Men are apt to have
contrary conceits of Christ, but he tells them his disposition there, by
preventing such hard thoughts of him, to allure them unto him the more. We are
apt to think, that he being so holy, is therefore of a severe and sour
disposition against sinners, and not able to bear them; no, says he, I am
meek, gentleness is my nature and temper; as it was of Moses, who was (as in
other things, so) in that grace his Type: he was not revenged on Miriam and
Aaron, but interceded for them. So says Christ; injuries and unkindnesses do
not so work upon me, as to make me irreconcilable, it is my nature to
forgive; I am meek. Yea, but (may we think) he being the Son of God, and
Heir of Heaven, and especially being now filled with glory, and sitting at
Gods right hand, he may now despise the lowliness of us here below; though not
out of anger, yet out of that height of his greatness and distance that he is
advanced unto, in that we are too mean for him to marry, or be familiar with:
He surely has higher thoughts, then to regard such poor low things as we
are: And so though indeed we conceive him meek, and not prejudiced with
injuries, yet he may be too high and lofty to condescend so far as to regard,
or take to heart the condition of poor creatures. No, says Christ, I am lowly
also, willing to bestow my love and favor upon the poorest and meanest. And
further, all this is not a semblance of such an affable disposition, nor is it
externally put on in the face and outward carriage only (as in many great
ones, that will seem gentle and courteous) but there is all this (...), in the
heart: it is his temper, his disposition, his nature to be gracious: which
nature he can never lay aside. And that his greatness when he comes to enjoy
it in Heaven would not a whit alter his disposition in him, appears by this,
that he at the very same time when he uttered these words, took into
consideration all his glory to come, and utters both that and his meeknes with
the same breath: So ver 27. All things are delivered to me by my Father: and
presently after for all this he says, Come unto me all you that are heavy
laden, -- [I am meek and lowly;] ver. 28, 29. Look therefore what lovely,
sweet, and delightful thoughts you use to have of a dear friend, who is of
an amiable nature, or of some eminently holy or meek Saint, of whom you think
with your selves, I could put my soul into such a man's hands, and can
comprimise my salvation to him (as I have heard it spoken of some:) Or look
how we should have been encouraged to have dealt with Moses in matter of
forgiveness, (who was the meekest man on earth) or treated with Joseph, by
what we read of his bowels toward his brethren: or what thoughts we have of
the tender hearts of Paul, or Timothy unto the souls of men in begetting, and
in nurturing and bringing them up to life (being affectionately desirous of
you, we were willing (says Paul) to impart our own souls to you, 1 These. 2.
8.) and this, naturally, (as his word is, 2 Phil. 20.) even such and infinitely
more raised apprehensions should we have of that sweetness and candor that
is in Jesus Christ, as being much more natural to him.

And therefore the same Apostle does make Christ's bowels the pattern of his,
Phil. 1. 8. Ge^. is my witness, how greatly I long after you in the bowels of
Jesus Christ. This phrase [in the bowels of Christ] has (according to
Interpreters) two meanings, and both serve to illustrate that which I intend:
First, [in the bowels of Christ] is taken causally, as if he meant to show that
those bowels or compassions were infused into him from Christ, and so longed
after them with such kind of bowels, as Christ had wrought in him: and if so,
that Christ put such bowels into him, has he not them in himself much more?
Paul had reason to say, [in the bowels of Christ] for (in this sense) I am sure
he (once) had scarce the heart and bowels of a man in him; namely, when he was
out of Christ, how furious and Lion-like a spirit had he against the Saints,
and what havoc made he of them, being ready even to pull out their bowels? And
how came Paul by such tender bowels now toward them? who gave him now such
tender affections? Even Jesus Christ, it was he that of a Lion made him a
Lamb. If therefore in Paul these bowels were not natural, (but the contrary
rather were natural to him) and yet they so abounded in him, and that
naturally, as himself speaks; how much more must they needs abound in Christ,
to whom they are native and inbred? Or else secondly, [In] the bowels, is put
for [Instar] Like the bowels, or After the bowels, according to the analogy of
the Hebrew phrase: And so then the meaning were this, Like as the bowels of
Jesus Christ do yerne after you, so do mine. [Bowels] are a Metaphor to
signify tender and motherly affections and mercies: so Luke 1. 78. [Through
the tender mercies;] In the original it is [The bowels of mercy.] Thus Paul
when he would signify how tender his affections were, he instances in the
Bowels of Jesus Christ, (he making Christ his pattern in this in all, [Be ye
followers of me, as I am of Christ.]) Now how desirous was this great Apostle
to beget men to Christ? he cared not what else he lost, so he might win
some: he counted not his life dear, nay not his salvation dear, but wished
himself accursed for his brethren, (who yet were the greatest enemies Christ
then had on earth:) How glad was he when any soul came in? how sorry when any
fell off? falling into a new travail (he knew not how better to express the
anxietie of his spirit) for the Galatians, till Christ was formed in them: How
comforted was he when he heard tidings of the constancy and increase of any
of their Faith? 1. These. 3. 6, 7. and ver. 8. he says, for now we live, if you
stand fast in the Lord. Read all his Epistles, and take the character of his
spirit this way; and when you have done, look up to Christ's humane nature in
Heaven, and think with your selves, Such a man is Christ. Paul vvarbles out
in all these high strains of affections but the soundings of Christ's Bowels in
Heaven in a lower key: Esaias. 63.
They are natural to Christ, they all and infinite more are eminent in him.
And this is the second Demonstration taken from his own natural disposition as
Son of God.

A third demonstration shall be taken from the Third Person of the Trinity,
the holy Ghost. If the same spirit that was upon him, and in him, when he was
on earth, does but still rest upon him now he is in Heaven, then these
dispositions must needs still entirely remain in him.

This Demonstration is made up of two Propositions put together: 1. That the
holy Ghost dwelling in him, concurs to make his heart thus graciously affected
to sinners: And 2. that the same spirit dwells and continues in and upon him for
ever in Heaven.

For the first, It was the Spirit who over-shadowed his mother, and in the
mean while knit that indissoluble knot between our nature and the second
Person, and that also knit his heart unto us; It was the Spirit who sanctified
him in the womb; It was the Spirit that rested on him above measure, and
fitted him with a meek spirit for the works of his mediation; and indeed for
this very grace sake of meekness did the Spirit come more especially upon him.
Therefore when he was first solemnly inaugurated into that office, at his
Baptism, (for then he visibly and professedly entered upon the execution of it)
the holy Ghost descended upon him: and how? as a Dove; so all the Evangelists
jointly report it. But why in the shape of a Dove? All apparitions that God at
any time made of himself, were not so much to show what God is in himself, as
how he is affected toward us, and declare what effects he works in us: so
here, this shape of a Dove resting upon him, was to show those special
gracious dispositions wherewith the holy Ghost fitted Jesus Christ to be a
Mediator. A Dove (you know) is the most innocent and most meek creature,
without gall, without tallons, having no fierceness in it, expressing nothing
but love and friendship to its mate in all its carriages, and mourning over it
in its distresses: and was therefore a fit emblem to express what a frame and
temper of spirit the holy Ghost did upon this his descending on him, fill the
heart of Christ with, and this without measure: that as sweetly as doves do
converse with doves, sympathising and mourning each over other, so may we with
Christ, for he thus sympathizeth with us. And though he had the Spirit before,
yet now he was anointed with him (in respect of such effects as these, which
appertained to the execution of his office) with a larger measure, and more
eminently then before. Therefore the Evangelist Luke notes upon it, ( Chap. 4.
1.) Jesus being full of the holy Ghost, returned from Jordan. And Peter also
puts the like gloss upon it, as appears Act. 10. 37. for speaking there of
the baptism of John, he shows how after that his being baptized, he began to
preach; and how God having anointed him with the holy Ghost, (namely, at that
baptism of his) he went about doing good, etc. And that this was the
principal thing signified by this descending of the holy Ghost as a Dove upon
him, (even chiefly to note out his meekness, and sympathizing heart with
sinners, wrought in him by the holy Ghost) is evident by two places, where
Christ himself puts that very intendment on it.

The first presently after, in the first Sermon that he preached after that his
having received the holy Ghost, (in the same 4. of Luke) where first it is
noted ver. 1. that he returned from being baptized, full of the Spirit, and so
was led to be tempted: then ver. 14. it is said that he returned from being
tempted in the power of that spirit, and after this is explained by himself
the mystery of his having received the Spirit in the likeness of a dove, and
this is the subject matter of the first Text which he opened in his first
Sermon, singled out by him on purpose, by choice, not chance, out of Isaiah,
which he read to them, ( ver. 18.) [The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, (that is, in spirit, the
afflicted in conscience for sin) he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted,
to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering sight to the blind, to
set at liberty them that are bruised, etc.] And when he had read so much as
concerned the expressing the compassionate disposition of his spirit unto
sinners, (whose misery he sets down by all sorts of outward evils) then he
reads no further, but closes the Book, as intimating, that these were the
maine effects of that his receiving the Spirit. [The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, [because] he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor:] That is,
for this end, or for this very purpose has he given me his Spirit, because I
was designed, or anointed to this work, and by that Spirit also has he
anointed, or qualified me with these gifts and dispositions suitable to that
work.

Another place that makes the fruit and end of his receiving the Spirit then at
his baptism, to be these tender dispositions unto sinners, is that in Mat. 12.
18, 19, etc. out of another place of Isaith, [Behold my beloved, in whom my
soul is well pleased, I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show
judgment to the Gentiles, etc.] That seems to be a terrible word, but be not
afraid of it; for by [judgement] is meant even the doctrine of free grace and
of the Gospel, that changes, and reforms men: As in like manner (according to
the Hebrew phrase) in ver. 20. by judgment is meant the work of Gods grace on
men's hearts: When he says [He will send forth judgment unto victory,] the
work of grace being the counterpane of the Doctrine of grace. And in preaching
this Doctrine (which in it self is good tidings) the Prophet shows how he
should carry it with a spirit, answerable and suitable thereunto, even full
of all meekness, stillness, calmnesse, and modesty, which he expresses by
proverbiall speeches usual in those times, to express so much by, [He shall
not strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets:]
that is, he shall deal with all stillness and meekness; without violence, or
boisterousnesse. John had the voice of a crier, he was a man of a severe
spirit; but Christ came piping and dancing; all melodious sweetness was in his
ministry and spirit; and in the course of his ministry he went so tenderly to
work, he was so heedfull to broken souls, and had such regard to their
discouragements, that it is said he would not break a bruised reed: That is, he
would set his steps with such heed, as not to tread on a reed that was broken
in the leaf; or he would walk so lightly and softly, that if it lay in his
way, though he went over it, yet he would not have further bruised it; nor
quenched either by treading out the smoking flax, (which is easily done) or
with any rushing motion have raised so much vvind as to blow out a weike of a
candle, (as some translate it) smoking in the socket; which the least stirring
of the air puffes out. All this is to express the tenderness of his heart;
and this, upon his receiving the Spirit, and especially from the time of his
baptizing: for then (you know) those words were together therewith uttered,
[This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased] and they are the same words
also, which together with Gods giving him the Spirit, are joined in that 40. of
Esaias, whence these words are taken. So that he was filled with the Spirit, to
that end to raise up in him such sweet affections toward sinners.

Now for the second part that goes to make up this Demonstration: It is as
certain, that the same Spirit that was upon Christ, and acted his spirit here
below, does still abide upon him in heaven. It must never be said, The Spirit
of the Lord is departed from Him, who is the Sender and Bestower of the holy
Ghost upon us. And if the Spirit once coming upon his Members abides with them
for ever, (as Christ promises, John 14. 16.) then much more does this Spirit
abide upon Christ the Head, from whom we all (since Christ was in heaven)
receive that Spirit, and by virtue of which Spirits dwelling in him, he
continues to dwell in us. Therefore of him it is said, ( Esaias 11. 2.) The
Spirit of the Lord shall [rest] upon him. Yea, and in that story of the holy
Ghosts desending upon him at his Baptism, it is not only recorded, that He
descended on him, but over and above it is added, [And abode upon him.] Yea
further, to put the greater emphasis upon it, it is twice repeated: So John 1.
32. I saw the Spirit (says the Evangelist) descending from heaven like a Dove,
(and he adds this also as a further thing observed by him) [ and it abode upon
him.] And then again, ver. 33. I knew him not, (says he) but he that sent me,
gave me this token to know him by, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit
descending, [and remaining on him,] the same is he. And further, (as it is
intimated there) he rested on him, to that end, that he might baptize us with
the holy Ghost unto the end of the world: [ The same (says he) is he that
baptizeth with the holy Ghost.] He at first descends as a Dove, and then abides
as a Dove for ever upon him; and this Dove it self came from heaven first: And
therefore certainly now that Christ himself is gone to heaven, he abides and
sits upon him much more as a Dove still there. Moreover, let me add this, that
although the Spirit rested on him here without measure in comparison of us; yet
it may be safely said, that the Spirit in respect of his effects in gifts of
grace and glory, rests more abundantly on him in heaven, then he did on earth,
even in the same sense that at his baptism (as was said) he rested on him in
such respects more abundantly then he did before his Baptism, during the time
of his private life: For as when he came to heaven he was enstalled King and
Priest as it were anew, in respect of a new execution: so for the work to be
done in heaven, he was anew anointed with this oil of gladness above his
fellows, (as Psalm. 45. 7.) Which place is meant of him especially as he is in
heaven, at Gods right hand, in fullness of joy, (as Psalm. 16. ult. it is also
spoken of him:) when also it is, that he goes forth in his majesty to conquer,
(as ver. 4. of that 45. Psalm.) And yet then, Meekness is not far off, but is
made one of his dispositions in this height of glory: So it follows in the
forecited verse, In thy majesty ride prosperously, because of Truth and
Meekness, etc. Therefore Peter says, ( Acts 2. 36.) that That same Jesus whom
you (Jews) have crucified, (and who was risen, and ascended) God has made both
Lord and Christ: [Lord,] that is, has exalted him as King in heaven; and [
Christ,] that is, has also anointed him: (and this Oil is no other then the
holy Ghost) with whom (the same Peter tells us) he was anointed at his
Baptism, Acts 10. 38. Yea, and because he then at once received the Spirit in
the fullest measure that for ever he was to receive him; therefore it was that
he shed him down on his Apostles, and baptized them with him, (as in that 2.
of the Acts we read.) Now it is a certain rule, that whatsoever we receive
from Christ, that he himself first receives in himself for us. And so one
reason why this oil ran then so plentifully down on the skirts of this our
High Priest, that is, on his members the Apostles and Saints, (and so continues
to do unto this day) is because our High Priest and Head himself was then
afresh anointed with it. Therefore ver. 33. of that 2. of the Acts, Peter
giving an account how it came to pass that they were so filled with the holy
Ghost, says, that Christ having received from the Father the promise of the
holy Ghost, had shed him forth on them; which receiving is not to be only
understood of his bare and single receiving the promise of the holy Ghost for
us, by having power then given him to shed him down upon them, as God had
promised, (though this is a true meaning of it) but further that he had
received him first as powered forth on himself, and so shed him forth on them:
according to that rule, that whatever God does unto us by Christ, he first does
it unto Christ: all promises are made and fulfilled unto him first, and so unto
us in him; all that he bestows on us, he receives in himself. And this may be
one reason why (as John 7. 39.) the Spirit was not as yet given, because Jesus
was not as yet glorified: But now he is in heaven, he is said to have the seven
spirits: so Rev. 1. 3. (which book sets him out as he is since he went to
heaven.) Now those seven spirits are the holy Ghost, for so it must needs be
meant, and not of any creature, as appears by the 4. ver. of that Chap. where
grace and peace are wished from the seven spirits: so called, in respect of the
various effects of him both in Christ and us, though but one in person. And
seven is a number of perfection, and is therefore there mentioned, to show,
that now Christ has the Spirit in the utmost measure that the humane nature is
capable of. And as his knowledge (which is a fruit of the Spirit) since his
Ascension is enlarged, (for before he knew not when the day of Judgment should
be, but now when he wrote this book of the Revelation, he did) so are his
bowels (I speak of the humane nature) extended; all the mercies that God means
to bestow being now actually to run through his hands, and his particular
notice, and he to bestow them not on Jews only, but on Gentiles also, who were
to be converted after he went to heaven. And so he has now an heart adequate
to Gods own heart, in the utmost extent of showing mercy unto any whom God
has intended it unto.

And this is the third demonstration from the Spirits dwelling in him; wherein
you may help your faith, by an experiment of the holy Ghost his dwelling in
your own hearts, and there not only working in you meekness toward others,
but pity toward your selves, to get your souls saved; and to that end,
stirring up in you incessant and unutterable groans before the Throne of
grace, for grace and mercy. Now the same Spirit dwelling in Christ's heart in
heaven, that does in yours here, and always working in his heart first for you,
and then in yours by commission from him; rest assured therefore, that that
Spirit stirs up in him bowels of mercy infinitely larger toward you, then you
can have unto your selves.

. II.
A second sort of Demonstrations from several engagements now lying upon
Christ in heaven.
THere are a second sort of Demonstrations which may be drawn from many other
several engagements continuing and lying upon Christ now he is in heaven:
which must needs incline his heart toward us as much, yea more then ever. As

1. The continuance of all those near and intimate Relations and allyances
unto us of all sorts; which no glory of his, can make any alteration in: and
therefore not in his heart and love, nor a declining any respects and offices
of love, which such relations do call for at his hands. All relations that are
natural, such as between father and child, husband and wife, brother and
brother, etc. look what world they are made for, in that world they for ever
hold, and can never be dissolved. These fleshly relations indeed do cease in
that other world, because they were made only for this world: as Romans 7. 1.
The wife is bound to her husband but so long as he lives: But these relations
of Christ unto us, were made in order to the world to come (as the Epistle to
the Hebrews calls it:) and therefore are in their full vigor and strength, and
receive their compleatment therein. Wherefore it is, that Christ is said to be
the same to day, yesterday, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. To illustrate this by the
constant and indissoluble tie of those relations of this world, whereto no
difference of condition, whether of advancement or debasement, can give any
discharge. We see in Joseph when advanced, how as his relations continued, so
his affections remained the same to his poor brethren, (who yet had injured
him,) and also to his father. So Genes. 45. where in the same speech he
mentions both his own greatest dignities, and advancement, [ God has made
me a father to Pharaoh, and Lord of all his house, and a Ruler throughout all
the Land of Egypt:] (so ver. 8.) and yet withal, he forgets not his
relations, [ I am Joseph your brother,] (ver. 4.) even the same man still. And
his affections appeared also to be the same; for he wept over them, and could
not refrain himself, as you have it, ver. 1, 2. And the like he expresses to
his father, ver. 9. Go to my father, and say, Thus says thy son Joseph, God
has made me Lord over all Egypt, (and yet thy son Joseph still.)

Take another instance (wherein there was but the relation of being of the same
country and alliance) in Esther, when advanced to be Queen of an hundred
twenty and seven Provinces; who when she was in the arms of the greatest
Monarch on earth, and enjoyed highest favor with him, yet then she cries out,
How can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people, or how can I
endure to see the destruction of my kindred? So Chap. 8. 6.

She considered but her relation, and how does it work in her veyns by a
sympathy of blood? Now much more does this hold good of husband and wife, for
they are in a nearer relation yet. Let the wife have been one that was poor
and mean, fallen iuto sickness, etc. and let the husband be as great and
glorious as Solomon in all his royalty; all mankind would cry shame on such a
man, if he should not now own his wife, and be a husband in all love and
respect to her still. But beyond all these relations, the relation of Head and
Members, as it is most natural, so it obliges most: No man ever yet hated his
own flesh, (says the Apostle) (though diseased and leprous) but loves and
cherishes it. And it is the law of Nature, that if one member be honored, all
the members are to rejoice with it, (1 Cor. 12. 26.) and if one member suffer,
all the rest are to suffer with it. Even so is Christ, (as ver. 12.) And these
relations are they that do move Christ to continue his love unto us. Jesus
knowing that he was to depart out of this world, having loved his own who were
in the world, he loved them unto the end, John 13. 1. And the reason thereof is
put upon his relation to them; they were his own; and his own by virtue of
all relations whatsoever, his own Brethren, his own Spouse, his own flesh;
and the very world will love its own, (as himself speaks) much more will he
himself love his own. He that provides not for his own family, is worse then
an Infidel, (says the Apostle.) Now though Christ be in heaven, yet his people
are his family still: they are retainers to him, though they be on earth; and
this, as truly as those that stand about his person now he is in his glory. So
that speech evidently declares, [ Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth
is named] they all together make up but one and the same family to him as their
Lord. Christ is both the founder, the subject, and the most perfect exemplar
and pattern to us, of all the relations that are found on earth. First he is
the founder of all relations, and affections that accompany them both in
nature and grace. As therefore the Psalmist argues, shall he not see who made
the eye? So do I; Shall not he who put all these affections into parents, and
brothers, suitable to their relations, shall not he have them much more in
himself? Though our Father Abraham being in heaven be ignorant of us, and
Israel acknowledge us not, yet O Lord, thou art our Father, and our Redeemer,
etc, Isai. 36. 16. the Prophet speaks it of Christ; as appears by ver. 1, and
2. and in a prophecy of the Jews Call; and he speaks it of Christ, as supposed
in Heaven, for he adds, Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation
of thy holiness and thy glory. There are but two things that should make him
to neglect sinners; his holiness, as they are sinners, and his glory, as they
are mean and low creatures: Now he there mentions both, to show, that
notwithstanding either as they are sinners he rejects them not, and as they are
base and mean he despises them not.

2. He is the Subject of all relations, which no creature is. If'a man be a
husband, yet not a father, or a brother; but Christ is all: No one relation
being sufficient to express his love, where with he loves and owneth us. And
therefore he calls his Church both Sister and Spouse, Cantic. 5. 1.

3. He is the pattern, and exemplar of all these our relatious, and they all
are but the copies of his. Thus in Ephesians. 5. Christ is made the pattern of the
relation and love of husbands; Husbands (says the Apostle) love your wives, as
Christ loved his Church, so ver. 25. Yea, ver. 31, 32, 33. the marriage of
Adam, and the very words he then spoke, of cleaving to a wife, are made but the
types and shadows of Christ marriage to his Church. Herein I speak (says he)
concerning Christ and the Church: and this is a great mystery. First, a
mystery, that is, this marriage of Adam was ordained hiddenly, to represent and
signify Christ's marriage with his Church. And secondly, it is a great mystery,
because the thing thereby signified is in it self so great, that this is but a
shadow of it. And therefore all those relations, and the affections of them,
and the effects of those affections, which you see and read to have been in
men, are all, and were ordained to be (as all things else in this world are)
but shadows of what is in Christ; who alone is the truth and substance of all
similitudes in nature, as well as of the Ceremonial types.

If therefore no advancement does or ought to alter such relations in men, then
not in Christ. He is not ashamed to call us brethren; as Heb. 2. 11. And yet
the Apostle had just before said of him, v. 9. We see Jesus crowned with glory
and honor. Yea and as when one member suffers, the rest are touched with a
sympathy, so is it with Christ. Paul persecuted the Saints, the members, and
why persecutest thou me? cries the Head in heaven: the foot was trodden on, but
the Head felt it, though crowned with glory and honor. We are flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone, Ephesians. 5. 30. and therefore as Esther said, so
says Christ, How can I endure to see the evil that befalls my people? If a
husband has a wife that is mean, and he become a King, it were his glory and
not his shame to advance her; yea, it were his shame to neglect her:
especially, if when the betrothment was first made, she was then rich and
glorious, and a Kings daughter, but since that, fallen into poverty and misery.
Now Christ's Spouse, though now she be fallen into sin and misery, yet when she
was first given to Christ by God the Father, (who from all eternity made the
match) she was looked upon as all glorious. For in election, at first, both
Christ and we were by God considered in that glory which he means to bring
him and us unto at last; that being first in Gods intention, which is last in
execution. For God at the beginning does look at the end of his works, and at
what he means to make them. And so, he then primitively intending to make us
thus glorious as we shall be, he brought and presented us to his Son in that
glass of his Decrees, under that face of glory wherewith at last he meant to
endow us. He showed us to him as apparelled with all those jewels of grace and
glory which we shall wear in heaven; he did this then, even as he brought Eve
unto Adam, whose marriage was in all the type of this: so that as this was the
first Idea that God took us up in, and that we appeared in before him, so also
wherein he presented us then to Christ, and (as it were) said, such a wife will
I give thee. And as such did the second Person marry us; and undertook to
bring us to that estate. And that God ordained us thus to fall into sin and
misery, was but to illustrate the story of Christ's love, and thereby to render
this our Lover and Husband the more glorious in his love to us, and to make
this primitive condition whereunto God meant again to bring us, the more
eminently illustrious. And therefore we being married unto him, when we were
thus glorious in Gods first intention, although in his decrees about the
execution of this, or the bringing us to this glory, we fall into meannesse and
misery before we attain to it, yet the marriage still holds; Christ took us
to run the same fortune with us, and that we should do the like with him. And
hence it was, that we being fallen into sin, and so our flesh become frail
and subject to infirmities, that he therefore took part of the same, as Heb. 2.
13. And answerably on the other side, he being now advanced to the glory
ordained for him, he can never rest till he has restored us to that beauty
wherein at first we were presented to him, and til he has purged and cleansed
us, that so he may present us to himself a glorious Church, (as you have it,
Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.) even such as in Gods first intention we were shown to him to
become; having that native and original beauty, and possessing that estate
wherein he looked upon us, when he first took liking to us, and married us.
This is argued there from this very relation of his being our husband, ver. 25.
26. And therefore though Christ be now in glory, yet let not that discourage
you, for he has the heart of a husband toward you, being betrothed unto you
for ever, in faithfulness, and in loving kindness, (as Hos. 2.) and the idea
of that beauty is so imprinted on his heart, which from everlasting was
ordained you, that he will never cease to sanctify and to cleanse you, till he
has restored you to that beauty which once he took such a liking of.

A second engagement. This love of his unto us is yet further increased, by
what he both did, and suffered for us here on earth, before he went to heaven.
Having loved his own, so far as to dye for them, he will certainly love them
unto the end, even to eternity. We shall find in all sorts of relations, both
spiritual and natural, that the having done much for any beloved of us, does
beget a further care and love toward them. And the like effect those eminent
sufferings of Christ for us, have certainly produced in him; we may see this in
parents, for besides that natural affection planted in mothers toward their
children, (as they are theirs) the very pains, hard labor, and travail they
were at in bringing them forth, increases their affections toward them, and
that in a greater degree them fathers bear. And therefore the eminency of
affection is attributed unto that of the mother toward her child, and put upon
this that it is the son of her womb, Isai. 49. 15. And then, the performing
of that office and work of nursing them themselves, (which yet is done with
much trouble and disquietment) does (in experience) yet more endeare those
their children unto them which they so nurse, to an apparent difference of
bowels and love, in comparison of that which they put forth to others of their
own children which they nursed not. And therefore in the same place of Esaias,
as the mothers affection to the son of her womb, so to her sucking child, is
mentioned, as being the highest instance of such love. And as thus in paternall
affection, so also in conjugall. In such mutual loves in the pursuing of
which, there have any difficulties or hardships been encountered; and the more
those lovers have suffered the one for the other, the more is the edge of their
desires whetted, and their love increased; and the party for whom they
suffered, is thereby rendered the more dear unto them.

And as it is thus in these natural relations, so also in spiritual; we may
see it in holy men, as in Moses, who was a mediator for the Jews, as Christ is
for us; Moses therein being but Christ's Type and shadow, and therefore I the
rather instance in him. He under God had been the deliverer of the people of
Israel out of Egypt, with the hazard of his own life, and had led them in the
wilderness, and given them that good Law that was their wisdom in the sight
of all the Nations, and by his prayers kept off Gods wrath from them. And who
ever (of all those Heroes we read of) did so much for any Nation, who yet were
continually murmuring at him, and had like once to have stoned him? and yet,
what he had done for them did so mightily engage his heart, and so immoveably
point and fix it unto their good, that although God in his wrath against them,
offered to make of him alone a greater and mightier Nation then they were, yet
Moses refused that offer (the greatest that ever any Son of Adam was tempted
with,) and still went on to intercede for them, and among other used this very
argument to God, even the consideration of what he had already done for them
(as with what great might and power, he had brought them out of Egypt, etc.)
thereby to move God to continue his goodness unto them, so Exodus 32. 11. and
elsewhere, And this overcame God, as you may read in the 14. ver. of the
forenamed Chap. Yea, so set was Moses his heart upon them, that he not only
refused that former offer which God made him, but he made an offer unto God of
himself, to sacrifice his portion in life for their good: Rather (says he)
blot me out of the book of life: So ver. 32.

And we may observe the like zealous love in holy Paul, toward all those
converts of his, whom in his Epistles he wrote unto; toward whom, that which
so much endeared his affections, was the pains, the cost, the travail, the
care and the sufferings that he had had in bringing them unto Christ. Thus
toward the Galatians, how solicitous was he? how afraid to lose his labor on
them? I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain: so he
expresses himself, Galat. 4. 11. and ver. 19. he utters himself yet more
deeply; My little children (says he) of whom I again travail in birth,
until Christ be formed in you. He professes himself content to be in travail
again for them, rather then lose that, about which he had been in travail for
them once before.

Now from both these examples (whereof the one was Christ's Type, and the other
the very copy and pattern of Christ's heart) we may raise up our hearts to the
persuasion of that love and affection which must needs be in the heart of
Christ, from that which he has done and suffered, for us.

First, For Moses, did Moses ever do that for that people, which Christ has
done and suffered for you? He acknowledged that he had not borne that people in
his womb, but Christ bare us all, and we were the travail of his soul, and
for us he endured the birth-throws of death (as Peter calls them, Acts 2. 24.)
And then for Paul, was Paul crucified for you? (says Paul likewise of
himself) but Christ was, and he speaks it the more to enhaunce the love of
Christ. Or if Paul had been crucified, would, or could it have profited us?
no; If therefore Paul was contented to have been in travail again for the
Galatians, when he feared their falling away; then how does Christ's heart work
much more toward sinners? he having put in so infinite a stock of sufferings
for us already, which he is loath to lose; and has so much love to us besides,
that if we could suppose, that otherwise we could not be saved, he could be
content to be in travail again, and to suffer for us afresh: But he needed to
do this but once (as the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks:) so perfect was his
Priesthood. Be assured then, that his love was not spent or worn out at his
death, but increased by it. His love it was that caused him to die, and to lay
down his life for his sheep; and greater love then this, has no man, (said
himself before he did it.) But now having dyed, this must needs cause him from
his soul to cleave the more unto them.

A cause, or a person that a man has suffered much for, according to the
proportion of his sufferings, is ones love and zeal thereunto; for these do
lay a strong engagement upon a man: because otherwise he loses the thanks and
the honor of all that is already done and past by him. Have you suffered so
many things in vain? says the Apostle to the Galathians, Chap. 3. 4. where he
makes a motive and an incitement of it, that seeing they had endured so much
for Christ, and the profession of him, they would not now lose all for want of
doing a little more. And does not the same disposition remain in Christ?
especially seeing the hard work is over and dispatched which he was to do on
earth; and that which now remains for him to do in heaven, is far more
sweet and full of glory, and as the reaping in joy, of what he had here sown
in tears. If his love was so great, as to hold out the enduring so much; then
now when that brunt is over, and his love is become a tried love, will it not
continue? If when tried in adversity, (and that is the surest and strongest
love) and in the greatest adversity that ever was; if it then held, will it not
still do so in his prosperity much more? Did his heart stick to us, and by us
in the greatest temptation that ever was; and will his glorious and prosperous
estate take it off, or abate his love unto us? Certainly no: [ Jesus the same
to day, yesterday, and for ever.] Heb. 13. 8. When he was in the midst of his
pains, one for whom he was then a suffering, said unto him, Lord remember me
when thou come into thy Kingdom; and could Christ mind him then? (as you
know he did, telling him, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise) then
surely when Christ came to Paradise, he would do it much more; and remember
him too, by the surest token that ever was, and which he can never forget,
namely, the pains which he was then enduring for him. He remembers both them
and us still, (as the Prophet speaks of God.) And if he would have us remember
his death till he comes, so to cause our hearts to love him; then certainly
himself does it in heaven much more: No question but he remembers us, as he
promised to do that good thief, now he is in his Kingdom. And so much for
this second Engagement.

A 3. Office, which still lies upon him, and requires of him all mercifulness
and graciousnesse toward sinners that do come unto him. And therefore whilst
he continues in that place, and invested with that office, (as he for ever
does) his heart must needs continue full of tenderness and bowels. Now that
office is the office of his Priesthood; which this Text mentions, as the
foundation of our encouragement to come boldly to the Throne of grace, for
grace and mercy, -- seeing we have a great High [Priest] entered into the
Heavens.

Two things I am to show, to make up this Demonstration:

First, that this office of High Priesthood is an office erected wholly for the
showing of grace and mercy.

And secondly, that this office does therefore lay upon Christ a duty to be in
all his dispensations full of grace and mercy; and therefore his heart
remains most certainly suited and framed thereunto.

For the first. The office of High Priesthood is altogether an office of grace:
And I may call it the Pardon-office, set up and erected by God in heaven; and
Christ, he is appointed the Lord and Master of it. And as his Kingly office is
an office of power and dominion, and his Prophetical office an office of
knowledge and wisdom; so his Priestly office is an office of grace and mercy.
The Highpriests office did properly deal in nothing else. If there had not
been a Mercie-seat in the Holy of Holies, the High Priest had not at all been
appointed to have gone into it. It was Mercy, and Reconciliation, and
Atonement for sinners, that he was to treat about, and so to officiate for at
the Mercie-seat; He had had otherwise no work, nor any thing to do when he
should come into the most holy place. Now this was but a typical allusion unto
this office of Christ's in heaven. And therefore the Apostle (in the Text) when
he speaks of this our Highpriests being entered into heaven, he makes mention
of a Throne of grace, and this in answer to that in the Type both of the
High Priest of old, and of the Mercie-seat in the Holy of Holies. And further
to confirm this, the Apostle goes on to open that very Type, and to apply it
unto Christ, unto this very purpose which we have now in hand: And this in the
very next words to my Text, Chap. 5. 1, 2, 3. verses; in which he gives a full
description of an High Priest, and all the properties and requisites that were
to be in him, together with the eminent and principal end that that office was
ordained for. Now the great and essential qualifications there specified; that
were to be in a High Priest, are Mercy and Grace, and the ends for which he is
there said to be ordained, are works of Mercy and Grace. And besides what the
words in their single standing do hold forth to this purpose; observe that
they come in to back and confirm that exhortation in the Text, wherein he had
set forth Christ as an High Priest touched with the feeling of infirmities; and
that therefore we should come with boldness for grace and mercy: for every
High Priest (says he) taken from among men is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God: that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sin. One
who can have compassion, etc. So that these words are a confirmation of what
he had before said, and do set out Christ the substance, in his grace and
mercifullnesse, under Aaron and his sons the shadows: and all this for the
comfort of believers.

Now 1. for the ends for which those Highpriests were appointed, they speak
all nothing but grace and mercy unto sinners; it is said, he was one ordained
[for men,] to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins. There is both the finis
cujus, the end for whom, and the finis cui, the end for which he was ordained.

1. For whom, He was ordained for men, that is, for men's cause, and for their
good: Had it not been for the salvation of men, God had never made Christ a
Priest. So that he is wholly to employ all his interest and power for them, for
whose cause he was ordained a Priest, and that in all things that are between
God and them. He is to transact (...), all things that are to be done by us
toward God, or for us with God; he is to take up all our quarrels with God,
and to mediate a reconciliation between us and him; He is to procure us all
favor from God, and to do all that which God would have done for our
salvation. And that he might do this willingly, kindly, and naturally for us,
as every High Priest was taken from among men; so was Christ, that he might be
a Priest of our own kind, and so be more kind unto us, then the nature of an
Angel could have been. And how much this conduces to his being a merciful
High Priest, I shall show anon.

2. The end for which every High Priest was ordained, shows this. He was to
offer gifts and sacrifices for sins: Sacrifices for sins, to pacify Gods
wrath against sin, and gifts to procure his favor. You know the Apostle in
the foregoing words had mentioned Grace and Mercy, and encouraged us to come
with boldness unto this High Priest for both; and answerably, to encourage us
the more, he says, the High Priest by his office was to offer for both; Gifts
for to procure all grace, and sacrifices to procure all mercy for us, in
respect of our sins. Thus you see the ends which he is ordained for, are all
matter of grace and mercy, and so of encouragement unto men for the obtaining
of both, ver. 1.

3. The qualification that was required in a High Priest, was, that he should
be one that could have compassion, etc. and this is set forth, ver. 2. He that
was High Priest, was not chosen into that office for his deep wisdom, great
power, or exact holiness; but for the mercy and compassion that was in him.
That is it which is here made the special (and therefore the only mentioned)
property in an High Priest, as such; and the specificall and essential
qualification that was inwardly and internally to constitute him, and fit him
for that office: as Gods appointment did, outwardly and externally, as ver. 4.
has it. And the word [(...),] [that can, or is able] imports an inward
faculty, a spirit, a disposition, a heart that knows how to be compassionate.
And it is the same word that the Apostle had before used, to express Christ's
heart by, even in the words of the Text, [(...)] that is, [Who can be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities.] And he had also used it of him before
that, in the point of mercy, Chap. 2. 18. [(...), etc.] [he is able] to
succor, etc. which is not meant of any external power, (which we usually call
Ability) but of an internal touch in his will; He has an heart able to
forgive, and to afford help.

Now therefore if this be so essential a property to an High Priest as such;
then it is in Christ most eminently. And as Christ had not been fit to have
been Gods King, if he had not had all power and strength in him, which is
essential to constitute him a King; so nor to have been Gods High Priest, if
he had not had such an heart for mercifulness; yea, and no longer to have
been a Priest, then he should continue to have such a heart. Even as that
which internally qualifies a Minister for the ministry is his gifts, which if
he loses, he is no longer to be in that office: Or, as reason makes a man a
man, which if he loses he becomes a beast: Thus no longer should Christ
continue to be a Priest, then he has an heart that can have compassion, (as
this second verse has it.) And the word which we translate [to have
compassion] is exceeding emphaticall, and the force of it observable; it is in
the Original [(...)] and signifies [to have compassion according to every ones
measure and proportion.] He had said of Christ in the words of my text, that he
was touched with the feeling of our infirmities, or that, he had a suffering
with us in all our evils: and this word also here used imports a suffering:
But then, some greatly distressed souls might question thus; Though he pities
me, and is affected, yet my misery and sins being great, will he take them in
to the full, lay them to heart, to pity me according to the greatness of them?
To meet with this thought therefore, and to prevent even this objection about
Christ's pity, the Apostle sets him out by what was the duty of the High Priest
who was his shadow; that he is one that can have compassion according to the
measure of every ones distress; and one that considers every circumstance in
it, and will accordingly afford his pity and help, and if it be great, he has
a great fellow-feeling of it, for he is a great High Priest: Thy misery can
never exceed his mercy. The word here used comes from [(...)] a measure, and
[(...)] to suffer. And that it is the Apostles scope to hold this forth in this
word, is evident by what follows, for he on purpose makes mention of those
several degrees, proportions, and ranks of sinners under the old Law, who were
capable of mercy and compassion, who can have compassion (says he) on the
[ignorant,] and on them that are [out of the way.] In the old Law you may read
of several degrees and kinds of sins, for which God appointed or measured
out differing and proportionable sacrifices. So for sins of ignorance there
was one kind of sacrifice, Levit. 4. ver. 2. and 5. and another for sins
against knowledge, or such as were wittingly committed, Chapter 6. ver. 2, 3.
compared with ver. 6. Now when any sinner came to the High Priest to make
atonement for him, the Priest was wisely to consider the kind and the
proportion of his sin; as whether it were a sin of mere ignorance, or whether
it were against knowledge, and accordingly he was to proportion a sacrifice,
and to mediate for him: And so he did (...), pity him according to measure, or
according to reason or discretion, (as in the margent it is varied.) And
therefore the Apostle here mentions both the ignorant, (that is, those that
sin out of mere ignorance) and them that are gone out of the way, namely, by
wilful and witting iniquity. And so by this property that was to be in the
High Priest, does he here set forth Christ. As the measure of any man's need and
distress is from sin and misery, accordingly is he affected toward him. And
as we have sins of several sizes; accordingly has he mercies, and puts
forth a mediation proportionable; whether they be ignorances, or sins of daily
incursion, or else sins more gross and presumptuous. And therefore let
neither of them discourage any from coming unto Christ for grace and mercy.

So that (for the closure of this) here is both the qualification disposing him
for this office, a merciful compassionatenesse; and here are the ends of this
office, even to deal mercifully with all sorts of sinners according to the
proportion and measure of their sins and miseries. From each of which do
arise these Corollaries, which make up the demonstration in hand, as the
conclusion: 1. That he is no longer fit for this place, then he continues to be
of a gracious disposion, and one that can have compassion. 2. That he can no
longer be faithful in the discharge of this office, (according to the ends for
which it was appointed) then he shows all grace and mercy unto them that come
unto his throne of grace for it.

And that is the second thing which I at first propounded; that this office did
lay a duty upon him to have compassion: And it necessarily follows from the
former. And answerably to confirm this, we have both these two brought to our
hands in one place together, (and which is a parallel place to this last
interpreted) it is Heb. 2. 17. [That he might be a merciful and a faithful
High Priest, etc.] He is at once here said to be both merciful and faithful:
And both are attributed to him, in respect of this Highpriests office,
[faithfull [High-Priest:] and that, as it is to be executed in heaven, after
the days of his flesh ended. For the Apostle giving the reason of it, and
showing what it is that fits him to be such an High Priest, adds, ver. 18. [In
that himself [hath] suffered:] so that it relates to the time after his
sufferings ended. Now in that he is said to be [mercifull,] this relates to
that internal disposition of his heart, (before spoken of) qualifying him for
this office; and in that he is said to be [faithfull,] that respects his
execution of it; he is faithful in the discharge of the duty which that place
lays on him.

So then, this goes further then the former, for it shows, that to exercise
mercy, is the duty of his place, and that, if he will be faithful, he must be
merciful. For faithfulness in any office, imports an exact performance of
something appointed by him, who designs one to that office, and that as a
duty: and that this is a true description of faithfulness, and also that this
faithfulness so described is in Christ, we have at once employed, in that which
immediately follows in the beginning of the 3. Chap. v. 3. Who was (says the
Apostle, going on to speak of Christ) faithful to him that appointed him, as
Moses also was faithful in all his house: we have the same thing as expressly
spoken in that forequoted place, Heb. 5. (in the next words to those we even
now opened,) ver. 3. And by reason hereof [he ought] to offer for sins: -- he
speaks it of Christ's Type, the High Priest, (as the former also he had done)
But thereby to show that it is Christ's duty also to mediate for all that come
to him, He ought to do it. Now then to enforce this consideration, for the
help of our faith herein; If this office does by Gods appointment thus bind him
to it, and if it be the duty of his place, then certainly he will perform it
most exactly, for else he does not do his duty. And our comfort may be, that
his faithfulness lies in being merciful; therefore (you see) they are both
here joined together. Every one is to do the proper duty of his place, and
exactly to see to that And therefore the Apostle Romans 12. exhorting to the
discharge of the duties of each office in the Church, ver. 7. he says, Let him
that has a Ministry committed to him, wait on his ministry; and (among
others) if his place of ministration be to show mercy, (as ver. 8.) (which was
an office in the Church, upon which lied the care of the poor and sick) he is
to do it with cheerfulness. And so says Christ of himself, Esaias 61. 1, 2.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, to bind up the broken hearted, to open the
prison doors to them that are bound, (to visit and relieve them) and to preach
good tidings to the meek. Such kind of souls are they that he has the charge
of. He is the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, 1 Pet. 2. ult. and the
sick, and the broken, they are his sheep, his charge, his Diocese, as Ezekiel
has it, Chap. 34. 16. And to tend such as these, he looks for ever upon it as
his duty, as his own expression upon the like occasion imports, in John 10.
16. Other sheep I have, (says Christ) them I [must] bring, etc. Observe how he
puts a [(...)] an [ I must] upon it; looking at it as his duty, strictly laid
upon him by his place of being a Shepherd. And the proper duty of his place
being to show mercy, he does it with cheerfulness, (as the Apostle speaks:)
For Mercy makes one do what they do, with cheerfulness. And Christ, as he
is the Bishop, so the (...), the Deacon also, (for he bears all offices to his
Church) as of the circumcision, so of the uncircumcision also: so he is called,
Romans 15. 8. And these offices of High Priest, Shepherd, Bishop, etc. he has
still in heaven; for he continues a Priest for ever, Heb. 7. 24.

Now therefore to conclude this Head: Never fear that Christ's great
advancement in heaven, should any whit alter his disposition; for this his very
advancement engages him the more. For although he be entered into the heavens;
yet consider withal that it is here added, [to be an High-Priest] there; and
so long, fear not: for his place it self will call for mercy from him unto
them that treat with him about it. And although in the heavens he be advanced
far above all principalities and powers, yet still his High Priesthood goes
with him, and accompanies him: For such an High Priest became us, as was higher
then the heavens, Heb. 7. 26. And further, though he sits at Gods right hand,
and on his Fathers Throne, yet that Throne it is a Throne of grace, (as the
Text has it) upon which he sits. And as the Mercie-seat in the Type was the
farthest and highest thing in the Holy of Holies; so the Throne of grace (which
is an infinite encouragement unto us) is the highest seat in heaven. So that if
Christ will have, and keep the greatest place in heaven, the highest preferment
that heaven it self can bestow upon him, it engages him unto grace and mercy.
The highest honor there has this Attribute of Grace annexed to it in its very
title, [ A Throne of Grace:] And as Solomon says, A Kings Throne is
established by righteousness, it continues firm by it; so is Christ's Throne
by Grace. Grace was both the first founder of his Throne, or his raiser to it,
and also it is the establisher of it.

First, it is the founder of it; For the reason why God did set him up in that
place, was, because he had more grace and mercy in his heart, then all the
creatures had, or could be capable of. All Favorites are usually raised for
something that is eminent in them, either beauty, pleasantness of wit,
State-policie, or the like. Now if you ask what moved God to advance Christ to
this high Throne, it was his grace: So Psalm. 45. 3. [ Grace] is poured into thy
lips, (and so dwells much more in his heart) [ Therefore] God has blessed thee:
(so it follows:) namely, with all those glories in heaven (which are Gods
blessing to his Son.)

And then secondly, Grace is the upholder of his Throne: so ver. 4. of the
aforesaid Psalm. 45. In thy majesty -- prosper thou; as well because of
meekness, as of righteousness, and also because of Truth; that is, the word
of truth, the Gospel of our salvation, (as Paul exegetically expounds it,
Ephesians. 1. 13.) These are the pillars and supporters of his throne and majesty:
And there are two of them, you see, that are of grace, (meekness, and the
Gospel of our salvation) unto one of justice, or righteousness; and yet that
one is for us too. And these establish Christ's Throne: So it follows, verse 6.
Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever: And you know who applies this unto
Christ, Heb. 1. 8. Fear not then, when as meekness supports his majesty, and
grace his throne; and when as he holds his place by showing these. And thus
much from that office that is laid upon Christ as he is a Priest.

A fourth engagement, own Interest; both in that our salvation is the purchase
of his blood; and also that his own joy, comfort, happiness, and glory are
increased and enlarged by his showing grace and mercy, in pardoning, relieving,
and comforting his members here on earth, under all their infirmities. So that,
besides the obligation of an office undertaken by him for us, there is the
addition of a mighty interest of his own, coincident therewith, to fix his
heart unto faithfulness for us, in all that does concern us. We see that
Advocates and Atturneys who plead for others, although that they have no share
in the estate for which they plead, no title to, or interest therein; yet when
they have undertaken a Clients cause, (if honest) how diligent will they be to
promote and carry it for that their Client, simply because it is their office,
and the duty of their place; and yet they have but a very small Fee given them,
in comparison of that estate which often times they follow suit about: How much
more would their diligence be whetted, if the Lands and Estates they sue for,
were their own, or a purchase of theirs for their wives jointure, or childrens
portions? Now such is the pardoning of our sins, the salvation of our souls,
and the comforting of our hearts unto Christ; these are the purchase of Christ's
blood, and whilst he is exercised in promoving these, he does good to his own
child and Spouse, etc. which is in effect a doing good unto himself. Yea, to
do these, brings in to himself more comfort and glory, then it procures to
them. And therefore the Apostle in the beginning of the following Chapter,
(namely, Heb. 3.) says, that Christ is engaged to faithfulness in the
execution of his office, not as a mere servant only, who is betrusted by his
Master, but as an owner, who has an interest of possession in the things
committed to his care, and a revenue from these: So ver. 5. Moses verily (says
he) was faithful as a servant in Gods house; but Christ as a Son over his own
house, (that is, as an Heir of all) Whose house (or family) are We, (says the
Apostle,) ver. 6. If a Physician for his fee will be faithful, although he be
a stranger; much more will he be so if he be Father to the Patient, (so as his
own life and comfort are bound up in that of the child's) or when much of his
estate and commings in are from the life of the party unto whom he ministers
physic: In such a case they shall be sure to want for no care and cost, and to
lack no Cordials that will comfort them, no means that will cure them, and keep
them healthful, and no fit diet that may nourish and strengthen them. As the
care of that Prince of the Eunuchs, in the first of Daniel, was, to have those
children committed to his charge, to eat and drink of the best, because that on
their looks and good liking his place depended: Now so God has ordered it,
even for an everlasting obligation of Christ's heart unto us, that his giving
grace, mercy, and comfort to us, is one great part of his glory, and of the
revenue of his happiness in heaven, and of his inheritance there.

First, to explain how this may be, consider, That the Humane nature of Christ
in heaven has a double capacity of glory, happiness, and delight; One in that
near fellowship and communion with his Father, and the other Persons, through
his personal union with the Godhead. Which joy of his in this fellowship,
Christ himself speaks of, Psalm. 16. ver. ult. as to be enjoyed by him, In thy
presence is [fulnesse of joy,] and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. And this is a constant and settled fullness of pleasure; such as
admits not any addition or diminution, but is always one and the same, and
absolute and entire in it self; and of it self alone sufficient for the Son
of God, and Heir of all things to live upon, though he should have had no
other commings in of joy and delight from any creature. And this is his
natural inheritance.

But God has bestowed upon him another capacity of glory, and a revenue of
pleasure to come in another way; and (answerably) another fullness, namely,
from his Church and Spouse, which is his Body. Thus Ephesians. 1. when the Apostle
had spoke the highest things of Christ's personal advancement in heaven that
could be uttered, as of his sitting down at Gods right hand far above all
principalities and powers, etc. ver. 20, 21. yet ver. 22. he adds this unto
all, And gave him to be an Head to the Church, which is his Body, the
[fulnesse] of him who fills all in all. So that although he of himself
personally be so full, (the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him) that he
overflowes to the filling all things; yet he is pleased to account (and it is
so in the reality) his Church and the salvation of it to be another fullness
unto him, super-added unto the former. As Son of God he is complete, and that
of himself; but as an Head, he yet has another additionall fullness of joy
from the good and happiness of his members. And as all pleasure is the
companion, and the result of action; so this arises unto him, from his
exercising acts of grace, and from his continual doing good unto, and for
those his members; or (as the Apostle expresses it) from his filling them with
all mercy, grace, comfort, and felicity; Himself becoming yet more full, by
filling them; and this is his inheritance also, as that other was. So as a
double inheritance Christ has to live upon; One personal, and due unto him
(as he is the Son of God) the first moment of his Incarnation, ere he had
wrought any one piece of work toward our salvation: Another acquired,
purchased, and merited by his having performed that great service and
obedience: And certainly, besides the glory of his person, there is the glory
of his office, of Mediatorship, and of Headship to his Church: And though he is
never so full of himself, yet he despises not this part of his revenue that
comes in from below. Thus much for explication.

Now secondly, for the confirmation and making up the demonstration in hand.
This superadded glory and happiness of Christ is enlarged and increased, still
as his members come to have the purchase of his death more and more laid forth
upon them: So as when their sins are pardoned, their hearts more sanctified,
and their spirits comforted, then comes He to see the fruit of his labor, and
is comforted thereby, for he is the more glorified by it: yea he is much more
pleased and rejoiced in this, then themselves can be. And this must needs keep
up in his heart his care and love unto his children here below, to water and
refresh them every moment, (as Isaiah speaks, Chap. 37. 3.) For in thus putting
forth acts of grace and favor, and in doing good unto them, he does but good
unto himself; which is the surest engagement in the world. And therefore the
Apostle exhorts men to love their wives, upon this ground, that in so doing,
they love themselves: (Ephesians. 5. 28. So ought men to love their wives, as their
own bodies: He that loves his wife, loves himself:) so strict and near is
that relation. Now the same does hold true of Christ in his loving his Church.
And therefore in the same place, the love of Christ unto his Church is held
forth as the pattern and exemplar of ours, so ver. 25. [ Even as Christ also
loved the Church.] And so it may well be argued thence by comparing the one
speech with the other, that Christ in loving his Church, does but love
himself; and then the more love and grace he shows unto the Members of that
his Body, the more he shows love unto himself. And accordingly it is further
added there, ver. 27. that he daily washes and cleanses his Church, (that is,
both from the guilt and power of sin,) that he might present it to [himselfe]
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, etc. Observe, it is to [
himself.] So that all that he does for his members is for himself, as truly,
yea more fully then for them; and his share of glory out of theirs is greater
then theirs, by how much the glory of the cause is greater then that of the
effect. And thus indeed the Scripture speaks of it: as, whilst it calls the
Saints the glory of Christ: So 2 Cor. 8. 23. And Christ, in John 17. 13. and
ver. 22, 23. says, that he is glorified in them. And Psalm. 45. where Christ is
set forth as Solomon in all his royalty and majesty; yet ver. 11. he is said
greatly to desire or delight in the beauty of his Queen: that is, the graces
of the Saints; and that not with an ordinary delight, but he greatly desires;
his desire is increased as her beauty is: For that is there brought in as a
motive unto her to be more holy and conformed unto him, to incline her care,
and forsake her Fathers house, v. 10. [ So] shall the King greatly desire thy
beauty. Christ has a beauty that pleases him, as well as we have, though of
another kind; and therefore cease not till he has got out every spot and
wrinkle out of his Spouses face, (as we heard the Apostle speak even now) so
to present her glorious unto himself; that is, delightful and pleasing in his
eye. And suitably unto this (to confirm us yet more in it,) Christ in that
Sermon which was his solemn farewell before his going to heaven, assures his
Disciples that his heart would be so far from being weaned from them, that
his joy would still be in them, to see them prosper and bring forth fruit; so
JOHN 15. 9, 10, 11. where his scope is to assure them of the continuance of his
love unto them when he should be gone; so ver. 9, 10. As my Father has loved
me, so have I loved you. Continue in my love, etc. As if he had said, Fear not
you my love, nor the continuance of it in my absence; but look you to do your
duty, etc. And to give them assurance of this, he further tells them, that even
when he is in heaven, in the greatest fullness of pleasure at Gods right hand,
yet even then his joy will be in them, and in their well doing; so ver. 11.
These things have I spoken unto you that my joy may remain in you, and that
your joy may be full. He speaks just like a Father that is taking his leave of
his children, and comforting them at his departure, and giving them good
counsel, to take good courses when he is gone from them, to keep his
Commandments, and to love one another, so ver. 10, and 12. and backs it with
this motive, so shall my joy remain in you, (it is as Fathers use to speak)
and it will be for your good too, your joy will be also full. To open which
words a little, the word [ remaine] used concerning their abiding in his love,
and his joy abiding in them, is used in reference to the continuing of both
these toward them in heaven. And when Christ says, That my joy may remain in
you, it is as if he had said, that I may even in heaven have cause to rejoice
in you, when I shall hear and know of you, that you agree and are loving each
to other, and keep my Commandments. The joy which he there calls His joy, [
My] joy, is not to be understood Objective, of Their joy in Him, as the object
of it: but Subjectie, of the joy that should be in himself, and which he
should have in them. So Augustine long since interpreted it. Quodnam (says
he) est illud gaudium Christi [in nobis,] nisi quod ille dignatur gaudere [de
nobis?] what is Christ's joy in us, but that which he vouchsafes to have of
and for us? And it is evident by this, that otherwise if it were their joy
which he meant in that first sentence, then that other that follows, [ And
your joy shall be ful] were a Tautologie. He speaks therefore of his joy and
theirs, as of two distinct things: and both together were the greatest motives
that could be given to encourage and quicken his Disciples in obedience. Now
take an estimate of Christ's heart herein, from those two holy Apostles Paul and
John, who were smaller resemblances of this in Christ. What (next to immediate
communion with Christ himself) was the greatest joy they had to live upon in
this world, but only the fruit of their Ministry appearing in the graces both
of the lives and hearts of such as they had begotten unto Christ? See how Paul
utters himself, 1 These. 2. 19. What is our hope, (says he) or joy, or crown
of rejoicing? Ye are our glory and our joy, ver. 20. And in the 3. Epist. of
JOHN, ver. 3. John says the like, that he greatly rejoiced of that good
testimony he had heard of Gaius: For (says he) I have no greater joy then to
hear that my children walk in the truth, ver. 4. Now what were Paul and John
but instruments by whom they believed and were begotten? and not on whom:
Neither of these were crucified for them; nor were these children of theirs the
travail of their souls: How much more then unto Christ, (whose interest in us
and our welfare is so infinitely much greater) must his members be his joy and
his crown? And to see them to come in to him for grace and mercy, and to walk
in truth, rejoices him much more; for he thereby sees of the travail of his
soul, and so is satisfied. Certainly what Solomon says of Parents, Prove. 10.
1. that a wise son makes a glad father, etc. is much more true of Christ.
Holiness, and fruitfulness, and comfortablenesse in our spirits while we are
here below, do make glad the heart of Christ, our everlasting Father. Himself
has said it, I beseech you believe him, and carry your selves accordingly. And
if part of his joy arise from hence, that we thrive and do well; then doubt
not of the continuance of his affections: for love unto himself will continue
them toward us, and readiness to embrace and receive them when they come for
grace and mercy.

There is a fifth Engagement, merciful High Priest. So that as his office lays
it as a duty upon him, so his becoming a Man, qualifies him for that office,
and the performance of it, (and so may afford a farther demonstration of the
point in hand.) This we find both to have been a requisite in our High Priest,
to qualify him the better for mercy and bowels; and also one of those great
ends which God had in that assumption of our nature.

First, a requisite, on purpose to make him the more merciful. So Heb. 5. 1.
(the place even now insisted on, when yet this primary qualification I then
passed over, and reserved unto this mention) it is said, Every High Priest
[taken from among men] is ordained for men, (and that, to this end) that so he
might be one that can have compassion: namely, with a pity that is natural and
kindly; such as a man bears to one of his own kind: For otherwise the Angels
would have made higher and greater Highpriests then one of our nature; but
then they would not have pityed men, as men do their brethren, of the same
kind and nature with them.

And secondly, this was also Gods end and intention in ordaining Christ's
assumption of our nature, which that other place before cited, (namely, Heb. 2.
16, 17.) holds forth; Verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but the
seed of Abraham: That is, an humane nature, and that made too of the same
stuff that ours is of, and it behooved him to be made like us in all things,
[that] he might be a merciful High Priest, etc. [(...)]. To the end he might
become, or be made merciful.

But was not the Son of God as merciful (may some say) without the taking of
our nature, as afterward when he had assumed it? Or is his mercy thereby made
larger then of it self it should have been, had he not took the humane
nature on him?

I answer, Yes, he is as merciful, but yet

1. Hereby is held forth an evident demonstration (and the greatest one that
could have been given unto men) of the everlasting continuance of Gods mercies
unto men: by this that God is for everlasting become a man; and so we thereby
assured, that he will be merciful unto men, who are of his own nature, and
that for ever: For as his union with our nature is for everlasting; so thereby
is sealed up to us the continuation of these his mercies, to be for
everlasting: So that he can, and will no more cease to be merciful to men,
then himself can now cease to be a man, which can never be. And this was the
end of that assumption.

But secondly, that was not all: His taking our nature not only adds unto our
faith, but some way or other even to his being merciful. Therefore it is said,
[ That he might be made merciful, etc.] That is, merciful in such a way, as
otherwise God of himself alone had never been; namely, even [ as a man.] So
that this union of both natures, God and Man, was projected by God to make up
the rarest compound of grace and mercy in the result of it, that ever could
have been; and thereby fully fitted and accommodated to the healing and saving
of our souls. The greatness of that mercy that was in God, that contributes
the stock and treasury of those mercies to be bestowed on us: and unto the
greatness of these mercies nothing is, or could be added, by the humane nature
assumed; but rather, Christ's Manhood had all his largeness of mercy from the
Deity: So that had he not had the mercies of God to enlarge his heart toward
us, he could never have held out to have for ever been merciful unto us. But
then, this humane nature assumed, that adds a new way of being merciful: It
assimilates all these mercies, and makes them the mercies of a Man: it makes
them humane mercies, and so gives a naturalnesse and kindlinesse unto them to
our capacities. So that God does now in as kindly and as natural a way pity
us, who are flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone, as a man pities a man:
Thereby to encourage us to come to him, and to be familiar with God, and treat
with him for grace and mercy, as a man would do with a man; as knowing, that
in that man Christ Jesus (whom we believe upon) God dwells, and his mercies
work in and through his heart in an humane way.

I will no longer insist upon this notion now, because I shall have occasion to
touch upon it again, and add unto it under that next third general Head, of
showing the way how Christ's heart is affected toward sinners: Only take we
notice, what comfort this may afford unto our faith, that Christ must cease to
be a man, if he continue not to be merciful; seeing the very plot of his
becoming a man, was, that he might be merciful unto us, and that in a way
so familiar to our apprehensions, as our own hearts give the experience of the
like, which otherwise (as God) he was not capable of. And add but this bold
word to it (though a true one) that he may now as soon cease to be God, as to
be a man. The humane nature, (after he had once assumed it) being raised up to
all the natural rights of the Son of God; whereof one (and that now made
natural unto him) is, to continue for ever united: And he may as soon cease
to be either, as to be ready to show mercy. So that not only the scope of
Christ's office, but also the intention of his assuming our nature, does lay a
farther engagement upon him, and that more strong then any, or then all the
former.

THE HEART OF Christ in Heaven, Toward Sinners on Earth.
PART III.
HEB. 4. 15. For we have not an High Priest who cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted like as we are, yet
without sin.
. I.
Some generals to clear how this is to be understood, That CHRIST'S Heart is
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, together with the way how our
infirmities come to be feelingly let into his Heart.
HAving thus given such full and ample Demonstrations of the tenderness and
samenesse of Christ's Heart unto us now he is in Heaven, with that which it was
whilst he was here on earth; and those, both extrinsecall (in the first part)
and Intrinsecall (in the second.) I now come to that last Head which I
propounded in the opening of these words, namely, the way and manner of Christ's
being affected with pity unto us; both how it is to be understood by us, and
also how such affections come to be let into his heart, and therein to work
these bowels of compassion unto us. This in the beginning of the Second Part I
propounded to be handled, as being necessary both for the opening and clearing
the words of the Text, (which mainly hold forth this) as also for the clearing
of the thing it self, the point in hand. For (as I there showed) these words
come in by way of pre-occupation or prevention of an objection, a sif his state
now in heaven were not capable of such affections as should tenderly move him
to pity and commiseration, he being now glorified both in soul and body. Which
thought, because it was apt to arise in all men's minds, the Apostle therefore
fore-stalls it, both by affirming the contrary, [ We have not an High Priest
that cannot be touched, etc.] that is, he both can be, (or, is capable of it)
and likewise is touched, notwithstanding all his glory; as also by his annexing
the reason of it, or showing the way how it comes to pass, in that in all
points he was tempted like as we are.

Now in handling and opening these, (which is a matter full of difficulty) I
shall with all wariness proceed to the discovery of what manner of affection
in Christ this is, and that by these steps and degrees.

1. This affection of compassion, or his being touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, is not wholly to be understood in a metaphorical or a
similitudinary sense, as those speeches used of God in the Old Testament are to
be understood, when bowels of compassion are attributed unto him, and his
bowels are said to be rolled together; or as when as it is said of God, that he
repented, and was afflicted in all his peoples afflictions. All which
expressions were spoken of God, (as we all know) but merely (...), after the
manner of men: so to convey and represent to our apprehensions, by what
affections use to be in parents or friends in such and such cases, (what
provoke them unto such and such actions,) which like effects proceed from God
toward us when he sees us in distress. And so they are spoken rather per
modum Effectus, then Affectus, rather by way of like Effect, which God
produces, then by way of such Affection in Gods heart, which is not capable of
any such passions as these are. Now toward the right understanding of this,
the first thing which I affirm is, that (barely) in such a sense as this, that
which is here spoken of Christ, is not to be understood; and my reason for it
is grounded upon these two things put together: First, that this affection of
his toward us here spoken of, is manifestly meant of his humane nature, and
not of his God head only, for it is spoken of that nature wherein he once was
tempted as we now are. So expressly in the next words, which can be meant of no
other then his humane nature.

And Secondly, That those kind of expressions which were used of God before the
Assumption of our nature, only in a way of metaphor and similitude ( after the
manner of men) should in no further, or more real and proper sense be spoken
of Christ and his humane nature now assumed, and when he is a man as truly and
properly as we are, I cannot imagine; when I consider and remember that which I
last insisted on, that one end of Christ's taking an humane nature, was, that
he might be a [mercifull] High Priest for ever; in such a way, as he being God
alone, could not have been. I confess I have often wondered at that expression
there used, Heb. 2. He took the seed of Abraham, that he might he made a
merciful High Priest, which at the first reading, sounded, as if God had been
made more merciful by taking our nature. But this solved the wonder, that this
assumption added a new way of Gods being merciful: By means of which it may
now be said, (for the comfort and relief of our faith) that God is truly and
really merciful, as a man. And the consideration of this, contributes this to
the clearing of the thing in hand, that whereas God of himself was so blessed
and perfect, that his blessedness could not have been touched with the least
feeling of our infirmities; neither was he in himself capable of any such
affection of pity, or compassion; He is not as a man that he should pity or
repent, etc. He can indeed do that for us in our distress, which a man that
pitties us uses to do: but the affections and bowels themselves he is not
capable of. Hence therefore amongst other ends of assuming man's nature, this
fell in before God as one, that God might thereby become loving and merciful
unto men, as one man is to another. And so, that what before was but improperly
spoken, and by way of Metaphor and similitude in the Old Testament, so to
convey it to our apprehensions, might now be truly attributed unto him in the
reality; that God might be for ever said to be compassionate as a man, and to
be touched with a feeling of our infirmities as a man. And thus by this happy
union of both Natures, the language of the Old Testament uttered only in a
figure, becomes verified and fulfilled in the truth of it, as in all other
things the shadows of it were in Christ fulfilled. And this is the first step
toward the understanding of what is here said of Christ, taken from this
comparison with the like attributed unto God himself.

A second and further step to let in our understanding to the apprehension of
this, is by the like further comparison to be made with the Angels, and those
affections of love and pity that are certainly found in them. In comparison of
which, these affections in Christ's humane nature, (though glorified) must needs
be far more like to ours, even more tender, and more humane: For in that Heb.
2. it is expressly said, He therefore took not the nature of the Angels, that he
might be a merciful High Priest. Part of the intendment of those words is to
show and give the reason, not only why he took our nature under frail flesh,
(though that the Apostle mentions, ver. 14.) but why an humane nature for the
substance of it, and not the nature of Angels: Because in his affections of
mercy he would for ever come nearer to us, and have such affections, and of the
same kind with ours. Whereas otherwise in other respects, an Angel would have
been an higher and more glorious High Priest then a man.

Now the Angels being fellow servants with us, (as the Angel called himself,
Rev. 22. 9.) they have affections toward us more assimilated unto ours then
God has; and so are more capable of such impressions from our miseries, then
God is. Although they be Spirits, yet they partake of something analogicall, or
resembling and answering to those affections of pity, grief, etc. which are in
us. And indeed, so far as these affections are seated in our souls, and not
drencht in the passions of the body, (unto which our souls are united) they
are the very same kind of affections in us, that are in them. Hence the same
lusts that are in men, are said to be in devils, John 8. 44. and therefore the
devils also are said to fear and tremble, etc. And so (oppositely) the same
affections that are in men, so far as they are spiritual, and the spirit or
soul is the seat of them, they must needs be found in the good Angels. But
Christ having an humane nature, the same for substance that ours is, consisting
both of soul and body, although through glory made spiritual, yet not become
a Spirit, (A Spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have, says Christ of
himself, after his Resurrection, Luke 24. 39.) therefore he must need, have
affections toward us yet more, like to these of ours then those are which the
Angels have. So then by these two steps we have gained these two things, That
even in Christ's humane nature, (though glorified) affections of pity and
compassion are true and real, and not metaphorically attributed to him as they
are unto God; and also more near and like unto ours here then those in the
Angels are; even affections proper to man's nature, and truly humane. And these
he should have had, although this humane nature had from the very first
assumption of it been as glorious as it is now in heaven.

But now thirdly, add this (further) that God so ordered it, that before
Christ should cloathe this his humane nature with that glory he has in heaven,
and put this glory upon it, he should first take it as clothed with all our
infirmities, even the very same that do cleave unto us, and should live in
this world as we do for many years. And during that time, God prepared for
him all sorts of afflictions and miseries to run through, which we our selves
do here meet withal; and all that time he was acquainted with, and inured
unto all the like sorrows that we are: and God left him to that infirmity and
tenderness of spirit, to take in all distresses as deeply as any of us,
(without sin) and to exercise the very same affections under all these
distresses that we at any time do find stirring in our hearts: And this God
thus ordered, on purpose thereby to fit him, and to frame his heart (when he
should be in glory) unto such affections as these, spoken of in the Text. And
this both this Text suggests to be Gods end in it, as also that forementioned
place, Heb. 2. 13. For as much as we (namely, his members) are partakers of
flesh and blood, (which phrase does ever note out the frailties of man's nature,
as 1 Cor. 15. 50. etc.) he himself took part of the same, -- that he might be
a merciful High Priest, etc. ver. 17. And then the Apostle gives this reason
of it, ver. 18. [ For in that himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able
(this Ability is (as was before interpreted) the having an heart fitted and
enabled, out of experience, to pity and) to succor them that are tempted.] The
meaning of which is, that it was not the bare taking of an humane nature (if
glorious from the first) that would thus fully have fitted him to be
affectionately pitiful out of experience, (though (as was said) the knowledge
of our miseries taken in thereby, would have made him truly and really
affectionate toward us, with affections humane and proper to a man; and so,
much nearer and liker ours then what are in the Angels themselves, or then are
attributed to God, when he is said to pity us) but further, his taking our
nature at first clothed with frailties, and living in this world as we; This
has for ever fitted his heart by experience to be in our very hearts and
bosoms; and not only or barely to know the distress, and as a man to be
affected with an humane affection to one of his kind; but experimentally,
remembering the like in himself once. And this likewise the Text suggests as
the way whereby our distresses are let into his heart the more feelingly, now
he is in heaven. We have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, [but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
without sin.] And the more to comfort us herein, observe how fully and
universally the Apostle speaks of Christ's having been tempted here below.
First, for the matter of them, or the several sorts of temptations, he says
he was tempted (...), in all points, or things of any kind, wherewith we are
exereised. Secondly, for the manner, (he adds that too) (...), like as we are.
His heart having been just so affected, so wounded, pierced, and distressed, in
all such trials as ours use to be, only without sin. God (on purpose) left
all his affections to their full tenderness, and quickness of sense of evil.
So that Christ took to heart all that befell him, as deeply as might be; he
slighted no cross either from God or men, but had and felt the utmost load of
it. Yea his heart was made more tender in all sorts of affections then any of
ours, (even as it was in love and pity) and this made him a man of sorrows; and
that more then anyother man was, or shall be.

Now therefore, to explicate the way how our miseries are let into his heart,
and come to stir up such kindly affections of pity and compassion in him, it is
not hard to conceive from what has now been said, and from what the Text does
further hint unto us.

1. The understanding and knowledge of that humane nature has notice and
cognizance of all the occurrences that befall his members here. And for this
the Text is clear: For the Apostle speaks this for our encouragement, That
Christ is touched with the feeling of our infirmities. Which could not be a
relief unto us, if it supposed not this, that he particularly and distinctly
knew them; And if not all as well as some, we should want relief in all, as
not knowing which he knew, and which not. And the Apostle affirms this of his
humane nature, (as was said) for he speaks of that nature that was tempted here
below. And therefore the Lamb that was slain, and so the man Christ Jesus, is
Revel. 5. 6. said to have seven eyes, as well as seven horns; which seven eyes
are the seven spirits sent forth into all the earth. His eyes of Providence
(through his anointing with the Holy Ghost,) are in all corners of the world,
and view all the things that are done under the sun; in like manner he is
there said to have seven horns for power, as seven eyes for knowledge; and
both are defined to be seven, to show the perfection of both; in their extent,
reaching unto all things: So that, as all power in heaven and earth is
committed unto Him as Son of man, (as the Scripture speaks,) so all knowledge
is given him of all things done in heaven and earth, and this as Son of man
too: his knowledge and power being of equal extent. He is the Sun as well in
respect of knowledge, as of Righteousness, and there is nothing hid from his
light and beams, which do pierce the darkest corners of the hearts of the
sons of men: He knows the sores (as Solomon expresses it) and distresses of
their hearts. Like as a looking-glass made into the form of a round globe,
and hung in the midst of a room, takes in all the species of things done or
that are therein at once; so does the enlarged understanding of Christ's humane
nature, take in the affairs of this world, (which he is appointed to govern:)
especially the miseries of his members; and this at once.

2. His humane nature thus knowing all, [ I know thy works, thy labor, and
thy patience, etc. Rev. 22.] He therewithal has an act of memory, and recalls
how himself was once affected, and how distressed whilst on earth, under the
same or the like miseries: For the memory of things here below remains still
with him, as with all spirits in either of those two other worlds, heaven or
hell. [ Son, remember thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and
Lazarus evil, etc.] says Abraham to the soul of Dives in hell, Luke 16. 25.
[ Remember me when thou come into thy Kingdome] said the good thief to
Christ; And Revel. 1. I am he (says Christ) that was dead, and am alive: He
remembers his death still, and the sufferings of it; and as he remembers it, to
put his Father in mind thereof, so he remembers it also, to affect his own
heart with what we feel: And his memory presenting the impression of the like
now afresh unto him, how it was once with him; hence he comes feelingly and
experimentally to know how it is now with us, and so affects himself
therewith: as Dido in Virgil, Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco: Having
experience of the like miseries, (though a Queen now) I know how to succor
those that are therein: As God said to the Israelites when they should be
possessed of Canaan their own land, Exo. 23. 9. Ye know the hearts of
strangers, seeing ye were strangers, etc. and therefore does command them to
pity strangers, and to use them well upon that motive: So may it be said of
CHRIST, that he does know the hearts of his children in misery, seeing himself
was once under the like. Or as the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews, Heb. 13. 3.
Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and them that suffer
adversity, as being your selves [in the body,] and so ere you die, may come to
suffer the like. So Christ, the Head of the body, (which is the fountain of
all sense, and feeling in the body) does remember them that are bound and in
adversity, having himself been once in the body; and so he experimentally
compassionates them. And this is a further thing then the former: We have
gained this further, That Christ has not only such affections as are real
and proper to an humane nature, but such affections as are stirred up in him,
from experience of the like by himself once tasted in a frail nature like
unto ours. And thus much for the way of letting in all our miseries into
Christ's heart now, so as to strike and affect it with them.

. II.
A more particular disquisition, What manner of affection this is: The Seat
thereof, whether in his spirit, or soul only, or the whole humane nature.
Some Cautions added.
BUt concerning this Affection it self of pity and compassion, fellow-feeling,
and sympathy, or suffering with, (as the Text calls it) which is the product,
result, or thing produced in his heart by these; there still remains another
thing more particularly to be inquired into; namely, What manner of affection
this is. For that such an affection is stirred up in him, besides and beyond a
bare act of knowledge, or remembrance how once it was with himself, is evident
by what we find in the Text. The Apostle says, not only that he remembers how
himself was tempted with the like infirmities that we are, (though that be
necessarily supposed) but that he is struck and touched with the feeling of our
infirmities; to the producing of which, this act of remembrance does but
subserve. And he tells us, Christ is able, and his heart is capable of thus
being touched. And the word [(...)] is a deep word, signifying to suffer with
us, until we are relieved. And this affection thus stirred up, is it which
moves him so cordially to help us.

Now concerning this affection, (as here thus expressed) how far it extends,
and how deep it may reach, I think no man in this life can fathom. If Cor
Regis, the heart of a King be inscrutable, (as Solomon speaks) the heart of the
King of Kings now in glory is much more. I will not take upon me to intrude
into things which I have not seen, but shall endeavor to speak safely, and
therefore warily, so far as the light of Scripture and right reason shall
warrant my way.

I shall set it forth three ways:

1. Negatively. 2. Positively. 3. Privatively.
1. Negatively: It is certain that this affection of sympathy or
fellow-feeling in Christ is not in all things such a kind of affection as was
in him in the days of his flesh. Which is clear, by what the Apostle speaks
of him and of his affections then, Heb. 5. 7. Who in the days of his flesh
when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong cryings and
tears, was heard in that which he feared. Where we see his converse and state
of life here below, to be called by way of difference and distinction from what
it is now in heaven, [ The days of his flesh:] By [ flesh] meaning not the
substance of the humane nature, for he retains that still; but the frail
quality of subjection to mortality, or passibility. So [ Flesh] is usually
taken; as when all flesh is said to be grass: It is spoken of man's nature, in
respect to its being subject to a fading, wearing, and decay, by outward
casualties, or inward passions. So in this Epistle, Chap. 2. 14. For as much as
the children (we his brethren) did partake of flesh and blood, (that is, the
frailties of man's nature) he himself also took part of the same. And
accordingly the Apostle instanceth in the following words of that 14. verse, as
in death, (which in the days of his flesh Christ was subject to) so also in
such frail passions and affections as did work a suffering in him, and a
wearing and wasting of his spirits; such as passionate sorrow, joined with
strong cries and tears, (both which he mentions) and also fear, (in those
words) [ He was heard in that which he feared.] Now these days of his flesh
being over and past, (for this was only (as says the Apostle) in the days of
his flesh) hence therefore all such concomitant passionate overflowings of
sorrow, fear, etc. are ceased therewith, and he is now no way capable of them,
or subjected to them.

Yet (2.) Positively, why may it not be affirmed that for substance the same
kind of affection of pity and compassion, that wrought in his whole man both
body and soul, when he was here, works still in him now he is in heaven? (If
this Position be allayed with those due cautions and considerations which
presently I shall annexe) For, if for substance the same flesh and blood, and
animal spirits remain and have their use; (for though Christ in Luke 24. 29.
mentioned only his having flesh and bones after his resurrection, unto Thomas
and the other Disciples, because these two alone were to be the object of his
Touch and Feeling; yet Blood and Spirits are included in that flesh, for it is
caro vitalis, living flesh, and therefore has Blood and Spirits that flow and
move in it,) then why not the same affections also? and those not stirring only
and merely in the soul, but working in the body also, unto which that soul
is joined, and so, remaining really humane affections? The use of blood and
spirits is, as to nourish, (which end is now ceased) so to affect the heart and
bowels by their motion to and fro, when the soul is affected. And why this use
of them should not remain, (and if not this, we can conceive no other) I know
not. Neither why this affection should be only restrained to his spirit or
soul, and his corporeal powers not be supposed to communicate and partake in
them. That so, as he is a true man, and the same man that he was, both in body
as well as in soul, (for else it had not been a true Resurrection) so he has
still the very same true humane affections in them both: and such, as whereof
the body is the seat (and instrument) as well as the soul. And seeing this
whole man both body and soul was tempted, and that (as the Text says) he is
touched with a feeling in that nature which is tempted, it must therefore be in
the whole man, both body and soul. Therefore when as we read of the wrath of
the Lamb, as Revel. 6. 16. (namely, against his enemies) as here, of his pity
and compassion (toward his friends and members) why should this be attributed
only to his Deity, (which is not capable of wrath) or to his soul and spirit
only? And why may it not be thought he is truly angry as a man, in his whole
man, and so with such a wrath as his body is affected with, as well as that he
is wrathful in his soul only; seeing he has taken up our whole nature, on
purpose to subserve his Divine nature in all the executions of it?

But now, how far (in our apprehensions of this) we are to cut off the
weakness and frailty of such affections as in the days of his flesh was in
them, and how exactly to difference those which Christ had here, and those
which he has in heaven, therein lies the difficulty; and I can speak but
little unto it.

Yet first, this we may lay down as an undoubted Maxim, That so far, or in
what sense his Body it self is made spiritual, (as it is called, 1 Cor. 15.
44.) so far, and in that sense all such affections as thus working in his Body
are made spiritual; and that in an opposition to that fleshly and frail way
of their working here. But then, as his Body is made spiritual, not Spirit,
(spiritual in respect of power, and likeness to a Spirit, not in respect of
substance or nature) so these affections of pity and compassion do work not
only in his Spirit or Soul, but in his Body too, as their seat and
instrument, though in a more spiritual way of working, and more like to that
of Spirits, then those in a fleshly frail body are. They are not wholly
spiritual in this sense, that the soul is the sole subject of them, and that
it draws up all such workings into it self: so that that should be the
difference between his affections now, and in the days of his flesh. Men are
not to conceive, as if his body were turned into such a substance as the Sun is
of, for the soul (as through a case of glass) to shine gloriously in only;
but further it is united to the soul, to be acted by it, (though immediately,)
for the soul to produce operations in it. And it is called spiritual, not that
it remains not a body, but because it remains not such a body; but is so framed
to the soul, that both it self and all the operations of all the powers in
it, are immediately and entirely at the arbitrary imperium and dominion of the
soul; and that, as the soul is pleased to use it, and to sway it and move it,
even as immediately and as nimbly (and without any clog or impediment) as an
Angel moves it self, or as the soul acts it self. So that this may perhaps
be one difference, that these affections, so far as in the body of Christ, do
not affect his soul, (as here they did, though as then under the command of
Grace and Reason to keep their motions from being inordinate or sinful) but
further, the soul being now too strong for them, does as its own arbitrament
raise them, and as entirely and immediately stir them as it does it self.

Hence 2. these affections of pity and sympathy so stirred up by himself,
though they move his bowels, and affect his bodily heart as they did here; yet
they do not afflict and perturbe him in the least, nor become they a burden
and a load unto his spirit, so as to make him sorrowful, or heavy, (as in this
life here his pity unto Lazarus made him, and as his distresses at last, that
made him sorrowful unto death.) So that, as in their rise, so in their effect,
they utterly differ from what they were here below. And the reason of this is,
because his Body, and the blood and spirits thereof, (the instruments of
affecting him) are now altogether impassible; namely, in this sense, that they
are not capable of the least alteration tending to any hurt what ever: And so,
his body is not subject to any grief, nor his spirits to any wast, decay or
expense. They may, and do subserve the soul in its affections, as they did
whilst he was here; but this, merely by a local motion, moving to and fro in
the veins and arteries, to affect the heart and bowels, without the least
diminution or impair to themselves, or detriment to him: And thus it comes to
pass, that though this Blood and spirits do stir up the same affections in
his heart and bowels, which here they did, yet not (as then) with the least
perturbation in himself, or inconvenience unto himself: But as in this life
he was troubled and grieved [ without sin,] or inordinancie; so now when he
is in heaven he pitties and compassionates without the least mixture or tang of
disquietement and perturbation (which yet necessarily accompanied his
affections whilst he was here, because of the frailty in which his body and
spirits were framed:) His perfection destroys not his affections, but only
corrects and amends the imperfection of them. Passiones perfectivas to be now
in him, the best of Schoolmen do acknowledge.

Thirdly, All natural affections that have not in them Indecentiam status,
something unbefitting that state and condition of glory wherein Christ now is,
both Schoolmen and other Divines do acknowledge to be in him. Humanae
affectiones quae naturales sunt, neque cum probro vel peccato conjunctae, sed
omni ex part rationi subduntur; denique ab iis conditionibus liberantur quae
vel animo, vel corpori aliquo modo officiunt, Beatis nequaquam repugnare
censendae sunt. Those affections which are natural to man, and have no
adhaesion of sin or shame unto them, but are wholly governed by reason, and
lastly are exempt from such effects as may any way hurt either the soul or the
body, there is no ground to think that such affections may not well stand with
the state of souls in bliss, says Justinian upon this place. Now if we
consider it, Christ his very state in glory is such, as it becomes him to have
such humane affections of pity and compassion in his whole man; so far as to
quicken and provoke him to our help and succor: not such as to make him a man
of sorrows in himself again, (that were uncomely, nay, incompatible to him,)
but such as should make him a man of succors unto us, which is his office. To
this end it is to be remembered, that Christ in heaven is to be considered, not
personally only as in himself made happy in his Father; but withal in his
relations and in his offices as an Head unto us, and in that relation he now
sits there, as 1 Ephesians. 21. 22. (and the head is the seat of all the senses for
the good of the body;) and therefore most sensible of any other part. Wherefore
because his members unto whom he bears this relation, are still under sin
and misery, therefore it is no way uncomely for him in that estate, to have
affections suitable to this his relation. If his state of glory had been wholly
ordained for his own personal happiness, then indeed there had been no use
of such affections to remain in him; but his relation to us being one part and
ingredient of his glory; therefore they are most proper for him: yea, it were
uncomely if he had them not. Neither are they a weakness in him, as so
considered; but rather part of his strength (as the Apostle calls them) [(...)]
And although such affections might in one respect be thought an imperfection;
yet in another respect, (namely, his relation to us, and office for us) they
are his perfection. As he is our Head, (which he is as he is a man) it is his
glory to be truly and really (even as a man) sensible of all our miseries; Yea
it were his imperfection if he were not.

And 4. let me add this for our comfort, that though all such affections as
are any way a burden to his spirit, or noxious to his body, be not now
compatible to him; and though that passionate frailty and infirmity which did
help him here to pity and relieve men in misery, out of a suffering hurtful to
himself; though these be cut off: yet in those workings of affections and
bowels, which he has now, (which for substance are the same) there is (instead
of that passionate frailty) a greater capaciousnesse, vastness, and also
quickness in his affections now in heaven, so to make up a compensation; and
so no less effectually to stir and quicken him to relieve us, then those
former affections did. For it is certain, that as his knowledge was enlarged
upon his entering into glory; so his humane affections of love and pity are
enlarged in solidity, strength, and reality, (as true conjugall love uses to
be, though more passionate happily at first.) They are not less now, but are
only made more spiritual. And as Solomon's heart was as large in bounty and
royalty, as in knowledge; so Christ's affections of Love are as large as his
Knowledge or his Power: They are all of a like extent and measure. So far as
Gods intention to show mercy does reach, (and who knows the end of those
riches?) so far does Christ's disposition to bestow it. Ephesians. 3. 19. The Love
of Christ, God-man, passes knowledge. It has not lost, or been diminished by
his going to heaven. Though God in his nature be more merciful then Christ's
humane nature; yet the act and exercise of Christ's affections is as large as
Gods purposes and decrees of mercy are. And all those large affections and
mercies are become humane mercies; the mercies of a Man unto men.

3. Privatively. If these affections of Christ's heart be not suffering and
afflicting affections; yet we may be way of Privation express this of them,
that there is a less fullness of joy and comfort in Chriss heart, wstilst he
sees us in misery and under infirmities, comparatively to what will be when we
are presented to him free of them all.

To clear this, I must recall (and I shall but recall) that Distinction I made
(in the 4. Demonstration, Sect. 2. Part 2.) of a double capacity of Glory, or a
double fullness of Joy which Christ is ordained to have: The one Natural, and
so due unto his person as in himself alone considered; The other Additionall,
and arising from the completed happiness and glory of his whole Church,
(wherewith mystically he is one.) So in Ephesians. 1. ult. although he by reason of
his personal fullness is there said to fill all in all; yet as he is an Head,
in relation to his Church as his body (as in the verses before he is spoken of)
thus the perfection of this his bodies beatitude, it is reciprocally called his
fullness; and therefore until he has filled them with all happiness, and
delivered them from all misery, himself remains under some kind of
imperfection, and answerably his affections also (which are suited to this his
relation,) have some want of imperfection in them, whilst theylie under
misery, in comparison of what his heart shall have when they receive this
fullness. We may warrantably say Christ shall be more glad then, (and is
now) as his children are grown up from under their infirmities, and as they
do become more obedient and comfortable in their spirits, so John 15. 10, 11.
I shall add some illustration to this by this similitude (which though it hold
not in all things, yet it will hold forth some shadow of it) The spirits of
just men, departed, are said to be perfect, Heb. 12. yet because they have
bodies unto which they have a relation, and unto which they are ordained to be
united, they in this respect may be said to be imperfect, till these bodies be
reunited and glorified with them, which will add a further fullness to them.
Thus in some analogy it stands between Christ Personal, and Christ Mystical
considered. Although Christ in his own Person be complete in happiness; yet
in relation to his members he is imperfect, and so accordingly has affections
suited unto this his relation: which is no derogation from him at all. The
Scripture therefore attributes some affections to him which have an
imperfection joined with them; and those to be in him, until the day of
judgment. Thus Expectation and Desire, (which are but imperfect affections in
comparison to that joy which is in the full fruition of what was expected or
desired) are attributed to him, as he is man, until the day of Judgment. Thus
Heb. 10. 12, 13. He is said to sit in heaven, expecting till his enemies be
made his footstool. The destruction of which enemies will add to the
manifestative glory of his kingdom. Now as that will add to the fullness of
his greatness; so the complete salvation of his members will add to the
compleatnesse of his glory. And as the expectation of his enemies ruin maybe
said to be an imperfect affection, in comparison of the triumph that one day he
shall have over them: so his joy which he now has in his Spouse, is but
imperfect, in comparison of that which shall fill his heart at the great day of
Marriage. And acordingly, the Scripture calls the accomplishment of these his
desires a satisfaction, so Isai. 63. 11. He shall see of the travail of his
soul and be satisfied, which argues desires to be in him, lying under a want
of something in the end to be obtained: Only we must take in this withal,
that Jesus Christ indeed knows and sees the very time when this his fullness
through the exaltation of his members up to himself shall be completed, and
when he shall trample upon the necks of all his and their enemies; He sees
their day a coming, (as the Psalmist has it,) which alleviates and detracts
something from this imperfection, that he should thus expect or tarry.

. III.
This Scruple satisfied: How his heart can be feelingly touched wtth our
Sins, (our greatest infirmities) seeing he was tempted [without sin.]
THere remains one great unsatisfaction to be removed, which cannot but of it
self arise in every good heart. You told us, (may they say,) that by [
infirmities] sins were meant, and that the Apostles scope was to encourage us
against them also, (and they are indeed the greatest discomforts and
discouragements of all other) Now against them, this which the Apostle here
speaks affords us but little, seeing Christ knows not how experimentally to
pity us therein, for he knew no sin: Yea, the Apostle himself does here
except it, He was tempted in all things, [yet without sin.] It may comfort
us indeed, that Christ does and will pity us in all other infirmities,
because he himself was subject to the like; but he never knew what it was to
be under sin, and vexed with a lust, (as I am,) and how shall I releeve my
self against that, by what the Apostle here speaks of him? I shall endeavor
to give some satisfaction and relief in this, by these following
considerations.

First, The Apostle puts in indeed, that he was tempted [yet without sin,]
and it was well for us that he was thus without sin, for he had not been a
fit Priest to have saved us else: so Heb. 7. 25. Such an High Priest became us
as was separate from sinners, innocent, etc. Yet for your relief withal,
consider, that he came as near in that point as might be, [ he was tempted in
all things] so says the Text, though without sin on his part; yet tempted to
all sin, so far as to be afflicted in those temptations, and to see the
misery of those that are tempted, and to know how to pity them in all such
temptations. Even as in taking our nature, in his birth, he came as near as
could be, without being tainted with original sin, as namely, by taking the
very same matter to have his body made of that all ours are made of, etc. So in
the point of actual sin also he suffered himself to be tempted as far as
might be, so as to keep himself pure. He suffered all experiments to be tried
upon him by Satan, even as a man who has taken a strong antidote, suffers
conclusions to be tried on him by a Mountibanke. And indeed because he was
thus tempted by Satan unto sin, therefore it is on purpose added, [ yet
without sin,] And it is as if he had said, sin never stained him, though
he was outwardly tempted to it. He was tempted to all sorts of sins by Satan,
for those three temptations in the wilderness were the heads of all sorts of
temptations, (as Interpreters upon the Gospels do show.)

Then Secondly, To fit him to pity us in case of sin, he was vexed with the
filth and power of sin in others whom he conversed with, more then any of us
with sin in our selves. His righteous soul was vexed with it, as Lots
righteous soul is said to have been with the impure conversation of the
Sodomites. He endured the contradictions of sinners against himself, Heb. 12.
3. the reproaches of them that reproached thee, (that is, upon his God,) fell
upon me, Romans 15. 3. It was spoken by the Psalmist of Christ, and so is quoted
of him by the Apostle: that is, every sin went to his heart. So as in this,
there is but this difference betwixt him and us, that the regenerate part in us
is vexed with sin in our selves, and that as our own sin; but his heart with
sin in others only: yet so, as his vexation was the greater, by how much his
soul was more righteous then ours which makes it up; yea, in that he sustained
the persons of the elect, the sins which he saw them commit, troubled him, as
if they had been his own. The word here translated Tempted, is read by some
[(...)] that is, vexed.

Yea, and Thirdly, to help this also, it may be said of Christ whilst he was
here below, that in the same sense or manner wherein he bore our sicknesses,
Mat. 8. 17. (who yet was never personally tainted with any disease) in the same
sense or manner he may be said to have borne our sins, namely thus, Christ when
he came to an elect child of his that was sick, whom he healed; his manner
was, first by a sympathy and pity to afflict himself with their sickness,
as if it had been his own: Thus at his raising of Lazarus, it is said that he
groaned in spirit, etc. and so by the merit of taking the disease upon
himself, through a fellow-feeling of it, he took it off from them, being for
them afflicted, as if he himself had been sick. And this seems to be the
best interpretation that I have met with, of that difficult place in Mat. 8.
16. 17. where it is said, He healed all that were sick, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah the Prophet, saying, Himself took our
infirmities, [ and bare our sicknesses.] Now in the like way or manner unto
this, of bearing our sicknesses, he might bear our sins too, for he being
one with us, and to answer for all our sins, therefore when he saw any of his
own to sin, he was affected with it, as if it had been his own. And thus
is that about the power of sin made up and satisfied.

And fourthly, as for the guilt of sin, and the temptations from it, he
knows more of that then any one of us. He tasted the bitterness of that, in
the imputation of it, more deeply then we can, and of the cup of his Fathers
wrath for it, and so is able experimentally to pity a heart wounded with it,
and struggling under such temptations. He knows full well the heart of one in
his own sense forsaken by God, seeing himself felt it, when he cried out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Uses of all.
1.

First, Christ himself suffers (as it were) at least is affected under them,
as his enemies, which therefore he will be sure to remove, for his own quiet
sake. His heart would not be quiet, but that he knows they shall be removed.
As God says in the Prophet, so may Christ say much more, My Bowels are
troubled for him, I remember him still. Jeremiah 31. 20.

Secondly, there is comfort concerning such infirmities, in that your very
sins move him to pity more then to anger. This text is plain for it, for
he suffers with us under our infirmities, and by infirmities are meant sins,
as well as other miseries, (as was proved) whilst therefore you look on them
as infirmities, (as God here looks upon them, and speaks of them in his own)
and as your disease, and complain to Christ of them, and do cry out, O
miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me? so long fear not. Christ he
takes part with you, and is so far from being provoked against you, as all
his anger is turned upon your sin to ruin it; yea his pity is increased the
more toward you, even as the heart of a father is to a child that has some
loathsome disease, or as one is to a member of his body that has the leprosy,
he hates not the member, for it is his flesh, but the disease, and that
provokes him to pity the part affected the more. What shall not make for us,
when our sins that are both against Christ and us, shall be turned as motives
to him, to pity us the more? The object of pity is one in misery whom we
love; and the greater the misery is, the more is the pity, when the party is
beloved: Now of all miseries, sin is the greatest; and whilst your selves
look at it as such, Christ will look upon it as such only also in you: And he
loving your persons, and hating only the sin; his hatred shall all fall, and
that only upon the sin to free you of it by its ruin and destruction, but
his bowels shall be the more drawn out to you; and this as much when you lie
under sin, as under any other affliction. Therefore fear not, What shall
separate us from Christ's love?

What ever trial,

First, that we are thereby but conformed to his example, for he was tempted in
all, and this may be no small comfort to us.

Secondly, we may look to that particular instance of Christ's being under the
like, as a meriting cause to procure and purchase succor for us under the same
now; and so in that respect may yet further comfort our selves. And

Thirdly, his having once borne the like, may relieve us in this, that
therefore he experimentally knows the misery and distress of such a
condition, and so is yet further moved and quickened thereby to help us.

As the Doctrine delivered is a comfort, motive against sin; and persuasive
unto obedience, to consider, that Christ's heart if it be not afflicted with,
(and how far it may suffer with us we know not) yet for certain has less joy
in us, as we are more or less sinful, or obedient. You know not by sinning
what blows you give the heart of Christ: If no more but that his joy is the
less in you, it should move you, as it uses to do those that are ingenuous.
And take this as one incentive to obedience, that if he retain the same heart
and mind for mercy toward you which he had here on earth: Then to answer his
love, endeavor you to have the same heart toward him onearth, which you hope
to have in heaven; and as you daily pray, Thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven.

In all miseries and distresses you may be sure to know where to have a friend
to help and pity you, Choose, I know one that will, one in heaven, whose heart
is touched with the feeling of all my infirmities, and I will go and bemoane
my self to him. Come boldly, (says the Text) (...), even with open mouth, to
lay open your complaints, and you shall find grace and mercy to help in time
of need. Men love to see themselves pityed by friends, though they cannot help
them: Christ can and will do both.

FINIS.

