TWO HYMS, OR SPIRITVALL SONGS; Sung in Mr. Goodwins Congregation on Friday
last being the 24. of October. 1651. Which was a day set apart by Authority of
Parliament for a solemn Thanksgiving unto GOD by this Nation, for that most
wonderful and happy Success of the English Army under the conduct of his
Excellency the Lord General Cromwell over the Scottish Forces at Worcester. ALSO
A Letter for satisfaction of some Presbyterian Ministers, and others, who hold
it unlawful to give thanks for the shedding of blood.

Psalm. 97. 8. Sion heard, and was glad; because of thy righteous judgments, O
Lord. Revel. 14. 3. And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, etc.
LONDON: Printed by F: N: in Aldersgatestreet. 1651.

To those Presbyterian Ministers and others, who are unsatisfied with the
lawfulness of giving thanks to GOD for the shedding of blood.
THe objection of a Friend at our late meeting was, that he was unsatisfied in
his Judgment, that it is lawful to rejoice at the sheding of blood, though it
were granted to be in the destruction of an Enemy. To which I answer; That
considering of it simply of it self, it is a sad thing, and a matter rather of
sorrow then rejoicing, to see so Noble a Creature as man, to loose his life in
such a manner, but as it is to be considered in the relative, and by the
effects and drift of the Enemy, which sought for our lives, Liberty, and
Freedom, even in the Ordinances of God; I say if men become thus stubborn and
wilful, their destruction becomes a matter of joy and delight. Then shall the
righteous rejoice and be glad. Syon heard and was glad and the Daughters of
Judah rejoiced, because of thy Judgments O Lord. Psalm. 97. 8. He casts the
wicked to the ground, sing unto the Lord with Thanksgiving. These places show
the behavior of the righteous, when God arises and puts forth his strength
for the destruction of his Enemies, They exceedingly rejoice: Psalm. 68, 1, 2
and they express that Joy before the Lord verse 3. from which places it is
evident, that the Church and people of God when they have victory, are
enjoined to rejoice, from whence I conclude, that solemn days of Tanksgiving
for Victories obtained, are not only lawful, but enjoined as a duty, and when
the people of God, do come before God to perform this duty, they ought
exceedingly to rejoice, Ps. 58. 10. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees
the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked, what
vengeance this is you may see in the former verse where the wicked are
destroyed like thorns under a Pet. Genesis 15. 19. Melchisedick blesses God for
the Victory and success given unto Abraham. And when the Lord drowned Pharoh
and all his Host: Moses and Meriam rejoiced and sung praises unto God, Judges
5. So when David was compassed about with many Enemies, and the Lord had
scattered them, the voice of joy and gladness was in every godly heart, and
certainly there is great reason why it should be so, for God is much glorified
in this work of power, we see when Pharohs Chariot wheels flew off, then he
acknowledged that God fought for Israel, Exodus 14. and the like in Psalm. 83.
13. etc Now are the enemies of God by this means, brought to glorify God, and
shall not his own people in whom he puts forth his power, give evidence of
thank fullness unto him. Psalm. 50 23 He that offers praise and thanks,
glorifieth God. Again, this joy and gladness comes from the benefits that come
to Gods people, when their Enemies are destroyed. First their subduing of the
Enemy gives them the more freedom and liberty in the service of God, as when
Saul was dead, then David could frequent the Sanctuary. Secondly, it gives
evidence of Gods favor, to be renewed and confirmed to his people, and
therefore they cannot but reign Psalm. 41. 11. By this I know thou favourest me,
because mine Enemy does not triumph over me.

Thus far have I thought good, briefly to communicate these Meditations unto
you, which if you please to ponder and consider seriously of, I hope not only
your self, but others of the Presbyterian Brethren will be so far from
censuring us, that they will join with us in this Heavenly duty, from whence
does arise an over flow or breaking forth of the spirit into Songs of joy and
gladness.

Mr. Jo: Goodwins Song or Him.
THis is the day the Lord has made,
On purpose to rejoice.
To raise his praises to the Heaven,
Spare neither heart nor voice.
The Heavens on high have bowed down,
The Earth with joy does ring:
For what he has prepared and done,
On Earth he makes us sing.
Prepare and sanctify your selves,
You Priests of God most high.
In likeness of a Man of War,
Your God to you's come nigh.
In heaven a glorious victory,
For you prepared he has:
And what he has prepared in heaven,
On earth for us he does.
You have seen, you have seen; his vision high,
The glory of your God:
Make hearts and bodies clean and pure,
Sacred for his abode.
Your Enemies rage and cruelty
Between them they had still:
No wonder God in flesh, they fell
Opposers of his will.
Your Enemies were not, afterward,
Why God himself had hid.
Though at their cost they lately had,
His presence with you tried:
But fell into his ambushment,
And tumbled on his sword.
And by the sound of dreadful fall,
Proclaimed truth in his word.
And taught the world this victory,
In anguish of their blood:
That God to wicked men did pay
The Judgments in his word.
The Lord that Mountains he had touched,
And made them smoke before:
This smoke it healed not their pride,
They swelled still more and more.
And Scottish ground for their proud look
They thought too mean and base:
And would no longer there be born,
Their land of such disgrace.
Up from their native soil they rise,
With lofty pace they move
To Englands honored ground, on which
They pitched their hopes and love.
As commodation fit to bear
Their glory and their weight:
This Land they judged of measure just,
But God a fire prepared:
In place near Worcester Town it was,
At Englands feet they lay.
To melt these Mountains that would not
By smoking, but by fire
Consume and melt, this is the way
Of Gods provoked ire.
Glory this day to our Land is come,
In glory swell not here:
The first born sons of Godly shape
To the world we shall appear.
For when God comes to visit men
In such a shining path,
He n'ere departs till sin does say,
D^part with high disgrace.
And sin when God has once then showed
His lovely face to men,
Its no great matter to disdain,
And fear the same again.
O let this great salvation (...)
Which greets us now from heaven
Be kept a sacred record,
And on our hearts be graven.
And let it be our Councellor,
To instruct us what to render:
That God who it to us has given
Out of his bowels tender.
The heavens in travail lately were
Of Englands joy and peace:
They are delivered, and brought forth
A crop of pleasant fare.
The Heavens do pipe, come let us dance,
They call to joy and gladness:
Lats answer in the voice of man,
Saved by God from sadness.
And after this days sacred joy,
Where is no place for sorrow:
Abstain from sin, then this day joy
Shall be your joy too morrow.
Yea then they shall nere take away
The voice of joy from our Land,
Our joys without or clips or clouds,
Like Sun and morn shall stand.
Mr. (...) Song or Him.
AWake, awake, Let Us all arise,
With loud voice let us Sing.
To God our Lord and Savior,
A Song of Thanksgiving.
O all ye Saints behold and see
The beauty of your God:
Who has prepared another Glass,
Besides that of his Word.
For you to see his Glory in,
Who are so much in's heart;
He loves to show his glorious Face,
Though we have no desert.
Look full his Sons of glory then,
Be struck with admiration:
To see the wondrous works of God,
The God of your Salvation.
Near twenty thousand men of Arms,
Of late crept in this Nation.
Whose face was principally set,
Against Gods Habitation.
Princes and great men more then one,
In this works had their hands.
The liberty of English Saints,
To put in Iron bands.
They said within themselves, all is well,
How rich is our design.
To kill and slay, spoil and destroy,
The Company of English men.
So stout and big the Sons of Pride,
Whose hearts were full of Lust,
The great and mighty God has sent,
What they for us did trust.
He crushed their rage and cruelty,
The proud which did advance;
The wicked he has now brought low,
And trodden down their place.
Amongst Princes and Nobles all,
The Lord contended sore.
This is the fruit of cruelty,
The Saints they have the more.
O all ye Enemies abroad,
Why should you vainly think:
Of thorns to gather Grapes, and make
Your sweet and pleasant Drink.
It Is righteousness and peace does kiss,
And truth them both embrace.
If ever you would taste such fruit,
Let righteousness take place.
And yea O sons and Saints of God,
What say you to this sight,
Shall not the goodness of your God,
Be greatly your delight?
And now O Saints, what Creatures then,
Can carry you away.
Who have been blessed with such a sight,
To make you go astray.
Let all agree with us this day,
Let this be our Thanksgiving:
To give our selves and ours to God,
And bring in all men living.
Another Him of Mr. John Goodwins.
THe mighty God has once again
appeared from Heaven high,
His people to deliver from
The house of slavery.
The Iron yoke he lately broke
which men prepared had,
To put upon the necks of Saints
to make their hearts full sad.
The Northern waves lift up their voice,
and roared so terribly,
That English Land thereat 'gan quake,
and tremble fearfully.
Of Men, and Horses fierce and stout
Their Armies were prepared,
Gebal and Ammon, Amalek,
and Tire were ensnared,
To join in sinful league against
the Lord, the Lord of might,
And his despised ones, because
they weak appeared in fight.
Come, let us tread them down (said they)
Like clay and mire in street:
We Will give them Laws, and Lords, and Kings,
And all as we think meet.
Our Sword shall teach them what to know
Of God, what to believe:
To worship God as they think meet,
No longer will we give.
Their lives upon their knees they shall
Of us beg and entreat:
The dust o'th Earth we will compel
Them to lick at our feet.
These swelling words the Heavens above
Disdeigned long to bear:
The Stars made ready for to fight,
Each one out of his sphere.
And God, the holy one of those,
Who thus despised were,
To stop the way against such rebukes,
Brought forth both shield and spear.
His Enemies heart he takes away,
And gives unto his Friends
To them the wings of fear, for flight;
To these, a Sword he sends,
To execute his judgment just
On them that sought their woe,
To teach them violence to hate,
And righteous things to do,
The Lord, and his, together thus
Triumphed gloriously,
Thousands by death, yet thousands more
Fell by Captivity.
This mighty work recall's to mind
The days of ancient date,
When God on high the swelling power
Of Egypt did abate.
And when the staff of Midian
Was by him broke in sunder,
Wherewith he smote the innocent,
And sought to bring them under.
This is a day the Lord has made,
A day of grace and wonder,
Where in our prayers from the Heave's
He answered has in thunder.
Out of the hands and bands of those,
Who sought to make us thrall,
He has delivered us by an Hand
Far higher then they all.
He that has thus delivered us,
Shall be our God forever;
Him will we love, Him will we serve,
Forsake us be will never.
FINIS.

