Die Mercurij, 29. Iunij, 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the COMMONS now assembled in PARLIAMENT, That Sir
Thomas Barrington do return thanks to Doctor Gouge for the great pains he
took in his Sermon this day preached at St. Margarets in Westminster at the
entreaty of the COMMONS House of PARLIAMENT, this being the day of the public
Fast, and that he be desired to Print his. Sermon; and that no man presume to
print it, but such as he shall appoint, till the House shall take further Order.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl, D. Com.

I Appoint Joshua Kirton to Print the foresaid Sermon.

WILLIAM GOUGE.

THE SAINTS SVPPORT, Set out in A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House
of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.

At a public Fast, 29. June, 1642.

By William Gouge.

(...).

ECCLUS. 49. 13. Among the Elect was Nehemiah, whose renown is great.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Joshua Kirton at his Shop in Paul's Churchyard at
the Sign of the white Horse, MDCXLII.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Most worthy Patriots,
THE Wiseman among his many approved Proverbes, Prove 25 11. (...) Iuxta modus
suos. Merc. Quibus modia dici debet V^t. Tempore, suo. (...).
has this choice one, A word spoaken upon his wheels ( so runs the
Original, or set upon his measures, that is, as our English not unfitly has
translated it, fitly spoken) A word fitly spoken, is the like Apples of Gold in
picutres of silver; precious and pleasant. Precious, as golden Apples: pleasant
as yellow Gold curiously wrought and artificially wrethed in white Silver.

This Proverb turned my mind to think of some seasonable Theme, after
notice was given me, that by your Order, which to me is a Law, I was deputed
to preach before your Honorable Assembly. And I think I have hit upon a fit
Subject, were I fit and able to handle it as it is meet to be handled in such
an Assembly.

It is the Pattern of a good Patriot.

A point pertinent in General and Particular.

In General, a Pattern or Example registered and approoved in Sacred
Scripture, shows

1. What is the good and acceptable will of God.

2. Si inveniuntur exempla quae nos per rectan ducunt viam, sequen. da sunt.
Hier. ad celant.
What in like case others are bound to do.

3. Excitamur in ipem, qua nos etiam ita posse vivere, qui homines sum ex eo
quod aliqui homines ita vixerunt, minime desperamus. Aug de Trin. l. 8. c. 9.
What may be done by such as will thoroughly set themselves to it.

4. What, when it is so done, may be pleaded in an humble-self-denying manner
before God.

In Particular this Example of Nehemiah shows,

1. Who is a good Patriot.

2. How he ought to behave himself.

3. (...) Plut de Lib instit.
What difficulties and dangers attend him.

4. What opposition and contradiction he is like to meet with.

5. What resolutions become him.

6. On whom his confidence is to be placed.

Our times are in many things not much unlike to the time wherein Nehemiah came
to Jerusalem.

Grievances in State.

Corruptions in Church.

He did as much as in him lay (and that indeed was very much) for redressing of
the one, and removing of the other.

His pattern is not only an Instruction, to teach what is to be done: or an
Incitation to stir up such as know what is to be done: but also a Justification
and Approbation of such as do as he did.

And they may look for such an end, (...) etc. Joseph An^iq. Iul. l. 11. c. 5.
as Josephus testifies that Nehemiah had. His testimony is this, When Nehemiah
had done most magnificently many good things worthy of praise, being an old man
he died, and lest behind him the name of a gracious, just and bountiful man
toward his own Nation.

The Lord incline our great Kings heart to you, as he did the heart of
Nehemiahs King to him, and so work by you, as he did by him: that every of you
may with such confidence say to your God, as he did to his, Think on me, my
GOD for good, according to all that I have done for this People. This is, this
shall be, the prayer of

Your daily Orator William Gouge.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at the celebration
of a FAST 29. June, 1642.
NEHEM. 5. 19. Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have
done for this people.


THose two motives which enduced the good Patriot Nehemiah to prefer this
Petition to his God, have enduced me to choose it for my Text, to handle it
before so many worthy Patriots as are now met together to present their humble
supplications to their God.

The two motives were these,

1. The many, great, good things which he had done for the Church and State.

2. The many, great, desperate dangers which he had met with, and knew he
should further meet with in prosecuting his good beginnings.

Whether there be not at this time the like occasions for the representative
body of this Kingdom, as one man, to pray and say, Think upon me my God for
good, according to all that I have done for this people, let the times judge.

To this Text the more diligent heed is to be given, in that it contains the
last memorable matter which the Holy Ghost saw meet to commend to his Church in
the old Testament. For the former part of it (wherein the maine substance of
the whole lies) is repeated in the last clause of this Book, Neh. 13. 31.
which is the last Book of the old Testament. For all the Prophesies registered
in the old Testament were before Nehemiahs time: which thus appears. All but
the three last were before the Captivity of the Jews in Babylon. Two of those
last three, Ezr. 5. 1. Hag. 1. 1. Zech. 1. 1. -- 7. 1.
Haggai and Zechary uttered their Prophesies about the time that the Temple was
finished, in the four first years of Darius his reign. Malachi who is the
last of all the Prophets prophesied anon after the Temple was built, Malachi,
id est Esdras, post Aggeum and Zechariam, qui sub Dario prophet averunt, fuisse
credendus est Hier in pro in Malach. Lege Clem Alex Strom. l 1.
as is evident by the maine scope of his Prophecy: So as he may well be thought
to have uttered his Prophecy in the days of Darius, or in that time of
Artaxerxes reign, wherein Ezra came first to Jerusalem. For Malachi is
supposed to be Ezra, and called Malachi, because he was the Lords Messenger.

As for the book of Hester, though it be placed after this of Nehemiah, yet is
it an History of many years before: for the things therein recorded were in the
reign of Ahashuerus, Host. 1. 1.
of whom mention is made, Ezr. 4. 6. He ended his days fourscore years
before Nehemiah came to Jerusalem. The compiler of the books of the old
Testament, had more respect of the order of matter then of time in placing
Ester after Nehemiah. For Ezra and Nehemiah are one continued History, which
sets down the restoration of the Jews after their captivity. Both were
written by Ezra, and of old called the first and second book of Esdras: Apud
Hebraeos Esdrae, Neemaeque sermones inunum volumen coartantur. Hieron in Esd.
and Neem praesat. Ezr. 2. 2. -- 3. 8.
yea by the Hebrews they were both brought into one Volume.

For the foresaid end of settling the State of the Jews there were three
solemn commings of three famous persons to Jerusalem. The first was of
Zerubbabel, who being a young man laid the foundation of the Temple in the
reign of Cyrus, and being an old man finished it in the reign of Darius. The
second was of Ezra, -- 6. 15.
a ready Scribe in the Law of Moses, -- 7. 6.
whose coming was After the return of the Jews Cyrus reigned nine years, One
Darius 36. Ahashuerus 22. One Artaxerxes 40. Another Darius 19 Another
Artaxerxes 7. before Ezra came. Neh. 5. 1. etc. -- 13. 4.
about one hundred thirty and three years after the first, in the seventh
year of Artaxerxes. He came to instruct the Jews in the Law of God. The third
was of Nehemiah, thirteen years after Ezras. The end of his coming was to
build up the City of God and the wall thereof, that Gods people might therein
more freely observe Gods Ordinances, and live in safety and security from their
enemies. When he came thither he found many Grievances in the State, and
corruptions in the Church. Those he redressed, these he remooved: and withal
settled the Sabbaths Sanctification. Ne. 13. 15, etc.


To show whence he received his courage to do what he did, notwithstanding the
strong and great oppositions against him, it is often noted in this book, that
his heart was on his God, to whom on all occasions he preferred his prayer in
the beginning, progress and end of all.

So soon as he heard of an occasion of going to Jerusalem, Neh. 1. 4. etc.
he made his prayer to God. It was the first thing he did. Ever and anon was
his heart lift up unto God in the Progress. Neh. 2. 4. -- 4. 4. -- 4. 9. -- 5.
19. -- 6. 14. -- 13. 14. -- 22. -- 29.
Eight particular instances thereof betwixt his first and last prayer, are
expressly noted in this History. This History is concluded with the same prayer
that is in my Text.

Thus you see how my Text is inserted in the midst of this History, as a
Demonstration of the Support whereon this Patriot rested, and whereby he was
encouraged in his good, great, difficult, dangerous attempts.

May I in this Auditory have leave to give, meo more and modo, after my
ordinary and plain manner, the Grammatical Interpretation and Logical
Resolution of the Text, a more ready way will be made thereby for raising and
prosecuting proper Theological Observations thereout.

First, (...)
therefore of the sense.

The word translated, Think, properly signifies Remember. Neh. 1. 8. -- 6.
14. -- 13. 14. -- 22. -- 29. -- 31.
So it is in other places translated even by these Translators, and that six
times in this book applied to God.

It imports two things.

1. To keep and hold fast in mind and memory what is once known. So it is
opposed to forgetfulness: as where the Law says, Remember and Forget not.
Deuteronomy. 9. 7.


2. To call again to mind and memory what was once known, but after
forgotten: in which sense says Pharaohs Butler, Genesis 41. 9. -- 40. 23.
I do remember my faults this day. He had forgotten his faults, his
imprisonment, his dream, the interpretation and issue thereof (all which are
employed under this phrase, The chief Butler did not Remember Joseph, but
forgot him) But by the wise men's ignorance of the meaning of Pharaohs dreams,
he remembered and called to mind his faults, and what followed thereupon.

In these two respects a word derived from this root is put for a Memorial:
(...) Exodus 28. 12. (...) Est. 6. 1.
and for Records: by which matters are so kept and retained, as they are not
lost or forgotten: and by which if matters be forgotten they may be again
called to mind, as Mordecais faithfulness to the King being forgotten, was by
the Kings hearing the Records brought to his mind.

This act of Remembering is in sacred Scripture applied to God and man.

To man properly in both the forementioned acceptions. As the two proofs do
show. For to man it was said, Deuteronomy. 9. 7. Genesis 41. 9.
Remember and forget not: and he was a man that said, I do remember my faults.

To God it is most properly applied in the former signification. For he ever
fast holds in memory and never forgets what he once knows: Act. 15. 18.
And known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world.

Yea, also in the latter signification it is often attributed to God, Ier. 44. 21.
as where it is said, Did not the Lord remember them? and came it not into his
mind? The latter phrase shows that the act of remembering attributed to God
in the former clause, is meant of calling to mind what was formerly known. Job
often calls on God to remember him in this sense. Job 7, 7. -- 10, 9. -- 14,
13. (...)
In this respect God is said to have Remembrancers: to whom he thus says, Put
me in Remembrance: and to this end he is said to have a book of Remembrance.
See Margin on Isa. 62. 6. Isa. 43. 26. (...) Mal. 3. 16 (...).
But surely these things cannot be properly spoken of God. They are to be taken
tropically, by way of resemblance, after the manner of man. When men having
forgotten a friend, neglect him, do nothing for him, suffer him to want, to be
oppressed, to lie in prison, or remain in captivity, but being put in mind
that he is such and such a friend, do good to him and succor him, are said to
remember him: So God (when after long suffering his children to want such and
such a blessing, or to lie under such and such a cross, he bestows on them
the blessing which they so long waited for or freeth them from the cross under
which they lay so long) though he never forgot them, but knew and saw their
want and pressure, is said to remember them. Thus he remembered Rachell, Genesis
30. 22. Exodus 2. 24.
who had long wanted a child: and the Israelites, who had long lien under
bondage.

In brief Nehemiah by this phrase, Think upon or Remember, intends that God
would so deal with him, as he himself might have assurance and others
evidence, that God did think upon what he did and well remember it.

This Petition he makes, not as doubting of Gods good will to him, but as
resting on God for some evidence thereof. For what believers expect from God
they pray for: and what they pray for, with confidence they expect to receive.

To give further evidence of his special assiance on God, he restrains this
act of Gods good will to himself in particular, (...)
by this clause, upon me, and it carries this Emphasis, that though the Lord
regarded not them who testified no hearty affection to himself, his house or
people, yet he would think upon him whose heart was set on all these. Think
on me.

The next clause, my God, does yet further set out that his special affiance
on God. (...)
My, is an appropriating particle: yet such an one as admits others that are of
like quality. Nor this, nor the former particle of speciality, nor Me, nor My
is to be taken exclusively, as if he exempted all but himself from these
privileges, for before this, he desires God to think on others like himself,
Neh. 1. 11.
thus, O Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine care be attentive to the prayer of
thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants who desire to fear thy name.
And though Neh 28, 18. -- 6. 14. -- 7. 5. 13. 14, 15, 29, 31.
sometimes he express the relation betwixt God and himself in the singular
number, my God, yet Neh. 4, 4, 9, 20. -- 13. 18, 17
other times in the plural number, thus, our God, yea and in the second and
third persons, thus, Neh. 8. 9.
your God, Neh. 13. 26.
his God, Neh. 12. 45.
their God.

He uses the first person and singular number ( my God) to testify the full
assurance he had of his own interest in God. He uses other persons and the
plural number ( His God, Our God, Your God, Their God) to intimate the strong
persuasion he had of others like interest in God. The former is judicium
certitudinis, an assured knowledge: the latter judicium charitatis, a
charitable belief. That these two may stand together is evident by these
phrases joined together, Ruth. 1. 16.
Thy God shall be my God: Ioh. 20. 17.
I ascend to my God and your God.

By the way take notice, that the mention which I made of the singular number,
has respect to the translation, (...) De istis december nominibus lege Hier.
Epist ad Marcel. See also the Churches conquest on Exodus 17. 15. Sect. 72.
rather then to the original, especially in the title GOD. For the Hebrew word
is one of those ten titles which in sacred Sacred Scripture are as names
attributed to God; and it is of the plural number. As all the other titles
have their significations and mysteries, so this. It imports a plurality of
persons: yet so as in construction it intimates an unity, (...) Verbatim Dij
creavit. Gen 1. 1.
an unity in nature, the unity of the Deity. For it is joined with a verb of
the singular number: as in the first sentence of the Bible, which in other
languages may imply some Grammatical incongruity; but it expresses a true
Orthodox, Theological Mystery: which God from the beginning would have to be
known for his own glory and Churches good. For (even our enemies, worshippers
of false gods being Judges) our God is such a God, as no other God could ever
be imagined like unto him. Many of Gods incommunicable properties and works
have (though most unjustly and falsely) been attributed to false gods, as O
Pater o hominum, ^ivumque aeternae pote, ^ Virg. AEneid. 10.
eternity, Teque omnipotens Neptune invoco, Cic Tusc. l. 4.
omnipotency, Ovid Met l 1.
creation of Heaven and Earth, Ovis nutu and arbitrio coeum, terra, martque
reguntur, Cic ac Fin.
divine providence, and other the like. But it never came into the mind of any
Idolater to imagine his God to be three in one. The Trinity in Unity is a
mystery of mysteries, making much to the honor of him that is known and
believed to be such a God.

By it also we know and believe that the Spirit which proceeds from the
Father and the Son, and helps our infirmities, enableth us to do the will of
God and establishes us against all assaults, is true God: and that the Son
of God, the only begotten of the Father, the Mediator betwixt God and man, is
true God: and that the Father to whom we have access for all needful
blessing, is true God. Thus we have not many gods for many purposes; but one
God for all turns. One to enable us to go to the throne of grace: One to
mediate for us there: One to accept us there, all one God. Is not this a
comfortable mystery?

But this by the way.

That for which he desires his God to think upon him, (...) 2 Samuel 7 28. 1
Kin. 8. 66.
is for good. The Hebrew word properly signifies goodness, and is so
translated in sundry places, often in the Psalms and Prophets. Some therefore
here take it for a property in God, and the cause or ground of his says and
hope, and of all blessing: as if he had thus expressed it, Think on me for thy
goodness sake. This is in it self a good sense, and answerable to this of
David, Remember thou me for thy goodness sake o Lord. Ps. 25. 7.
But in my Text the particle of relation to God, ( Thy) is not expressed, and the
proposition (...) expressed, admits not that sense. (...). In bonum.
Therefore the LXX. Greek Interpreters, the ancient Latin and sundry other
translate it as our English, for good: in like manner is this very word with
this preposition turned ( Genesis 50. 20.) unto good. Thus it sets down the end
why he would have God to think on him, namely, some good, benefit, blessing to
himself. That this is here intended, is further evident by that which
follows, according to all that I have done, etc.

Look upon your books and ye will find this word, according, in another
character, which shows that it is not in the Original, as indeed it is not.
Some therefore join these two words, In bonum omnium quae feci.
good, all, together, thus, for good of all that I have done. This exposition
might well stand, (...) Distinguit mediam sententiam, and respondet colon.
but that there is an accent or pause annexed to the former word, which
distinguishes sentences, or at least the parts of a sentence. Something
therefore must be understood to make up the latter part of this sentence: and
surely our English has hit upon the fittest supplement, as the ancient Latin,
Secundum omnia.
and sundry other languages. The particle ( according) here supplied, is often on
like occasions expressed, Ps. 62. 12. (...)
as where the Psalmist says to God, Thou renderest to every man according to
his works. By this supplement no merit, but the kind or quality, and measure
or quantity of reward is intended. Gal. 6. 7, 8.
In regard of the kind, whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. He
that sows wheat shall reap wheat: he that sows tares shall reap tares: He
that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that
sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. 2 Cor. 9. 6.
In regard of the measure, He which sows bountifully shall reap bountifully.

Therefore he adds the next general particle All, (...)
for All compriseth many things under it, and excludes not any at all.

That which he pleads of his own doing in this phrase ( that I have done) is
not to be taken in reference to his own ability in and of himself: (...)
but to the manifestation of the power of Gods Spirit in him, Zach. 4. 6. 1 Cor
15. 10.
which God himself thus expresses, Not by might nor by power, but by my
spirit, and Saint Paul thus, I have labored more abundantly then they all: yet
not I, but the grace of God which was with me.

For further amplification of what he did, he ads the persons in whose behalf
he did all that he did, for this people. He means hereby the Jews, among whom
he then was, and thereupon as pointing at them, he uses a double demonstrative
particle, as if to the full it had bin thus expressed, (...)
for this people, even this. Well might he set this emphasis upon that people,
because at that time they were the only Church of God, Exodus 19. 5.
a peculiar treasure unto him above all people.

Thus have you the plain meaning of the Text.

The sum of all in two words is,

Saints Support.

Which is in one word GOD.

This Support of Saints is set down in form of a Petition.

Therein is expressed,

1. The Person petitioned.

2. The Point prayed.

The Person is set out,

1. By his general title, GOD.

2. By his special relation, MY.

In the Point prayed for, ye may observe,

1. The Kind

2. The End of it.

The Kind points at,

1. An Act desired of God, THINK UPON.

2. The special Object thereof, ME.

The End is,

1. Generally propounded, FOR GOOD.

2. Particularly amplified.

In the amplification are distinctly set down.

1. The Ground, THAT I HAVE DONE.

2. The Rule, ACCORDING TO.

3. The Extent, ALL.

4. The Restraint or Limitation, FOR THIS PEOPLE.

Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have done for this
People.

The Observations hence arisings are these.

I. GOD is the Support of Saints. This Saint by directing this his Petition to
God, gives instance hereof.

II. The LORD is a peculiar GOD to a Believer. This appropriating particle, MY,
being uttered by a believer in reference to God, evinceth as much.

III. GOD has Remembrancers. He that said to God, think upon or remember, was
such an one.

IV. GODS mind is soonest drawn to his own. He that could say, my God, was
one of Gods own and thereupon was persuaded to say to his God, think upon ME,
in confidence that God would soon so do.

V. Prayer may be made for ones own good. This phrase for good, intends as
much.

VI. Works may be pleaded before GOD. So does he that in his prayer to God
thus pleads, that I have done.

VII. Man's works are the rule of Gods reward. This is implied by the word
fitly supplied, according.

VIII. Every thing well done shall be rewarded. This general particle All,
extends to every good work, and intends such an extent of reward.

IX. Good done to GODS people is most acceptable. Thus much is manifested, as
by the expression of this people, so by the emphasis added thereto, this
people, even this.

These are the principal intendments of this Text.

That ye may the better discern the true and just ground of all these points,
and especially of this Patriots confidence, whereby he was enboldened to put
his God in mind, to think on him for good according to all that he had done
for his people. I suppose it will not be impertinent, nor yet unprofitable to
give you a brief view of such particular acts done by him, as are in this
book distinctly specified from the beginning to my Text. Hereby ye may have a
pertinent pattern for Justification of what ye have done, and direction for
what remains yet to be done: and withal ye may see in what courses and causes
ye may with confidence depend on your God and say, Think on us our God for
good, according to all that we have done for this people.

1. The first particular noted of him is an inquisitive disposition after the
State of the Church, how it fared with her. So soon as he heard that Hanani
and others were come from Judah, Neh. 1. 2.
he asked them concerning the Jews, and concerning Jerusalem. He himself was
in a safe and secure place: He had the favor of the greatest Monarch then on
Earth: yet he thought not that enough: he must know how the Church does. By
this enquiry he came to know what otherwise, it may be, he should never have
known: and then the Church might have wanted all that good which he did for
it. Ignoti nulla cuptilo.
What eye sees not or ear hears not, heart rues not. Natural men are in a
most woeful plight: But because they know nothing of it, they are no whit
moved with it, nor care to seek any redress for it. Many do nothing for the
Church, because they know nothing of the Church. Be we therefore inquisitive
after it.

2. That which he heard of the Churches distress wrought much compassion in
him: Neh. 1. 4.
For he sat down and wept, and mourned certain days. By this sympathy he
shows himself a true member of the Church. 1 Cor. 12. 26.
If one member suffer, all the members suffer with it. This cannot but beseem
the best. For of God himself it is thus said, Iud 10. 16. Isa. 63. 15. Hos. 11.
8.
His soul was grieved for the affliction of Israel. In such cases his bowels
are said to sound: and his heart to be turned within him. Art thou Lord so
affected, and afflicted at our misery, and we no whit moved with our own or
others distresses? Amo. 6. 1, etc.
Woe, says the Prophet, woe to them that are at ease, etc. that stretch
themselves upon their couches, and eat the Lambs out of the flock: that chant
to the sound of the violl: that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves
with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of
Joseph. What good can be expected from such senseless dispositions? That
compassion which was wrought in this Patriot, set him on work, to do all that
good which he did for the Church. Let this mind be in you, which was also in
him.

3. Before he attempts any thing, he goes to God. First to God, then to the
King. I prayed, says he, Neh. 1. 4.
before the God of Heaven. This made all that he did so successful as it was.
Saul, though an hypocrite, could make this apology for his overhasty sacrifice,
1 Samuel 13. 12.
The Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made
supplication to my God. A Love principium.
The very Heathen did use to begin all with their God. Should not we Christians
so do with our God? I am confident ye so do: and thereupon with confidence I
may say, Go on, and prosper.

4. He added one kind of prayer to another: to his daily, ordinary prayers, he
added extraordinary. The phrase of praying day and night, Neh. 1 6.
implies his constant morning and evening prayer, wherein he was ever mindful
of the children of Israel. His susting was an evidence of extraordinary prayer.
-- 4. (...)
This particle, now, or this day, prefixed before day and night, shows that
in this day of extraordinary prayer helped by fasting, he omitted not his
ordinary morning and evening devotion. Thus much was prefigured in the Law. Ex.
29 38, 39. Number. 28 3. etc.
For every day one Lamb was to be offered in the morning, and another at even:
on their feast days they had other solemn sacrifices enjoined, yet so as with
those extraordinary sacrifices they joined their daily morning and evening
burnt offering. In the 28. and 29. Chapters of Numbers, Numb. 28. 10, 15, 23,
24, 31. and 29, 6, 11, 16, 19, 22, 25, 28, 31, 34, 38.
where those extraordinary sacrifices on their several days are expressly set
down, this proviso ( beside the continual burnt offering) is fifteen times
repeated. Ordinary and extraordinary prayer joined together, will add life and
power each to other. Ordinary morning prayer may prove to be a good preparation
to the extraordinary ordinance: and the evening ordinary prayer a means of
calling our failings in the extraordinary to mind, of craving and obtaining
pardon for the same, and procuring a blessing in all. As for extraordinary
prayer quickened with fasting, it was never performed (if at least it were
rightly performed) without some more then ordinary blessing. That Dvell, which
cannot otherwise be cast our, may be cast out by prayer and fasting. Mat. 17.
21.
What therefore God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

I might here distinctly set out the particular branches of his powerful
prayer, as,

1. His solemn preamble, Neh. 1. 5.
whereby he shows how his mind was so fixed on Gods greatness and goodness
as it had wrought a mixture of fear and faith.

2. -- 6.
His humble confession of sin: of his own sins, of the sins of his fathers
house, yea and of the whole house of Israel. Ps 32. 5. Pro. 28. 13. 1 Ioh. 1.
9. Neh. 1. 8, 9.
This, penitently done, is the ready way for obtaining mercy and pardon.

3. His pressing Gods own promise, whereby he testifies on what ground his
faith was founded.

4. His pleading that special relation which was betwixt God and them for whom
he prayed, thus, These are thy servants, -- 10.
and thy people. By this he gives proof that the mark he aims at is Gods glory.

5. His putting God in mind of his former dealing with them, thus, whom thou
have redeemed, etc. This shows, that by God himself, and his former dealing
with them, he is put on to commend their cause to him.

6. -- 11.
His quickening of his own spirit, by his earnest, ardent expression of his mind.

But it being my purpose only to cull out such distinct acts of his as moved
him to put God in mind of him for good, it might hinder my purpose to insist on
every particular circumstance in those several acts, that are recorded of him.

I return therefore to my principal purpose.

5. His heart was ready on the sudden to be raised to God. For when the King
gave him occasion to make his mind known to him, Neh. 2. 4.
he instantly prayed to the God of Heaven: Not by turning aside and uttering
any words to God, but by lifting up his heart to God. This is called an
ejaculation of the spirit: when the spirit within a man casts up a sudden
desire to God. This sudden desire might be, that God would direct him in
ordering his desire to the King, and that God would incline the Kings heart to
grant his desire. So much was before thus expressed, Grant me mercy in the
sight of this man, meaning the King. This may be as fervent and prevalent, as a
solemn prayer uttered with the mouth, witness that ejaculation of Moses
spirit, when he was in the midst of the people, and encouraging them against
Pharaohs furious host that hotly pursued them: He then uttered no words of
prayer, yet of that ejaculation, or inward desire, says God, Exodus 14. 15.
why criest thou unto me? which phrase implies great fervency. This frequently
and heartily used argues an heavenly mind, and holy familiarity with God. This
is one way whereby we may pray always, continually, even by the readiness of
the heart to pray at all times, in all places, on all occasions, when we are
alone, or in company, in conference, reading, studying, working, or doing any
other lawful thing. Thus may I now in preaching, pray: thus may you even now
in hearing, pray. Assuredly, if we were well disposed hereunto, we might have
much better success in many things we do, then we have. What good success
had this Patriot hereupon? God moved the King to grant whatsoever he desired.
Neh. 2. 8.
In sending, in delivering Petitions to the King on earth, Pray to the GOD of
Heaven, as Nehemiah did.

6. Together with all sorts of prayer to God, Neh. 2. 5.
he uses humane helps. He gratefully acknowledges the Kings former favor: --
7.
He humbly supplicateth leave to go to Judah: -- 8.
he desires a safe convoy: he craveth the Kings Letters patent for all useful
and needful Timber out of his Forests. All these were lawful means: and
such means are the hand of Gods providence, whereby he brings matters to
pass. It is true indeed, that man lives not by bread alone: Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
means alone without Gods blessing do no good. Asaes fault consisted not
simply in this, 2 Chr. 16. 12.
that in his disease he sought to the Physicians, but in this, that he sought
not to the Lord A woe is denounced against those that take counsel, Isa. 30.
1. -- 31. 1.
but not of the Lord, and that cover with a covering, but not of his Spirit.
But true also it is, that where means are meet to be used, God will not bring
matters to pass without means. In the great danger wherein Paul, and all in
the Ship with him were, God promised that there should be no loss of any man's
life among them: yet when the Ship-men (who are an especial means of help in
fear of wreck) were about to fly out of the Ship, Paul said, except these
abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. It will therefore be our wisdom to
observe in the matters that we enterprise, what lawful means may be helpefull
thereto, and with prayer to use the same. By using means without prayer we
presume: by praying without the use of means we tempt God.

7. He goes himself to the place where he intended to do good. Neh. 2, 11.
I came to Jerusalem, says he. The desire that he had to have the work
thoroughly don, moved him to go himself about it, and not to put it off to
others. If men of place and power, who wish well to Church and State, were so
minded, there would not be so many miscarriages in weighty matters, 2 King 4 30.
as often fall out. The Shunamite would not leave the Prophet, till he himself
went to her child. His servant went with his staff, but effected nothing;
When he himself came, the deed was soon done. A difference betwixt a
Gentleman that holds his land in his own hands, and scarce raises up so
much as the ordinary rent amounts to, and the Farmer, who beside the rent,
raises up a good livelihood, herein lies; That the Gentleman lying in bed, or
following his pleasures, says to his servants, Go Sirs, intending that they
should go about his work: But the Farmer says, Gaw Sirs, Oculus Domini
pascit equum.
that is, Go we, together, or go with me. This Proverb, the eye of the
Master makes the horse fat, intends as much. This may be a good pattern to
you Governors, to us Ministers, and to all that have the charge of matters of
moment.

8. He himself takes an especial view of the ruins of Jerusalem. Neh. 2. 13.
I went out by night, says he, and viewed the walls of Jerusalem, which were
broken down, etc. He had heard thereof before: but now he was an eyewitness;
and this increased his compassion, enflamed his zeal, and stirred him up more
diligently and thoroughly to repair the ruins, and make up the breaches which
he had seen with his own eyes. Sight of distress is of great force to work
on the affections, and to procure succor. Luke 10. 33.
The Samaritan who came where the wounded man was, Tu desceude iudaginis
studio, ne quid sit quod sallat, aut lateat. Ambx. de Pateiach. Abr l. 1. c. 6.
and saw him, had compassion on him, and succored him. Do ye likewise what ye
can, to take special notice of the particular cases of such as are in
distress, that nothing beguile you, nothing be concealed from you. Go to
prisons, visit the sick, cast your eyes on miserable objects.

9. He puts others in mind of that which he and they saw: Neh. 2. 17.
and stirs them up thereby to be assistant to him, in these words, ye see the
distress that we are in, etc. Come, and let us build up the wall, etc. This he
did to stir up such a spirit in many others, as he himself had, and to
obtain their help: that so the great work might the better go on. For many
hands make light work. Multorum manibus grande levatur onus.
The fruit and benefit hereof is distinctly set down in the third Chapter.
Wherefore think it not enough (in great matters, which of and by your selves
ye cannot to purpose accomplish) think it not enough to do, even to the
uttermost what lies in your own power: stir up others to be aiding and
assisting to you. This justifies your Protestation, your Subsidies, Pole Money,
Landrate, Loanes, and other means used for assistance from others in the
weighty works you have in hand.

10. He manifests invincible courage against such adversaries as sought to
blast all his good intents and endeavors. Neh. 2. 19 20.
When Sanballat and others laughed them to scorn, and despised them, he with a
confident spirit said, The God of Heaven he will prosper us; Therefore we his
servants will arise and build. Behold his courage, behold the ground thereof.
We will arise and build. O undaunted Spirit! God will prosper us: a sure and
safe ground. If in any thing ye imitate this Patriot, herein imitate him. Be
not discouraged by adversaries. 1 Cor. 16. 9.
Where God opens a great and effectual door to his servants, there will be
many adversaries: Phil. 1. 28.
But in nothing be terrified by them: and that ye may in nothing be terrified
by them, so place your confidence on God, as ye may in faith say, The God of
Heaven he will prosper us.

The third Chapter distinctly describes the assistance that was afforded by
others in fencing the City, and is an express demonstration of the benefit of
helpers, set down in the ninth branch. I therefore pass over this Chapter,
that I may hasten to my Text.

11. In an holy zeal, and just indignation, he imprecates vengeance against
proud, scornful, implacable enemies of Gods Church, in this manner, Turn
their reproach upon their own head, Neh. 4. 4.
and give them for a prey in the land of their captivity, and cover not their
iniquity, etc. I must confess that the imprecations of holy men recorded in
sacred Scripture, are sharp, two edged tools: not for every ones handling.
When Christ's Disciples would have commanded fire (as Eliah did) to come down
from Heaven to consume the Samaritans, Luke 9. 54. 55.
he rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of.
Particular imprecations against particular persons are not for every spirit;
but for such extraordinary spirits, as Prophets and Apostles had: Yet thus
far may every faithful spirit testify his holy zeal in this very kind of
imprecation, by an indefinite extending it against such as are indeed
mischievous and irreconcilable enemies of the Church. But because Saul may
prove a Paul, and a persecutor may prove a preacher of the Gospel, we may not
imprecate against any particular persons, yet against their mischievous
practices we may.

12. Them whom he incited to assist him, he encouraged, and that by the same
ground of encouragement whereby he himself was encouraged. He was encouraged
by his confidence on God; Neh. 2. 20. -- 4. 14.
and thus he encourages others, Be not ye afraid of them, remember the Lord,
who is great and terrible. To such a purpose tends this of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
1. 4.
God comfort us in all our tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them
which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted
of God. Ye that are strong, do what ye can to strengthen others: Ye whose
spirits are lofty and steady, lift up and hold up the spirits of others: put
courage into others, ye that are men of courage. This was Christ's advice to
Peter, Luke 22. 32.
When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren, etc.

13. In an extraordinary case he uses extraordinary diligence and vigilance.
Neh. 4. 8, 11, 12
The manifold mischievous plots of their adversaries showed their danger to be
more then ordinary. Ver. 0, 16, 17, 20, 21, 23.
In this case, he set a watch against them day and night: One half of his
servants wrought in the work, the other half held offensive and defensive
weapons. Every workman wrought with one hand, and with another held a weapon,
they had a trumpet to draw them all to the place of danger; they daily watched
from the rising of the Morning till the Stars appeared: none of them put off
their clothes, saving that every one put them off for washing. Is not now the
more then ordinary pains, watching, loosing meals meat, defensive provision,
and diligence used by our Parliament, is it not every way warrantable and
commendable? Have we any cause to complain thereof? Have we not just cause to
bless God therefore?

14. He redresses home-grievances. He thought it not enough to secure the City
from public enemies, unless also he eased the common people from the
oppression of their Governors. Neh. 5. 1, etc.
For there was a great cry of the people and of their wives, against their
brethren the Jews, who were Governors, and had power over them. The
particulars of their complaints are expressly related. -- 6, etc.
This good Patriot hears them all, is much offended at the wrongdoers,
advises about redress, and so orders the matter, that for the wrong done,
restitution and satisfaction is made; and for the future, order is taken that
there be no more such grievances.

Ye that justly have obtained the name of good Patriots, and have begun to
redress many grievances, go on in that good work, till through Gods blessing
and your endeavors it be brought to some good perfection, as Nehemiah's was.
Hear complaints, receive Petitions, examine Accusations, punish Delinquents,
cause restitution of that which is uniustly taken away, and satisfaction for
that which is wrongfully done, to be made.

Ye are now the great Judges of this land: Iudex and Ara idem: pariter enim ad
utru^que confugiunt qui inturia afficiu^tur. Archite dict. Job 29. 12.
and of old it was said, that the Altar and Judge are as one, in that such as
are wronged fly to the one and the other for succor. Such was Jobs practice. I
delivered, says he, the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that
had none to help him. Remembrance hereof much comforted him against his friends
unjust calumnies in the depth of his great miseries.

15. He relieved such as were in distress. It was not a pharasaicall brag, but
a known truth, which he thus professes of himself, Neh. 5. 8.
We after our ability have redeemed our brethren, etc. To him it seemed not
sufficient to redress the wrongs which others had done, and to take off the
heavy burdens which others had laid upon the backs of their poor brethren
(which was a great privitive good) unless also positively be relieved with
money, corn, and other necessaries, and that gratis, such as were in need.

Hereby we see how far our works of mercy ought to extend. This to the life
is thus exemplified by a Prophet, Isa. 58. 6, 7.
in the name of the Lord: Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, to loose the
bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go
free, and that ye break every yoke? (Though this be most properly meant of
redressing such wrongs, as men themselves do, yet may it also be extended to
redressing the wrongs which others do; but for the point which we have in hand,
mark what follows) Is it not to break thy bread to the hungry, and that thou
bring the poor that are cast out, to thy house, etc. This is the extent of
charity.

16. He brought them to a solemn covenant and oath to bind them to that good
order that he had made, Neh. 5 12.
lest they should start from it. It is thus expressed, I took an oath of them
that they should do according to their promise. (Their promise was this, We
will restore them, and will require nothing of them: so will we do as thou
say.) Yea he made a terrible imprecation against every one that performed
not this promise. He feared least in his absence, when he should in the time
limited return to the King, they would return to their former exactions and
oppressions. Therefore he would hereby restrain them. A pious and prudent
course. The like course we read to be taken by Asa, who bound his people by
Covenant and Oath to remain faithful with the Lord. 2 Chr. 15 12. etc.


This is the rather to be noted for justification and commendation of the
course which both Houses of Parliament have taken, about bringing most of this
Land into a solemn Covenant. The Lord make men faithful in keeping it, and
give a happy issue thereto.

17. For the peoples good in their necessity he remitted of his own right. For
he was by the King appointed a Governor; and Governors had allowances due to
them, which former Governors had taken: By reason hereof they were chargeable
to the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty shekels of
silver (that is, Neh. 5. 14, 15. Siclus S Scripturae po^derabat stateremunum,
seu semiunciam Shind.
five pounds sterling; for a shekell is half an ounce, which makes two
shillings six pence: They exacted the foresaid bread and wine, that is, all
manner of provision, ( (...) Post argeti ficlos, posl quam accepissent ab eis
40 siclos argenti, olim constituros ancibus pro victu suo. Vatabl Summumius
summa tniuria. Ci. Offic l and Orat pro Mur.
beside the forty shekels, which was their set allowance) But, says he, from
the time that I was appointed to be their Governor, I and my brethren have not
eaten the bread of the Governor. He renders this reason hereof, because of the
fear of God.

They therefore that fear the Lord will be like minded: they will not
over-strictly stand upon their right, especially in times of necessity, and
cases of extremity. Over-strict standing upon right may prove a great
oppression.

18. He, though a Governor, did bear a part in that which he required others
to do. I also, says he, continued in the work of the wall: Neh 5. 16.
neither bought we any Land: and all my servants were gathered thither unto the
work. He had done much for them through the Kings favor to him, Neh. 2. 8.
and through that power and authority which the King had given him: For he
obtained for them as much timber as was needful out of the Kings Forest: He
drew on others that were able to help on the building of the walls: He made
special provision for their security against their adversaries: He did many
other good turns for them; yet so long as there remained any thing which might
further be done by him or his, all that he had done, though it were much,
seemed to him too little.

A worthy pattern this is to such as have done much good, to observe whether
yet there be any thing wherein they may do more good, Gal. 6. 9.
Let us not be weary in well doing.

19. Rom 12. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 9. Neh. 5. 17.
He was given to Hospitality, and used it without grudging. For there were at
his Table one hundred and fifty of the Jews and Rulers, besides those that
came unto them from among the Heathen. So as he entertained all of all sorts:
Heb. 13. 2.
such as had their habitations thereabouts, and such as were strangers and came
out of other countries. Thus he made his entertainment not only a work of
courtesy in affording it to Neighbors and Rulers, who might have provided for
themselves: but also of charity in extending it to strangers. How bountiful he
was therein is made evident by the daily provision prepared for those purposes,
as one Ox, six choice Sheep: also Fowls once in ten days, and store of all
sorts of wine. Hospitality to strangers as well as others, Genesis 18. 1, etc. --
19. 1. etc. Heb. 13. 2. Mat. 25. 34, 35.
is so acceptable to God, as he sent Angels with blessed tidings to be guests
to such persons: and Christ reckons up this work of charity in special and by
name among those which he does most abundantly recompense.

I will conclude this particular with that exhortation which Christ gave upon
another act of Hospitality, Luke 10. 37.
Go and do likewise.

20. Whatsoever he did, he did in respect to God. He expected no reward from
man: nor did he propound any bie-ends to himself: nor did any thing on
bie-respects. My Text gives a plain demonstration hereof. For thereby we see
that his mind was fixed on his God. On God he calls to think upon him, from God
he expects his reward for all that he had done. How many Nehemiahs, how many
good and zealous Patriots would this and other Kingdoms have, if we had many
men of place and parts so minded? Every one that minds God in every good thing
that he does, and expects his reward from him, in such a way, after such a
manner as Nehemiah did, may with like confidence say to God, Think on me my
GOD for good, according to all that I have done for this people.

By this recollection of the principal acts of this Patriot, you see what
remarkable matters he did: what difficulties and dangers he passed through,
what encouraged and emboldned him to stand against so many, mighty, malignant
adversaries as he met withal, and what was the happy issue of all. Hereby also
you may further see what becomes worthy Patriots to do: (...) (virtutem
intelligit) (...), etc. Hesiod.
what dangers and difficulties they may meet withal: (for what excellent work
is not environed with many difficulties, yea and dangers too?) with what
courage and constancy they ought to stand against malignant parties: on whom
they may securely place their confidence: and on what ground any one may say,
Think on me, my GOD, for good, according to all that I have done for this
people.

Thus have I brought you again to my Text: which (as you heard before) affords
many considerable Observations. So much time has bin spent in setting out the
pattern of a worthy Patriot, as there can be no expectation of handling all
the nine Doctrines collected out of this Text. The first is the chiefest of all
and comprizeth the pith of all the rest within it. May I have liberty and
ability to touch upon it, I will give place to my reverend Brother, that with
greater strength may hold out the solemnization of this days humiliation.

The first Observation is this,

God is the Support of Saints.

1. He is a Support, because he is God.

2. He is so to Saints, because he is a peculiar God to them.

3. Saints know it to be so, in that they are Gods Remembrancers, and call upon
him to think upon them.

4. Saints with more confidence rest on God for Support, because his mind is
soonest drawn to them: whereupon every Saint says to God, think upon me.

5. Their expectation of good from God further shows, that they take him for
their Support.

6. Their pleading of their works before God, gives further proof to the
point.

7. The rather in that their works are the rule according to which God rewards
them.

8. And in that he rewards every good work of theirs.

9. And finally, in that God has most and best respect to that which is done
to his people.

Thus you see how the eight subsequent Doctrins have an eye to the first: so as
I had cause to say, that the first compriseth the pith of all the rest within
it. I come now directly and distinctly to handle it by it self. It is this,

God is the Support of Saints.

Many, many Epithites attributed to him in sacred Scripture, are as so many
proofs of the point: such as these, Ps. 14 6.
Refuge, -- 31. 2.
House of defense, -- 6 13.
Shelter, Ps 18. 2.
Fortress, high Tower, Buckler, Rock, -- 119 114.
Hiding place, Isa 49. 26.
Savior, Redeemer, Ps. 40 17.
Deliver -- 54. 4.
Helper, Heb. 11. 6.
Rewarder, yea Ps. 27. 1.
Salvation, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Redemption, Ps 115. 9.
Help, Genesis 15. 1.
Exceeding great Reward. These latter Epithites being in the abstract (whereby
is showed that all Salvation, Redemption, Help and Reward arise only and wholly
from him) add much Emphasis to the point.

There are two especial grounds thereof.

1. Saints taking God to be their Support.

2. Gods undertaking to be to his Saints, what they take him to be.

To him on all occasions they have recourse for Support: and He answerably
supporteth them that have recourse to him. He never fails them that seek him.

Three things move Saints to take God for their Support.

1. The many enemies and dangers whereunto they are here subject. This world is
a wilderness of wild and ravenous Beasts. All sorts of wicked men are those
wild and ravenous Beasts: they are as Lions, Tigers, Bears, Wolves, and such
like. Saints are as Sheep and Lambs. In allusion hereunto says Christ, Mat.
10. 16.
Behold I send you forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves. This their condition
in this world makes them seek for a Support.

2. Their own manifold infirmities by reason of the flesh which they carry
about them. They are (to use the woman of Tekoahs phrase) as water spilt upon
the ground, 2 Samuel 14. 14.
which cannot be gathered up again: or to use a more pertinent comparison, They
are as a Vine full of most sweet and useful fruit, yet so weak, as it cannot
stand of it self, without a frame, or some other support to bear it up. The
weakness of Saints makes them seek for a strong support: which they know God
to be.

3. The impotency and disability of any creature to help and support them.
Ezekiel. 20. 6, 7.
All creatures are as reeds, weak, brickle, full of teeth: if they be leaned
upon they will soon break and tear the flesh of such as lean upon them. So
as it is not only unusefull and in vain, but also dangerous and damageable to
rest on mere creatures for a support.

More then three things move God to be for his Saints, what they take him to
be: as

1. That ancient love which of his own goodwill he did bear to them before
they were, yea before the worlds were. This does the Apostle lay down as the
ground of all those spiritual blessings wherewith God blesses us, Ephesians. 1. 3,
4, 5, 6. This he makes the ground of Gods quickening us together with Christ,
Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6.
and of his raising us up together, and making us sit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus.

2. 1 Cor 6. 20 1 Pet. 1. 19. Heb. 9. 12
That price which the Son of God has paid for them, which was his own
precious blood. Hereby he obtained eternal redemption for them.

3. Romans 8 34. Heb 7. 25.
That continual intercession which he makes for them at the right hand of his
Father. Hereby he procures continuance of Gods favor to them.

4. That stamp or impression of Gods image, which the Holy Ghost has set in
them, Ephesians 1 13. -- 4 30.
and whereby by they are sealed unto the day of Redemption: Hereby God knows
them to be his.

5. The many promises which God has made to them of caring and providing for
them, and of protecting them from all dangers and evils, Heb. 10. 23.
and faithful is he who has promised.

6. Their faith in resting upon those promises. This makes them put God in mind
thereof, as He did, Ps. 119. 49.
who thus said, Remember thy word (meaning his word of promise) upon which thou
have caused me to hope.

This Act of Saints in taking God for their support is an evidence of that
wisdom and prudence wherein God, 1 Information in the wisdom of Saints who
take God for their support. Ephesians. 1. 7, 8.
according to the riches of his grace, has abounded toward them. For such as
are not able to stand of themselves, to seek a Support, and such an one as of
it self can sufficiently support them, so as they need seek to no others, is
questionless an especial part of prudence. But such a support the Lord is. For

1. 1 Chr. 19 9.
The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole Earth to show
himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him: so
as he is not, he cannot be ignorant of the needs or distresses of any of his
Saints. Exodus 3. 7.
I have surely seen the affliction of my People, says the Lord.

2. As the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, 1 Pet. 3. 12.
so his ears are open to their prayers. What cry soever they make to him in
their disresse for succor and support, he hears.

3. He is ready and forward to do what he sees to be needful and useful for
them, I know their sorrows, and I am come down to deliver them, says the
Lord to his people that were in distress. Many promises has he made for
granting their desires. Psalm. 50. 15.
The more to set out Gods forwardness in granting his Saints desires, Dan. 9.
23.
an Angel sent from God to Daniel while he was praying, thus says, At the
beginning of thy supplication the Commandment came forth, Isa. 65. 24.
etc. and the Lord himself, thus, before they call I will answer, and whiles
they are yet speaking I will hear.

4. Psalm. 86. 15. Ier. 31. 20.
He is full of compassion: in so much as his bowels are troubled for his
children when they are in any distress: thereupon he makes this inference, I
will surely have mercy upon them. Nothing sooner moves any to succor and
support, then compassion. It is often noted to be the cause of that ready succor
which Christ in the days of his flesh afforded to all that came to him, that
he had compassion on them, Mat. 14. 14. -- 15 30. ark. 1. 41.
and was moved therewith.

5. He is able to support his in their greatest weaknesses, Ephesians. 7. 13.
and to deliver them out of their greatest distress. Behold (says the Lord) I
am the Lord the God of all flesh. Ier. 32. 27. Luke 18. 27.
Is there any thing too hard for me? The things which are unpossible with men
are possible with God.

6. As God is might in strength, so in wisdom. His understanding is infinite.
Job 36. 5. Psalm. 147. 5.
He best knows when to support his and how: yea and how long to continue his
support to them. If at any time he seem to leave them to themselves, he does
it purposely, prudently, for good ends to good uses. And even then when he
suffers them to lie under afflictions, he so wisely supporteth them, as they
are enabled to endure it, and are not overburdened: Witness he that said, We
are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, 2 Cor. 4. 8,
9.
but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not
destroyed: Yea through his wisdom ( as at first he commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
so) he brings much good to Saints out of their troubles. For we know that
all things work together for good to them that love God. This by good
experience he found to be true in himself, Psalm. 119. 7.
who said, It is good for me that I have been afflicted.

These considerations of the notice that God has of his peoples state and
case, of his hearing their prayers, of his forwardness to grant their desires,
of his compassion at their distress, of his power and ability to help, and of
his wisdom in ordering the season and manner of succor: These and other like
considerations give a clear and evident demonstration, that God is a safe,
sure, and secure support, whereby the wisdom of Saints is manifested in
taking him for their support. In this therefore respect, as in many others,
Deuteronomy 4. 6.
it may be said of them, Surely this is a wise and understanding people.

On the other side, 2 Demonstration of their folly who take not God for their
support.
it must needs be a part of egregious folly and plain dotage, to confide in,
or trust unto any other support then this God. Yet most in the world are such
doting fools: As,

1. Psalm. 14. 1.
Atheists, who say in their hearts there is no God. Surely they who deny him to
be, will not rest on him for support.

2. Pagans, who being ignorant of the one only true God, place their
confidence on such things as never were, never had any true being, but were
mere fantasies and imaginations of men's vain brain. Such as Baalim,
Ashteroh, Dagon, Molech, and such other as are mentioned in sacred Scripture:
And Jupiter, Juno, Apollo, Diana, Mercury, Venus, and multitudes of the like
reckoned up by the heathen. Hesiod in Osoyor.
One of their Poets reckons up about thirty thousand of them: Others more.

3. Purch. Pilgr. of Asia, l. 4. c. 1.
Indian Savages, who make the Devil their support, and adore him, that he may
not hurt them and their cattle. A part of their country is called Terra
Diaboli, the Devils Land. To retort upon these in their own kind, Not only
no hurt, but good, is to be expected from such as are adored, as it is in my
Text, Think upon me for good.

4. Papists, who make the innumerable company of Angels, the blessed Virgin
Mary, Apostles, Confessors, Martyrs, and all that their Popes have canonized:
Whereof some may be accounted, such as the forementioned Gods of the Pagans,
mere fantasies and imaginations; and others, without breach of charity, may
be judged to be damned wretches in Hell.

5. Worldlings, who rest on mortal men, and earthly means, which are all like
to the forementioned weak reed full of teeth. Isa. 31. 1.
The Prophet denounces a woe against such.

6. 2 Samuel 16. 21. and 17. 1, etc. 1 Samuel 17. 8. etc.
Self-boasters, who trust to themselves, to their own parts, or to that
command which they have over others: As Achitophel who relied on his own wit;
Isa. 10. 8, etc.
Goliath on his own strength; the Assyrian on the great command which he had:
so others to other things; all which turn to their ruin.

Of all these, and others like to these, I may, concerning the case in hand,
take up the Prophets patheticall Exclamation, Ier. 2. 12, 13.
Be astonished, O ye Heavens at this and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate, says the Lord: For my people have committed two evils; they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisternes,
broken cisternes that can hold no water.

As for you that have been so far enlightened as to know God to be the only
sure and safe support, 3 Exhortation to use God as a Support.
and thereupon have been moved to take him for your support, be now further in
the name of this God exhorted, to use him as a support. Use him as a Refuge,
Shelter, House of Defense, Fortress, high Tower, Buckler, Shield, Rock, Hiding
place. These resemblances will afford good help for making a right use of the
Lord in this very point, as he is a support to his Saints.

1. A refuge is a place for such as are in danger to fly unto for succor and
security. Such were the Cities of Refuge among the Jews. When a man was
unjustly suspected of wilful murder, and hotly pursued by the avenger of
blood, he made all the speed he could to the City of Refuge. There was his
cause rightly judged, there might he be secure. Do you also fly to God in all
undue suspicions and unjust accusations. In him you may be sure to have your
cause righted, and your persons secured.

2. A Shelter is for such as in their journey are overtaken taken with showers
of rain, with hail, snow, storm or tempest: In such cases, if a traveller espy
a shelter, he will make haste to it. God has undertaken to be a covert from
storm and rain. Isa. 4 6.
When the raging rain of oppression, or storm of persecution, or violent
tempest of any malignant opposition falls upon you, shelter your selves under
the covert of your God.

3. An House of Defense, or Castle, or Fortress, or High Tower, are all for
safety against armies of enemies that compass us about, and besiege us, and
would utterly destroy us, if we had not such a place of safety. Now the Lord is
indeed an high and strong Tower, an impregnable Castle: abide therefore in him,
and fear not, though multitudes of enemies do on every side set against you.
They are safe whom the Lord does keep.

4. A Buckler or Shield is of singular use to keep off push of pike, stroke of
sword, force of dart, arrow or bullet that shall be flung, or shot against us:
So faith in God will keep off all assaults of Satan, even all the fiery darts
of the Devil; Ephesians. 6. 16.
much more the furious, envious, and malicious words and deeds of wicked men.

5. A Rock is a firm and sure foundation. An edifice that is well erected and
settled on it, cannot be overthrown. Mat 7 24, 25.
Though the rain descend and the floods come, and the wind blow, and beat upon
that house, yet it falls not because it is founded on a rock. For application of
this Metaphor, note what Christ says of himself as he is a rock: Mat 16. 18.
Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it.

Again, a rock being in the Sea remains immovable: The strongest tempests and
violentest waves of the Sea cannot shake it, much less overthrow it. If
therefore any who have suffered shipwreck lie floating on the Sea, and espy a
rock, they will make to it: so in our greatest troubles, and most desperate
dangers, let us get to God the rock of our salvation, and we may be sure to be
safe.

6. An hiding place, is that wherein in many beasts do repose themselves on
all occasions: As a Connies burrow, a Foxes hole, a Lions den: when they are
there they think themselves safe: There therefore they use to sleep; there
they use to carry the prey they get, and there to eat it: if they be hunted, or
fear any danger, they will make thither as fast as they can: If they be hurt or
wounded, there they use to lick themselves whole: yea in these their hiding
places they die for the most part, if at least they be not surprised, and killed
when they are out of their den or hiding place. Seeing it pleases the Holy
Ghost to attribute unto God this resemblance of Psalm. 119. 114. (...)
safety (For the Psalmist styles God his hiding place: and the Prophet a
covert) give me leave in Christ's phrase to say unto you, Latibulu^ meum. Isa 4.
6. (...)
Behold the beasts of the field: Behold them in this particular, Abscontio.
and use God your hiding place, as they use their holes and dens. On all
occasions repose your selves on him, and rest secure in him when ye sleep, when
ye wake. Have ye good success in your affairs? (as the beast thinks he has
when he gets a prey) go to God to rejoice in him, and to give the praise to
him. Do thy affairs succeed ill? even then also go to God, to mourn in him,
to power out thy soul into his bosom. Art thou hunted or persecuted? fly to
God for succor and protection. Art thou abused, wronged, or hurt? To God for
redress and right. In peace and trouble, in hope and fear, in safety and
danger, in all cases, on all occasions have recourse to God, live in God, die
in God.

Do this the rather, because as follows in the next observation.

The Lord is a peculiar God to a believer.

But my time is slipped out, and I find my strength to fail, and you find my
voice to fall, willingly therefore I give place to my reverend brother: Only
let us first call upon God for his blessing upon that which has been
delivered, and give him thanks for his gracious assistance.

FINIS

