THE World to Come. OR, The Kingdom, of Christ asserted, In two Expository
LECTURES On Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. verses. PROOVING That between the state of this
World as now it is, and the state of things after the day of Judgment, when
God shall be all in all; There is a world to come, which is of purpose, and in
a more especial manner appointed for Jesus Christ to be King, and wherein he
shall more eminently Reign. Preached by Mr. Tho: Goodwin many years since, at
ANTHOLINS, LONDON. Published for the Truths sake.

DAN. 7. 27. And the Kingdom and dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole heaven, shall be given to the Saints of the most high, whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey
him. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold in Pope's Head Alley, and in
Westminster Hall, 1655.

THE WORLD TO COME. OR, The Kingdom of Christ asserted. In two Expository
LECTURES.
EPHESIANS. 1. 21, 22. Far above all principality, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in
that which is to come; and has put all things under his feet.
THese words set forth, and proclaim the supremacy of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ over all persons, by what names or titles soever distinguished, or
dignified in all Gods dominions, belonging either to this world, or that which
is to come. I showed you before what it was, for Christ to sit at Gods right
hand, as also how it was amplified by the subl^mity of the condition, and by
the quality of the persons, over whom Jesus Christ is set: by Principalities,
Might, and Dominions, he would include all sorts whatsoever, as Angels good and
bad, and so Magistrates. Now I am to speak of the extent of Christ's dominion,
and that is in this world, and in the world to come; the great thing to be
opened, is, what is meant by the world to come; There are three interpretations
given of the words.

heaven and earth, this state of the world on earth, and that state of the
world in heaven, which are two worlds, only here will be a question, why heaven
should be called a world to come, when it is extant now as well as the earth,
which is called the present world: To which it may be answered, that though
heaven be a world now that is extant, yet to us poor creatures here below it is
a world to come, though it was created at the same time this lower world was,
its comfort to Saints that they have a world to come; for wicked men come in
for the greatest share in this, therefore called men of this world; let them
take it, its their world; Saints have a world to come, Luke 18. 13. but this
does not seem to be that which the Apostle aims at here.

the duration of Christ's kingdom that it is everlasting; for so in Scripture
it is used to express eternity, Mat. 12. 32. And therefore Isa. 9. 6. which we
translate the eternal Father; the Septuagint reads, the Father of the world to
come, and so Christ's kingdom is said to be for ever and ever; that is, not
for one ever but for all evers, the Apostle in Heb. 10. 12. says, that Christ
after he had offered one sacrifice for sin, for ever sat down at the right
hand of God. Now that word for ever does not relate to Christ's sitting at Gods
right hand, but rather to the sacrifice he offered, who for ever by one
sacrifice took away sin; for it may be said that there are not Principalities
and powers for ever, that Christ may sit for ever at Gods right hand; when this
world ends, there will be an end of all Principalities, and powers, 1 Cor. 15.
24. Then comes the end, when he shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father
and shall put down all rule, etc. Take notice in what sense Christ has a
kingdom, and sits at Gods right hand for ever, and in what sense he is said to
give up this kingdom to the Father, I would clear it by two distinctions.

a natural kingdom due to Jesus Christ as he is in the Godhead, and a
natural inheritance due to him being man, as he is joined to the Godhead: For
so he inherits the privileges of that second person, which is this natural
Kingdom, which he obtained, and which was due to him by inheritance, Heb. 1.
8. To the son he said, thy throne O God is for ever and ever: he speaks of
his natural inheritance, though the right be involved in him as he is God, and
so he is joined in commission for ever as God and man with the Father, and so
in respect of this natural dominion of his all things are said to be made by
him and for him, Col. 1. 16. Now this natural right that Jesus Christ has
remains for ever, and accordingly many of those privileges which are to be
understood by his sitting at the right had of God, they likewise must remain
for ever.

As first, a fullness of joy; At thy right hand is fullness of joy. Jesus
Christ does enjoy a fullness of joy immediately by God himself.

Secondly, All that personal honor and those glorious abilities which he was
filled and crowned with, when he went first to heaven, Heb. 2. 9. all these
shall remain to eternity; And they are naturally due to Christ, though they
were bestowed on him then when he came to heaven; he is thus in commission with
his Father, so far as natural rule goes, though in that respect less then
the Father.

2. The second part of this distinction is, that there is a dispensa^ory
kingdom that Christ has, and that is, as he is considered as Mediator between
God and his Church, which kingdom is given to him, it is not by nature due to
him, but as he was the Son of God, he was chosen our to exercise that power
which in this kingdom is held forth, and this is pointed out by his sitting at
Gods right hand, which God gave him as the reward of his obedience, John 5. 22,
23. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son; It
is committed to Christ, he is that Lord that God has set up to do all his
business for him visibly and apparently; and this kingdom is in a special
manner appropriated to Christ; it is so Christ's, as it is not the Fathers, in a
more eminent manner; the Father judges no man. To appropriate a work to one
person rather then another, is an act of Gods wisdom; hence it is that Christ
has his work for a time, and afterward gives it up to another, till the day
of judgment be over Jesus Christ has the government of the kingdom, and
shall reign; but after the day of judgment, the kingdom is to be given up to
the Father, and the reasons why God has appointed a time of reigning to Christ.

First, is to draw all men's thoughts to him; that is, that all men might honor
the Son, as they honor the Father. John 5. 22. As for every work there is a
season, so likewise for every person, wherein they shall in a special manner
be more glorious.

Secondly, this was a reward exceeding due to Jesus Christ, that he should have
a kingdom appropriated to him for a season, that all judgment should be
commi^ed to him, and he should draw all men's eyes to him in a more immediate
manner, because he veiled himself in obedience to his Father; therefore the
Father to recompense him, he will not appear himself so much in the
government; says he, let my Son take it, I will commit all judgment to him;
and see the equity of this, because God will put all things under the feet of
Christ, therefore will he again give up all things to God, and be subject
himself to him as God-man, 1 Cor. 15. 28. Though Jesus Christ has this
kingdom and means to conquer all his enemies, before he give it up: yet when
he is in the height of his dominion, when he is in his full triumph, and has
cleared all the worlds accounts, then will he give up the kingdom to the
Father; which may teach us, when we are highest, and most assisted and raised,
to fall down and give glory to the Lord; so Jesus will do when he has all
enemies under his feet, and judged and pronounced sentence upon all, then will
he set up his father, deliver up the kingdom unto him, and he shall become all
in all, this will be the last and great solemnity of all.

This is the first distinction, his natural kingdom which is due to him as
man joined to God, that remains forever, but there is something of his
Mediatory kingdom to be given up.

This Mediators kingdom it receives a double consideration.

First, Consider Christ as a Mediator for the Church, and so consider him as
under imperfection, sin, or misery, or any other want, till they shall be
complete; or

Secondly, Consider him as he is head to the Church, made complete, and
perfected in all parts and degrees, that I may explain my self: You may call to
mind, that when I opened the third and fourth verses, compared with the seventh
verse, I told you that in election there were two great designs or
contrivements; the one was more principal, and chief, which I called Gods
decree of the end, what Gods design was to make us, and there it was that God
chose us in Christ as a head unto absolute glory, which with Christ and in
Christ we shall have for ever in the highest heavens.

Secondly, God designed the way unto this end, and so God was pleased, that he
might set off the glory of that perfect state the more; therefore he lets us
fall into sin and misery, and suffers our bodies and souls, to be separated,
before we shall come to that end which God has designed us to; To enjoy this
Canaan, we must go through a wilderness to it. Now answerable to this double
design of God, Jesus Christ has a double relation to his Church, the one as a
head simply considered, and so were chosen in him, to that perfect state unto
which God has designed us; Secondly, Christ has the relation of a Redeemer
and Mediator for us, that as we are fallen into sin, and misery, and
distress, so he might redeem us and help us; now while the Church is in an
imperfect state, and has not all its members, nor they out of all danger
neither; though they be in no real danger, yet they are to give an account of
their actions, and there is a final sentence to be past upon them; and in that
sense, there may be said to be forgiveness of sin in the world to come, and
therefore Paul prays for one, that he may find mercy at that day; Now while
there is any such thing as guilt, or the appearance of it, or any imperfection,
and till that final sentence be past, so long is Jesus Christ a Mediator for
us, and so God has given him all power in heaven and earth, to give eternal
life to them that believe: Now so long as Jesus Christ rules in a way of
conflict, and as a Conqueror is destroying sin and death, and all emnity,
also raising soul and body, and bringing them together; in this sense the
Sripture speaks of his sitting at the right hand of God; but when once the
final sentence is past, then this work of the Mediator, his reigning, as to
destroy enemies and such like is over, and then Jesus Christ will present us to
to his Father, Lo here I am, and the children which thou have given me; we are
now as thou did look upon us in thy primitive thoughts in election; so he
stands in relation to them as a head, there we are considered as perfect, and
the Mediators office is laid down, and God becoms all in all both to Christ and
us. I would add a third thing to this, and that is, how Christ is a King, and
sits at the right hand of God for ever; when Jesus Christ has given up this
kingdom of his Redeemer-ship unto the Father, yet then he shall sit down for
ever with this honor, that it was he that did exercise this office, so that
there is not a soul lost, nor a sin unsatisfied for, nor any enemies
unsubdued; it is true, he is not a General in War any longer, but he shall
have this honor, that he did all these exployts, brought all these rebels in;
so that indeed, and in truth, Jesus Christ shall reign more gloriously with the
Father after that time of judgment is over, then ever he did before; now he
shall reign triumphantly, whereas before he reigned as one in conflict and
conquest. Jesus Christ himself will say, that he never was King so much as he
shall be now; Jesus Christ shall ever have the glory of it, that he was that
great and glorious Dictator, that he subdued all enemies, and delivered up the
kingdom peaceably to his Father, and in some sense set the Crown upon his
Fathers head, who was as it were in some sense put out of his rule in the world
by Satan and wicked men, that did what they list; and the Saints they lie under
sin and misery, and Christ he subdues all these enemies, and presents all these
souls to the Father with a peaceable rule and government, and this he enjoys
with the Father for eternity; now whereas it is said, Of his kingdom shall be
no end, the meaning is, it shall not be destroyed for ever; its a kingdom that
gives way to no kingdom, it shall still be continued, though he himself give
it up to the Father, and become visibly and apparently more subject then he was
before; not in respect of his Godhead, for so he is never subject; nor in
respect of his manhood, for so he is always subject; but then Christ shall
acknowledge the Father to be the Author of his kingdom, and that he gave him
power, and honor, and glory, and then shall he resign up his Crown to his
Father again from whom he had it; so much for the second sense of the words.

(Not only in this world, but in the world to come) but not to exclude the
other two I named before, but it shall rather take them in, and that which I
shall say is this; That between the state of this world as now it is, and the
state of things after the day of Judgment, when God shall be all in all: there
is a world to come, which is of purpose, and in a more special manner
appointed for Jesus Christ to be King in, and wherein he shall more eminently
reign.

God has appointed a special world, on purpose for Jesus Christ, which in
Scripture is called a world to come, and Christ's world: That as this world was
ordained for the first Adam, and given to the sons of men: so there is a
world to come for the second Adam, even as that time after the day of Judgment,
is more eminently; for God when he shall be all in all: So there is a world to
come, which is made for Jesus Christ, and which the Angels have nothing to do
withal, for it is not subjected unto them, as this world now is. Heb. 2. 5, 6,
7, 8. Unto Angels has he not put into subjection the world to come, whereof
we speak, but one in a certain place testifies, saying, What is man that
thou art mindful of him, etc. Thou made him lower then the Angels, thou
crownedst him with glory and honor, etc. And has put all things in subjection
under his feet: But says he, We see not yet all things put under him, but
we see Jesus Christ, who was made lower then the Angels, crowned with glory
and honor, etc.

We see plainly that he speaks there of Jesus Christ as he does here in the
Text: And what he here in the Ephesians calls sitting at Gods right hand, there
he expresses it to be his crowning with glory and honor: And then likewise
for that passage of all things being under the feet of Christ, which is spoken
of here in the Ephesians, the Apostle quotes out of Psalm 8 6. which speaks of
Christ's dominion, and that sentence is no where found in the Old Testament, but
only there, and quoted likewise in 1 Cor. 15. 27. all which places relates to
Christ: Then again he calls it a world to come, in Heb. 2. that is ordained
for this man, and he does the like here in the Text; therefore these places
compared together, we see how they agree. 1 Cor. 15. 25. He says, Christ must
reign till he has put all things under his feet, which he quotes out of Psalm
110. 1 So that these places before named, they are all parallel places with the
Text, and there is another place parallel with it, 2 Pet. 3. 7. compared with
the 13. verse. The heavens and earth which are now by the same word, are kept in
store and reserved to fire against the day of judgment. And at the 13. verse,
in opposition to the heavens and earth which are now, he says, We according to
his promise look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness; that is, we look for a world to come, wherein righteousness
dwells: and that these places hold forth the same thing, appears by this, that
when he had alleged there was to be a new heaven, and a new earth, that is, a
world to come: At the 15. verse, he quotes Paul, that he had written to them of
these things, and that was in his Epistle to the Hebrews: For it is the best
argument to prove that Paul wrote the Epistle to the Hebrews; He has written
to you, says he, of this new world, and that was in Heb. 2. there he wrote of
this new World: So likewise unto this give all the Prophets witness, in Acts
3. And therefore I am not ashamed to give witness to it too, Rev. 5. 10. When
they saw Christ once take the book, and was installed King, what do their
thoughts presently run out too? it is to the World to come. He has made us
Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on earth: To be sure at the day of
Judgment they shall, which shall certainly be a long day, when all the accounts
in the world shall be certainly rip't up, and the world shall be new hung
against the approach of their new King, and the glory of the creatures then will
put down the glory of this old world. We see then how this place to the
Ephesians, and that in Heb. 2. how parallel they are: Now I would have you
consider likewise the scope of the 8. Psalm, as the Apostle brings it to prove
this new World: And indeed any one that reads that Psalm, would think the
Psalmist does but set out old Adam in his Kingdom in Paradise, who was made in
his nature a little lower then the Angels; One would think that were all the
meaning, and that the Apostle applies it to Christ only by way of allusion: but
the truth is, the Apostle brings it to prove, and to convince these Hebrews,
that that Psalm was meant of the Messiah whom they expected; says he, One in a
er taine place has testified: He brings it as an express proof and testimony
that it was meant of Christ, and was not an allusion only. Now the scope is
this, as you read in Romans 5. 13. that Adam was a type of him that was to come,
namely Christ: So in the 8. Psalm, you read there Adams world is the type of a
world to come. The first Adam had his world where there was sheep, and oxen,
and fowls of the air: Now whereas it is said in the Psalm, that all things
were under his feet, it is not meant of man in innocence, but of the Messiah,
Christ and his world, which is made of purpose for him, as the other world was
for Adam; That it was not meant of man in innocence properly and principally,
appears,

First, because it is said, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou
ordained strength: There was no babes and sucklings in Adams time, he fell
before there was any.

Secondly, it is said was to still the enemy and avenger: But the Devil was
not stilled by Adam, he overcame him; therefore it must be meant of another
that should still this enemy: How excellent (says the Psalmist) is thy name
in all the earth, speaking of this world. Adam he had a Paradise, but he never
propagated Gods name in all the earth, much less did he sound it in the
heavens.

Again, Adam, though man, yet he was not the son of man, but called the son
of God, he came not of a man.

Again, take the argument the Apostle uses; says he, this man must have all
subject to him, all but God; he must have Angels subject to him, for he has
put all things in subjection under his feet: This could not be Adam, no not in
the state of innocence; but it is true of Jesus Christ, Angels and all were
under his feet.

2. As it is not meant of man in innocence, so it cannot be meant of man fallen
neither, that is as plain as the other. The Apostle himself says, that we see
not all things subject to him. Some think that is an objection the Apostle
answers, but indeed it is a proof to prove that man fallen cannot be meant, for
we do not see all things subject to him: You have not any one man of the whole
race of mankind to whom all things are subject; take all the Monarchs of the
world, there was never any man that was a sinner that had all subject to him,
therefore it is not meant of man fallen: but says he, We see Jesus crowned
with glory and honor, and therefore it is this man, and no man else that is
there spoken of: And then again, take notice, that it is not an Angel to whom
all shall be subject, but plainly man that is made a little while lower then
the Angels, but then crowned with glory and honor.

And it is not only this world that shall be in subjection to this man, but it
is a world to come: For says he, We see not yet all things under his feet, but
we see Jesus Christ crowned with glory and honor: Therefore it is not this
world, but there will be a world that shall be in subjection unto Christ, when
all things shall be under his feet: And it is that which the 8. Psalm speaks
of; besides Christ interprets this Psalm of himself, Mat. 21. 16. when as they
cried Hosanna, and made him the Savior of the world, the Pharisees were angry
at it: and our Savior confutes them out of this Psalm, Know you not, or have
you not read, that out of the mouths of babes and sucklings he has ordained
praise, quoting this Psalm to speak of himself; what the meaning is, I refer
to what Mr. Mead has written upon the 8. Psalm, he interprets it of that man
Christ principally, that was but a babe, by whom God would still the enemy, it
is therefore Jesus Christ to whom only all things are subject, and shall be put
under his feet: He is the sole manwhom the Psalmist and Apostle means, that
has a world to come, ordained for him, as the first Adam had a world made for
him, so shall Jesus Christ the second Adam have a world to come made for him,
this world was not good enough. When I considered (says he) thy heavens, the
work-manship of thy hands. Jesus Christ has a better world, a better heaven
and earth then Adam had: A new heaven and a new earth, according to his
promise, when the Saints shall reign: This world he has not subjected to
Angels, none of those Principalities and Powers rule there: As there are two
Adams, and the one was the type of the other, so there are two Covenants, the
Law and the Gospel; the Angels, they by nature were above the world, and all
things in it, and the Law was their Covenant, they were the deliverers and
declarers of it, the Law was given by Angels.

There Is a second Covenant, which is the Gospel, and that declares and speaks
of this second world made for Christ: Now the Angels, God has not used them to
preach the Gospel, they do not meddle with it, that work is not carried on by
them; but God has appointed men to do it, who were babes, and sucklings; out
of their mouth has he ordained strength, to begin to create this new world,
but then why is it a world to come? If we speak of it as the Gospel beginning
of it; because as the other world was 6. days in making, the work went on by
degrees, so will it be in this new world: and we are now but at the first days
work, the perfecting of it is to come. Therefore the Kingdom of heaven is
said to be like to a grain of mustard seed, which is the least of all seeds,
but grows to a great bigness by degrees: The Apostle calls conversion a
delivering of us from this present evil world; there is the first days work,
and God will never leave till he has perfected this world: and because the
perfection of it was to be afterward, therefore it was said to be A world to
come: And as the first world had a seventh day for the celebration of the
Creation in it, so has the new world a Lords day, a Rest, of which he speaks
in Hebr. 4. Now this world, when it is finished, it shall not be subject to
Angels, but to Christ, and his babes and sucklings, to the man Christ Jesus for
whom it was made, and to the Saints who shall be the Citizens of this world; as
they suffer with him, so they shall reign with him. We do not read that the
Angels at the day of Judgment, shall sit upon thrones of Judgment: But it is
said of Saints, that they shall sit upon thrones, Mat. 19. 20. and so in Rev.
20. And so likewise Christ promises to give the government of tenn Cities to
him that had ten Talents, and improved them; and five Cities to him that had
five Talents. The Devils shall be shut up; and if they be gone, there needs not
the Principalites of good Angels to oppose them. That which good Angels do to
the Saints in this present state below, that office and work shall the Saints
that arise from the dead perform unto the Saints that shall remain alive in
that world to come. For it is now such as have part in the first Resurrection
that shall have to do in that world, and not Angels, and it is no absurdity
neither: And if Angels which have always beheld the face of the Father (as
Christ says of them) yet have they been busied and employed about things
below, why may not Saints be so too? It will be an honor rather to them: Thou
have made us Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on earth: It is true, the
Angels shall gather the Elect from all the corners of the world, and they are
Executioners to throw men to hell: but they that are the Principalities and
powers of this world to come, they are men that shall judge the Angels, and
then shall Christ's Kingdom be at it is height; and when that is ended, the
Kingdom shall be given up to the Father.

here is two worlds for you that look for happiness: Methinks you should be
satisfied with the expectation of this. Alexander wept before he had half
conquered this world, that there were no more for him to conquer; out of a
supposition, when he had conquered all, what he should do afterward: If thou
had the same desire, thou needst not care for this world; for there is
another world, as there are things present, so the comfort is, there are things
to come. Care not for this world, it is old Adams world, it brings often times
much loss to Saints, it is well if thou can get handsomely rid of it, with
little sinning; It is called a present evil world. It was all Christ desired
for his Disciples, John 17. Not that they might be taken out of the world, but
kept from the evil of it: But there is a world to come, which Abraham and all
Believers are Heirs of; for they were not only heyrs of Canaan, but it is
expressly said in Romans 4. 13. that they were Heirs of the world.

Admire we this man, Christ Jesus, whom God has thus advanced and set up, and
has made a world of purpose for him, peculiarly for him and his to enjoy, and
for him and his (as under him) to rule and govern: That he that was the scorn
and derision of men (for so Christ was when here below) that God should raise
him up, and set him at his own right hand, and subject all Principalities and
powers unto him, and use him in all that great business of judging the world.
If this had been spoken of God, it had been no wonder, for all Nations of the
earth are but as the drop of the bucket to him; but to hear it spoken of man,
who is but a drop of that bucket, that this babe or suckling should still
Satan, subdue Angels, have them all under him: O how excellent is thy name in
all the earth! This made the Psalmist admire, What is man that thou visitest
him? Visiting is sometimes put for visiting in anger, as in Psalm 59. 9. So God
visited Christ at first; and when that was done, he visited him with favor;
he takes that broken shattered man and raises him up, to crown him with glory
and honor: What is man? He speaks of the nature of man, as being united to the
Godhead. What is this babe, this suckling, that thou should raise him up to
such an height? All this concerns us, for the Psalmist calls him the Lord our
God, how excellent will his name be one day in all the earth. This will swallow
up the thoughts of man and Angels to eternity. Now put all together, and here
is the most glorious appearance of a Kingdom that ever eyes beheld, more by
far than all the Kingdoms of the world that Satan showed our Savior, take
but what this Chapter holds forth of it.

First, here is a father of glory mentioned, verse. 17. For as God is the
fountain of glory, so himself is the father of it. This father has an eldest
son whom he made a man, and visited him as you have heard, and set him in the
Throne at his own right hand: There is your King; and to set out the glory of
this King, he has Nobles under him, as Principalities, and Powers, and Mights,
and Dominions, he has them all under his fect; Those that are his Friends,
they fall down and worship him, they throw down their Crowns before him; and
for those that are his enemies, he has the most glorious conquest over them;
he sits and makes them his footstool, that he may sit the easier: And for
Satan that great Devil, Jesus Christ triumphs so over him, that he makes his
children set their feet upon his neck, here is the highest exaltation that ever
was; What can be added to make Christ Jesus more glorious? one would think he
has enough? He is a King over a whole world, is advanced in the highest
Throne, he has the highest power, all is under his feet; what is there more to
be added? Look upon Adam, who was the type of Christ, he had a world about him,
he had a Paradise, a Court which was peculiarly his, as the King of the world
(if he had stood) he was the father of our nature; what wanted this man? he
wanted a wife, a helper, God himself says so, all this was in a type. This
man Christ Jesus, we hear of his advancement, ^ar above all Principalities and
powers. Here is a father of glory, and a son set in glory, and he has
glorious Nobility enough: But where is the Queen? what says the-words
following; He has given him over all to be the head of the Church, above all
privileges else: He counts this the highest and chiefest flowr in the Crown,
that he is a head to the Church, who is his body, and the fullness of him that
fills all in all; as if our Lord and Savior should have said, though I have
all this honor, and am thus full, yet if I have not a body, a Church, I wan^
my fullness; for the Church is the fullness of him that fills all; therefore
above all has God given this to him to be a head to his Church, Christ has
all else under his feet: but come up, says he to the Church, and sit on my
right hand, Psalm 45. As I sit at my Fathers right hand, and as I sit down in my
Fathers throne, you shall sit down with me in my Throne. And though all
things else be under my feet, I will have my Church, my body, sit on my right
hand, for she is my fullness. (My brethren) Jesus Christ delights more in love
then in power; Though he be a King, and has all power committed to him, yet
that does no whit abate his love, he takes care that his Church shall share
with him in his glory and greatness: Oh what is man that thou art mindful of
him! the Lord Christ and the Church made up that man.

THE WORLD TO COME. OR, The Kingdom of Christ asserted. The second Sermon.
EPHESIANS. 1. 21, 22. Not only in this world, but in that which is to come; and
has put all things under his feet.
THE last time my work was to show you, that between this world as now it is,
and the state of things after the day of Judgment, when God shall be all in
all; that there is a state which the Scripture calls a world to come, which is
of purpose, and in a more special manner appointed for Jesus Christ to be
King, when he shall have all things put under his feet. I quoted diverse places
to make it good, especially that in the eighth Psalm, and the 2d of the
Hebrews; At the 5. verse of Heb. 2. I found it was the Apostles scope to prove
that the Psalmist had prophesied of a world to come ordained for Christ: and he
proves it by this, that he was to have a world, wherein he was to have all
things subject to him, which was but the same thing that follows here in the
text: And says he, though we now see Christ crowned with glory and honor,
ver. 8. which is all one with sitting at the right hand of God: Yet, says he,
We see not all things put under him; therefore it proves that there is a world
to come, wherein all things shall be subject to Christ. Now then, finding in
the Text mention of a world to come, wherein Christ has his Kingdom over all,
and all things is under his feet; and which in the judgment of most
Interpreters, is taken out of the 8. Psalm, no ratioall man could imagine; but
in the same sense that the world to come is taken, in Heb. 2. it must be taken
here in the Ephesians. I spent time the last day to prove that the Son of Man
prophesied of in the 8. Psalm, that was to have all things under his feet, was
Jesus Christ: Now I shall speak of this, that he has a world to come ordained
for him, and I shall express my self in these two heads.

First, that the world to come, mentioned in Hebr. 2. 5. wherein Christ is to
have all things under his feet, it is not this world that now is, or merely the
government that Christ now has; nor it is not the world or state that shall be
after the day of Judgment, and yet it is said to be a world to come.

And secondly, I shall in a few words show what I think is meant by that world
to come, and see the several steps and degrees of its growing up to
perfection, I shall speak a little to these two things to clear up what I
delivered the last day, because I fear I was not well understood in what I
said, and I shall do it with as much brevity as I can.

First of all, That the world to come mentioned in Heb. 2. 5. and prophesied of
in the 8. Psalm, that it is not the world that now is, that is plain; for the
Apostle distinguishes the world that now is, from that world to come: By this
(says he) we do not now see all things subject to him, and it is the argument
by which he proves there must needs be a world to come that must be subject to
Christ, Heb. 2. 8. We see not all things now put under his feet, which
implies that there is a world to come wherein this is to be fulfilled; take
this world now as it is in its ruff, and it falls far short of that world to
come, wherein all things are to be subject to Christ, for that is not grown to
perfection; we see Jesus now only Crowned, but we see not all things subject to
him; it is true, this world to come is begun, but is not come to its perfection.

Secondly, I shall prove, that it is not the state of the world after the day
of Judgment, and that I shall prove likewise out of Heb. 2. compared with this
place.

My first reason to prove that the world to come ordained for Christ, is not
that world after the day of Judgment: I mean it is not that state then,
because this world to come here spoken of which is for Christ, Adams world was
the type of. Now look in to Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22. He shows you there, that
Adams world, that is this very world wherein now we are, which is the
type of that world to come; he tells you there, that this world that now is,
the creatures in it they groan for the manifestation of the

sons of God; for says he, the creature was made subject to vanity, not
willingly, but by reason of him that has subjected the same in hope; for we
know that the whole creation groaneth, etc. We may in these words plainly see
that there is a world to come, which is not that world or state of things after
the day of Judgment: For what will become of these creatures then no man can
tell, but it is this very individual Creation wherein we live, that groans for
restitution, and the restitution of it is a world to come, as the present
corruption and bondage of it, is this world; then look into the 8. Psalm, which
is Christ's world typed out, it is said, that heaven and earth, the moon and
stars, the sheep and oxen, the fowls and fish, etc. they are all said to be
subject to him. This cannot be meant after the day of Judgment, for there is
nothing after that which heaven and earth, the sun, moon, and stars, the sheep
and oxen, etc. should signify and typifie; so that the world to come is a
State which is between the state of this world, which is yet in its Ruff, and
height, and that state which is after the day of Judgment.

A second reason for it is this; When this world to come shall come, and Christ
shall have all subject to him: Now after this subjection of all things to him,
then shall he deliver up the kingdom to his father, namely after the day of
Judgment is over: This is plain in 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. When Jesus Christ is
fully in possession of this world to come, that all things are subject to him,
then shall the son also himself be subject to him, that put all things under
him, so that this world of Christ's shall cease after the day of Judgment is
over, for then comes the end.

Thirdly, out of the words of the Text, you have this world and the world to
come, wherein there are Principalities, Powers, Mights, and Dominions: Now
after the day of Judgment there will be no Principalities, and Mights, and
Dominions; that is plain in 1 Cor. 15. 24. He shall deliver up the Kingdom to
his Father, when he shall have put down all rule, and power, and authority; so
that the world to come the Apostle speaks of, wherein Christ is actually to
have all things under his feet, it is not that time or state of things after
the day of Judgment is ended, nor is it this world or the state of things now:
so much for the first general head.

Now I would a little explain what is meant by this world to come, and that
but in few words. I would first show why it is called a world, and then why a
world to come, and the several degrees and countings on of this world, and
when it is at its perfection, and when it shall cease.

First, why is it called a world? (my brethren) you must know this; that as God
made this world for Adam, and put all things under him, though not under his
feet, for God appointed a world for the second Adam Jesus Christ, and Adams
world was but a type of this world, Romans 5. 13. its said Adam was the type of
him that was to come, answerably this old Adams world which now good Angels,
and bad Angels, and sinful men rule, it is but the shadow of that world which
is to come, prophesied of in the 8. Psalm, and mentioned in Heb. 2.

Yea let me add this, that God does take the same world that was Adams, and
makes it new and glorious; this same creation groans for this new world, this
new clothing; as we groan to be clothed upon, so does this whole creation,
even as God takes the same substance of man's nature, and engrafts grace upon
it, so he takes the same world, and makes it a new world, a world to come. For
the second Adam, for the substance, the same world shall be restored which was
lost in Adam; this God will do before he has done with it, and this
restitution of it is the world to come.

Now then, why is it called A world to come? It is called so, though the
foundation of it be now laid, and was laid then, when our Lord and Savior was
upon earth, the foundation of it is laid in the new creature. As the first
creation began the old world, so this new creature begins the new world; and as
the old world was six days in making, so this new world is not perfected at
once: the new creature that is in your hearts, it is but the beginning of it.

Mark in Heb. 2. how this new world is begun, and but begun, and when it began;
Ver. 2. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, how shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation, which at first began to be spoken of by our Lord,
and was confirmed to us by them that heard him, God also bearing them witness,
etc. For unto Angels has he not put into subjection the world to come, whereof
we speak; its plain, he speaks before of the preaching of the Gospel, which
was begun to be preached by Christ; and though the Angels delivered the Law,
yet this Gospel which is the Kingdom of Heaven, and the beginning of the world
to come, whereof we now speak; this Gospel was not delivered by Angels, this
world to come was not subjected to them, they preached it not, neither shall
they have to do in that world, which the Gospel begins; so that you see this
world to come began when Christ began to preach, and therefore observe the
language of the Gospel; Repent, says John the Baptist, for the kingdingdome of
Heaven is at hand; the world to come is coming upon you; so our Savior, Mark
1. 14. Mat. 16. 28. There be some standing here that shall not dye, says
Christ, and yet all were dead that stood there long ago; they shall not dye
(says he) till they see the Son of man come in his Kingdom.

The foundation of this world was laid by Christ in bringing in the Gospel, and
it was he that was Prophesied of in Dan. 2. 44. In the days of these Kings
(whiles Principalites and Powers were standing, he that meant to reign in the
world, came stealing in upon it) In the days of these Kings shall the God of
Heaven set up a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed, etc. This new world
began in the flourishing and height of the Roman Monarchy: what did Christ
when he came into the world, and afterward went up to Heaven? he began this
world, before that time the Devil was worshipped as the God of this world, in
all parts of it; Christ he flings him down, Luke 10. 17, 18. I saw Satan fall
down like lightning. Christ destroyed the Devil in all those heathen Oracles
whereby people were deceived; when heathenisme did not prevail, then did
Jewisme show it self, and Christ he throws that down too, by the preaching of
the Gospel, the Apostle calls this a shaking of the earth: There was a great
deal of the old world gone presently, and fell down before this new world:
Jesus Christ he converted by the Apostles millions of souls over all the
world, in 2 Cor. 5. 17. Conversion is there expressed by the passing away of
old things; this is the first days work, for the world is yet to come; this is
but a delivering us out of this present evil world, and not a subjecting of it
to Christ, as in Gal. 1. 4. When Christ threw down heathenisme, and Jewisme, it
was but the first days work, like a new nail that being stricken in, puts out
the old one by degrees. This kingdom of Christ's shall break in pieces and
consume all other kingdoms, Dan. 2. 44. this will eat out all the Monarchies,
and glory of the world.

Now after this first days work of throwing down heathenisme and Jewisme, then
came a night of Popery which was set up in the room thereof: what will Christ do
before he has done? he will have a second days work, and will not cease till
he has thrown down every ragg, all that dross and defilement that Antichrist
and Popery brought into the world: We now are under the second days work, we
are working up still to a purer world; it is still this new world, working up
to its perfection; and Jesus Christ will never rest, till he has not only
thrown out all the dross of this world, both of doctrine and worship which
conformity to the world has brought in.

But for a second degree of this work, Jesus Christ will not rest, till he has
brought in the generallity of men in the world to be subject to himself; the
world (according to Scripture account) consists of Jews and Gentiles; and how
bitterly does the Apostle complain in his time, of Gods cutting off the Jews,
the generality of the Nation was cast off: and for the Gentiles, says he, Who
has believed our report. There was very few of them in comparison that did
come in to Christ; but there will come a time, when this new world shall have a
further perfection, when the generality of mankind, Jew and Gentile, shall
come into Christ: The world was made for Christ, and he will have it before he
have done, Romans 11. 26. All Israel shall be saved. There he tells us of a new
world of the Jews, and for the Gentiles; he tells you, They shall be cast in,
the veil shall be taken from off all nations, Isa. 25. 7. And that which is so
much aleadged for unity, shall one day be fulfilled, but it will be when Christ
is Lord of all the earth, and not till then; Christians will not agree till
then, here will be a brave world indeed, that will be another degree of that
world to come: One shepherd and one sheepfold of Jews and Gentiles, and that
as large as all the world, John 10. 16. This was never yet fulfilled, Jews and
Gentiles, were never yet one sheepfold together, but they shall be so one day:
Read the Prophets, and you shall read there of strange things, of glorious
times, that shall be here upon earth, of all Nations coming into the Church,
the mountains of the Lords house, being set on the top of the mountains, and
all Nations flowing unto it, and of great prosperity they shall have, which was
never yet fulfilled; and there are many fall in and acknowledge thus much, that
there shall be a glorious church on earth, when the Jews shall be called: but
there is a third thing which is much controverted, which here follows.

The third degree of this new world is this, that when this glorious time
comes that Jesus Christ, as we have said, will call home both Jews and
Gentiles, and have a new world, in respect of the multitudes that shall come
into him; Christ will also make this new world more complete, he will bring
part of Heaven down too, to add to the glory of this state. I shall briefly
give you some grounds for what I say, such as for this twenty years I have
not known well how to answer.

I do not say that Christ himself shall come down from Heaven to reign here
on earth; but let it be understood that Christ shall still remain in Heaven,
and there to be his Court, where he shall reign both over this world, and the
world to come; Yet this I conceive, that part of Heaven shall come down and
rule this new world, to make the glory of it the more complete; and that it may
clearly put down old Adams world; my reasons and grounds which satisfies me in
this are these.

If this be not so, I do not know how to understand that place which shall be
the foundation of the rest, in Rev. 20. the whole Capter; but specially the
five first verses, you shall find, and such as know that Book, they do
acknowledge as much, that in the Chapter going before, both Pope and Turk is
destroyed: In Chap. 19. Ver. 20. it is said there, The Beast was taken, and
with him the false Prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with which he
deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast, and them which
worshipped his Image, these both were cast alive into the lake of fire, burning
with brimstone. Here we see the Beast and the false Prophet is gone, where is
the Devil? he is left still; therefore in the beginning of the 20. Chapter, he
tells us, what becomes of the Devil: I saw an Angel come down from Heaven,
having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, and he
laid hold on the Devil, and bound him a thousand years, and cast him into the
bottomless pit, and shut him up, set a seal upon him, that he should deceive
the Nations no more, till the thousand years were ended. The Devil, though now
he travel the Earth up and down, and is ruler over the world, yet here he is
kept up, that he may not deceive the Nations: This was never yet fulfilled, it
could not be fulfilled, during the times of Antichrist; for the Devil never
deceived the creatures more then he did in that time; and we see how it follows
in order, after the Beast is taken and destroyed, then is Satan bound up: but
we know the Beast is not yet destroyed, therefore this thing is not yet come,
and it cannot be after the day of Judgment, his binding up, for he is after
his binding to be loosned a little season: and you shall find that after Satan
is let loose a little while, then the day of Judgment follows, when all the
dead shall rise and be Judged, as in the 11, 12, 13. Verses.

Now take notice, that when the Devil is gone and thus shut up for a thousand
years, what there is done in these thousand years, of that we read in the 4, 5,
6, 7. Verses, And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was
given unto them; Who are they that have this Judgment given unto them? What is
meant by Judgment, but reigning, and Authority, that such shall have. And I
saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and the
word of God (which were the Martyrs in the Primitive times, under the Roman
Emperors persecution) and (says he) which had not worshipped the Beast,
neither had received his mark on their foreheads, or in their hands, which
were such as had stood it out in the times of Antichrist, and had not defiled
themselves. They lived (says he) and reigned with Christ a thousand years, but
the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished,
this is the first resurrection: Now it is said by some, that the first
resurrection is a spiritual resurrection, of men's souls from the death of
sin, such interpretations are commonly put upon it: Now I desire yon would
consider with your selves a little, and weigh the place.

First of all it is the body of men that are said to be dead, that is plain,
for they are said to be beheaded, or slain with the sword, for the witness of
Jesus. It cannot be said so of the soul, that it is beheaded or slain with the
sword. And as the death is, such must be the resurrection, but their death was
a natural death, and their resurrection must be answerable. And says he, They
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. This is not meant the glory of
heaven, that reigned with Christ only there, for so they shall reign for ever
with him, and so they had reigned from the first time that they were slain,
they were with Christ in glory; but this reigning is upon their rising from the
dead, for says he, The rest of the dead lived not again; therefore this
rising of theirs is a living again; This (says he) is the first resurrection.
Now (my brethren) consider further, where do these reign? It seems it is on
earth by this argument, because why else is the Devil bound up, he need not be
bound up for their reigning in Heaven; but we see here as a preparation to
their reigning, the Devil is bound: this is a place I could urge multitude of
things out off, but I must not enlarge; I know not likewise how to answer
another place, Rev. 5. 10. where we have the the Saints in John's time, saying,
Thou have made us Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on earth: They do not
say, we do reign, but we shall reign on earth, and then join with that what
is said in 2 Pet. 3. 13. We according to his promise look for new heavens, and
a new earth, etc. We Apostles, we Saints that live now, we look for it; how
prove you that? because the use he makes of it shows as much, as in ver. 14.
Wherefore beloved seeing you look for such things, be deligent that you may be
found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. It could be no argument to
them in those times to be holy, and blameless: If they that lived in those
times might not personally look for it; and what was it which according to his
promise the Saints then looked for? it is for a new heaven and a new earth. If
we take heaven properly, there is new heavens to be made, but the old heavens
shall continue which was made from the foundation of the world, and where we
shall ever be with Christ after the day of judgment: And how is there a new
earth? It shall be an earth wherein righteousness dwells; because as I said, it
will be a new world, subject to Jesus Christ, when the new Jerusalem comes down
from heaven; if you ask me what the Saints that rise from the dead shall do
here in this new world: For that I shall give you such considerations as shall
take off the absurdity that seems to be in the thing.

First, to tell you what they shall not do; They shall not eat and drink, nor
marry, and give in marriage: So Christ tells us in Mat. 22. 30. The children of
the resurrection do none of these things: And therefore to imagine a Turkish
heaven here below, is the absurdity that has been put upon it, and which
indeed made the Fathers, many of them, after the first 300. years after Christ,
to fly out so much against this subject; for there was an opinion then, that
Christ should reign at Jerusalem, and that they should abound in all several
pleasures and delights, etc. and this the Fathers were against. I have told you
what they do not; I will tell you what they do: he tells us, as I said before,
that they shall be Kings and Priests, as in Rev. 20. 6. Blessed and holy is he
that has part in the first resurrection; why? on such (says he) the second
death has no power; they are out of all danger of it, being in a celestial
state: ^ut (says he) they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall
reign with him a thousand years; here is both their reigning and their
Priesthood set out, I would open it a little. First, they shall be Kings; You
heard before out of Heb. 2. 5. That he has not put this world to come in
subjection to Angels: The Angels now, they are the Thrones, and Principalities,
and great ones that rules this present world, but the Saints shall be Kings
then: And for them to take the Angels places, to be as the Angels now are,
after their resurrection, there is no absurdity in it: Christ says, after the
resurrection, the Saints they shall be as the Angels of God, and they shall be
Priests likewise. I shall take off what absurdity there may seem to be in that
by this: Our Savior when he took up his body out of the grave, he continued
forty days upon the earth; What did Christ do all that while? It is plain, he
performed the part of a Priest and Prophet; he did instruct them in the worship
of God, and speaking to them of things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, so
you read expressly in Acts ^. the Apostles had a brave Teacher, Christ risen
from the dead; so he began that new world, and he remained forty days here of
purpose to do it: Now consider, is it any absurdity for the Saints to be
conformed to Christ their Lord and head, to run through the same states that he
did? he lived in this world, was poor and miserable, so are you; when he dyed,
he commended his spirit into the hands of his Father; and whether his soul
went, our souls go: So likewise when he took his body again out of the grave,
he remained forty days upon earth, instructing his Disciples in the things
concerning the Kingdom of God: If the Saints do so when they take up their
bodies again, in all this here is but a conformity to Christ, he ascended then
up to heaven, and so shall his, and be for ever with the Lord.

But the great objection is, That the souls of men that are now in heaven, and
see the face of God, for them to come down and reign on earth, and do such
service here below, it would be a disadvantage to them, or changing a better
estate for a worse, which seems to be a great absurdity.

For answer, consider to take off the absurdity that even this State I speak of
will be a better State then what their souls are now possessed of, for
otherwise our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST when his body and soul was united
again at his resurrection, was not in a better state then his soul was in
after death, when it was separated from his body. Certainly his state after his
resurrection, whilst upon earth, was better then his state before his
resurrection: but you will say, they are now in heaven, where they behold the
face of God as the Angels do, which they may loose by coming here upon earth;
that does not follow, for the Angels came down here below, and yet Christ
says, they always behold the face of their father, so may these Saints on
earth behold the face of God. Stephen, though a mortal man, yet the heavens
were opened to him: He saw the glory of God, and Jesus sitting at the right
hand of his Father. My brethren, God has eternity of time to reveal himself
to his people in: and he does advance his Favorites by degrees. First, he
glorifies their souls apart; after when soul and body is united, it is in a
better condition, simply considered, then the soul had before, how many ways
God has to manifest himself to his Saints, and how many degrees they shall
pass through, and how many worlds he will have to do it in, that is known to
himself, however the more the better. If God shall lead you by degrees through
this and that glory, from one to another, it will be to your advantage. As in a
Masque there are several shows, which adds to the excellency of it, God has
eternity of time to make all these shows and representations of himself to
his children: And let me add this, that the will that he fulfilled, which is
prayed for in that we call the Lords prayer, Thy will be done on earth as it is
in heaven. There is a time when the will of God shall be done on earth, as
completely as in heaven, which is in that time of the first resurrection: My
brethren, I have spoken these things, as that which has a great show of truth
in it, and as that which is exceeding probable: I have told you my grounds for
it, which I could never answer my self.

Now there is a fourth degree of this world to come, and that I am sure will
hold, and that is that time during the day of judgment, strictly so taken,
after the general resurrection both of just and unjust: Then to honor this
New World, not only shall the Saints come down, but Jesus Christ himself will
come down and abide a long day here below: Therefore it is not absurdity for
Saints to leave heaven, when Christ himself shall do it; neither will it
diminish any thing from Christ's happiness, for he will come and bring all his
glory with him. That we call the day of judgment will be a long day, judge you
your selves whether it will be so or no: Do you think that the accounts of all
the world can be cast up in the twinkling of an eye? Does not Solomon say
expressly, That God will bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing,
whether good or evil, in Eccles. 12. And does not the Apostle say in 1 Cor. 4.
5. That when the Lord comes, he will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart, Will not this
require much time? surely it will be a long day, when our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ will do that great work or service to God, the greatest that ever
was, more then all his preaching, which is the examining the accounts of all
the world, convincing all mankind of their evil, and sending them speechless
to Hell. Things shall be so there, that the Saints shall be able to judge the
world too, according to that in 1 Cor. 6. 2.

Now here this new world will be in its height and perfection, here is Christ
and all his Saints and Angels about him: Yet not that this world shall be
subject to Angels, but they shall gather all the Nations together, and shall
execute the sentence that Christ pronounces against them, and fling them all
to Hell: but the Angels shall not sit as Judges, they shall stand and not sit,
whereas the Saints are said to sit upon 12. Thrones, and they are said likewise
in 1 Cor. 6. To judge Angels: And now shall this world to come be at its
perfection; that creature that has groaned under man's lusts, shall then be
fully restored to the glorious liberty of the sons of God, the world will then
be new hung; This is Christ's world to come, wherein he shall have all things
subject to him. For at this time shall all things be under Christ's feet, and
never till then; for the last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death: and when
all things shall be subdued to him, then shall the son also himself be
subject, then shall he give up the Kingdom to the Father: And what that State
is that shall come after Christ has given up the Kingdom to his Father, no
man knows, only the Scripture says this of it; That God shall be all in all,
and that Christ himself shall then be subject.

FINIS.

