CHRIST THE UNIVERSAL PEACEMAKER: OR, THE RECONCILIATION Of ALL the PEOPLE of
GOD, Notwithstanding all their Differences, Enmities. By THO: GOODWIN, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Dawlman, 1651.

CHRIST, The Universal PEACEMAKER.
I. PART.
EPHESIANS. 2. 14, 15, 16. For he is our peace, who has made both one, and has
broken down the wall of partition between us:

Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the Law of Commandments
contained in ordinances, for to make in himself, of twain, one new man, so
making peace.

And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross, having
slain the enmity thereby. (or) in Himself.


IT were a manifest folly in the judgments of most knowing men, to go about
to use in any set way, exhortatory motives to persuade to peace and
reconciliation the people of God amongst us. The provocations are so high, and
exasperations so fresh and increasing, that if I had an audience made up of
those alone that have the swaying power of either, and together therewith their
most favorable attention, and interest in affection without prejudice, I
should not know how to attempt it with any hope of success. But though the
animosities of men's spirits, augmented by coincident circumstances, are gone
beyond the power of the persuasions of men in this present paroxisme: yet they
are not above the power of Gods wisdom and providence, nor the force and
efficacy of Christ's blood. You may therefore, in the midst of all contrary
appearances, give me leave, though I cannot hope to persuade, yet to BELIEVE
(The Catholic Church, and Communion of Saints, they are in my Creed) and
because I believe therefore to speak, and so to give you an account of my
faith as to this issue. Let your faith but wait, and give God time for it, and
leave him to effect it his own way. And to this end I have taken this Text,
Christus Pax nostra: For he is our peace who has made both one, etc. and my
inference is, That therefore the Saints SHALL and MUST be one, and reconciled
in the end. And this is the best news which in these times can be told you,
the seasonablest we can hear of, and is indeed one great part of the glad
tidings of the Gospel it self, without which it were imperfect, which Christ
himself our peace (who came to purchase it, as these words show, so) came to
preach, as the very next v. 17. has it.

The maine and principal intendment of these words is, to give an eminent
instance of the efficacy of Christ's mediation in slaying the enmities that are
amongst the people of God themselves, and of his being our peace in that
respect; instancing in that the greatest that ever was between Jew and Gentile;
Whom yet (as here) he has made both one, and has broken down the partition
wall between us: and however he mentions in the 16. v. our reconciliation made
with God (of which elsewhere he treats more largely) yet (here) but by way of
confirmation of our faith in this other of reconciliation amongst our selves.
For the aim of its introduction here is but to show, how that Christ in
reconciling us to God himself, carried it so, and did it under such a
consideration and respect, as necessarily drew on and involved our
reconciliation one with another; namely this, that he reconciled us unto God IN
ONE BODY among our selves. It is an happy clause, that addition [in one body]
and on purpose inserted thereinto, to show, that when God was to transact our
peace and reconciliation to and with Christ, hanging upon the Cross, he would
not nor did not acknowledge himself, to him, then, reconciled to us by him,
upon any other terms, then as withal we were looked at, and represented to him
by Christ as one body; and therein reconciled one to another, whilst we were
reconciled to himself.

The Connection of the 16. ver. with the 15. discussed: And how That
Reconciliation to God in one body, ver. 16. is to be understood: whether of
that reconciliation wrought for us, or in us.
I Meet but with one eminent difficulty in the coherence and contexture of
these words, and that is the connection of these two verses, v. 15. 16. as
namely of these words, And that he might reconcile us to God, v. 16. etc. with
the former v. 15. Having abolisht the enmity, etc. Now this enmity mentioned v.
v. 14.
15. is evidently intended of the enmity between Jew and Gentile, (...).
as is clear by its connection with v. 14. Who has made of twain one, and
broken down the partition wall: Having slain the enmity. Now the twain, or
the two, thus made one (between whom this enmity was) is not God and we, but
the Jews and the Gentiles (of whom he had spoken in the former verses) for he
adds, that he might create both in one new man, which could not be said of God
and us.

Now then the difficulty is, what reconciliation to God in one body that should
be v. 16. which the Apostle makes the consequent of having slain the enmity
between these Jews and Gentiles; For the connection seems to import the one a
consequent of the other: And the words to run thus, Having slain the enmity
between themselves, v. 15. that he might reconcile them to God, v. 16. Now this
reconciliation to God must be either meant of the work of reconciliation
wrought in us, whereby we turn unto God, as 1 Cor. V. 15.
5. Be ye reconciled to God, or that Reconciliation which Christ wrought for us
unto God: and whether of these should be intended, V. 16.
is the Question. And so withal the Question is, whether those words, v. 16.
And that he might reconcile both unto God, are to be cast unto the 15. verse as
a part of the discourse thereof, or do not rather begin a new and entire
discourse full and complete within themselves.

For the first stand many Interpreters, and the chief reason for that opinion
is, (...).
The coherence of these words with those next immediately foregoing, Having
abolisht the enmity, that he might create in himself of twain one New man,
and that he might reconcile both unto God, etc. The resolve of which seems to
be this, That Christ having on the Cross wrought in himself this great work
for us, to slay the enmity between us, and make both one, by the sacrifice of
himself, and this as the antecedent work: That yet there remained two other
as consequent works as the effects that follow therefrom. Namely,

1. To create both one new man, so making actually peace between themselves.
And 2. To bring them both into an actual state of reconciliation with God, by
working reconciliation in them toward God, so making them one body.

And the reason for this interpretation further is, That both these two are
brought in and yoked in the like Tenor of speech, (...).
That he might create, etc. And that he might reconcile; as if they were like
parallel fruits of that antecedent work, slaying that enmity mentioned, v. 15.
and according to this parallel, look as creating them both into one new man,
is and must be acknowledged to be understood of a work wrought in them, viz.
the new Creation: so also that other, the reconciling them to God must be
understood of the work of reconciliation unto God wrought in them also; and so
the new man they are created into, v. 15. answers but unto that one body they
are reconciled unto, v. 16. being one and the same.

And that which increases the difficulty is, that if it should be understood
of reconciliation unto God himself wrought by Christ on the Cross, how such a
reconciliation should be the consequent of his slaying first the enmity between
the Saints themselves, so as it should be said, He slew the enmity among the
Saints, that he might reconcile them to God: This is not consonant to reason,
seeing rather (that according to the harmony and dependence of Theological
truths) his reconciling them unto God upon the Cross is the antecedent and
cause of his slaying the enmity of them mutually, because our reconciliation
one with another is rather depending upon, and the fruit of reconciliation with
God himself, who being first reconciled to us, all things else are reconciled
one to another; as Subjects that have been at variance, when reconciled to
their Prince or Head, become reconciled one to another among themselves.

But yet I rather incline to think, that other kind of reconciliation between
God and us, wrought by Christ for us on the Cross, to be intended v. 16. and
so to be brought in as a parallel with that former reconciliation wrought by
him also on the Cross between and on behalf of the Jew and Gentile mutually.
And so this 16. v. to begin a new and entire discourse, apart and sejunct from
the other, namely, of our reconciliation with God, as the former verses had
discoursed of that reconciliation which is wrought for us between our selves.

And so the maine proportions of this parallel are these, that as that
reconciliation between Jew and Gentile, wrought by Christ on the Cross, had
two parts, 1. Positive, making both one. 2. Privative, the amoveing the
impediment that caused the enmity, v. 15. (the consequent of which is the
creating of both into one new man:) So the Apostle discoursing, v. 16. of this
other reconciliation with God, v. 14, 15.
he therein intends to make like two parts thereof, answerable to the other,
only with a transposition of speech, 1. Positive, reconciliation to God in one
body: 2. Privative, Having slain that enmity, namely, against God: The
resolution of all which is, as if he had said, Whereas there was a double
enmity, one to God, another among our selves; Christ that is our peace has
dealt with both: He having slain the enmity between themselves, v. 15.
has made both one: And having slain in like manner the enmity to God, v. 16.
has reconciled us unto God.

Now that which cleares and confirms this connection is,

1. That this renders a more full and just analysis of the words, which is
this: 1. That v. 14. He in general proclaims Christ our peace. And then 2. In
the next words proceeds to the two particular branches, wherein Christ is made
our peace, 1. Between our selves mutually, 2. Between God and us. And then 3.
In the handling of either, observes this parallel in either, namely, between
a privotive part, slaying the enmity; and a positive part, reconciling and
making one, so enumerating the complete requisites to either.

Then 2. To show, that these are indeed two disjunct and complete discourses of
two such heads of Reconciliation: He severs the first, v. 15. from the second,
v. 16. by adding a full period, and as it were a Selah to the first, thus
sealing up the v. 15. So making peace, namely, fully and completely, that
peace, which had been spoken of among Jew and Gentile, that so he might enter
anew, and distinctly from this, upon that other of reconciling both unto God,
which he does, v. 16.

Then 3. For the close of that 16. v. that he should in like manner bring in a
second time these words, [Having slain the enmity] upon occasion of his
mentioning our reconciliation to God, argues still more, his aim to be to cut
off the 16. v. from the 15. For if those words, v. 16. That he might reconcile
us to God, had referred to that other [Having slain the enmity, v. 15.] as a
part of that sentence not made complete; then this second [Having slain the
enmity] needed not to have been: but does rather show, that there is another
enmity between God and us, distinct from the former intended by him; and so
the slaying thereof, joined properly and genuinely with its fellow conjugate,
namely, reconciliation unto God, as the former, v. 15. had in like manner been
connected with its conjugate also, making both one among themselves. If indeed
the Apostle had carried his speech in the 15. v. thus, Having abolisht the
enmity between them, that he might create one new man, and that he might
reconcile both unto God in one body, and so ended his discourse of it: then
these two, in their reference could not have been parted: but he moreover
adding to their reconciling to God, a second time these words, Having slain the
enmity (namely, that between God and us) he so makes the 16. v. an entire
sentence and period of it self, as the 14, and 15, do make in like manner a
full period of themselves: and so the 14, and 15, are to be read and joined
thus; Christ has made both (Jew and Gentile) one, having slain the enmity
(that was between them:) thus Beza and others: and answerably the 16. to this
sense, with an easy and fair transposition, And having slain, Or, And has
slain the enmity (namely, between God and them) that he might reconcile both
unto God in one body by the Cross, on which he also slew that enmity.

And whereas it will be said, That the word (...), or (And) which the 16. v.
begins with, seems to cast the reference of this, upon the former slaying the
enmity, v. 15. and so the latter to be but an emphaticall repetition of the
same: I answer, That that (and) v. 16. is but all one with moreover, as it is
often used, as introducing a new and distinct discourse, added to a former.

And so 4. As thus understood the parallel is rendered yet more full; for as
there is here found a double enmity, and an answerable double slaying of each
in order to a double reconciliation, so to make up the parallel (which the
Apostle intended) yet the more full, there are two further clauses added to
each, fitly answering to one another. For as of the one he says, Having
abolisht the enmity IN HIS FLESH, v. 15. so of the other (the latter) in like
manner he speaks, having slain that enmity IN HIMSELF, v. 16. as the Greek
bears, and the margent varies it.

Now as to any difficulty proposed, That which is left as material to be
considered, is only this; How his having slain that enmity between us our
selves first, should be conceived to be the antecedent to reconcile us to God?

Now for answer hereunto; 1. Besides, that according to that connection which I
have given, that the 16. v. should thus make up a full period of it self, and
does keep it self entire within it self (as v. 14, and 15, also do) and so
not at all referring to the slaying the enmity, v. 15. as has been explained;
which coherence does at once cut off the whole of that objection at first made:
But besides this (supposing it might take in, and refer to that slaying the
enmity v. 15. among the Saints, as the antecedent, or at least ingredient unto
their reconciliation with God) there may perhaps this just assoylment be given
thereto.

That 2. In order of nature, All enmity must first be supposed removed, ere
friendship or (as here) reconciliation, can be supposed to be procured: the
reason of which is obvious to any judgment, first peace by slaying enmity, and
then good will. And so upon this and the like grounds, these words, that he
might reconcile unto God in one body, may well be supposed to have a secondary
aspect to his having first abolisht the enmity between our selves, ver. 15. as
well as our enmity against God, ver. 16. And the Apostle his adding [IN ONE
BODY] (which he studiously has done) shows, that they being under that notion
and respect reconciled unto God by Christ upon the Cross; that then withal at
the same time, yea in order of nature, first, their enmities one against
another were removed as well as against God himself: All sorts of Enmities
being to be removed ere Any sort of Reconciliation attained, surely under that
notion, they cannot be considered reconciled to God, but withal it must be
said, they are at peace, and so made one among themselves, at least these two
do mutually argue each the other. If indeed there had been room left for us
to conceive, that our reconciliation with God had been so wrought by Christ
for us, as for each person considered only single, and apart (though even so
it was intended, namely for each and every person; and this is involved in that
other:) Then indeed it might have been supposed that their enmities to God,
had been slain and done first away, and reconciliation wrought with him first,
by one primary act, and then after that, ex consequenti, as a secondary work,
our reconciliation amongst our selves had been cast in, and followed thereupon;
or which is all one, wrought and procured by a second act or intention of
Christ's. But if in one and the same very individual act, and intention of
their being reconciled to God, they were considered [AS ONE BODY] and that this
is put in as an involved ingredient thereinto, so, you must necessarily suppose
their own mutual enmities done away also, at least together therewith, by one
and the same individual act also; and this consideration if there were no
other, is a sufficient salvo to the forementioned difficulty. Now how this
reconciliation unto God in one Body was performed by Christ on the Cross, I
shall handle in the second Section of this discourse.

I shall trouble you no further with untying this knot, or the drawing out into
one smooth continued line, the series of this coherence: For however (take the
16. ver. in which of these senses you please) the words in the 14. and 15. ver.
are sufficient bottom for the heads of that whole discourse I intend. For
these words, ver. 14, 15. do undeniably (as all must confess) treat of the
reconciliation of the people of God among themselves, and sufficiently hold
forth these two Generals.

1. The work of Christ on the Cross to procure it, He has made both one,
having slain the enmity in his flesh: and has virtually (in the virtue of his
death) broke down the partition wall that occasioned it, which in his
providence he after ruined. And 2. the work of Christ by his spirit in us,
creating both one new man in himself.

And now take the other words ver. 16. in either sense, or in both, (which are
not inconsistent) however this is observable even therein; that the Apostle was
not content to have setly pursued the Saints reconciliation among themselves,
in those two whole verses, the 14, 15. but when he speaks of reconciliation
with God also, ver. 16. he must needs add, and put in that clause also, IN ONE
BODY; the reconciliation then of the Saints mutual is upon all accounts, the
principal intendment of the Apostle here.

The Division of the words. The Principal Heads of this Discourse set out,
which are four.
NOw for the DIVISION of the words, That will fall according to either the
larger, or else the more special scope of the words. If we take them in that
first and largest comprehensivenesse, as treating of both our reconciliation
with God, and between our selves also, and how Christ our peace is both, so
they admit of this division and Analysis:

1. That the general theme and argument of the whole should be premised in
these words, Christus Pax nostra, Christ is our peace; which is the inscription
of a Proclamation of him under one of his eminent Royal titles, Christ the
great and perfect Peace maker. And then,

2. Proclaiming him such, in all the branches or particulars thereof, that may
argue him such.

1. As an Universal Peacemaker, as both, being a peace between all sorts of
persons at variance, and also extending his mediation to the removing of all
sorts of enmities. 1. Persons, as 1. Between us, ver. 19. that is, among our
selves, abolishing (...) that enmity, ver. 15. 2. Between God and us, slaying
that enmity also, ver. 16. thus an Universal Peacemaker.

2. The establisher of a through and a perfect peace, both for time past, and
time to come. 1. Who has already made and concluded it, as in his own person,
(...), he has made it, (...) he has dissolved and broke down, and so not now
to be done. And 2. the same secured for the future, even for ever; these
enmities being abolisht, ver. 14, 15. that is, utterly abolisht, as never to
get head; slain, ver. 16. never to revive.

3. Our complete peace as in respect to all parts, that concur to it, and
ways of peace to accomplish it, and make it sure. 1. In respect of Parts. Both
1. Negative by removing and destroying even the very occasion of the enmity:
The partition wall of ordinances, breaking that down, and again, ver. 16.
slaying the enmity it self. 2. Positive, expressed in two words, Reconciling,
ver. 16. making both one, ver. 14, 15.

Then 4. By all sorts of ways accomplishing it, 1. representing us in his
person, as in one body, ver. 16. personating all his people, and under that
consideration reconciling them to God, and one another. 2. Meritoriously,
taking on his person, (as representing their persons) all their enmities, [in
his flesh] or the humane nature, says the 15. v. Hanging on the Cross, ver.
16. and so offering that up as one common sacrifice to God for all; (He is said
to reconcile all in one body by the Cross, ver. 16.) 3. Efficiently by his
spirit, creating both into one man, of all conjunctions the nearest, and that
creation wrought in himself, of all foundations of union the firmest: for they
being both created one man, and united in and to himself, he is able and will
be sure to hold them for ever together. And to put the more evident notice upon
all he had said or should say of him in this respect, he intermingleth in the
midst of his discourse, this Selah or note of observation, so making peace,
(take notice of it says he) So or THUS, Universally, perfectly, compleately,
and eternally. And this is one account of the words, and indeed of the whole
and every part and particle thereof.

But if we single forth that more special and principal aim, before
mentioned, Christus Pax nostra, as in relation unto making peace among us, the
elect of God: so in stead of any accurate division of them, I shall only draw
forth these four propositions, which will suck into themselves the strength of
what these words have in them, as to this great point. Namely,

1. The story of the greatness of that enmity, (the greatest that ever was,)
between Jew and Gentile before Christ's coming, and a while after, by reason of
those Jewish rites and ordinances of the Ceremonial Law, which the Apostle by
a Metonymie terms therefore the enmity.

2. The story of Christ's transactions on the Cross, by which he virtually slew
and abolisht this enmity, and meritoriously made them both one, and reconciled
both in one body.

3. The story of their actual accord, and becoming one as the records of the
Acts of the Apostles, and they in their Epistles have presented it unto our
view: and the principles by which, and the providence whereby, that partition
wall was broke down, and the enmity allayed; chiefly by creating both one New
man in himself.

4. That the instance of all this was intended by God as a PRECEDENT, and
leading cause under the New Testament, to assure us, that whatsoever should
fall out in after ages, of difference among the Saints, yet still however they
both might and should in the issue be reconciled, and their differences in a
like manner allayed and compounded; as also to show the ways and principles
whereby to effect it.

I. SECTION. 1 Head. The Greatness of that Enmity, which was between Jew and
Gentile, until Christ purchased their Reconciliation.
FOr the first, I have to present you out of this text, with an instance of the
deepest, and most lasting enmity, between two sorts of men chosen to be one
body unto God, that shared as then the whole world between them, (Jew and
Gentile) that ever was or will be in all ages: which yet was compounded by
Christ. View we it first in the general through those expressions the text
uses of it. The Apostle sets it forth to us, not barely by terms of distance
and division, calling them (...), Both or two, and (...), twain; nor simply of
being enemies in an ordinary way, but speaks of an enmity in the abstract,
(...); a special enmity it was, not that which is common to man against man,
(who as the Holy Ghost that knows our nature tells us, are mutually hateful
to, and hating one another, Tit. 3. 1.) But a knotted, twisted, combined
enmity. That the word (...) disolved it, ver. 14. imports. A stirring active
enmity, that lay not sleeping. This the word (...), ver. 15. implies: He made
it inefficacious, took away the strength, the energy, the operative virtue of
it: Yea and if you will take in, and borrow from the expression ver. 16. (...),
He slew it. It was a living spritefull enmity, yea that had a rage in it, (we
on the contrary call such an one deadly, because it aims at life:) The (...),
magisquidpiam qua^ (...), occidere, significat occidere cum saevitia. Beza.
Mat. 10. 28 Ezekiel. 25. 15.
word bears up to this, non tam occidit quam trucidavit; Christ did not barely
kill it, but bloudily with a rage, as provoked with the fierceness that was
found in the enmity it self. For the rage thereof was cruel, and reached up to
heaven, as the Scripture speaks.

Likewise an old Hatred, (as the Prophet Ezekiel in his times termed it,
speaking of that between the PhilistimGentiles, and the Jews; but this was now
grown much older, in all, of 2000. years continuance,) even from the first
time wherein God separated the people from the rest of the Nations, as in
Abraham by circumcision he did. A wall of separation (if I may pursue the
Metaphor in the text) whose foundation was laid in Abraham's time, when
circumcision was first given (for that began the quarrel) reared up higher by
Moses rites, Further lengthned and stretched out in all the times of the
Prophets, throughout all ages, until Christ who came to abolish it, and break
it down.

And lastly, an Universal hatred in the Jews to all Nations, and in all
Nations to the Jews. Even all who were called (...), Gentiles in the flesh,
and uncircumcision by that which is called circumcision, ver. 11. as all
Nations were termed and reckoned by them.

Thus God foreordained, that as to honor his Son in reconciling us to
himself, he permits the greatest sins and enmities to be in the hearts and
lives of those he intends to save, against himself: so likewise that the
highest and toughest animosities should be found, amongst those, (when he
should come on earth,) that were ordained to be his people, to show the
Sovereign power, and efficacy of his mediation, in constituting them one
new-man in himself. These but in general for a foundation out of the text.

The story of the Particulars of it has two branches: 1. What it was between
them before Christ, and the conversion of either to the Christian faith. 2.
What after conversion, and that both equally had embraced Christ.

1. Take the elevation of it before, both out of the Scriptures and other
authentic Testimonies: Both, 1. Of the Jew against the Gentile. 2. Of the
Gentile against the Jew. And I shall withal by the way, make a parallel of the
one with the other.

1. Of the Jew against the Gentile. The quarrel was begun indeed by them; they
out of a carnal fleshly boasting of their privilege to be the only people of
God, (as they were) scorned and contemned the poor Gentiles. The 11. verse
insinuates this: Yea were Gentiles who are called uncircumcision by that
(nation namely) which is called the circumcision in the flesh. It began at
Nicknames: and the Jews were they, that began to call names first, as
interpreters have observed. And it began early, almost from the time when the
seed of Abraham first received that badge of difference. You hear on it in
Jacobs time, To give our sister to one that is uncircumcised, that were a
reproach to us. Genesis 34. 14. say the sons of Jacob in the case of Dinah. And
after amongst all the race of the Jews both good and bad in all ages, The same
was used as a reproach, as by Sampson, Judge. 15. 18. by Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14.
16. By David, Chap. 17. 26. 36. By Saul, Chap. 31. 4. They judging it, (though
but a circumstance, yet) far worse then death it self, to dye by the hands of
the uncircumcised, or have the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. 2 Samuel
1. 20. And in the Prophets uncircumcised and unclean are all one. Isa. 32. 1.
When they would accurse one to the most accursed death, (as all Nations,
according to what they have esteemed the worst of Deaths, they have accordingly
expressed such like curses; As Abi in malam crucem, among the Romans) Let him
dye (said the Jew) the death of the uncircumcised, as Ezekiel. 28. 10. When they
imprecated the most ignominious burial, Thou shall lie in the midst of the
uncircumcised, Ezekiel. 31. 18. A person excommunicate, accursed, and a heathen
was to them all one; Let him be as an heathen, Mat. 18. and they distinguish
themselves from the Gentiles, by appropriating the title of sinners, wholly to
the Gentiles; we that are Jews BY nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles,
Gal. 2. 15. and God foreseeing how apt their spirits were to grow from hence
into an abhorrency of all other Nations, made a specall Law to prevent it,
concerning some particular Nations. Deuteronomy. 23. 7. Thou shall not abhor an
Edomite, for he is thy brother: thou shall not abhor an Egyptian, because thou
wast a stranger in his Land.

Next see this enmity expressed in their carriages and dealings with the
Gentiles, they not only not communicate with them in sacris, in holy things,
but their zeal was such, and this after the light of Christianity appeared to
them, that they would have killed Paul, Acts 21. 31. for no other crime but
this, ver. 28. This is the man has brought Greeks, (that is Heathens) into the
Temple, and has polluted the holy place, ver. 28. nay they accounted it an
abominable thing, (...), (as in 1 Pet. 4. 3. the word is rendered, abominable
Idolatry) and so the vulgar Here) to keep company, that is, familiarly, yea or
so much as to come, (unnecessarily,) to one of another Nation; founding all
this, upon that which was a peculiar command, upon a special ground, against
the Ammonites and Moabites, Deuteronomy. 23. 6. Thou shall not seek their peace, nor
their prosperity all thy days for ever. This they extended to all Nations: and
This to that rigidity, that they would not do ordinary courtesies of common
humanity,

Non monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti, Lib. 14. Satyr.
says Juvenal, not tell a man's way, to a poor wanderer, an act of civility:
Non ad fontem deducere, to lead to a well for water, which was an act of
charity. The Woman of Samaaia therefore wonders at Christ, Joh. 4. 8, 9. How is
it that thou being a Jew, ask drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for
the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans. Each one of you (says Christ)
will, and that on the Sabbath day, loose his Ox or his Ass from the stall,
and lead him away to watering, Luke 13. 15. but they would not do thus much
for an Heathen though ready to perish for thirst, not show him a Well hard by,
says the same Juvenal in the same place, Quaesitum ad fontem solos deducere
verpos: not give a cup of cold water, which Christ makes the least of
courtesies, save only to their own The word signifies both worms and
circumcised.
Verpi, as we say vermin and circumcised ones. So Juvenal scoffs them, and hoc
Judaicum Jus, This is the Jewish Law.

And no wonder of all this, for indeed they accounted all the Heathen as beasts
made to be destroyed: (upon the mistake of their Commission concerning those
seven Nations, Deuteronomy. 7. 11.
given up by God the Judge of the World (in whose sovereignty it was,) into
their hands.) Even Christ speaking in the common language of the Jews, calls
the Syropheniciam Woman and all the Gentiles dogs, Mat. 15. 25, 26. as the
Turks call Christians at this day; yea out of their own records some of the
Rabbinicall interpreters upon Deuteronomy. 21. 11. they have delivered, that they
accounted them feris deteriores, worse then beasts, and nuptias eorum innuptas,
their marriages, no marriages, and therefore nec homicidium nec adulterium in
eos committi posse, that it was no adultery to abuse their Wives, no murder to
kill any of them, no robbery to take from them, by never so much violence.
Hispanus.
Which Josephus Albo Justifies in his disputation adversus Christianos, giving
this reason, that be that lived without their Law and worshipped false Gods, he
was a common enemy, and in eum illicitum nihil, and nothing can be unlawful,
that is done against him by them.

Can malice be supposed to rise any higher? and yet in that Nation it did
against these poor Gentiles. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16, 17. Contrary they are to all men,
and it follows, forbidding us to preach to the Gentiles, that they might be
saved. The Apostle speaking it by way of aggravation, of their malice, seems
to intend it not only consequenter, that they denied them the Gospel, without
which, they could not be saved: but farther intentionaliter, what was in their
intentions, that suppose, they had thought the Gospel a means of salvation,
they would have forbad it to be preached to them, that they might not be saved.
Is there not work for a Peacemaker now? This on the JEWS PART.

And can we think the GENTILES were behind hand with them? and yet the truth
is, the Gentiles were the more moderate of the two, as the 11 verse here, and
the Parable of the good Samaritane, that poured Oil into a strangers wounds,
and the story of the Samaritan Woman, All show: for she lays fault on the
Jew, that HE would not ask water of a Samaritan, and not e contra. It were too
much to reckon up all that might be, out of their Poets and Historians. I will
but so far make mention of some Testimonies of the Gentiles hatred against the
Jews, as they make up a parallel with what has been said of the Jewish
enmity against the Gentiles: thereby to manifest that the Gentiles were even
with them, if not in malice, get in jeeres and scorns.

1. Did the Jews reproach them as uncircumcised, as you heard? the Gentiles on
the contrary scorned the Jews as much for circumcision, calling them Apellas,
Judaeus Apella: Curtos, so 1 Sermon. sat. 5.
Horace; Recutitos, so L. 7.
Martial. And Sat. 5.
Persius, Verpos, as also Juvenal. There is wit in these, but so unseemly as I
must forbear to English them: They were jeeres at their circumcision.

2. Did the Jews abhor the Gentiles and not converse with them? the Gentiles
on the other side would hold their Nose at the Jews when they met them, and
cry Malvenda hom. de Antichristo, c. 3.
Faetentes Judaeos, stinking Jews: Barn. An 72. c. 31. Am mian de Marco lib.
11.
vel fortuitum eorum occursum oculis horrebant, animo persequebantur, they
abhord the sight of them, if by chance they met them.

And 3. Ibid.
esteemed them of all Nations the worst: so Marcus the Emperor, but passing
through Judaea to Egypt, and observing their manners, dolenter dicitur
exclamasse, O Marcomanni, O Quadi, O Sarmatas, tandem alios vobis deteriores
inveni: which was as if when we would express the wretchedness of any Nation
we accounted most vile, should say, O you Canniballs, yea barbarous savages,
that are found amongst the wildest Africans or Americans, We have at length
found, and light upon a Generation of men, worse by far then you. In this
manner does he speak of these Jews.

And 4. As the Jews turned it into a curse to be a Gentile, as you heard: so
the Gentiles in their cursings, turned the like upon the Jews. Jer. 24. 9. And
I will deliver them to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the Earth for their
hurt, to BE AREPROCH, and a PROVERB, and a TAVNT, and a CURSE in all places
whither I shall drive them. It was Gods own Retaliation upon them and
fulfilled; as we now, so the Hearthen then imprecated on themselves, I were a
Jew, if I did so or so, and thus in all places, as the Prophet has it: yea
Jer. 42. 18. they were made, an EXECRATION, AN ASTONISHMENT, and A CURSE. What
can be more?

5. As they esteemed all other Nations as Dogs and Beasts: the Gentile does
the like by them, and reckons them but as Swine, the most contemtible of
Beasts, and this in a witty retortion from the Jewish practices, Nec distare
putant humana carne suillam.
putting this interpreation upon their forbearance to eat swines flesh, that
mankind and swine were alike to them.

And 6. As they hated all Nations, so the Gentiles resented accordingly this
Catholic spirit in the Jew against them all, which turned their hearts
universally to hate them. Ashuerus had 127. Provinces, amongst which, the Jews
(as we read) had enemies in them all. Est. 8. 9. and 9. 16. compared, whom the
Kings Letters restrained with difficulty from falling on them in every Nation:
And they accuse and arraign the Jews, 1. As hurtful to Kings and Provinces,
Ezra 4. 15. as continually moving sedition, in the same place of Ezra 4. 15.
They are a people that of old time have moved sedition. And the same aspersion
went current among the Romans and Greeks many hundred years after: These men
being Jews do exceedingly trouble our City, Acts 16. 20. say the Philippians
to the Magistrates of the City. They lay their accusation that it was the
genius of the Nation: it is their Known custom so to do. 2. As unsociable to
the rest of mankind. Diod. 1. 5.
Antiochus friends in Diodorus pleaded thus against the Jew: (...)
That they alone of all Nations were insociable, and not capable of any mixture
or coalescency with them; no not at table; (...). In Esther you have the same
intimated, c. 3. 8. There is a certain people (speaking of the Jews)
scattered abroad and dispersed among the people, whose laws are diverse from
all people, etc. 3. The Gentiles accused them as enemies to all Nations, so in
that of Diodorus, (...), that they wished well to none: and not only so, (...),
to account all others enemies. So also Tacitus l 5. adversus omnes alios
hostile odium, an hostile and deadly hatred is in them against all others. Yea
(...), haters of mankind; so also it follows there in Diodorus. It Is strange
the Apostle should express it, in the very same manner, and near the same
words, They ARE CONTRARY TO ALL MEN, and God they please not, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16,
17.

4. As they founded their hatred against the Gentiles on this, that they were
Worshippers of other Gods, so the Gentiles accused and detested them as Cicero
pro Flacco.
Hosts immortalium Deorum, Enemies of the immortal Gods: and Religion was the
cause of all this, these rites here were the partition wall.

And Lastly, Under the notion of such a manner of persons as these, were they
universally hated by all Nations, as the Books of the Prophets do show,
especially Ezekiel and Jeremy, where the Cup is carried to all Nations for no
other crime then their enmity to the Jews; likewise the Books of Esther and
Ezra: and accordingly persecuted they were, upon that account; banished out of
Rome again and again, as by Claudius, Acts 16. 20. As by other Emperors: and
at last they destroyed both their City and Commonwealth.

You have seen the enmities of both. And was there not cause to wish and pray,
as David Ps. 14. upon the like occasion, Oh that the salvation (or Savior and
Messiah) were come out of Sion: or, The desire of all Nations were come?

This for the story of their enmity before their conversion: that of their
enmity and dissentions that continued after, though proper to this, yet comes
more fitly in, and cannot be disjoynted from the third part of this Discourse,
where it will have its place in order, to show, How those enmities were
actually allayed, and composed between them.

II. PART.
II. Head. What has been done in the person of Christ himself on the Cross,
Virtually and Representatively, toward our reconciliation Mutual. A twofold
reconciliation between the Saints themselves, in and by Christ, held forth in
the words, and distinguished.
THis second is to unfold the transactions by which Christ has virtually
slain and abolisht all this enmity, and procured this peace.

Now to make way for the distinct handling of what belongs to this second Head
from what is to follow in the third; And to sever the one from the other, I
desire that in the text this difference may be observed between the things
that Christ has done for the effecting and accomplishment of that peace. 1.
What was transacted and done simply and abstractly in his own person alone,
for the procurement of it, On the Cross. 2. What he works efficiently in us,
(though concretely, in himself, upon us) by his Spirit; and through
Providence, to the full accomplishment thereof. The first of these belongs to
this second Head; the last of these takes up the third Head.

Only for the clearing of this method, I shall desire it may be noticed, how
evidently in the text, these two sorts of workings by Christ are distinguished
each from other, and ranged there in the order I have proposed them.

Here is manifestly a double making of these twain one: 1. The one expressed in
time past; the other as to come, and to be perfected. 1. (...), who has made
both one, v. 14. and (...), having abolisht, v. 15. in his own flesh
personally. 2. (...), That he might make both one. The first antecedent, and
already done; the other consequent, and to be accomplished: the latter
distinguished from the former, as the consequent or effect from its cause: He
has made both one, THAT HE MIGHT create both one into one new man; the
influence and virtue of the first, bringing about the latter. And 2.
accordingly in the Original, these two are further distinguished by words of a
different import (though our Translation has taken no notice of it, but has
folded them up each, under one and the same word [making one] so making them
one indeed; But) the first (...) making one, v. 14. is of a more large
signification, and is appliable and extendible to express (as here also it is
intended) a virtuall, influentiall making Us one in his own person, before we
are made one in our selves. The latter (...) (more restrictive) properly and
strictly signifies Creation, [CREATING both one] or making both one by a new
creation: And therefore [IN ONE NEW MAN,] is added as the product of this
second kind of making: and this imports a physical efficiency, and working
upon us; a moulding and forming us, by creation, into this oneness among our
selves, although the mould in which this latter is wrought and cast, is his
person also, [in himself:] Yet not in himself, considered personally and
alone, but as uniting us to himself, and so working upon us concretely through
in and by himself. And therefore 3. they differ, the first being performed in
himself singly, personally when he was in this world, and especially on the
Cross, and is therefore expressed as past, Has made one, as a business done,
and perfected already, as much (in respect of such a way making one) as ever it
shall be. The other to be effected afterward in us, in our several ages, and
by degrees, as the new Creature is: that he might create of two, one new man.

To illustrate the difference of these two makings one, but in one parallel
instance (although the like duplicate is found, and distinction holds in all
kind of works done in us, and for us by Christ:) because it is the next akin to
this. The parallel is that of Reconciliation or making peace between God and
the Saints. These two works, as they are the nearest twins of all other done
for us by Christ: so are they, herein, exactly parallel and alike. Now unto the
accomplishment of our reconciliation with God, a double reconciliation is
necessary: The one wrought out of us, in Christ's person for us; God was in
Christ reconciling the world: The other in us; We beseech you to be reconciled
to God, 1 Cor. 5. 19, 20. The like holds in this our Reconciliation Mutual. Or
to set the likeness of these Gemelli to your view in another glass (that is,
another Scripture) that gives forth the neernesse of the resemblance of this
sort of Reconciliation, in parallel words and lines, to those in the text, it
is, 1 Coloss. 20. He says first, Christ having made peace by the blood of his
Cross, to reconcile all to himself; this is a work already done, and done FOR
ALL, at once, meritoriously, and representatively, as there it follows. [In
the body of his flesh through death, v. 22.] After which he speaks of another
reconciliation of us, wrought in us, toward God too, in these words, And you
that were enemies has he NOW reconciled. This latter therefore wrought since,
and after the former, was perfected, as the effect of it. The very same or like
here you have expressed of that reconciliation or making one of the Saints
mutually, which we have in hand. 1. He has made both one, v. 14. in his flesh,
v. 15. in one body by the Cross, v. 16. thus meritoriously and
representatively. 2. That he might create of twain in one new man, so
efficiently: Both must go in their several seasons and successions to the
effecting thereof, or there would not be peace. I have given you the grounds
for these general heads out of the text; I come to such particular branches of
each, as into which the text also spreads it self, and is a root unto them.

1 SECTION. Two Branches of what Christ did in his own person, On the Cross,
to reconcile the Saints. 1. By way of sacrifice, and taking on him their
enmities. 2. Of representation, [in one body] in himself.
THat which is proper (as was said) to this PART, is, What has been done in
Christ's own person. The particulars hereof are two, which I find in the text,
(to the materials of which I confine my self, and shall take them in that
order in which they lie:) 1. By way of sacrifice, having taken on him before
God the enmities of both against each other, and so offering up his flesh as a
sacrifice for both. The 2. By a voluntary assuming and gathering the persons of
all the Elect into one BODY in himself: he representing and sustaining their
persons, and so [in one body] reconciling them unto God.

Both are expressly and distinctly mentioned: The first in these words, Having
abolisht the enmity (namely, between them) in his flesh: which flesh, taking on
him their enmities, was made a sacrifice on the Cross, therefore v. 16. By the
Cross is added. The second in these words, That he might reconcile both to God
in one body: and though both these were performed at once, and by one
individual act, yet that act is to be looked at, as having these two distinct
considerations concurring in it. And the first in order of nature, making way
for the second, as in opening the connection of v. 15, and 16. I have already
showed; I must handle them therefore each apart.

How Christ's offering himself up as a sacrifice to God, and his standing as a
common person in our stead before God, should abolish all our enmities against
God himself, and reconcile us unto him, This is ordinarily and generally
apprehended, and were proper to speak of, if our reconciliation to God
himself had been the theme set out to be treated of: But how these very same
acts and transactions of Christ should together therewith conduce to our
reconciliation one with another, this only is genuine at this time, and to be
eyed as the direct and proper level of what does ensue: although even this is
so involved with that other, that this cannot be explicated without supposing
and glancing thereat: this but to set and keep the Readers eye steady upon the
single mark aimed at.

1. Branch. Two things to explicate the first Branch. 1. That Christ's offering
himself was intended as a sacrifice for Enmities between the Saints, as well
as against God.
TWo things are distinctly to be spoken unto for the clearing of these things.

1. That the offering up Christ's flesh on the Cross, was intended as a
sacrifice, as well for our reconciliation mutual, as for reconciliation with
God.

2. How according to the analogy of the ends, use, and intent of sacrifices of
old, the offering up of Christ's flesh should be intended and directed as a
sacrifice, to take away these our own enmities, and make peace and friendship
amongst our selves.

For the first, which is the (...) of this point, That as a sacrifice it was so
intended, the whole frame and contexture of these words does evince it.

1. When he says v. 15. That he has abolisht the enmity in his flesh, he does
undeniably intend that enmity which was between these twain, the Jew and
Gentile (this has been proved before:) and therefore he is found particularly
to instance in the rites of the ceremonial Law, (which by a metonymie he calls
the enmity,) as the outward occasion of that bitter enmity in each others
hearts.

Now then 2. That this enmity was taken away by his flesh as a sacrifice;

First, The laying together the phrases of the Text, evinceth it; as when he
says, He has abolisht this enmity in his flesh. 1. In saying the enmity in
his flesh, it necessarily imports his having taken that enmity in or upon his
own flesh, to answer for it in their stead. Even as well, as when in the 16.
verse, he is said to have slain the enmity (namely, against God) in himself;
thereby is intended, that he took that enmity on himself; undertaking to
pacify and allay, and by being himself slain, to slay it. 2. In saying in the
time past, that he has abolisht it, in his flesh, this notes out a virtuall
act perfectly done and past, (as in him:) by virtue of which it is to be
destroyed actually in us after. Unto which 3. add that in the 16. v. there is
an additionall word [By the Crosse] put in, which (...), or in common, is to be
referrd to the abolishing of this enmity in his flesh, v. 15. and reconciling
us mutually; as well as to the slaying of the enmity against God mentioned, v.
16. as that which equally and alike shows the way, how, we are to understand
that in his flesh, he has perfectly abolisht both these enmities; namely, by
taking on his flesh that enmity, and offering it up upon the Cross as a
sacrifice for it. For to say, by the Cross, or by the sacrifice of himself on
the Cross, is all one: so as what the one verse wants, the other supplies: In
his flesh, says the 15. v. By the Cross, says the 16. and (which will
warrant this) we have elsewhere both put together, 1 Coloss. 20, 22. By the
blood of his Cross, in the body of his flesh, through death.

2. The paralleling this place with that of the 2 Coloss. argues this: The
enmity here instanced in, by a metonymie is the rites of the ceremonial Law:
which he is said to have made void or weak. Thus expressly v. 15. Having
abolisht in his flesh the enmity, the Law of Commandments in Ordinances: Now
the abolishing thereof is in that second to the Colossians expressly said to
have been by the sacrifice of His Flesh on the Cross: or which is all one,
That, by His being nailed to the Cross, He nailed it to His Cross, Coloss. 2.
14. Blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, and took
it out of the way, NAYLING IT TO HIS CROSS, which fully accords with this
Text, He abolisht it in his Flesh by the Cross.

Lastly, (for a winding up of this) The parallel which the Apostle observes in
his Discourse between his effecting our Peace and Reconciliation with God, and
this our Peace and Reconciliation one with another, will induce to it: He being
first alike in common termed our peace. v. 14. in respect to either. Then to
demonstrate each apart, a double enmity (as I observed at first) is distinctly
and apart mentioned by him. The one v. 15. the other v. 16. Of the one he
says, he has abolisht: of the other, he has slain it: of the one he says,
he has abolisht it in His Flesh: of the other, in himself (as the Greek has
it v. 16.) And so those words by the Cross are common to each: As those first
words, [He is our Peace] were to all that followed. And so as the Parallel has
hitherto run along in these particulars, so it holds on, that look How in
this, or by what way He slew the enmity betwixt God and us, on the Cross, by
the same way he abolisht the enmity between the Jew and Gentile, or the people
of God mutually: But he slew the enmity between God and us, on the Cross by
taking those our enmities against God on Himself, and they being found on him,
he was slain and sacrificed for them on the Cross, and thereby slew them and
reconciled us to God: In like manner then it is to be understood, that HE first
took all our enmities against one another on His Flesh [in His Flesh] says
the Text: (and it was the general intent of Sacrifices to be offered up, for
what was laid upon them or reckoned to them.) And so, our enmities being there
all found in His Flesh, that Flesh was offered up for them, and so they were all
dissolved and abolisht and made weak, as the Text speaks of them, in his being
dissolved or made weak (as the 2 Cor. 13. and Phil. 3. speaks in like manner
of him.)

So then as there was a double enmity, and a double slaying which the Apostle
mentions; so there must be in this one Sacrifice a double consideration in the
intention thereof: It is a Sacrifice serving at once, to slay and abolish both
the one and the other: he being in common alike and indifferently termed, Our
peace, as in relation unto either; there being nothing also done for us by
Christ, but the like was first done on Himself.

The second thing to explicate the first Branch. That one end or Use of
Sacrifices, both among Jews and Gentiles, was to ratify peace between Man
and Man, as truly as between God and Man: and that Christ's Sacrifice holds an
Analogy herein to other Sacrifices.
THis being cleared, I come to the second, the (...), namely to demonstrate how
according to the Analogy of the ends, and use of sacrificing of old in the
shadow, Christ's Sacrifice was likewise intended and directed to make peace
between Man and Man, Jew and Gentile, as truly and as genuinely as between
God and Man. For the illustration of this, we must know and consider, that of
old Feuds or enmities between Man and Man, were removed and put to an end, by
Sacrifice: and also leagues of amity and friendship even between Man and Man,
were anciently ratified and confirmed, and Reconciliation established by
Sacrifices: and as by Sacrifices so likewise AFTER Sacrifices, or over and
beside Sacrifices, by eating and feasting together, and this both among Jews
and Gentiles (of which latter, namely, that by eating together, friendship was
sealed, Liquet quod apud Israclitas faedera partim epulis partim Sacrificiis
inita fuisse and sancita. Vide Rivet in Genesis 31. Exercit. 135.
we shall have further use anon to confirm and explicate this very Notion in
hand.) I say leagues of peace and friendship were used to be ratifyed by
Sacrifices solemnly before God: so to make such Covenants, a matter of Religion
(to bind the stronglier:) and not to be merely the obligations of humane faith
and honesty: even by this, that men did find them ratifyed in the presence of
a Deity; which they worshipped as their God, by so solemn and Religious and
Action; which did withal invocate from God a curse upon the infringers of that
peace and friendship made thereby. This to have been their use, I am to clear.

We may consider that though all Sacrifices were offered up before and unto God,
yet not all only by way of expiation, or atonement made unto God, or as
expressions of thankfulness unto him: but some were Sacrifices of
pacification, and faederall in their intention, between Man and Man, being
offered up before God as a witness and avenger. This to have been one use of
Sacrifices is evident both among Jews, and likewise Gentiles (who were in
their Sacrifices and the rites thereof imitators of the Jews.)

1. The Jews. Jer. 34. from v. 8. etc. we read, That Zedekiah the King made a
solemn Covenant with the people, and they with their servants to let them go
free according to Gods Law in that behalf made Exodus 21. 1. and Deuteronomy. 15. 12.
and this Sacrificiall Covenant was solemnly performed in Gods House, and
before God, as v. 15. and 18. The rites of it were, They cut a Calfe in twain,
and passed between the parts of the Calfe, even the Princes and all the
people, v. 19. in token that it was one common Sacrifice between All those
parties, Masters and Servants, and the joint act of each, which being thus
solemn, before God, carried with it an implicit or tacit execration, That if
either brake this Covenant in this manner confirmed, then let God so deal with
them, as this Calfe sacrificed was dealt withal: and therefore these having
broken this Covenant, v. 11. (which breach of Faith was the occasion of this
part of Jeremies message to them) God threatens to bring the curse invocated
and signified by that rite, upon them, and to retaliate the like unto them v.
18. I will GIVE the men that have transgressed MY COVENANT so he calls it,
because the matter of it was his command, and it had been ratified before him,
as it follows:) which have not performed the words of the COVENANT which they
had made BEFORE ME, when they cut the Calfe in twain, and passed between the
parts thereof. That, therefore [I will give,] it is verbum similitudinis (as
it is often used:) whose meaning is, I will make them as that Calfe, I will
answerably deal with them: and so it is explained; I will give them into the
hands of them that seek their life, and expose them to the Sword of the
slayer, to slay at his pleasure, as you have done this beast, which you
Sacrificed: and their dead bodies shall be for meat to the fowls of Heaven,
etc.

The like intendment of Sacrifices with the same rite, and like imprecation to
confirm Leagues and Covenants, and end feuds, was in use among the Heathen, as
might be evidenced by many Quotations, which I have met withal. To instance in
one out of Livy which is most punctual to the thing in hand, and parallel to
the former out of Jeremy. They cut a beast in two, Caput, medium, and prior
pars ad dextram, posterior ad Laevam viae: pariter inter hanc divisam hostiam
copiae armatae traducuntur. Live. L. 39.
The midst and the head with the bowels were placed at the right hand of the
way: and the hinder parts on the left hand, and both the Armies (that made the
league,) passed between this divided Sacrifice. And as the same rites with the
former are expressed in this, so the same imprecation is recorded at the making
of this Covenant, and by Sacrifice confirmed, recorded by the same Author, when
these two Nations, Albanes and Romans, made this league: Si prius defexit, The
Latin Foedus a feriendo; and hence percutere, elicere faedus, to strike a
Covenant (with us.) Thus Sanctio a sanguine, which that of Tacitus confirms,
Sacrificiis conspiratio sancitur: agreements and combinations had their
sanction and confirmation by Sacrifices: and faedus cruore sacratum, lib.
Annal. 12.
Tu illum Jupiter sic ferito, ut ego hunc porcum hodie feriam: Let God strike
him that breaks it, as I strike this Swine, said the Sacrificer.

Et caesa jungebant foedera porca. Aeneid Virgil. l. 8.
The Holy Ghost speaks in like language, Psalm. 50. 5. My people that have made
a Covenant with me by Sacrifice.

To bring all this home to the point in hand: There being to be a perpetual
League and Covenant of Peace to be stricken between Jew and Gentile, and all
other the elect of God, who should be at variance in any Age; and Christ having
interposed himself as a Mediator for us to God, he did with all undertake to
be an Arbiter between them, (and us all) among Our selves, for all Our
differences also: and he offered up his Flesh as one common Sacrifice upon the
Cross, at once to be expiatory, to God, to blot out the sins and enmities of
ours against God Himself: So also pacificatory between Man and Man, Jew and
Gentile, and all other the elect: and therein answering to, and fulfilling one
true end and intendment of Sacrifices, as well as in the other of making
atonement to God. And the Text you see having said first, that he is made our
Peace, in making both One, verse. 14. and then pointing us to his Flesh, as (in)
which he bore their enmities, verse. 15. and then carrying us to the Cross,
verse. 16. it evidently (as was said,) argues, That He was made our Peace, by
being thus made a pacificatory Sacrifice, for both. And surely (if there were
no other reason to confirm it,) all Sacrifices in all their ends and uses
having been but shadows of this, and His Flesh and the Sacrificing it being
the subtance, this eminent Sacrifice of his must needs be supposed (as such,)
to have the Perfection, Use and Efficacy, that all other Sacrifices could any
way be supposed subservient unto, or it had not been the complete perfection
of them; Especially there being this need of having His Sacrifice directed to
this end, as well as to that other, there falling out so great animosities
among those that were members of Him; which as it called for a Sacrifice to be
offered up to allay and destroy them: so CHRIST in Sacrificing Himself would
not leave out, or lose this part of His Glory and Perfection in this respect.

Hence accordingly, as here He is termed our Peace; so elsewhere the Covenant
of the People, and both in the like latitude of sense and meaning. When here He
is called our Peace, the meaning extends not only to His being our Peace
between God and us; but between our selves also: so when He is called the
Covenant of the People, it intends not only His being a Covenant unto God for
us, but a Covenant before God OF US; or (as there it is expressed) of the People
of God, namely among themselves. He is twice so called, and with much
evidence, as to this sense: Isai. 4 2. 6. I will give thee for a Covenant of
the People, that is, (says Sanctius,) to the Jew, and for a light of the
Geatiles: and thus a Covenant of both. And Chapter 49. 8. For a Covenant of the
People to establish the Earth, that is, to this end, to settle in peace the
whole Earth, both Jew and Gentile; so then a Covenant of the People (as you
see) even in this very respect: Peace on Earth, among men, as well as good will
toward men from God in Heaven, being the foot of that Song was sung at His
Birth, and the sum of what is here said; He is our Peace.

II. SECTION. The Analogy between the Rites of such pacificatory Sacrifices,
and this Sacrifice of Christ's as offered up for our mutual enmities: and how
This end and intention of Christ's Sacrifice is held forth in the Lords Supper.
NOw observe further, A correspondency unto those rites mentioned, that were
used in those Sacrifices of peace, also held forth in this Sacrifice of His.
The Beast in such cases was divided and cut in twain for both parties to pass
through, and so peace to be made between them. And Christ to make both, or,
twain one (as here,) was divided and cut (as it were) in twain: The Godhead for
a time forsaking the manhood, Psalm. 22.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? His Soul also being by Death
separated from His Body; his joints loosned, to dissolve this enmity; the veil
of His Flesh rent, to rend the partition wall. Thus He was cut in twain as one
common Sacrifice, between both.

And again as the sacrificing of the beast cut a sunder was reckoned the
common joint Act of both parties in such a case, and they were esteemed by God,
and by one another, each to have an hand in the sacrificing of it, and as
consenting to the Covenant and peace that was intended to be entered into and
ratified by it: so here in this. And though we then personally existed not, yet
all we being considered in Him, by God, (who gave us to Him;) and by Himself,
that voluntarily sustained our persons, and He offering up Himself as a
Sacrifice on our behalf, and for our behoof and in our names; Hence His Will
in offering up Himself, was volunt as totius, the act and will of the whole
body, whose persons He sustained; our wills were thereby involved in His will;
His act was our act: and it may truly be said, that a Covenant of peace was
then made before God, BY US, and for us: for He was our Priest therein for us,
as well as our Sacrifice.

And hence in a further correspondency to the manner of those typical
Sacrifices: Therein although the Priest only offered up the Sacrifice for the
People, and in their name and stead, yet to show it was their act, they used to
eat of it after, or of that which was offered up with it. The interpretation of
which eating thereof, by the People, the Apostle gives us to be this, 1 Cor.
10. 18. They that did eat of the Sacrifices were partakers of the Altar: that
is, thereby they declared the Sacrifice to be theirs, the offering it up to be
their Act, that they partook, and had an hand in it, as if they had been at the
Altar with the Priest himself. Just in like manner, to show that we were
reckoned consenting to, and partakers in this sacrifice of Christ our Priest,
and that it was our own act, we do in like manner partake of that Sacrifice by
eating of it; The Lords Supper being as Tertullian rightly termed it,
Participatio Sacrificii, which Notion the Apostle there confirms in a parallel
of the Lords Supper in this very respect, to the case of those Sacrifices then
(for unto this purpose it was that he brings in that instance of the
sacrifices, v. 16.) The bread which we break, (says he) is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? namely considered, as sacrificed once upon the
altar of the Cross, and so by eating thereof, we are all partakers of that one
bread, as the thing signifying; and of that one body sacrificed, as the thing
signified: and so by this way of partaking therein, namely, by eating thereof,
is shown, as in the sacrifices of old, that it is our own sacrifice. And this
not only as Edendo censebantur, ipsius sacrificii tanquam pro ipsis oblati
fieri participes. Est. in loc.
Estius upon the place, who says, That by eating they were accounted partakers
of the sacrifice, as that which was offered for them: But further as Christus
vult in se credentes participes fieri ejus sacrificii, plane, quasi ipsi hoc
sacrificium obtulissent, quia oblatum ab eo qui naturam eorum susceperat.
Grotius, (speaking of the Lords Supper, upon Mat. 26. 25.) They are in Christ's
intent, says he, through their eating thereof, So partakers of this his
sacrifice, quasi ipsi hoc obtulissent, as if themselves had offered it up. And
thus to hold forth this previous consent of theirs, was one part of Christ's
intent in instituting eating and drinking in the Lords Supper, in a
correspondency to the like mysterious intent in the peoples eating of the
sacrifices of old: Grotius indeed puts the reason, why it is to be esteemed, as
if we had offered up that sacrifice, only upon this, because it was offered up
by him (says he) that had taken their nature: but I add out of this text,
because he had took on him their persons, in One Body, and their enmities, and
stood in their stead, as their Priest, as well as their sacrifice: and so it
was to be reckond their act on his Cross, as much as the peoples then, who
used to bring the sacrifice to the Priest, who, there, offered it alone upon
the Altar; whereas here WE (our selves) were brought to Christ by the Father to
undertake to be a Priest for Us, and he voluntarily undertook Our persons. And
so, as Levi is accounted to have offered tithes in Abraham his Father, when he
paid them to Melchisedech; so we much rather to have offered up a common
sacrifice of peace amongst our selves, when Christ offered up himself.

And hence also likewise, as in those pacificatory foederall sacrifices between
two parties of men, whoever of them went about to violate or infringe the
terms of peace, that sacrifice was intended to confirm, did (by reason it
was his act) bring upon himself the curse, which ceremonially and visibly was
inflicted on the beast or sacrifice slain: so here this act of sacrificing of
Christ for mutual peace being thus interpretative OURS, and our consent
involved, Hence I say in like manner, whoever goes about to break this
Covenant, and seeks to uphold the enmity among the people of God, he does not
only renounce his own act, but what in him lies, frustrates that intention of
it; and so further incurres the imprecation infolded in it, and brings upon
himself the blood of the Covenant, as in allusion to this curse (according to
the employed intent of such a sacrificiall Covenant) the Apostle speaks Heb. 10.

Now further to finish this Branch, let this be added; That Christ was not
simply offered up as a sacrifice to confirm a mere or bare league of peace
and amity between us: (sometimes such sacrifices before spoken of were designed
only to make and bind new Leagues and Covenants between such parties, as
never had been at variance:) But here in this case of ours, as there was a
Covenant of amity to be struck, so there were enmities to be abolisht and
slain, as the text has it; and that by this sacrifice and slaying of his
flesh: which cannot be conceived otherwise to have been transacted, but that
as in other sacrifices offered up, the trespasses were laid upon the head of
the sacrifice, and so in a significant mystery slain and done away in the
death of the thing sacrificed: And that as in that other way of reconciling us
to God, The Lord did lay upon him the iniquities of us all, namely, against
himself (as Isay speaks in allusion unto the rites (and the signification
thereof, in those sacrifices:) to which this text simularly speaks when it
says, He slew the enmity in himself, v. 16.) So answerably it was in this
(which is its parallel:) All the enmities and mutual injuries and feuds
between us the people of God, were all laid upon him, and he took them in his
flesh, and in slaying thereof slew these also, and abolisht them, that so he
might reconcile them in one body. And so the same nails that pierced through
his hands and feet, did nail all our enmities, and the causes and occasions of
them, to the same Cross, as 2 Coloss. insinuates. So as, we are to look upon
Jesus Christ hanging on the Cross, as an equal Arbiter between both parties,
that takes upon himself whatever either party has against the other. Lo here
I hang (says Christ a dying) and let the reproaches wherewith you reproach
each other fall on me: The sting of them all fix it self on my flesh; and in
my death dye all together with me; lo I dye to pacific both: Have therefore any
of you ought against each other? Quit them, and take me as a sacrifice, in
blood between you; only do not kill me, and each other too, for the same
offense: for you, and your enmities, have brought me to this altar of the
Cross, and I offer my self as your peace, and as your Priest: will you kill
me first, and then one another too?

And thus, if taking all your sins against God himself upon his flesh, and
sacrificing it for you, is of prevalency to kill, and slay that enmity; much
more is it of force to kill these your enmities also. Thus, like as by assuming
the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.
he killed the sin in our flesh: so by taking these our enmities and
animosities in his flesh, he slew and abolisht them: 1 Cor. 15.
and as his death was the death of death, so of these. And like as he cured
diseases by taking them on himself by sympathy, it is said of him when his
healing of them is recorded) Himself took our infirmities, and bare our
sicknesses: And as not our sins against God only, but our sicknesses by
sympathy: so, not our enmities against God only, but our animosities one
against another; and by bearing them abolisht them; by dying as an Arbiter
between us, slew them: and therefore in the text, he is called our peace, not
our peacemaker only, (when this peace amongst our selves is spoken of,) to
note out, as Musculus observes, that he was not only efficiently our
peacemaker, the Author of our peace, but our peace materially, the matter of
our peace, by the sacrifice of himself. God is styled our peacemaker, our
reconciler; God was in Christ reconciling the world: but not our peace; this is
proper to Christ: and why? but because he only was the sacrifice of our peace,
and bore our enmities. Even as he is not only called the Redeemer, (so God also
is,) but redemption it self.

Now for a coronis to this first Branch, and withal to add a further
confirmation yet, that Christ's death was intended as a sacrifice to these ends,
for amity and unity among Gods people, we may clearly view and behold this
truth in the Mirror of the Lords Supper. One most genuine and primary import
whereof, and end of the institution of it, being this very thing in hand: (I
shall have recourse thereto again in the next Branch also upon the same
account that now.)

The Lords Supper in its full and proper scope, is, as you know, a solemn
commemoration of Christ's death offered up upon the Cross, or if you will, in
the Apostles own words, it is a showing forth his death till he comes: And do
this (says Christ) in remembrance of me; namely, in dying for you: and so
withal to commemorate with application to themselves, the principal ends and
intendments of that his death, which is therein acted over before their eyes.
Hence therefore I take this as an undoubted maxim, which no knowing Christian
will deny (and its the foundation of what I am now a building:) That look what
principal ends, purposes or intendments this Supper or sacrificiall feast
holds forth in its institution unto us: those must needs be looked at, by all
Christians, in the like proportion, to have been the maine ends and purposes of
his death to be remembered. So that we may argue mutually from what were the
ends of Christ's death, unto what must needs be the designed intendments of this
Sacrament. And we may as certainly conclude, and infer to our selves, what
were the intendments of his death, by what are the genuine ends of that
Sacrament. These answer each to other, as the image in the glass does to the
principal lineaments in the face; the impresse on the wax, to that in the
scale; the action, the sign and remembrances, to the thing signified and to be
remembered.

Now it is evident that Christ upon his death instituted that Supper, As, to be
a seal of that Covenant of Grace between God and us, ratified thereby; so,
also to be a communion, the highest outward pledge, ratification and testimony
of love and amity among his members themselves. And accordingly, it being in
the common nature of it, a feast: look as between God and us, it was ordained
to be epulum foederale, a Covenant feast between him and us: (the evidence
whereof lies in this, That he invites us to his table as friends, and as those
he is at peace withal, and reconciled unto:) So, in like manner between the
Saints themselves, it was as evidently, ordained to be a Syntaxis, a love
feast, in that they eat and drink together at one and the same table, and so
become as the Apostle says, ONE BREAD. And again, look as between God and
us, to show that the procurement of this peace and reconciliation between him
and us, was this very sacrifice of Christ's death, (as that which made our
peace,) God therefore invites us, post sacrificium oblatum, after the sacrifice
offered up, to eat of the symboles of it; that is, of Bread and Wine, which
are the signs and symboles of his body and blood sacrificed for peace: So in
like manner does this hold as to the peace between our selves: And we may
infer, that we were through the offering up thereof, reconciled one to another,
and all mutual enmities slain and done away thereby, in that we eat together
thereof in a communion; which was a sacrifice once offered, but now feasted
upon together: And does show, that Christians of all professions or relations
of men have the strongest obligations unto mutual love and charity: For the
bread broken and the cup are the symboles of their Saviors body and blood once
made a sacrifice; and therefore they eating thereof together, as of a feast
after a sacrifice, do show forth this Union and Agreement, to have been the
avowed purchase, and impretation of the body and blood so sacrificed.

There was a controversy of late years fomented by some through Popish
complyances, That the Lords Supper might be styled a Sacrifice, the Table an
Altar, which produced in the discussion of it (as all controversies do in the
issue some further truth) the discovery of this true decision of it: That it
was not a sacrifice, but a feast after and upon Christ's sacrificing of
himself; Participatio sacrificii, as Tertullian calls it, a sacrificiall feast
commemorating and confirming all those ends for which the only true and proper
sacrifice of Christ was offered up, and so this feast a visible ratification of
all such ends, whereof this, is Evidently One.

III. SECTION. A Digression showing: 1. That Eating and Drinking together.
Especially upon, and after a pacificatory Sacrifice, was a farther confirmation
of Mutual peace, both among Jews and Gentiles: And 2. That the Eating the
Lords Supper, has the same intent and accord thereunto: The Harmony of all
these notions together.
NOw therefore to draw all these lines into one center, and to make the harmony
and consent of all these notions the more full; and together therewith to
render the harmony more complete between the Lords death, and its being
intended as a sacrifice to procure this peace, and the Lords Supper as a feast
after this sacrifice, holding forth this very thing, as purchased thereby, and
so further to confirm all this: look as before I showed (as in relation to
the demonstration that Christ's death was intended as a sacrifice for such a
peace) that that was one end and use of sacrifices both among Jews and
Gentiles, to found and create Leagues of amity between man and man so it is
proper and requisite for me now to make another like digression, (as in
relation to this notion of the Lords Supper) to show how that also by eating
and feasting together (especially after or upon such a kind of sacrifice) these
Leagues of Love were anciently used to be further confirmed and ratified: that
so it may appear that as according to the analogy of such sacrifices, Christ's
death was a sacrifice directed and intended to that end; so also that according
to the analogy of such feasting in and upon sacrifices, this eating and
feasting together upon the symboles of that sacrifice by believers, is as
genuinely intended a scale of this reconciliation amongst them, and that in a
due correspondency and answerablenesse to the genuine intent of that sacrifice
it self, as that which had purchased and procured it.

I might be as large in this as in the former. When after a grudge and enmity
past between Laban and Jacob, Laban to bury all things between them would
enter into a Covenant of peace; Come (says he, Genesis 31. 44.) let us make a
Covenant I and thou: and (that by a sign, for he adds) let it be a witness
between thee and me: Now what was that sign and witness? in the 46. it is
said, They took stones, and made an heap, and did EAT THERE: and v. 54.
(after an Oath passed v. 53.) Jacob offered a sacrifice on the Mount; and
called his Brethren (or Kinsmen) to eat bread; and early in the morning Laban
departed. The like did Isaac with Abimelech, Genesis 26. 28. David with Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 20. I single forth chiefly those two, 1. Because the parties that used
and agreed in this signal rite, were the one Jews, as Isaac and Jacob; the
other Gentiles, as Abimilech and Laban: to show at once that this way of
convenanting was common to them both, as the former by sacrificing was also
shown to be.

Some instances have been collected by Mr. Meade, Diatr. 2. part. upon Mal. 1.
11. as also by R. C. after him. Grotius, Rivetus, of the customs of several
Nations, ancient and modern, to show eating and drinking together to have been
intended testimonies, and ratifications of amity. I only shall cast in one from
the custom of the East-Indians (as in the stories of whom there are found, as
well as in other Eastern Nations to this day, many footsteps of like customs
to the Jews of old:) Sir Th. Roe Ambassador there, in his journall
observations relates, how he was invited by one of the great ones of the Court
to a Banquet with this very expression (simular to those which those Authors
allege as in use among other Nations:) We will eat bread and salt together to
scale a friendship which I desire. Purchase Pilgri. 1 Part. p. 348.
And further, that this rite of eating together, the Gentiles themselves did
use, especially after such sacrifices as were federall, unto this intent, that
by that superadded custom of eating together, upon or after sacrificing, they
might the more ratify and confirm such Covenants, first made, and begun by
sacrificing. This seems to me to be the intendment, Exodus 34. 15. Lest thou
make a Covenant (God speaks it to the Jew) with the Inhabitants of the Land,
and thou go a whoring after their Gods, and do Sacrifice unto their Gods, and
one call thee, and thou eat of their Sacrifices: namely upon pretense of
confirming that Covenant, which having first been contracted and agreed on,
they might further be drawn on, to Sacrifice and so eat of the Sacrifices
also, with those Heathens in token of confirming such a league, as was the
known common manner and custom of each to do.

Yea, and those that were more barbarous and inhumane among the Gentiles, when
they would put the more binding force into their Covenants, or some such more
solemn conspiracy, they used to sacrifice a man (a slave suppose,) and eat
His Flesh, and drink His Blood together; which because they judged the more
stupendous, they judged would carry with it, the deepest and more binding
obligation. Thus, (...)
we read in Plutarch, Those Roman Gallants entering into a Covenant drank the
blood of a man, whom first as a Sacrifice they had killed. And the same
Plutarch says of another company (those conspirators with Catiline:) that they
Sacrificed a man, and did eat His Flesh. So to bind and unite each other more
firmly to stick fast, and close together in so great an undertaking, by the
most sure and firmest way that their Religion could invent. (...)
And Psalm. 16. 4. makes an express mention of such among the Heathens, terming
them Their drink offerings of blood. See also Ezekiel. 39. 17, 18, 19. Men and
Nations less barbarous took WINE instead of blood, to confirm their leagues
after Sacrifices, it being the likest and nearest unto blood, the blood of the
Grape.

Now then to bring all this home to the point in hand, Christ our Passover,
(and so our Sacrifice for us) having been slain and offered up for our mutual
peace, has instituted and ordained us Believers to keep this feast, (It is
the Apostles own allusion, agreeing with and founded on the notion we have been
prosecuting:) and that to this end, That by partaking of it as a Sacrifice, and
by showing forth His death, we might hold forth, all the avowed ends of that
Sacrifice with Application to our selves. The eminent ends of the one as a
Sacrifice, corresponding and answering to the eminent ends of the other as a
Feast. A Feast it is, of Gods providing, and he the great entertainer of us at
it, in token of peace between Him and us: for HE it was, who prepared the
Sacrifice it self, and unto whom as a whole burnt offering Christ was offered
up; But God is not as one that sits down and eats with us, though He smelt a
sweet savor in it, we are the guests, and He the Master, of this Feast: And
yet He thereby proclaims, and professes His being reconciled, in that He
causes us to sit down at His Table. And this is the prime, and most eminent
significancy of it. And to hold forth this intent thereof, as between God us,
others have prosecuted this notion. But there is another, (more conspicuously
suited to the notion which has been driven, and) which is no less in the
intention of the institution it self: and indeed of the two more obvious to
outward sense,) and that is, that the Persons themselves, for whom it is
prepared, that do visibly sit down, and do eat and drink (in proper
speech,) the Bread and Cup together, that they are agreed, and at peace each
with other. God He is but as an invisible entertainer: but our eating and
drinking together, is visible to all the world; we outwardly show forth his
death, and do withal as visibly show forth this to have been the intent of
it. Yea and if we could raise up those Nations of old, both Jews and
Gentiles, and call together the most part of the world at this day: and should
but declare, that this is a Feast, especially a sacrificall Feast, a Feast
after a Sacrifice, offered once up for our amity and peace by so great A
Mediator: the common instinct, and notion which their own customs had begot
in them, would presently prompt them, and cause them universally to understand
and say among themselves, These men were at enmity one with another, and a
Sacrifice was offered up to abolish it, and to confirm an Union and
Pacification amongst them, and lo therefore, they do further eat and
participate thereof, and communicate therein. A manifest profession it is, that
they are in mutual love, amity and concord one with another: and thereby
further ratifying that Unity, which that Sacrifice, had been offered up before,
for the renewing of. This is truly the interpretation of that solemn
celebration even in the sight of all the Heathens and unto the Principles of
all the Nations, among whom Sacrifices were in use: yea and this they would all
account, the strongest and firmest bond of union that any Religion could
afford. And add this, the more noble the Sacrifice was, as if of a man, being
a more noble Creature, the more obliging they accounted (as was observed) the
bands of that Covenant made thereby.

Now our Passover is slain, our peace is sacrificed, not man, but Christ
God-man; He sanctifying by the fullness of God dwelling personally in him the
Sacrifice of that His Flesh and humane nature, to an infinity of value and
worth. He has become a Sacrifice of our mutual peace, was cut in twain; and
to complete this union among our selves, He has in a stupendous way
appointed His own Body and Blood to be received and shared as a Feast amongst
us, succeeding that Sacrifice once offered up. The bread we break is it not the
communion of the Body of Christ: 1 Cor. 10.
the Cup the Communion of His Blood: Scipio, Jovis epulo, cu^ Graccho
Concordiam Communicavit.
(so speaks Paul a most faithful interpreter of these mysteries) and a
Communion of many as one Body (as it follows there.) It Is strange that an
Heathen speaking of one of their sacred Feasts, intended to confirm an
agreement between two great personages, should use the same expression; Vale
Max. lib. 6. c. 2.
Communicarunt concordiam they are said TO HAVE COMMUNICATED CONCORD, And this
because they communicated together in the same Feast dedicated to their chief
God, and which was ordained to testify concord between them: The Apostle calls
it in like manner, A COMMUNION: whereby MANY are made ONE Bread, IN THAT THEY
EAT OF THAT ONE BREAD; Which whilst they eat and drink in, they eat and
drink the highest charity and agreement each with, and unto other.

But that this sort of Peace and Love, namely mutual among the Receivers was
an avowed intendment of our partaking of the Lords Supper, needs not to be
insisted on: this import of it has took the deepest impression upon the most
vulgar apprehension, of all that profess Christianity, of any other. To be in
charity with their Neighbor, etc. has remaind in all ages of the Church, upon
the spirits of the most ignorant and superstitious, when those other higher
ends and intendments of it were forgotten. My inference therefore is strong and
sure: that what was thus eminent an intention of this Feast upon a Sacrifice,
must needs be, upon all the former accounts, as eminent an intention of that
Sacrifice it self, as such.

Only let me ad this: That though all the people of God will not; some of
them not at all: many not together eat of this Feast through difference of
judgment, (And it is strange, that this which is the Sacrament of concord,
should have in the controversies about it more differences, and those more
dividing then any other part of Divine truth or worship,) yet still however
this stands good, to be the native original end, and institution of the
Ordinance it self, and so by inference, This to have been the intent of
Christ's death as a Sacrifice to the same end: of which death, to be sure, they
all must partake; and unto which Christ they must have recourse, even all and
every person that are, or shall be the people of God; And by so doing they find
themselves upon all these accounts forementioned, engaged and obliged unto
peace and concord with all the Saints in the world, how differing so ever in
judgment, in Him, who is our Peace, and by that Sacrifice has made both one.
And thus much for this Branch, which treates of what Christ has done in his
own person to procure this peace.

IV. SECTION. The second Branch, What Christ did by way of Representation of
our persons: That phrase in one Body explained.
THe second Branch of this first head is, What Christ did by way of
Representation of our persons, and how that conduces to this mutual
Reconciliation of the Saints among themselves. This we have in that small
additionall which is found in the 16. verse, That he might reconcile both unto
God [IN ONE BODY,] by the Cross having slain the enmity. The meaning whereof
is this, that he did collect, and gather together in one Body all the people of
God, that is, did sustain their persons, stood in their stead, as one common
person in whom they were all met, representing them equally and alike unto God,
and so reconciled them to God in one body. Bullinger. Zanchius. Beza. Groius.
As you heard he bore their enmities in his flesh and so abolisht them: so
withal He bore their persons, considered as one collective body, and under
that consideration reconciled them to God.

And this superadds to the former consideration of being a Sacrifice for their
enmities mutually, for that he might have been, and have performed it for each
of their persons, considered singly and apart. But further we see He was
pleased to gather them into one body in Himself.

If you ask me where and when this Representation of all the Saints was by
Christ, more especially made, and when it was they were looked at by God as one
body; The text tells us, ON THE CROSS. By which He thus reconciled us to God
in one body.

I will not now insist on that which at first, to make my way clear, I was so
large upon: That that kind of reconciliation of us, wrought by Christ for us on
the Cross, is here intended: to all which this may be added; That it was that
Reconciliation which at once took in and comprehended, all both Jew and
Gentile in all ages into one body; which was never yet since actually done, but
therefore then was done in himself. That which is now only left for clearing
my way, is the opening the import of those words [in one body,] which clause is
that I take for my foundation of this second Paragraph.

There is a question among interpreters, whether by this one body in the text
be meant the Church only, considered as one mystical body in Christ; or only
the body and humane Nature of Jesus Christ Himself, hanging upon the Cross: I
would to reconcile both senses take in both, as conducing to the reconciliation
of us.

1. Supposing, (which is necessary,) Christ's person, His humane nature, or (His
Flesh v. 15.) to be the Ubi, the substratum, the meeting place, and Randezvouz
of this other great body of the Elect, where this whole company appeared, and
was represented, so to be reconciled unto God. For indeed what the Apostle
mentions here apart, and at distance each from other: His Flesh, v. 15. and
Body, v. 16. these elsewhere he brings together, 1 Coll. 22. Having made peace
IN THE BODY OF HIS FLESH through death.

Which body as hanging on the Cross was 2 clothed upon when most naked with
this other body, which He Himself took on Him to sustain and represent, and
to stand in their stead, even the whole body of His Elect: His body (personally
His) becoming by representation one with that His other body, (mystically His.)
In sum, in the body of Christ personal, as the body representing, the whole
body of Christ mystical, as the body represented, was met in one before God,
and unto God. And in that one body of Christ personal, were all these persons
(thus represented,) reconciled unto God together, as in one body, by virtue of
this Representation.

V. SECTION. The influence, That our being reconciled to God, IN ONE BODY, has
into our reconciliation mutual: in two eminent respects.
IF any shall ask what influence and virtue this their being considered as one
body, met in His body, and under that consideration reconciled to God has into
their reconciliation one to another; I answer, much every way; neither is it
mentioned last (as last in order,) but as the foundation of all other
considerations thereto belonging.

1. In that they were thus all once met in one body, in the body of Christ both
in his intendment, and his Fathers view, This consideration, (if no more,) has
force enough in it to bring them together again, in after times. Even this
clandestine union (such indeed in respect of our knowledge of it then, yet
having all three persons the witnesses in Heaven present) this precontract,
this anticipated oneness, this forehand union has such virtue in it, that let
them afterward fall out never so much, they must be brought together again and
be one; Heaven and Earth may be dissolved, this union thus once solemnized, can
never be frustrated or dissolved: what God and Christ did thus put together,
sin and devil, men and angels cannot always, and for ever keep assunder.
His Fathers donation of them to Him, and Christ's own representation of the same
persons to His Father again, have a proportionable like virtue in them: for
there is the same reason of both. Now of the one Christ says, All that the
Father gives me shall come to me, Joh. 6. 37. Christ mentions that gift of
them, by the lump to him, by the Father, as the reason or cause (rather) why
they could not ever be kept from him: And as none can keep them from him,
because given of the Father to him, in like manner and for the like reason, the
whole body of them cannot be kept one from another, because presented by him
again to the Father: Christ mentions both these considerations as of equal
efficacy in that prayer, whereby he sanctified that Sacrifice of himself, John
17. Thine they were, And thou gave them me. All mine are thine, and thine are
mine, And I pray v. 21. that they all may be one, (and that in this world) as
we are. Christ then not only died for his sheep apart, that they might come
to himself, as Joh. 10. 15. but further that they might be one fold, as it
follows there. And as the Evangelist interprets Cajaphas prophecy; He died to
gather together in one the children of God, that were scattered abroad. Joh.
11. 51, 52. To make sure which gathering to come, He in and at His death
gathered them together representatively, they met all in him, and ascended the
Cross with him, as Peter's phrase is of all their sins, (therefore much more
their persons) 1 Pet. 2. 24. (...). He himself carried up in (or together
with) his body, our sins up to the tree: ascendere fecit sursum simul cum
seipso. The Cross was the first general Rendezvous in this world appointed
for him and his members, where they were crucified in him and with him, as the
Apostle often speaks. Christ told the Jews, If I be lifted up, Joh. 12. 32.
(speaking of his death on the Cross, v. 33.) I will draw all to me: And here
you see the reason of it, for in their lifting up him, they lift up all his
with him, as hung to and adjoined with him in one body, in his body. This great
and universal loadstone set in that steel of the Cross, having then gathered
all these lesser magneticke bodies, pieces of himself, into himself; the
virtue hereof will draw them all together in one again, as they come to exist
in the world: They may be scattered, they may fall out, but as branches united
in one root, though severed by winds and storms, and beaten one from and
against another, yet the root holding them in a firm and indissoluble union,
it brings them to a quiet order, and station again. And if the now scattered
Jews must one day come together, and make one body again; because those dry
bones (the Umbrae, the ghastly Shadows of them) were seen once to meet in
Ezekiels vision: how much more shall the Elect coalesce in one New man, because
they once met in him, that is, the body, and not the shadow? If those Jews
must meet, that the prophecy, the vision might be fulfilled, these must much
move, that the end of his death, and his hanging on the tree may be fulfilled,
in whom all visions and promises have their Amen and accomplishment. As in his
death, so in his resurrection also, they are considered as one body with him,
Isay 26. 19. Together with my dead body they shall arise (says Christ) and
both, in death and resurrection, one body, to the end they may be presented
(together) in one body, all at last, Coloss. 1. 22. and in the mean time in
the efficacy of these forehand meetings are they to be created into one new
man, v. 15. and that even (...), ONE individual man, Gal. 3. ult. not (...),
one bulk, body, or thing only. This one new man, which they are to grow up
into, answers exactly to that one body, which was then gathered together,
represented and met in him on the Cross, bearing the image of it, and wrought
by the virtue of it.

The second is, that if such a force and efficacy flows from their having met
once, as One Body, then much more from this, (which the text adds) that they
WERE RECONCILED TO GOD in that one Body. This clause, In one Body, was on
purpose inserted together with their RECONCILIATION TO GOD, to show, that they
were no otherwise esteemed, or looked at by God as reconciled to him, but as
under that representation, view and respect had of them (as then) by him, that
so, dum sociaret Deo, sociavit inter se: Crocius.
their reconciliation with God was not considered, nor wrought only apart,
singly, man by man (though Christ bore all their names too) but the terms
were such, unless all were, and that as in one body, and community together
among themselves reputed reconciled, the whole reconciliation, and of no one
person, unto God, should be accounted valid with him. So as their very peace
with God, was not only never severed from, but not considered, nor effected,
nor of force without the consideration of their being one each with other, in
Christ. Insomuch as upon the law and tenor of this Original act thus past,
God might according to the true intent thereof, yea and would renounce their
reconciliation with himself, if not to be succeeded with this reconciliation
of theirs mutually. And allthough this latter does in respect of execution and
accomplishment succeed the other in time, (the Saints they do not all
presently agree, and come together as one body) yet in the original enacting,
and first founding of reconciliation by Christ, these were thus on purpose by
God interwoven and indented the one in the other; and the terms and tenure of
each enterchangeably wrought into, and molded in one and the same fundamental
Charter and Law of reconciliation mutual: then which nothing could have been
made more strong and binding, or sure to have effect in dne time.

VI. SECTION. This Reconciliation of the Saints to God considered as in One
Body, Held likewise forth in the Administration of the Lords Supper. And one
eminent foundation of the institution of fixed Church Communion, hinted Herein.
THe impresse and resemblance of this, namely Christ's Reconciling us to God in
one Body, we may likewise perceive: (And I shall mention it the rather to make
the harmony of this with all the former still more full) in the administration
of the Lords Supper: in which we may view this truth also, as wehave done the
other.

That Supper being ordained to show forth his death; look as he dyed, so it
represents it. As therefore Christ was sacrificed representing the General
assembly of Saints, and so in one body reconciled them to God: so, this Supper
was ordained, (in the regular administration of it,) to hold forth the image of
this, as near as possible such an ordinance could be supposed to have done it;
For answerably the seat, the (...) of it, is a Communion of many Saints met
together in one Body. And not otherwise. Thus 1 Cor. 10. 17. For we being many
are one bread and ONE BODY. He had said v. 16. That the Lords Supper it was the
Communion of the body of Christ, etc. that is, a Communion of Christ's Body, as
to each, so as of a company united together among themselves; and accordingly
the Apostle subjoynes this as the reason; For we (whom you see, do ordinarily
partake of it,) are many (not one or two apart) and those many, are one bread
and one body: One bread as the sign; One Body as the thing signified. And thus
we are, then, considered to be, when Christ as dying is communicated by us. For
to show forth His Death is the end of this Sacrament. The seat therefore or
subject of partaking in this Communion, of Christ's Body and Blood; and which is
ordained for the public participation of it, is not either single Christians,
but a many; nor those meeting as a fluid company like clouds uncertainly, or as
men at an ordinary for running Sacraments (as some would have them) but fixed
setledly, as incorporated Bodies. Which institution, having for its subject
such a society, as then, when Christ's Death is to be shown forth, does
suitably and correspondently set forth, how that the whole Church the Image of
which whole Universal Church, Omnes qui eidem mensae sacrae pa^iter
accumbimus, and unam facimus and (...), quae (...) totius Ecclesiae gerit
imaginem. Grot. 1 Cor. 10. 17.
(these particular Churches do bear, as a late Commentator has observed upon
that plaee) was represented in and by Christ dying for us, under this
consideration of being One Body, then in Him.

And there is this ground for it, that the whole of that Ordinance was intended
to represent the whole of his Death, and the imports of it, as far as was
possible. So then look as the Death it self and his bitter Passion are
represented therein, both of Body in the breaking the Bread, which is the
Communion of his Body: of the Soul in the Wine, which is called the Communion
of his Blood, and this is the blood of the New Testament, so expressed in
allusion to that of the Old, in which the blood was chosen out, as the nearest
visible representer of the invisible Soul, that could be. The life lies in the
blood (for the spirits which are the animal life do run in it,) so spoke the
old Law, and the Poet the same;

Sanguine quaerendi reditus animaque litandum. Virg. 11. Aen.

He terms the Sacrifice of the blood, the Sacrifice of the Soul: and so Wine
was chosen as the nearest resemblance of blood, being also the blood of the
Grape.

As thus the death it self in all the parts of it; so the SUBJECT for which
he dyed, His Body, and that under that very consideration He died for them [as
one Body,] is in like manner, as visibly and plainly held forth; Every
particular Church bearing by institution the image of the whole Church (as
therein it has also all the privileges of it) fitly showing forth, thereby,
not only that Christ died for them singly, and a part considered (which yet is
therewith held forth here in that each personally does partake thereof,) That
might have been sufficiently evidenced if every person or family apart, had
been warranted to have received, and eaten this sacrificiall feast alone (as
they did the Passover and the Sacrifices, Lent. 7. 18.) but the institution is
for many; which very word Christ mentions in the institution, This is the blood
of the new Testament shed for many, which word, I believe the Apostle had aney
unto when he said, We being many are partakers, etc. Christ indeed principally
aimed therein, to show, that his intent in dying, was for a multitud of
mankind, the whole body of his Elect: yet because he inserts the mention
hereof; at the delivery of those Elements, and that the ordinance it self was
suited to hold forth this intent, The Apostle takes the hint of it; and adds
this gloss and construction upon it as glaunced at in it: that according to
the institution and import of this Ordinance, the partakers hereof are to be a
many (not one or two alone:) and these united into one Body, to the end that
thereby may be held forth this great intendment in His death, That he died for
the many of His Church, as one collective body. This however we are sure of,
that this way of partaking this Supper as in one Body, was to the Apostle a
matter of that moment, That we find him bitterly inveighing in the next
Chapter, that the same individual Church of Corinth, when they came together
in one for that and other Ordinances, should of all Ordinances else, not
receive this Ordinance together in such a community, but perverting that order,
should even in that place appointed for the meetings of the whole Church,
divide themselves into private several companies, and so make this as a
private Supper, which in the nature and intendment of the institution of it,
was to be a Communion of the whole Church or body together. Insomuch as he
says, This is not to eat the Lords Supper: for in eating (namely this
Sacramental Supper,) every one takes before (others perhaps do come:) His own
Supper, together with the Lords, and so makes it as a private colation or as
(...); wherefore my brethren when you come together to eat (that Supper,)
tarry one for another, to make a full meeting of the whole body: and as for
other Suppers, every man is at liberty to take them at home as he pleases, v.
34. The Apostle is thus zealous in it, as he had reason, because hereby is
shown forth one principal mystery in Christ's death, for from this, at least
upon occasion of this particular as well as any other, does the Apostle utter
this great maxim, yea show forth His death till he comes, v. 26. Of such
moment in their import and significancy are things (thus small and mean in the
eyes of some) that yet are full of Mystery in Christ's intendment. And thus much
for the Second Head.

FINIS.

