SIMPLICITIES DEFENSE against SEVEN-HEADED POLICY. OR Innocence Vindicated,
being unjustly Accused, and sorely Censured, by that Seven-headed
Church Government United in NEW ENGLAND: OR That Servant so Imperious in his
Masters Absence Revived, and now thus re-acting in NEW ENGLAND. OR The combat
of the United Colonies, not only against some of the Natives and Subjects, but
against the Authority also of the Kingdme of England, with their execution of
Laws, in the name and Authority of the servant, (or of themselves) and not in
the Name and Authority of the Lord, or fountain of the Government. Wherein is
declared an Act of a great people and Country of the Indians in those parts,
both Princes and People (unanimously) in their voluntary Submission and
Subjection unto the Protection and Government of Old England (from the Fame
they hear thereof) together with the true manner and form of it, as it appears
under their own hands and seals, being stirred up, and provoked thereto, by the
Combat and courses abovesaid. Throughout which Treatise is secretly
intermingled, that great Opposition, which is in the goings forth of those two
grand Spirits, that are, and ever have been, extant in the World (through the
sons of men) from the beginning and foundation thereof.

Jmprimatur, Aug. 3d. 1646. Diligently perused, approved, and Licensed to the
Press, according to Order by public Authority.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold by LUKE FAVVNE, at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Parrot. 1646.

Upon an occasional view, of this unexpected, and much unwished for Story.
THis Story's strange, but altogether true:
Old Englands Saints are banished out of New:
Oh Monstrous Art, and cunning of the Devil,
What hidden paths he goes, to spread, his evil!
The Man of Sin's the same, his eldest Son;
Both have more shapes, then be moats, in the Sun.
Hence disappointed, are the most of men;
When trouble's past (some think) they rise again.
Thus it befell these Pilgrims, in that Land,
To which they fled, from persecutions hand,
This Indians note, with Papists, Jews and Turks,
For in them all, the self same spirit works:
Thus is the Name of Christ, blaspem'd, by these,
Who burden them, to whom they promise ease.
Oh Christ arise, and spread thy glorious fame,
That all may know, the sweetness of thy Name:
As^ Affric, Europe, and America
Expect! and wait the dawnings of that day,
That Papists, Greeks, and we the Protestants
Of Calvin's Sect, those too, the Lutherans,
And they that are a streine above them all,
At Jesus feet, at length may humbly fall,
That so such Christ's, which most in fancy make
(Whence it is (Men think) that Christendom does shake)
May at the appearing of the Lord depart,
And all may worship him even with one heart:
That so the Nations may this glory see;
And into it, at length transformed be:
This to effect, cannot be by sword of man,
But that which to with-stand, no Kingdoms can,
For it is the Lords own might, the sword that does,
Even with two edges flow out of Gods mouth,
By which are slain the wicked of each Land,
And will sure break each Persecutors band:
Then England, and Ye Nations round about,
That are now so lofty, and so stout:
At length down fall to him that is Lord of you:
And learn with him, like meekness for to show:
If you with iron Rods, Saints break and bruise.
Know then your selves, that Christ you so will use.
R. B.

A Lover of peace, and one of eminent respect, viewing this Treatise at the
Press, kindly added this verse prefixed, which has both suddenly, and
unexpectedly drawn from my thoughts as here follows, as a testimony of my
kind respects unto the party, though but a stranger unto him; it may also serve
as an intelligencer, what was the only ground of controversy, in acting
according unto, and publishing of, this Treatise.
THe serpent with a voice so sly and fine
Consults with nature, as though he were divine,
Whilst she does seek for glory, wealth, and love
In things that are below, and not in that above;
Lending an Hence does arise the way of Solomon's harlot, set out in the way of
this woman, Genesis 3. Prove. 7. who may not speak in the Church, but usurpeth. 1 Timothy 2.
ear to listen unto him,
The fruit looks fair, the tree seems nothing grim:
And thence does he, at first begin to arise
Through earthly projects, for to make man wise:
Whereas the light of heaven, GOD himself ordained
To be that thing, whereby man is maintained
In wisdom, honor, happiness, and peace,
That does from serpent (sin, death, hell) release;
And not conjectural, doubtful, subtle notion
Set forth, by art, with sign of great devotion.
Come from the Prelates The serpents voice transm^^ts into new England,
speaking there in way of Ministry, as at the beginning.
, your persecuting foes;
Our Church ( as Primitive) Christ Jesus does disclose
Her Ordinances pure, a Church erected here
Where you may worship, void of care or fear,
Our Land is large; Our Magistracy good;
Come over to save that innocent-like blood
From such as are to cruelty so bent,
Our ways are meek and humble, to give all content;
Thus he appears, apparrelled in white
To snare in that, wherein he takes delight.
An earthly Kingdom, he would fain erect
Then spiritual honor, he must needs reject.
That when that, In this woman is set out the way of King Lemuels mother, that
teaches prophecy, Rev. 12 Prove. 31. who may pray and prophecy in the Church
without usurpation. 1 Cor. 11
woman, appears in her glory
With him in womb, of whom entreats all story.
Then Is he a dragon red, for to devour
That child, to whom is given, all the power
In heaven, and in earth, to rule as King and Lord.
None to the serpent, no, heaven cannot afford
A place of residence, he must thence depart
Down to the earth, full sore against his heart,
That he a place cannot devise to frame
Which from the heavens may seem to take its fame.
Cruel, Raging, Carnal, now he comes forth
His sly, and subtle wisdom, now proves nothing worth.
This woman, now in travel, finds not time
To listen unto him, naught but the child is mine:
Which child in her, can nothing else confess,
But Throne of glory For the one betakes it self to heaven, the other to the
wilderness.
, and bare Wilderness:
Which twain together, give all praise to one;
Then fury's in the Serpent, smooth policy is gone:
No middle place for Satan now is found,
Not one with the manehild; down he goes to ground:
His cunning cannot now entice so far,
But Michael, and his Angels will make War
With Dragon, and with all his Angels great,
Yea overcome him, never sound retreat.
Most of his skill he uses He ever puts off the day of the Lord as not yet time
to build the Temple, but would live in his own seiled (or artificial) house of
his own framing and device.
, he knows how
To talk of benefits to receive, although not now*
And so from place, and person still delights to wend,
Where Is outward peace, there is Christ, does he pretend;
And if so be that troubles do arise,
Himself he saves, the serpent is so wise:
No tie, to fold, nor flock, he then will know;
Christ in an earthly peace, he will have, where e're he go.
Whereas our Lord, his voice does sometimes teach
Go to Though he desired to be with Jesus, yet Jesus understanding his desire
to be but nature (that is) to enjoy him, according to the flesh, denies him
that, that so he might be with him according to the spirit. Mat. 28. 20.
Decapolis, and there thou shall me preach
Unto For so the word Decapolis signifies ten Cities.
ten Cities, great the number be;
My Word shall reach them, and I am with thee.
For I am truth, and truth thou go to show
Which makes thee free, my presence thou do know
No place can, scant thee off, then walk at large,
Doubt not, I Am with thee* do but keep my Charge,
The nations shall come forth at once, yea at one See Isa. 60. 21 22. and 66. 8.
birth;
Truth in the change of one, renews all the earth;
Else, were not perfect good, in every one erect,
Nor sin were full, through th'fall that great defect,
If change of one were not a world renewed,
What Nation then, not brought in, and subdued,
When truth is published, though but unto one
Embraced, received? oh happy State of man,
All Gentile Jewels, brought in, See Isa. 61. 6. and 60. 11. 16.
who can want
The world's in darkness, else could never be scant.
But Hypocrites cannot this thing digest,
In places, times, and persons, they seek wealth and rest,
And see not how the mighty Lord above
Has cast his skirt over Ruth, yea filled her lap in love,
Of whom comes Christ, that world of Gods goodwill,
What can she want, that heaven or earth does fill?
All keep their stations, attend as they have done,
Neglect no homage, or service to the Son,
All bring their virtues, treasures, and their glory
Centring them all in him, a world of Princely Dowry,
Then walk through Sea, or Land, by friends or foes
Let prisons fast, hard irons thee enclose,
All take thy part, yea plead thy cause for thee
The world vents its malice, in Christ's love thou art free.
The Spirit of this world by these things comes to light
Its pomp, and glory, which erst did shine so bright
Appears gross darkness, unto Christian eyes
Down comes its Kingdom, up goes its plaints and cries,
Help Sword and Gun, else does our Kingdom fall
Court, fire, Books so entitled written upon uncertain reports, tales, and
conjectures to cure the Church.
Gangrena, we taste wormwood and gall,
No marvel, for, Christ in his native kind
Set forth, declared unto a carnal mind,
Appears as odious unto such a wight
As sin to him, in whom is found the light:
What sentence shall be given then by sons of men,
When truth appears, if power were found in them?
No power but that of darkness then, let us to them ascribe
What Is in the Church's our Lords, all unto them denied;
Take heed ye Judge of Blasphemies aright,
For Light discerns, the darkness has no sight.
If Light, and Candlestick, you know not how, to make one
Suspend your judgment, all your skill is gone,
And let the Judge of all, his Circuit pass apace,
Who comes not to destroy, such is his grace,
And let that man his own destruction be,
Who breaks that faith with God, cannot be peec'd by thee:
Cease then your prosecutions, seek ye to do good:
Save life in any, in Church ways spill not blood:
In Christ, if you consider, the Covenant of God,
You Will find that all compulsion, is naught but that A mere hunting of men to
worry your own kind; (or rather that hind of the morning, see Psa* 22. in the
title) thirsting after the precious life. Compare G^n. 10. 8, 9. with Jer. 16.
16.
Nim-rod.
S. G.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, the Earl of Warwick, Lord High Admiral of ENGLAND,
and Governor in chief of the English Plantations in America, and upon the
coasts thereof, and to the rest of that Honorable Committee, joined in
Commission with his Excellency, For the well ordering, government, and safety
of Foreign Plantations.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
ACcording to the Fame we have heard of you, so have we found in you, a spirit
of tenderness and compassion toward the oppressed, which ever springs from
the courage and fortitude of a heart resolute to suppress the Oppressor, be
his power and policy what it may, whilst men unsensible of the cause of the
Needy, ever stand in readiness to side with the strongest party, and so (as
occasion serves) to become one with the cruel, venting the same spirit, which
for advantage can easily transform it self, so as if power comply with the
just man's cause, the vizard of hypocrisy is soon put on by such, either to
become dumb and silent, or else to speak so, as may best advantage it self,
let the cause be what it will. Your wisdom and noble care in those weighty
affairs committed to your trust, commands and binds us over to make a more
particular and full relation (then formerly we have done) of what has passed
betwixt some other Colonies in NEW ENGLAND, and our selves; that if it be
possible to find any leisure hours in a crowd of so great employments, your
Honors might be pleased to take a more full view of things; in the mean time
we stand humbly engaged, as we have done; and ever shall in any service, that
what we are, or have, can tender to the honor and peace of our Native
Country, or to any truehearted well-Wisher thereof; and if no other service
(we can) may be acceptable, yet of this employment none shall prevent us
(whilst our God gives us hearts) daily to pray for you.

Your Honors most humble Servants, the Inhabitants of Shaw-omet, whose names
are often expressed in this Narration.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER,
COURTEOUS READER.
Do not think that we delight to lay open the infirmity and weakness of men
(except our weaknesses and infirmities, as the Son of God sustained them) any
further, nor to other end, but as they serve to discover and lay open that one
spirit of the God of this world, which now works effectually in the children of
disobedience, which spirit in all its several ways of operation, may be
gathered up, and centred in, that son of perdition, yea, in that seven-headed,
and ten horned beast, whose power and policy like unto that deluge in the old
world, has so long overspread the face of the earth, swallowing up in death
every living thing that has its motion upon the earth, after or according to
the flesh.

Nor can any be offended justly with us, (no not our adversaries themselves)
for making this true Narration of things that have passed amongst us, of which
this Treatice truly speaks; For actions performed wherein men have cause to
glory, the further they spread, the more satisfactory to the agen^s; nor are
actions of such public nature seldom performed, but to such end and purpose,
for if they be good, they ought no^ only to be real and essential in them
amongst whom they are acted and done, but also presidentiall and exemplary unto
others where ever the Fame of them, may come; and if they be evil, then a
whorish Forehead must needs accompany them, being done in the light of the
Sun, and then can no wise man be offended, that a way-marke is cast up to give
notice of such desperate, and dangerous ways, unless himself be of the same
spirit, and is about, or else waits for an opportunity for the like design.

Thou art entreated therefore not to look upon this Treatise, as simply matter
of History, but as matter of mystery also: For as it was acted to make
manifest the operations and workings of a differing spirit, to that end it is
published also: so that if it be narrowly looked into, not only a savor of
that mystery of iniquity will appear (which always works effectually to the
same end and purpose, namely, to extinguish and put out the light of divine
truth, Wheresoever, or in whomsoveer it appears) but thou will find some
Footsteps also of that great mystery of God, whose bright beams of light
where ever made manifest, declare the men of the world to sit in the shadow of
death. Though the mystery of iniquity works not always in the same manner and
firm, nay seldom any long time together, without taking a new face, and using
the art of transformation of it self into one an other shape, and herein lies
the policy of Satan, that when some time has been spent (yea it may be an
age) in hopes and expectation of glorious times of peace, ease, and exaltation,
from the mouths of lying Prophets, who always drive the peace, power, and
principality of the Kingdom of God, some certain time before them, or at the
least before the common people (as they call them) as though they themselves
were the only men, that for the present were admitted into the counsels and
secrets of the Kingdom of God, and the people to take it upon their report,
where, and when, the appearance of it shall be.

But when the world by due proof, finds their praedictions to fail, and sees
troops of its ancestors go down to the grave, not having the possession put
into their hand, it then works effectually for a transformation, to cast its
worship of God into another form, wherein it hopes in shorter time for to attain
him, in which state it cannot rest to wait, unless it has the strongest
party, according to the power of the arm of flesh on its side, and therefore
must of necessity labor diligently as for life, to borrow a coercive power
from the civil Magistrate, to be transferred, turned over, and put into their
hands, whereby they may subdue others, and compel them to follow their way,
and to acknowledge their worship to be only divine, yea the only God of the
world, for there is but one divinity, which they have now made and set up unto
themselves, or else that the Civil Magistrate will be pleased to detain and
keep his own power upon this condition (^inding him unto themselves) that he
shall not fail, to bind the hands and tongues, yea and hearts also (if they can
but search and know what is in them) that none shall be permitted to
intermeddle, or any way to disturb them: But that they may peaceably worship,
every man in his garden, and under such a green tree, as he shall choose unto
himself, being fearful of trouble and disquiet, not knowing better, but that
the cross of Christ is terrible, as though the Son of God had not taken away
the terror and angry face of it, putting no less disparagement upon him, but
as though the sting were in death still, being ignorant of this, how that by
death he overcomes death, even until now.

The reason why the civil Magistrate is so* sought after, and (as I may justly
say) troubled, if not tortured, in the depopulation of Kingdoms, and loss of
true-hearted Subjects by the church, in her formalities, and perfunctory
worships, is this; a natural heart conceives the condition of the Church of
Christ, to be like a common weal or Kingdom, which cannot be well, unless
every individual within such natural and terrene confines, agree in one, for
the well being and glory of each particular in the whole, so that the humble
submission of every Subject becomes one, in that one heart and Spirit of the
King, who submits to the denial of himself (in any thing) for the preservation
of the whole, and that one heart, courage, and magnanimity of the King, is in
every individual of the Kingdom, to go forth for the honor, peace and
preservation, of that their one Lord; and so it is in the true Church rightly
considered in its relation with the King of Saints, truly considered in
Spiritual, and not in terrene respects; but that natural spirit that works in
a natural changeable and vanishing Church, judges of its peace according to
the consent of all within the compass of such natural bounds and terrene
confines as it self resides and abides in; and therefore the false prophet is
said to be the ^ail, because which way the honorable person looks, or the head
of the place where he is (according to man) he always stears the body of the
people, yea though it be but the body of the beast that way, that he may have
strength according to sense on his side, not knowing how to live or wa^k
according to the power of faith; therefore must either have all (if it be
possible) or at least the greatest both for authority and number on his side;
for he sees not the blessing of the Divine presence that goes with the ark of
God though among many adversaries in a wilderness; therefore will he take up
nothing but the Tabernacle of Molech (or as the word is) bear the booth of the
King, that is, what manner of house soever, authority and civil power erecteth,
for worship, he is ready to take up, and bear upon his shoulders, so that
Antichrist has as may ways of worship, as there is or has been forms of
Religion in the world, and in that the seed of the serpent crusheth the heel,
(or as the word is) the print of the foot-soal of Christ or seed of the woman,
for wherever the footsteps of our Lord have gone, the wisdom of the serpent in
reforming its religion casts it into a form, and so denies the power of
godliness, tying the Lord Jesus to appear in the very same print and
character again, whereas the Saints wait for his power in what way or form he
pleases to make it known and manifest in, and unto them; therefore the visions
and apparitions of God in the holy Scriptures, are never twice in the same form
(all circumstances considered) yea if our Savior appear one time walking upon
the Sea, as though all things must of necessity bear up their Lord, he appears
again under the hands of Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the Jews, thrust down into
the heart of the earth, as Jonah into the midst of the sea, as though all
things conspired together to annihilate and bring him to naught, and in the one
and the other appears an aptitude even in the Disciples themselves to mistake,
and in this the world is altogether mistaken, in that he walks upon and
raises himself up out of ways they know not how such things can be, to make
manifest his power and authority to be that of the son of God, who rules in
the midst of his enemies, and out of Egypt, Babylon Rahab is Egypt. Isa. 51 9.
10.
* Rahab, Palestina, Tire and Ethiopia, is brought forth, so that it may be
said this man was born there, even as the truth of the Gospel has been brought
forth in those parts, which our Jewish Reformers of religion by putting Christ
to death, could never have thought of or apprehended, nor will they (were it
never so plainly told unto them) believe it, so that in this Treatise you may
plainly see, how the mystery of iniquity already works, even in New England
which thought it self the root of Reformation of all the world, even as Babylon
always in the entrance of her compulsive contraction, artificial and
self-seeking, conjecturall reformation, sets her self up as a Queen, and thinks
never to see widdow-hood or sorrow any more, if she can but with all her art
and learning keep the Magistrates conscience in bonds, to use all his power and
civil policy for her wealth to get riches, and honor to Lord it over men's
consciences, and peace that she may sit in safety and at rest to enlarge her
barns and take her pleasure in the things of this life, never dreaming that
even in that night of gross darkness her soul shall be snatched away from
her, and then whose shall all those things be, whereof she has framed such a
service of God to her self, that must all leave her at death; even such as for
the most part, if not all (by her own acknowledgement) fail, and never pass
along with her into the Kingdom, and then must she either have a new God, or
else find out a new way of submission unto him, whom she has seemed so
zealously to serve; such is that spirit of the mystery of iniquity, the goings
forth whereof has forced this Treatise to come to the light and view of the
world, as a warning to all Christians, to take heed of being beguiled by a
voluntary humility in worshipping of Angels, messengers or ministers, who
labor to make men subject to the rudiments of the world in outward
observations, as touch not, taste not, handle not, rearing up a fabric of
ordinances in Divine worship; of such things which all perish in the use,
Neglecting the body which is Christ, by satisfying of the wisdom of the flesh
in these things, through which the Spirit of the Serpent multiplies it self
into that threefold spirit which comes out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out
of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, imitating
that Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical spirit that is by Jesus Christ,
beguiling the world with its uncleanness in adulterating the word of God by
bringing it into carnal copulation with earthly, transitory, momentany, fading
and vanishing things; woe is unto them because thereof, who like unto frogs,
will never appear, hold up their heads, nor utter a voice, but where the heat
and luster of the Civil Magistrate, brings forth a pleasant, fruitful and
prosperous estate and condition, in the things that only concern this present
life.

Again, if thou look narrowly into this Treatise, there is a possibility to
perceive in it, some glimpse of the light of that spirit that opens and
unfoldeth the mystery of God, especially when it takes up any Scriptures; look
diligently upon what hinge it turns, and you shall see a door open, another
way, yea a nearer and shorter cut to the Kingdom of God, then the common
ministry of this world drives at, and think it not strange if Jesus appear
in such places, and at such time, where, and when, the doors are not only
shut, but fast bolted unto the world, as a thing impossible, that his real and
substantial (though spiritual) body should come in, such a way, and so
unlooked for, being that in Sodom and Egypt our Lord is crucified, and put to
death; yet let me advise thee, as once our Lord did, handle them, carefully and
skilfully, ponder, poise, and feel the weight of them; taste, try and consider,
whether the reality and substantiality of Christ be not there; sure I am that
if the ministry or service of a Christian spirit lay hands on them, and put
it self into them, even as a graft is put into the stock, it shall find a plain
proof, argument, and demonstration undeniable, of the apparition and revelation
of the Son of God, returned from death to life, never to die any more, unto
whom I leave thee (in the communication of whose Resurrection the second death
can never exercise power) with my hearty wishes for all those that have learned
the truth as it is in Jesus, and know that elsewhere no truth (that is
Christian) can be found, for that only abides for ever, and is eternized in
all the lineaments and whole proportion of it, and happy is be that has so
learned Christ,

Amen.
S. G.

Innocencies Defense, against a seven-headed CHVRCH-GOVERNMENT United in
NEW ENGLAND.
THe moderation of New Englands Justice, desired to be known to all men As you
may see in the following Treatise.
, and what is the principal things pretended in the Execution thereof; namely,
To suppress Heretics, and to confirm that to be truth which the Unity of the
most Colonies hold; plainly declaring and setting forth to the view of all,
What is the proper bent and drift of that spirit that diggs so deep to hide its
sin in secret, which so affects to assume titles unto it self, and also to
give at their pleasure unto others; to make themselves appear, in the eyes of
men, more holy and honorable in the things of God, then others of their
Brethren; commonly crying out, against that power exercised amongst others, for
no other end but to assume it unto themselves, to cloth the dictates of that
spirit therewith, whereby themselves are led, and so to exercise it with all
zeal and wrath in the life, spirit, and substance of it, only with another face
or countenance set upon it to deceive and beguile the simple; Not being able to
endure the air, where Cap, Tippit, or upper Shirt appears: but can bath
themselves in blood and feed themselves fat, by devouring the good name,
estates, and lives of their brethren, who neither do, nor think harm unto
them, nor reside within the compass of any of their Jurisdictions, evidently
proved by a late assault given (by the men of the Massachusetts and other
Colonies united for such a purpose) upon others of their Countrymen,
Inhabitants of a tract of land called Shaw-omet, situate in the Nanhyganset Bay
in New England: The truth whereof this Treatise witnesses, and the substance
of all is to be seen under their own hand writing; as also in the writings of
others, who were eye and ear-witnesses in the Cause, and have testified under
their hands the truth of it.

Here follows a Narration of the men of Shaw-omet, concerning the ground of
transplanting of themselves and families, and of their first entrance into that
part of America now called New England.
WHereas we removed our selves and families out of our native Country, about
ten or twelve years ago by the leave of this State, only to enjoy the liberty
of our consciences, in respect of our faith toward God, and for no other end,
not scrupling any Civil Ordinance, for the education, ordering, or government
of any Civil State.

Landing by the providence of God at Boston in the Massachusetts Bay, we found
our Countrymen at great varianee in point of Religion, prosecuting it very
hotly in their public Courts unto fines and banishments, occasioning men
thereby much to vent and bring forth themselves; and we understanding that they
had formerly banished one Master Roger Williams, a man of good report both for
life and doctrine (even amongst themselves) for dissenting from them in some
points about their Church Government, and that in the extremity of winter,
forcing him to betake himself into the vast wilderness to sit down amongst the
Indians, in a place by their own confessions, out of all their Jurisdictions:
And at that time of our arrival at Boston, they were proceeding against one
Master John Wheelwright, a man of like life and conversation, whom they also
banished for differing with them in point of Doctrine, the sum whereof
consisted in this, That sanctification is not the first evidence unto a
Christian of his salvation; and many others manifesting their thoughts about
such points then controverted amongst them, were also imprisoned, fined,
banished, disarmed, and cast out from amongst them.

And we plainly perceiving that the scope of their doctrine was bent only to
maintain that outward form of worship which they had erected to themselves,
tending only to the outward carriage of one man toward another, leaving those
principles of Divinity, wherein we had been instructed in our native Country,
tending to faith toward God in Christ: and we finding no ground nor warrant
for such an order in the Church (to bind men's consciences unto) as they had
established amongst them; our consciences could not close with them in such
their practices, which they perceiving, denied us the common benefit of the
Country, even so much as a place to reside in, and plant upon, for the
maintenance and preservation of our selves, our wives and little ones; as also
proceeded against us, as they had done to others; yea with more severity, unto
confinements, imprisonments, chains, fines, whippings, and banishment out of
all their Jurisdictions, to wander in the wilderness in extremity of winter,
yea when the snow was up to the knee, and rivers to wade through up unto the
middle, and not so much as one of the Indians to be found in that extremity of
weather to afford us either fire, or any harbor, such as themselves had; being
removed into swamps and thickets, where they were not to be found; in which
condition, in the continuation of the weather, we lay diverse nights together,
having no victuals, but what we took on our backs, and our drink as the snow
afforded unto us, whereupon we were constrained with the hazard of our lives to
betake our selves into a part of the Country called the Nanhyganset Bay, buying
several parcels of Land of the Indians there inhabiting; and sat down in, and
near the place where Master Roger Williams was where we built houses, and
bestowed our labors to raise up means to maintain our wives and little ones
(which our Countrymen out of their zeal had deprived us of, and taken away from
us) quietly possessing them for the space of seven or eight years (some of us)
no man interrupting us, but both the Massathusets, and also Plymouth confessed
us to be out of the confines of their Patents; but when they perceived those
parts to be a refuge for such as were oppressed and grieved amongst themselves,
who repaired unto us for shelter, then they went about to bring those parts to
be under their Jurisdictions, by all possible pretenses, and stretching their
line for that purpose, thinking to get some color for their proceedings; yet
fell they short of our Plantations fourteen or fifteen miles, as did evidently
appear, and was by themselves acknowledged, and when they saw they could not
accomplish their ends by that project, they then insinuated themselves into the
minds of three il-affected persons amongst us, that they should acknowledge
themselves to be subjects unto them, and to depend upon them for protection and
government, whom they had formerly cast out from amongst them, both out of
their Churches, and censured them also in their Civil Courts for gross and
scandalous offenses, as one Robert Cole whom they had censured to were a D upon
his back for a whole year, to proclaim unto all men his guiltiness of the sin
of drunkenesse, and had also cast him out of their Church, and delivered him
unto Satan several times, who before and in the times of this his submission
usually conversed with, and was conversant amongst the Indians on the Sabbath
days, professing the Indians Religion to be the same with that which the
Massachusetts professed and practiced This speech of Robert Cole was uttered
before many who can witness it.
; There was also one William Arnald and his son Benedick who subjected
themselves unto the Massachusetts, which Arnald was a great professor of
Religion in the West of Old England; but in the time of this his subjection was
known constantly to employ himself in servile work upon the Sabbath day, and
professed it to be his excellency above that which his neighbor had attained
unto; his son Benedick constantly trading with the Indians on the Sabbath day,
being a factor for them of the Massachusetts, being supplied with commodity from
them, having toleration to sell powder to the Indians, but denied to be sold
unto us, unless we would subject our selves as they had done; these pretended
subjects of the Massachusetts, thus far fetched, had learned this devise, that
whereas some of us had small parcels of land laid out to build houses upon and
plant corn, and all the rest lay common undivided, as the custom of the
Country for the most part is, they would not permit us any more land to build
upon or to feed our cattle, unless we would keep upon that which they would
confess to be our proper right, and they would admit of no division, but by
the foot or by the inch, and then we could neither have room to set a house,
but part of it would stand on their land, nor put a cow to grass, but
immediately her bounds were broken, and then presently must the one be pulled
down, and the other put into the pound, to make satisfaction, or till
satisfaction were made for both. So that by this unreasonable and palpable
slight of these pretended subjects, together with the power of this so
irregular a Government, we plainly perceive^ a snare was laid to entangle us
again; not only to hinder us to provide for our families, but to bereave us
again of what God, through our labor and industry, had raised up unto us as
means to maintain our families with.

Now when the Massachusetts had gained these men to be instruments in this
manner to effect their end, then did they institute them as officers to execute
their warrants amongst us in those parts, upon any complaint these above named
subjects should make unto them upon the grounds above mentioned, who presently
sent a Warrant unto us, to command our appearance at their Courts, under the
hand of the Governor and diverse of the assistants in the Massachusetts,
threatening to use violence against us in case we obeyed not.

A true Copy of the first Warrant that was sent unto us from the Governor and
Assistants of the Massachusetts, into the Nanhyganset Bay, before we planted
upon that tract of land called Shaw-omet, situate upon the same Bay: The
Warrant is here set down verbatim, and is still extant.
Massachusetts, To our Neighbors of Providence.
WHereas William Arnald of Pautuxet Pautuxet is a placeneer Providence, where
one or two of these their subjects had built houses and at their pleasure were
both in Providence and also in Pautuxet, having houses and land in both.
, and Robert Cole, and others, have lately put themselves and their families,
lands and estates, under the protection and government of this Jurisdiction,
and have since complained to us, that you have since (upon pretense of a late
purchase from the Indians) gone about to deprive them of their lawful interest
confirmed by four years possession, and otherwise to molest them: We thought
good therefore to write to you on their behalf, to give you notice, that they
and their lands, etc. being under our Jurisdiction, we are to maintain them in
their lawful rights. If therefore you have any just title to any thing they
possess, you may proceed against them in our Court, where you shall have
equal justice: But if you shall proceed to any violence, you must not blame
us, if we shall take a like course to right them.

The 28o. of the 8o. 1642. Jo. Winthrop, Governor. Tho. Dudley. Ri. Bellingham.
Incr. Nowell.


This Warrant being delivered unto us by their new made officer William Arnald,
in the name of the Massachusetts, we took into serious consideration, having
former experience abundantly of their unkind and inhumane dealing with us, yea
toward our wives and children, when our selves were sometimes in banishments,
and sometimes in prison, and irons (by them) before. We thought it meet (for
the preservation of our peace, together with that Compassion we had of our
wives and little ones) to leave our houses, and the rest of our labors, lying
near unto those their pretended subjects (whom we saw maliciously bent) and to
remove our selves and families further off, from the Massachusetts, and such
their coadjutours, being then amongst us: For we saw that they did not only
endeavor to take away our livelihood, but intended to take away our lives also,
in case they could find a way to satisfy the Country in doing of such an act
and execution: For we had never accusation brought in against us, but what rose
from the Magistrates and the Ministers; for we walked so, as to do no man
wrong, only justified the cause of our Religion, as we had learned and received
the principles thereof before we went amongst them; as also the laws and
government of this Kingdom of England unto which we ever willingly
acknowledged our selves to be loyal subjects, and therefore could not suffer
our selves to be entrenched upon by our fellow subjects, further then the laws
of our King and State does allow.

Now that they sought the lives of some of us, at this time is evident; For
John Warner Citizen and Freeman of London a man well known, who afterward was
one of those against whom they now prosecuted, having formerly had some
business with Master Winthrop the Governor of the Massachusetts, he asked the
said Warner (living then in the Nanhyganset Bay) whether he knew one Samuel
Gorton, (a man also against whom they now prosecuted) who lived also in the
said Bay, but at that time John Warner had not seen him, living a matter of
twenty miles one from the other: The Governor told him he was a man not fit to
live upon the face of the earth; also one of the Elders of the Church of Boston
told a Minister Old M. Oliver
(who reported it in the place where Gorton lived) That if they had Gorton at
Boston in the Massachusetts, he would hardly see his own house any more; yea one
Master Collins, a man of excellent parts of learning, and of an unblameable
life amongst men, being Minister of one of the Western Islands, from that
report he heard of Religion, came to New England, who married one of Mistress
Huchinsons daughters, and being Francis Huchinson his brother in law, was a
member of the Church at Boston, who seriously considering and laying to heart
the ways of their Church and the carriage of his brethren consulting with the
Minister, the two young men could not have rest in their spirits till they went
down to advise or debate the matter with the Church, though they were come out
from them and lived on Road Island in the Nanhyganset Bay, and when they came
to Boston, and the Brethren were gathered together either to give or receive
satisfaction, when they saw the arguments produced by the Minister and his
brother to weigh somewhat heavy, then the strongest of their Church members of
Boston (namely the Governor and Assistants) cast them in prison to regulate
their opinion that differed from them, and there kept them in durance for many
Months; but at the last, setting them at liberty, yet giving out some
threatening words afterward, as though they would fetch them again; the young
men could have no rest in their spirits day nor night, till they were gone out
further from the Massachusetts then that Island was, yea under some foreign
government where the Massachusetts could not pretend to have any thing to do;
for they had heard that the Massachusetts intended to take in all the
Nanhyganset Bay under their Government and Jurisdiction: Whereupon Master
Collins came where the aforesaid Gorton and his Family were, namely at
Providence; and seriously advised him to go along to the Dutch Plantation or
else to the Sweads; for, upon his knowledge, the Massachusetts intended, in
short time, to take away his life, if he abode in any of the English
Plantations; for he had received certain information thereof, whilst he was
amongst them, showing great affection to move him thereunto: Gorton thanked him
kindly for his love, being but a stranger to him, but told him he could not go
under a foreign Prince for protection, till he saw further then yet he did;
knowing he had neither been false to his King nor Country, nor to his
conscience, in point of Religion, so far as God had informed him. But Master
Collins and his Brother, together with their Mother and whole Family, for fear,
removed to the Dutch Plantation, with diverse other friends and families; who
were miserably massacred by those barbarous Indians (both men, women and
children) being then at war with the Dutch, who took some of the English
children (out of families of good note) as Captives, and keep and train them up
amongst themselves unto this day, having most barbarously and cruelly slain
their Parents, who had been not a little careful to train them up in their
life time, both in faith and manners. But we removing ourselves, as abovesaid,
into another part of the Nanhyganset Bay, further from the Massachusetts, and
where none of the English, nor other Nations had any thing to do, but only
Indians, the true natives, of whom we bought a parcel of land called Shaw-omet
(as is abovesaid) not only of Myantonomy, chief Sachim, or prince of those
parts of the Country; but also with the free consent of the Inhabitants of the
place.

Now we plainly perceiving that the drift of the Massachusetts, and those joined
with them, was not only to take the whole Country of the English Plantations
into their Jurisdictions; but also to establish what way of Religion themselves
thought fit, to the the taking away (not only of goods) but lives also of such
as were otherwise minded: We made answer unto the Writing* they had sent unto
us, on this wise; which Answer was made upon our removal from Mooshawset
(otherwise called PROVIDENCE) to Shawomet.

A true Copy of our Answer to the Warrant or Writing which the men of the
Massachusetts sent unto us, as is above noted; wherein we only take up their own
expressions, to show unto them the spirit and power of their Religion, which
they go about by these means to preserve, enlarge, and show the glory of it to
the world: The Answer is verbatim examined by the original Copy; only
marginall Notes added to help the Reader to understand our true meaning.
Mooshawset, November the 20. 1642. To our Neighbors of the MASSACHUSETTS.
WHereas we lately received an irregular note Irregular because it went beyond
their bounds and jurisdictions limited unto them.
professing its form from the Massachusetts, with four men's Names subscribed
thereunto (as principal authors of it) of the chief amongst you, we could not
easily give credit unto the truth thereof; Not only because the conveyers of it
unto us are known to be men whose constant and professed acts are worse then
the counterfeitings of men's hands; but also, because we thought that men of
your parts and profession would never have prostrated their wisdom to such an
act: But considering that causlesse emnity you have against us, the proof
whereof every occasion brings forth, we cannot but conclude, That no act so
ill, which that ancient Mother will not bring forth her seed unto; That is the
wisdom of the flesh conver^ant about the things of God brings forth unto
cruelty all them in whom it is found so exercised.
For we know very well that it is the name of Christ called upon us Jer. 14. 9.
which you strive against, whence it is that you stand on tiptoe to stretch
your selves beyond your bounds, to seek occasion against us (so) as you might
hide your sin with Adam By d^ssembling the cause of their proceeding against us
to be another thing then indeed it was, even as Adam laid the fault upon the
woman, whereas indeed she came out of his own side and was confessed to be flesh
of his flesh and bone of his bone.
bearing the world in hand it is not your desire to contend with us, but some
civil breach in our course which you seek to redress; whereas neither you nor
any in way of truth can find wherewith to bring us under the censure of a
disorderly course of walking amongst them. And as for the way of that ancient
spirit of accusation of the brethren Rev. 12. 10.
we weight it not, knowing him to be a liar (or in the abstract a lie) from the
beginning Joh. 8. 44.
, yea and the father of it also; which thing you cannot know though it were
told unto you: whereas you say Robert Cole, William Arnald, with others, have
put themselves under the government and protection of your Jurisdiction, which
is the occasion you have now got to contend; we wish your words were verified,
that they were not elsewhere to be found But only among themselves, within the
bounds of their own Jurisdictions, as they affirm them to be though without
any ground or rule of true government.
, being nothing but the shame of Religion, disquiet and disturbance of the
places where they are; for we know neither the one nor the other, with all
their associates and confederates, have power to enlarge the bounds, by King
CHARLES, limited unto you. Behold therefore, in this your act, a Map of your
spiritual estate (to use your own phrase); for we know that the spirituality of
your Churches, is the civility of your Commonwealth, and the civility of your
Commonwealth is the spirituality of your Churches; the wisdom of man being the
whole accomplesense of them both, of which tree you delight daily to eat The
tree of the knowledge of good and evil paralelled with the wisdom of man
exercising it self in the things of God.
finding it fair and beautiful, to gain conformity with your maker; in these
your dissembling subjects grossly profane amongst us, but full of the spirit of
your purity: That is, the spirit of painted hypocrisy.
when they are with you, you may remember the brand your selves have set on
some of them, the cause whereof was never yet removed, The sin being still
continued in.
though it abide not upon their backs That is, the mark which was worn to
proclaim it to all.
, nor yet the cause of your commitment of them unto Satan (according to your
Law) for if that were removed you should do them wrong in not resuming your
vomit into its former concoction again: That is, in not receiving them into the
operations of that boiling Church Fellowship again, wherein they still walked.
Nor are we ignorant of those disgraceful terms they use and give out against
you behind your backs; Their submission therefore cannot be to any other end,
but to satisfy their own lusts, not only conceived, but in violent motion
against their Neighbors, who never offered the least wrong unto them; only the
proposition of amity, is object sufficient for these men's emnity. Even so the
passions of sin, which are by the law, having force in your members, Romans 7. 5.
you going about with great labor and industry to satisfy them by your
submission unto the Word of God, in your fasting, and feasting, in
contributing, and treasuring, in retiredness for study, and bowing of the
backs of the poor, going forth in labor to maintain it, and in the spirit of
that hireling Joh. 10. 12, 13.
raising up your whole structure and edifice; in all which you bring forth
nothing but fruit unto death: Some laboring for a price to give for the keeping
of their souls in peace, and safe estate and condition: That is, carefully
labor to pay wages to the Minister for that end either in way of contribution
or else.
some to have your bodies furnished with riches honor and ease That is the
Ministers and Magistrates study, teach, and execute to attain such ends.
; and further then the Lord Jesus agrees with these, you mind him not; nay you
renounce and reject him, and with these (according to your acceptance and
practice) he holds no correspondency at all; being the consultation and
operation of that his only adversary That is the wisdom of the flesh exercised
in the things of God.
; Man being that which you depend upon, and not the Lord, crying out in the way
of elevation, and lauding his Ministers, when in the mean time you know not
what, nor who, they are; professing them under a mediate call of Christ, though
formerly they have been called immediately by him. Hereby showing your selves
to be those which destroy the sacred ordinance of God; for if you make Christ
to be that to day, in stating of his Ministers, which he was not Heb. 13. 8.
yesterday, and that in the time of the Gospel also (to speak according to your
law) to be found in them both; you therein affirm, he has been that to his
Ministers, which now he is not; and to make the son of God to have been that
which now he is not, is to make a nullity of him; Not to be at all: For he is
the Lord that changes not Malach. 3. 6. James 1. 17.
no not a shadow thereof is found in him: So that you plainly crucify to your
selves the Lord of glory, and put him to an open shame Heb. 6. 6.
so that as you know not how Christ conversing with his Father in heaven is
found on the earth amongst the true worshippers, no more do you know how in his
conversing with Nicodemus on the earth he concludes himself to be in heaven
Job. 423. Ioh. 3. 13.
with his Father; on this foundation hangs the whole building of your
doctrine, concerning the sufferings of Christ, you annihilate the Cross, then
the which the Saints have no other consolation Gal. 6. 14.
and prepare no better a place then purgatory for the honorable Fathers of our
Lord Psa. 22. 4.
; for ye conclude that Christ dyed in the decree and purpose of God in the time
of the law, but actually only when he hanged on the Cross in the days of Herod
and Pontius Pilate, that he was crucified in the types and shadows of the law:
But in the truth and substance when he appeared born of the Virgin Mary; so
must ye also conclude that the fathers under the law were only saved in
purpose, and decree, in types and shadows, but actually and substantially only
at the coming of Christ in the flesh: Therefore deal plainly with those that
depend upon you for instruction, as your ancestors in the Papacy have done, and
proclaim a place of purgatory provided for them in the mean; without which your
doctrine has no foundation: for if you raise up a shadow without a substance,
and the substance of him that dwells in light 1 Timothy 6. 16.
without a shadow, you play the part of wizards, or Necromancers, not the part
of true naturalists in the things of the Kingdom of God: So that as far as
your men are That is their subjects so far fetched who lived among us.
from being honorable and loyal subjects, so far are you from being
voluntaries, in the day of Gods power Psa. 10. 3.
and from yielding subjection to the beauties of holiness; such also is your
preferment rule and government in the things that concern the Kingdom of our
God, they are infinitely beyond and out of the reach of that spirit that is
gone out amongst you, the capacity whereof can no ways comprehend the breadth
of the land of Emanuel Isai. 8. 8.
nor enters it within the veil: 2 Cor. 3. 15.
Therefore it cannot know those Cherubims of glory Heb. 9. 5:
, neither can it hear the voice of that lively oracle, speaking only from off
the covering mercy seat, Number. 7. 8, 9.
and not elsewhere to be heard; we speak not but what we know, these things are
not of its Jurisdiction; therefore dumm in telling Justice; neither speaks it
any of that righteousness and glory comprised in another circuit then you were
yet made lords of: Therefore long may you boast of your Jurisdiction before you
attain to Juris prudentia in these things, in that you tell us we offer wrong
by a pretended purchase, you are as much mistaken in the purchase as in the
wrong; for it is right that we are about to do, neither is our purchase a
pretense, but presidentiall, not only in this civil respect, but may also
admonish all men to take ^eed how they depend upon false and self-seeking
interpreters, when both themselves, and they that have the vision are ignorant
of the contract and covenant of God Arnalds son Benedick being interpreter
between the Indians about us, and the Massachusetts, seeking to get some
advantage against us by the Indians to blind the Country, as though they had a
just quarrel, we seeing and knowing the falsity thereof, do apply the thing to
their spiritual course they walk in.
: Thence it is that you teach, that the Spouse of Christ, upon contract with
her Lord, may conceive the seed of immortality and bring forth fruit unto the
Lord, when as yet the day of marriage, that great festivity and solemnization
of the consolations of God, is not yet come; witness your prorogation thereof,
if not to the descention of Christ from heaven to the earth, to reign certain
years, yet to the calling of the Jews, (whom ye your selves are, according to
the flesh) and to the destruction of that man of sin, whom you so stoutly
maintain: What is this but to proclaim to all the world that audacious spirit
of whoredom Hosea 4. 12. and 5. 4.
professing conception, and bringing forth before the Nuptial day, in that you
conclude your clients right to arise out of four years possession, we have no
such order, if you mean the right of conquest only held in that tenure, the
true owners were never yet subdued; for that is the right they expect to enjoy
by you. For some of them committed part of their supposed right unto us,
professing it was that they might have help to enjoy the rest As Robert Cole
did, their subject now since that time so made.
: But when they saw we would not be abettors unto them without, much less
contrary unto covenant, then they fly unto you for help, The Indians denying at
that time a perfect and full purchase of that place where these their subjects
had built houses, called Pautuxet.
their possession being a mere intrusion, as all the Natives know, and ever
exclaimed against them for the same; and so may our Countrymen also, whose eyes
are not dazzled with envy, and ears open unto lies, as we know yours are, else
you had heard both sides speak before you had judged; but we profess right
held in no such interest, but according to the ground of covenant, only known
in its nature in the parties twixt whom it is plight, in the possessor and the
possessed, with the nature of all fruit arising from their accord and
concurrency, together with their distinct, harmonicall, reciprocal, and joint
properties and operations of them both; such is the tenure that we hold, and
maintain it before men and angels, and oppose it against men and devils; not in
taking up unto our selves certain offices and officers, which we can teach
children to be and to perform, and from thence presently to conclude the
possession of the Kingdom, crying out our peace offerings are upon us, this
day we have paid our vows: Alluding to the harlot spoken of in the Proverbs
whose practice is such in spiritual things, as well as there is a literal sense
of it. Prove. 7. 13. to 23.
But that dark cloud that descended on the Tabernacle Exodus 33. 9, 10. Nehem.
9. 12.
becomes the light and glory of all Israel, there being nothing acknowledged
amongst them, but what arises out thence; then, and then only, are the orders;
as also the men of Israel derived from their true fountain, Psa. 68. 26.
which no tongue can confess but is salvation Romans ^0. 10.
, and then not else is the heritage of our Lord in possession Ps. 47. 4.
yea even the waylesse wilderness knows how to afford them an habitation,
which had its being before the hills and mountains were borne Psa. 90. 1, 2.
which men begin to fly unto for refuge to hide themselves from the presence of
the Lamb Rev. 6. 16. For there was nothing done to these men that seemed to
shelter themselves under the Massachusetts, but only opening the Word of God
amongst them, which is the revelation of the face or presence of the Lamb of
God Jesus Christ.
: This is a possession which no man can intrude himself into, it is only
covenanted with him through an enlightened eye and boared ear Pro 20. 12.
which man performs not, neither can it be received from him Psa. 40. 6. Gal.
1. 11, 12.
: for we know that cloud of thick darkness, that hides and covers the whole
frame and fabric of the work of God Alluding to the Tabernacle which it
covered, and so applied spiritually in the way of Christ.
* to be the clearing and evidencing of every point and particular thereof, yea
to us it is even that cloud of witness Heb. 12. 1.
which testifies to us the like work to appear, when ever the world has
occasion to make use of us: Never does it shine but in the night, never is it
dark to Israel but in the day Ps. 78. 14.
but in the one, and the other, the only glory and safety of all the tribes;
but how, you know not, neither can you, with all your librariers, give the
interpretation thereof, but have lost it in the wilderness, and accordingly
have made the whole way and will of our Lord, the oldnesse of the letter Romans
7. 6.
both to your selves and all that have an ear to listen unto you; thence it is,
that the day of the Lord is a day of darkness and gloominesse unto you Zeph.
1. 14, 15.
but of joy and gladness unto us; yea it lifts up our head only, Meaning
Christ, and not our selves, to set up flesh. Luke 21. 28.
and then is our salvation near, for we know the Worthies of David doubled
about the bed of Solomon, which expel all fear in the night Cant. 3. 7, 8.
handling the sword with success, making the adversaries nothing but meat to
feed upon That is, all kind of incombrances they meet with in this life, Isaiah
41. 2.
, so that the time of your fear is the time of our courage and conquest; for
when ye fear Error, Schism, Rents, and Confusions in Church and State, then do
we know the messenger of the Covenant, the Lord whom we seek, is speeding his
passage into his holy Temple; Malachi 3. 1, 2.
For who (under the terrors of your spirit) may abide his coming, he being like
a refiners fire and fullers soap?

In that you invite us unto your Courts, to fetch your equal balanced
Justice, upon this ground, that you are become one with our adversaries, and
that both in what they have and what they are, and we know them to be such as
profess the day of the Lord an unhallowed thing Heb. 10. 29.
. Now if we have our Opponent to prefer his action against us, and no^ so only,
but to be our Counsel, our Jury, and our Judge; for so it must be, if you are
one with them, as you affirm, we know beforehand how our cause will be ended,
and see the scale of your equal Justice turned already, before we have laid
our cause therein; and cannot but admire to see you carried so contrary to your
own received principles; for ye know not how to find Christ as a ruling and
teaching Elder both in one person, therefore he is not complete among you (by
your own law) except in several persons; and you may thank tradition, else you
know no more how to find a King and a Priest in him; and yet in your way of
making tender of your Justice unto us, you know how to become one with our
adversaries, so, as if we deal with them, we deal with you; and if we have todo
with you, we have to do with them also: yea further we know that the chief
amongst you have professed we are not worthy to live; and if some of us were
amongst you we should hardly see the place of our abode any more.

Now they that have brooded upon their law to take away life, they must much
more bring it forth in taking away all means of life, witness your prohibition
that no powder should be sold unto us for our money, and that in a time when
you could not think your selves safe in all your own selfe-provision and
worldly furniture, except you disarmed a company of poor Indians, whom Aaron
your Leviticall Sacrificer has made naked By alluding to that bodily nakedness
of the Indians, whom they disarmed, showing that spiritual nakedness which the
works of the law or levitical Priesthood brings men under, who ever they be
that are exercised in such ways.
as he does all those which triumph in a Calfe, though the most costly and
beautiful that the Jewels and Ear^ings of learning (either in language or art)
can possibly bring forth Exodus 32.
; your own amazements upon mere rumors may testify the truth thereof: so then
we are judged by your law before our cause be heard or our selves brought forth
under the liberties of it, which thing is well pleasing to us to have our
condition conformed to Moses the man of God, who was dead in Pharaos account
before he was brought forth For in Pharaohs edict and Herod's also they were
slain before they were born.
; and so it was with Christ our Lord (in the days of Herod also) who is our
life Collos. 3. 4.
at which you strike and makes all things, yea death it self lively, and
advantageous unto us Phil. 1. 20, 21 Romans 8. 28.
: we cannot but wonder that you should read the Scriptures and not find them
fulfilled in and amongst your selves, when as they appear so apparently, that
he that runs may read them; what think you of Herod, when the Lord had
delivered Peter out of prison, and released him of those bonds, and brought him
from that thraldom which he had so cruelly imposed upon him (to gain the favor
of the Jews) and that by a power supereminent transcending the bounds of his
authority That is, the authority of that wicked Herod. Act. 12. Chap.
throughout.
and by a wisdom surpassing the depth of his counsel and policy to find out,
together with the soldiers and champions, he presently goes down to Caesarea,
and Herod is angry with them of Tyrus and Sydon (Thumomathon] A heavy friend,
or has a secret grudge or perturbation of mind manifested in an out-reaching
and circumventing policy to subdue them unto himself that he might rule over
them, finding himself fall short of power and policy to subject the Word of
God in the messenger of it, to satisfy his own lust in his lordship over it,
he pursues with all eagerness to make himself a God by reigning over the
bodies and estates of men, yea though they be but such as Tyrus and Sydon can
afford unto him to make subjects of, and when they come to him with one accord
to make offer of themselves in yielding to his affectionate and political
project, he sitting on the Judgment seat in his royal apparel, making his
Oration of what power he has to protect them, what wisdom and counsel to
minister justice and righteousness unto them (which office belongs only unto
the Lord); the people with a shout crying out, the voice of God, and not of
man, the truth and substance of which cry, is, This is the Ordinance of God and
not of man, immediately the the Angel of the Lord smites him; and he that ever
acknowledged himself to be a worm, and no man upon the earth Psa. 22: 6, 7.
consumes and eats up all his pomp and glory even as those whom you account the
shame and contempt of the people shall through that Angel of the covenant waste,
and bring to naught all those Rhetorical (though earthly) Orations that are
made amongst you by your so learned, studious, and experienced Clerks; Take for
illustration of your estate (as above) the speech of your Alderman, Oliver, in
case of committing Francis Huchinson to prison, one of your Church members
wondering that Brother Winthrop would do it, before the Church had deals with
him (Brother says he] why, he is thy God, man. Lend your eye yet further to
parallel your practice personated in Pilate Ioh. 18. 28. ^^ 40.
and the people, when Pilate offers Jesus to the people to be judged, they
profess they have such a law that puts no man to death, they are all for mercy
and forgiveness when they are out of the Judgment hall; but let Pilate enter
in thither, then nothing but crucify him, crucify him, be their accusation
and witnesses never so false; even so in your dealings with men, in way of your
Jewish brotherhood, your law is all for mercy, to redress, to reform, and for
the preservation both of soul and body; do but enter into the common hal, then
as Pilate asked, am I a Jew? so do ye: do I sit on speak here as a brother? I
trow not; I am now in a higher sphere then that [though they be acknowledged
Coheirs with Christ] can attain unto; therefore if witness be brought in and
oath taken, though never so untrue, your consciences are purged by law, and
your power must have tribute paid unto it; so far, as men's names to be branded
with infamy (estates) depriving women and children of things necessary, and the
precious lives of men can extend themselves to contribute any thing thereunto,
so that they professed mercy and clemency of your law to exercise censures only
for amendment of life, and recovery comes unto this issue to send both soul and
body down unto S^^^ll for ever, without redress and all hope of recovery. But
your hour, and the power of darkness, is known what it is, either to have men's
persons in admiration, because of advantage Jude 16. v^
or else to seek all occasions against them to brand them with all manner of
reproach and ignominy; but for the truth taught daily in the Temple, you know
not how to stretch out your hand or exercise your ministry against it, least
it become leprous, and you take it back again with loss, when it appears dried
and withered and wherefore reason ye amongst your selves, saying we exercise
the power of our ministrations against none but such as are Delinquents,
whereby we clear the innocent, and establish peace in our borders; (we demand)
what think you of those two witnesses prophesying in sackcloth a thousand two
hundred and three^^ore days, Revel. ^^: Zach: 4.
those two Olive trees and Candlesticks standing before the God of the earth?
are these guilty and vile persons out of whose hands by the power of your
ministry, you are delivering and releasing the world? then indeed are your
ways justifiable: But if these be the just, chosen, and peculiar friends of
God, yea, such as without which his truth and righteousness are not justified,
his wisdom and holiness maintained and upheld in the world, in point of
salvation by Christ; then are your ways wicked and to be abhorred; for in your
professed course, you are they by whom they are slain and put to death, and all
your glory is to keep their Corpse unburied in your streets, and yet you know
not what you are doing, no more then you know what these witnesses are whom you
are altogether ignorant of; for your ^^^^^ries never ^^w them (and you see not
but by their eyes) That is, by what light they find in other men's works.
for these are two, and never more, nor yet less, yea ever the same, they are
Olive tree^, else no witnesses, and also Candlesticks, else both the former
fail, yea, are not at all: we must tell you what these are, else we cannot
declare how ye kill them: for it is not our intent to open unto you the house
of the creatures, the silver and the gold, the spices and the precious
ointment, no^ the house of our armor Jsai. 30* ^^
because ye take all as execrable, and put all to a profane use, that comes
from us: But these two witnesses are the life and death of our Lord Jesus
Christ Which comprehend his Kingdom and Priesthood set forth unto us in Joshua
the high Priest and Z^^^^^bel in their (...) out of Babylon to re-edifie the
Temple; as in Zechary the third and fourth chapters.
or (in the true language of heaven also) the strength and the weakness of
Christ: for he was crucified through weakness, but lives by the power of God
2 Cor. 13. 4^
, This is the Word of the Lord in Zorob^bel, not by an army, nor by power (and
so deprives him of all strength) but by a spirit that the greatest mountain o^
loftiest hill in the world cannot stand before, but becomes a plain, which with
facility and ease he passes upon: thence it is that he does not only ^ay the
top, or the head stone of all, but also the lowest in the foundation, and then
only is the voice of shouting heard, Grace, grace, in the house for ever: and
then does the day of small things become the day of joy and triumph, yea of
parting the rich spoils and prey of all the world: for then he that does but
turn and lift up his eyes, he cannot look besides that great flying book of the
Curse that is gone forth over the whole earth Zech. 5. 1, 2, 3
without these two witnesses jointly uttering themselves in every particular
Scripture undertaken to be divulged by any, no evidence nor testimony of God is
given or brought in at all, but a mere refuge of lies, for the souls of men to
betake themselves unto Isa. 28* 15.
without these two pipes of the Olive trees, emptying into the bowl of the
Candlesticks, no unction nor oil at all is found in them, and that being
wanting the light of the sanctuary is gone out, so that the light appearing
amongst you is only the light of Baalam whose eye was open, which you may read
either Shethum, or Sethum Which signifies either opened or shut, as in Numb.
24. 3, 4.
, for that opening is nothing else but the shutting up of the holy things of
God, so that in seeing ye see not, Isa. 6. 9, 10.
but communicate only in the light of that beast who puts the witnesses to
death Revel. 11. 7.
as Baalam did in the sight of that dumm beast of his, whose eyes were so
opened as to see the Angel before him Number. 22. 25. 27. That is before Balam,
so that the beast and Balam have the same light and look.
: So that while you think it is our wisdom to stoop unto you for light we
never come amongst you, but see our selves in a regiment of gross and palpable
darkness, and discern you very plainly how you scrable upon the wall to find
the door of L^ts house and cannot Ge^. 19. 11.
, as also how you toil your selves to climb up into the sheepfold another way
yea so many other ways, and have no sight nor discerning of the door at all,
by the which whosoever enters becomes a true feeder of the flock, yea none
enters in thereat but the true shepherd himself. Joh. 10. 1, 2, 3
Most impious it is to put to death two such noble witnesses that have power to
shut heaven that it rain not in the days of their prophesying, to turn waters
into blood, and to smite the earth with all manner of plagues as often as they
will Revel. 11. 6.
, whom that spirit that is amongst you kills on this wise. The life and power of
the Son of God as above Being one of the two witnesses before noted, or his
power and kingly authority.
, which is infinite, not admitting of circumscription or contenent, for the
heaven of heavens cannot contain him; 1 Kings 8. 27 2 Chronicles. 2. 6.
yet have ye not dared to grasp and inviron that power in the heavens, and
therefore have resolved and concluded, that he only rules upon the earth in
these days, by his Deputies, Lieutenants, and Visegerents* whereby you limit,
Psalm. 78, 41.
and so destroy the holy one of Israel, for, give him, that in one time or
place, which afterward, or else where ye deny unto him, and you make a
nullitie of him unto your selves, and in so doing, you kill the other witness,
namely the death or weakness of the Lord Jesus, which is his Priesthood,
wherein he deprives himself of all power of man, or strength of the aim of
flesh:
for you must have man to be honorable, learned, wise, experienced, and of
good report, else they may not rule amongst you; yea, and these things are of
man, and by man, as, Peers in that they only officiate so, as man may disanull
and take it away again, witness your change of officers, constantly speaking
for us herein; thus have you slain also, the Death, or the weakness of
Christ, who professes himself to be a worm and no man, Psalm 22, 6
the shame and contempt of the people, and these faithful and true witnesses
thus slain, you must of necessity deny burial, and keep them both in your
streets, Revel. 11. 8, 9, 10
in open view, otherwise all your pomp and glory falls to the dust That is, if
the power of God, and the weakness and frailty of man should not be so slain,
as to be still kept as dead in sight of all, then could not the power and glory
of the creature, (as Visegerent, unto the power and glory of God in his
absence) be seen set up, and made known.
whence it came, and on which it feeds, Gen 3, 14
nor can you send your presents one to an other, of your acts of Justice, power
to protect; wealth, honor, and friends, wherewith you gratify one another:
And where these are thus slain, and their corpse lie in open view, none of the
Gentiles, peoples, tongues, and kindreds, suffering their corpse to be put in
grave, Revel. 11. 8, 9, 10, 11.
there is that great City which spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt, where
our Lord is crucified: But after three days and an half the spirit of life,
from God, shall enter into them, and they shall stand up, upon their feet, to
the terror of you all: Nor do you think, that we only inveigh against the
great ones of the world, for thus doing; for we know, that the greatest of the
Princes of this world, has the very same spirit, wherewith the basest Peasant,
has laid himself open in the view of all the world, and the basest Peasant,
has the same spirit, with the greatest of the Princes of this world, Ephesians. 2,
1, 2, 3. Romans 3. 9. to 19.
These we say, are the two witnesses, if you can receive it Matt. 11. 14.
and what dishonor is it to trade so much by means of witnesses, and yet know
not what a true witness is, which if you did, you durst not attempt the things
ye do, whereby you cast reproach upon all the world, in that you profess
your selves a choice people picked out of it, and yet you go on with such
practices as you do, maintaining them as your only glory. Our Lord gives you
in charge, not to swear at all, Matt. 5. 34. to 38.
but it is your dignity to bring men to your seats of Justice, with nothing but
oaths in their mouths; why do you not balance the Scriptures in this point?
It has been said of old, thou shall not commit Adultery, but I say unto you,
he that looks on a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her
in his heart already. M^^. 5. 27, 28.
So also, it has been said of old, thou shall not forswear thy self, but I
say unto you, swear not at all: So that if it be Adultery to look to lust,
it is also forswearing of a man's self, to swear at all; if one be Adultery,
the other is Perjury; if one be admitted in some cases, the other also; so that
in preaching the Toleration, nay the duty of an oath, you preach the
toleration, yea, the duty of adultery it self: So that our Lord plainly
evinceth unto all men's consciences, not only the guilt, but the folly and
madness of the oath of man, to show how far it is from investing into place,
or demonstrating causes. So that he that concludes upon honor and power,
received from the oath of man, or upon knowledge, and holdnesse to judge, in a
cause from that Testimony, without the which he could not have it, is as
vain in his thoughts, as if he should hereupon conclude, I have now altered
the frame of Heaven, which is no less stable then the Throne of the great God,
or demolished the earth, which is as firm as his Footstool for ever, or made
a fraction in the orders of Jerusalem, that choice and peculiar City of the
great King, whose institutions no mortal breath can entrench upon, or to
profess his authority and skill to be such, whereby he can make a ^^ire of
his head black or white, viz. cause his age to wax old as a garment, or renew
it with the Eagle at his pleasure, Psalm. 103. 5
hereby does man in this point of swearing, profess his folly to be such, that
he is become not only vain in his imaginations, but to that pride and
usurpation therein, as to intrude himself into the Prerogative Royal of his
Maker, so tha^ howsoever ye boast of the Ordinances of God, yet he t^ls you,
there is no more then yea yea, and nay nay in them; for that which is once nay
is ever nay, in the ordination of Christ; and what is once yea, is ever yea
with him, and according to his account (howsoever man reckons, whose accounts
shall be called over again) what is once the curse, is ever the curse, and
that which is once the Principality and power of Christ, is ever the
principality and power of Christ; as that which is once the principality and
power of darkness is ever the same, what hands soever it comes into: for
manifestation, measure your Kingdom whether it be eternal, and your
jurisdiction whether it be illimited, for he has given him the Heathen for
his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.
8.
and a Kingdom of less extent he professes not, nor can he approve or
acknowledge any that do; no more then light can approve of darkness, or the
Lord I^hovah of the lord Baal. Be wise therefore and bethink your selves,
while it is called to day, harden not your hearts, Hebr. 3. 15
as though you would make your selves Meribba, nothing but strife and
contention against the Lord; rather kiss the Son, if it be possible, lest
his wrath kindle, and you perish from the way for ever: Oh blessed only they
that hope in him, Psalm. 2: 12.
so that he which professes on this wise, it is yea, I am a Pastor, but it
was nay; at such a time I was none at all; he renounceth that spirit of the
true Pastor, yea, the only Feeder of Israel, but professes that spirit only
that pusheth the weak with the horn, and pudleth with his feet the waters
where the flock of God should drink. Ezekiel 34. 19, 10, 21.
He with whom it is yea, I am a Ruler, but it was nay, when I was none,
renounceth that spirit of him that rules in Righteousness, Isaiah 32. 1.
professing the spirit of him that rules according to the god of this world,
that Prince of the power of the air, who is now working so effectually in the
children of disobedience; Ephesians. 2. 2.
so also, he with whom it is yea, I am a Captain or chief slaughter-man: As
the word signifies.
but it was nay, time was, I was none at all, renounceth that victory, and
slaughter made by the Captain, and High Priest of our profession, Heb. 2. 10.
who as he is a Lamb slain from the beginning, Revel. 13. 8.
his victory and slaughter, must be of the same antiquity, professing himself
to be a chief slaughter-man, or superfluous Giant, made in the Host of the
Philistims, standing in readiness to come out, to defy the Hoasts of the ever
living God, 1 Samuel 17. 10.
yea, it is evident, whatsoever is more then yea yea, and nay nay, not setting
each upon his base, whereon it stands for ever without control: but can
remove, create, or make void offices* and officers, at their pleasure, is of
that evil one, 1 John 3. 12.
not of Jesus the Salvation of his people, Matt. 1. 21
but of Shedim, As the word signifies, given in the Chaldean tongue for Devil.
that Waster and Destroyer of mankind for ever: Understand these things
according to the true intent, that is, any officer that lays claim to the
things of the Kingdom of God, by virtue of that, his office in that sense the
truth of these things stand firm and good, and does not deny or disallow any
humane ordinance of man in this world, so it be kept in its bounds and proper
place, for he that is a Captain of the Temple, that is, exercises force of
arms, for the help of the house of God, will ever with the Priests and
soldiers, lay hands on Peter and John, to put them in hold, at the least if
they preach Christ. But Cornelius is no Captain of that kind or kindred, for he
is a Gentile of Caesarea, and of the band called the Italian Band.
Know therefore, that it is the oath of God, which confirms, and makes good
his Covenant and promise to a thousand generations, Psalm. 105 9. 10
and it is the oath of man, that is, the bond and obligation of that league and
agreement made with hell and death for ever: Be ye assured, it is not the
Tabernacle of witness, Isay 15. 18
which you have amongst you, brought in by Jesus into the possession of the
Gentiles, Acts 7. 44, 45
but it is Siccuth your King, or the Tabernacle of Molech, the Star of your God
Remphan, figures that you have made to your selves, Acts 7. 43
which you have taken up, and are bearing so stoutly upon your shoulders. Now*
to tell you what an oath, according to God is, that the Scriptures are
delivered upon no other ground or terms of certainty, where ever they are
divulged, is a thing out of your jurisdiction, you cannot discern or judge of
it; therefore according to our Word above, we leave it as a Parable to you, as
all the holy Word of our God ^^, as your conversation in all points, as in
this, daily declares; in a word when we have to do in your jurisdiction, we
know what it is to submit to the wise dispensations of our God; when you have
to do amongst us, in the liberties he has given to us, we doubt not but you
shall find him Judge amongst us, beyond and above any cause, or thing you can
propose unto us; and let that suffice you, and know, that you cannot maintain
a jurisdiction, but you must reject all inroads upon other men's privileges,
and so do we; in the mean time we^ shall as we think good be calling over,
again some matters you have had up, and had the handling of amongst you, to
see what justice or equity we find has been exercised in them, and redress
them accordingly, for we profess right unto all me^, and do no violence at
all, as you in your prescript threaten to do to us, for we have learned how to
discipline our children or servants without offering violence unto them; even
so do we know how to deal with our deboist, rude, yea, inhumane neighbors
(or if you will Nabals) without doing violence; but rather rendering unto them
that which is their ^^e: Nor shall we deprive a witness of his modest
testimony, for the outcries and clamours of such a one, as ill-br^d
apostatized Arnald, that fellonious Hog- Killer, being the party to be
testified against, or for the oath of any interested in the cause, As they in
the Massachusetts had lately done, to condemn the innocent, and justify such
who otherwise had been proved guilty of felonious acts, even these their new
made subjects, whose shame they would not permit to appear, but rather deprive
sufficient witness of their testimony, at the guilty pers^ns request.
nor shall we be forward to come so far to find you work That is to their
Courts in the Massachusetts, to employ them about any matters of ours living
peaceably together so far remote from them, out of all their Jurisdictions.
upon your request, till we know you to bear another mind, then others of your
Neighbors do, with whom we have had to do in this Country, whose pretended
and devised Laws, we have stooped under to the robbing and spoiling of our
goods, the livelihood of our wives and children, thinking they had labored,
though groaping in great darkness, to bring forth the truth in the rights and
equity of things: But finding them to be a company of gross and dissembling
hypocrites, that under the pretense of Law, and Religion, have done nothing
else but gone about to establish themselves in ways to maintain their own
vicious lusts, we renounce their diabolical practice, being such as have
denied in their public Courts, that the Laws of our native Country should
be named amongst them; yea, those ancient Statute Laws, casting us into most
base, ^asty, and insufferable places of imprisonment, for speaking according to
the language of them, in the mean while breaking open our houses in a violent
way of Hostility, abusing our wives, and our little ones, to take from us the
volumes wherein they are preserved, thinking thereby to keep us ignorant of the
courses they are resolved to run, that so the visiosity of their own wills
might be a Law unto them; yea, they have endeavored, and that in public
expressions; that a man being accused by them, should not have liberty to
answer for himself in open Court: dealings of like nature we find, in the
place whereof you style us your Neighbors, on whose unbridled malice, we find
a higher then you putting a ^^ be, and yet in your account and reckoning we are
the parties that are still doing the wrong, and must bear the guilt in your
most mature sentence, in whomsoever the spot arises, and abides; but the God
of vengeance, unto whom our cause is referred, never having our Protector, and
Judge to seek, will show himself in our deliverance out of the hands of you
all; yea, all the house of that Ishbosheth, That is, man of shame.
and Merib-bosheth, Mouth of shame.
nor will he fail us to utter and make known his strength wherein we
stand, to serve in our age, and to minister in our course, today and tomorrow,
and on the third day can none deprive us of perfection, Luke 13. 31, 32, 33, 34.
for he has taught us to know what it is to walk today, and tomorrow, and
the day following also, when a perishing estate cannot rise out of Jerusalem,
though she be the only one, yea none but she, that kills the Prophets, and
stones them that are sent unto her: Behold ye that are looking after, and
foretelling so much of the coming of Christ, driving the day before you still
for certain years; which some, you say, shall attain unto, and unto the day
of death for the rest, ye blind Guids, as your Fathers have ever done, so do
ye: Behold, we say, when he appears, your house which you so glory in, shall
be left unto you de^o^^^e, it shall be turned into nothing but desolation, and
confusion, for Babel is its name, That is, as the word signifies Confusion.
nor shall you see him to your comfort, in the glory of his Kingdom, until
you can say (blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord) Mat. 21. 5. to
10. Matt. 23. 37. 38, 39.
when the authority and power of man, appears to be the building of Babel
unto you, and the name and authority of God only to be that wherein the
blessing consists, and that in such wise also, as is nothing but a way of
reproach in the eyes of all the world; that a King should ride into his chief
City ^ so strangly furnished upon an Ass, borrowed, her furniture ^id
over-worne Garments, and accompanied with none but poor, mean, excommunicate
persons, such as your Elders, ^^cribes, Pharisees, Lawyers, and all your
credible persons among you make full account they are not only accursed, by,
but also destitute and void of all Law, when you can find Hosanna in the
highest, arising out of such contempt, and shame, then, and then only shall you
sing unto him with comfort; in the mean time acknowledge your portion, which
is to ^ru^^ and stay your selves on the name of man, and in his beauty to
delight and glory, which shall fade as a Leaf, and like the grass, shall
wither when it is fitting it self for the Over; Isay 40. 7. 8. and ^. 30.
Psalm. 90. 5, 6.
such is man whose breath is in his Nostrils, Isay 2. 22.
and the son of sorry man, in whom you have deligh^ to trust, his power and
policy brings forth nothing else, but as you shall see and heart, in the
Country from whence we are brought; we are not ignorant of those shameful
lies, and falsities gone out against us, and the daily wresting of our words,
to cast contempt upon us, Psalm. 56. 5
thinking to bow down our backs under ignominy, and reproach, neither of the
straits, and difficulties, they have cast us upon in the things that concerns
this present life, to the taking away of the lives of many, if our God had not
been seen beyond and above what their thoughts could reach unto, (as their
own confession has witnessed) doing it in such a way, of painted hypocrisy,
and false gloss, unto the eye of the world, that we might seem unto it, self
executioners; we resolve therefore to follow our employments, and to carry and
behave our selves as formerly we have done, and no otherwise; for we have
wronged no man, unless with hard labor, to provide for our families, and
suffering of gross, idle, and Idol drones, to take our labors out of the
mouths, and from off the backs of our little ones, to lord^ne it over us: so
that if any shall got about to disturb, or annoy us, henceforth in our
employments, and liberties, which God has, or shall put into our hands, that
can claim no interest in us but by these courses, Knowing our selves to be free
subjects to the Laws and government of our native country, and not unto any
government extended out of its bounds and jurisdiction.
what their business is, we know by proof sufficient, to be nothing else but
that ancient errand of Nimrod, that rebellious Hunter after the precious life,
Ge^^ 10, 8, 9. Jer. 16. 16.
which errand of his shall be no more delivered unto us, in that covert
cruelty, and dissembling way of hypocrisy; but in direct and open terms of
tyranny, we will not be dealt with as before (we speak in the name of our
God) we will not* for if any shall disturb us, as above, secret Hypocrites
shall become open Tyrants, and their Laws appear to be nothing else but meet
lusts in the eyes of all the world: And wherefore do you murmr among your
selves at this saying, thinking it is not a Christian expression? it is because
you are ignorant of the Gross of our Lord Jesus, not knowing what it is;
therefore it is, while you inveigh against such as set up a Statue of wood and
stone to bow down unto it, and are so vain as to cross the air (to use your
own expression) upon the faces of Infants, when they sprinkle them with water,
to as great purpose, and in the mean time you preach, and set up Seighnirim,
for your Cross, whom you fall down unto so willingly, and lest you let the
word pass without expression of it unto all, it signifies Horror and Fear,
which is the Cross you hold and teach, and by and through which you think to
be saved, which name is given by our Lord to the Devil himself, (as our
English translate it, and the Lord never gives a name as an empty title, but
according to the nature of the thing named, so that if he speak, I have said
ye are gods, Psalm. 8 ^^, 7.
of any besides himself it is to declare, that they have not only the name,
but the very nature of the god of this world, and therefore he says, they
shall dye even as Adam, which aspired and usurped the place of God, and fall
also as one of the Princes, even as one of those Princes of Midian, whose
cark^sses became dung for the earth, Psalm. 83. 9, 10, 11.
and he that given that title unto any but the true God, that made heaven and
earth, in any other sense, but as it declares a flat opposition against God,
is Reacting that ancient spirit of the Serpent; if you eat you shall be as
gods, Genesis 3. 5. For he that assumeth a title unto himself, without respect
unto Christ, in whom the whole glory thereof consists such mind and disposition
prosecuted and followed to its height, according to the rise thereof, sets it
self in direct term of opposition against Christ and has the spirit of the
god of this world.
to judge of good and evil, for which all men are set up in that kind; even so
while you tell the people, that by sorrow, compunction, and anxietie of spirit,
and trouble of mind, they communicate in the sufferings of Christ; out of which
condition their comfort into flow, it is nothing else but to conclude, the
Son of God to be Belial; yea to affirm him to be Seighnirim himself; this
does he receive at your hands in your Ministries, for all your fawning upon him
with a kiss, Mat. 26. 4 9
so that if you will know how far you are from communicating in the death of
Christ, take it in this Parable, verily as far as the weakness of God is
stronger then man 1 Co^. 1 25
; country men, for we cannot but call you so, though we find your carriage to
be so far worse then these Indians, we advise you to take things together,
and what God has joined, let none dare to put asunder, Mark 10.
so that if you be ashamed of the Cross in Baptism, be ashamed of the
Baptism also, for such as the Cross is, such is the Baptism: Therefore your
Ancestors go beyond you, in that they join crossing of the air, and
sprinkling with the Element of water together: But wherever Baptism according
to the word of Christ is, there is the Cross of Christ also, Matt. 20. 2^ 23.
Luke 12. 50.
they can no more be separated then his Scepter and Kingdom can, for where the
one is, there is the other also; for as they are coincident, so are the
coaparant: So that if ever you see the Baptism of Christ, truly in use, and
exercised upon any, you do as truly see that party partaking in, and
communicating with the Cross and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to
see persons in such estate, and conclude afterward they are worthy of sensure,
yea possibly to an Athema, Maranatha, is nothing else but to conclude a ^o^all
and final falling away from the grace of God, as you Fathers have done before
you, for no grace greater then the Cross of our Lord Jesus; Behold therefore
you Despiserst^e vanity and abomination of all your Baptismes, how prejudicial
they are to the Cross of Christ, be ashamed, and return in time, or he shall be
a swift witness against you for ever, when your Repentance shall come too late;
but you think the Cross of Christ is not but in bowing the back under every
burden, and c^inging, and crouching to the lust of every man otherwise his
Shebet; That is, his Scepter, Rod* Staff, or tribe
is not fit, nor suteth it with your Regiment at all, unless so servile, that
every one may serve their lusts of him, to Wealth and Honor, Friends and
Allies, by setting bounds and limits to the holy Word of God; some in the way
of one devise, some in the way of another, and he that will not walk as a
dumb beast, worse then Balams Ass, and say nothing, or else give a sense of
the holy Writings to maintain that devised Plat-forme, if mercy must be used,
not to hang and burn, yet banishment is ready waiting for them: Therefore
shall you know, by the Rod of his power that comes out of Sion, Psalm. 110. 2.
that he will be Ruler even in the midst of his Enemies.

By us whom you style your Neighbors of Providence, you have said it,
Providence is our hold, the Neighborhood of the Samaritan we profess, and
for the lookings on, and turnings aside of your Priests and Levites, without
either Unction, or Compassion, all your slain and wounded in soul finding no
remedy, do plainly testify the nature of your travels, and Neighborhood
what it is; your speech to us in general, not using our names, when as we
know, it is particulars you aim at, gives us plainly to see the word Aelem,
the word Aelein signifies dumbness, so that the Phrase is, do ye indeed, do
dumb Justice, o Congregation? and so describes such persons what they are that
speak not a word of Righteousness in their acts and executions, which Psalm
showed unto us the spirit, practice and success of our Adversaries.
Revived and Living in you, as it stands with its Coherence, in Psalm 58.
Verse the first, etc. John Wickes. Randall Houlden. John Warner. Robert Potter.
Richard Waterman. These being the Purchasers of Shawo met the Sachim,
Myantonomy, as he sold it to 12. men, so his price was that every man should
pay 12. Fatham of Wamppum peage, that is, 144. Fatham, as our deed, which he
made unt: us being extant, witnesses to be paid unto him.
William Waddle. Samuel Gorto^. Richard Carder. John Green. Nicholas Powar.
Francis Weston. Sampson Shat^on.



This Writing sent to the Massachusetts we have related verbatim; only what is
in the margent is added for explanation, and more ease to the Reader to
understand our meaning which we sent at the time when their general Court sat;
desiring that all the Country might take notice of it, doubting they were not
well informed how the Magistrates and Ministers had carried themselves toward
us, nor upon what ground they had, or did proceed against us: But the chief of
them taking the matter into consideration* thought good to call an Assembly of
Magistrates and Ministers to consult, in way of a Synod, what course to take
uniting themselves together that what was done by any of them might be the act
of them all: and they perusing of our writings, framed out of them 26
particulars, or there abouts, which they said were blasphemous, changing of
phrases, altering of words and sense, not in any one of them taking the true
intent of our writings; but if they spoke our own words, it was to such purpose
as this; as though a man would write the words of the Psalm, and affirm (
there is no God) such words he may find written therein; but if he leave out
this, That the fool has said in his heart so, he spoils the sense, and in such
manner did they deal with our writings, and those things they were free to
divulge and make known amongst the people: These things concluded to be
heresies and blasphemies before ever they heard a word of what interpretation
we could give of our meaning therein: The Ministers did zealously preach unto
the people the great danger of such things, and the guilt such lay under that
held them, stirring the people up to labor to find such persons out and to
execute death upon them, making persons so execrable in the eyes of the people,
whom they intimated should hold such things, yea some of them naming some of us
in their Pulpits As Mr Cobbe^ who cried out against Gorton that arch heretic,
who (says he) would have al men to be preachers. But if he had turned his
speech against Moses, who wished that all the Lords people were prophets, he had
far more plainly expressed the bent of his spirit, and what manner of zeal he
had.
, that the people that had not seen us thought us to be worse by far in any
respect then those barbarous Indians are in the Country, which some of the
Ministers have rendered unto the people as Hittites, Cananites, and P^resites,
urging it as a duty unto the English to put them to death; whereupon we heard a
rumor that the Massachusetts was sending out an Army of men to cut us off: but
when they perceived we were removed further into the Country, and had left our
Lands, Houses, and Labors, where their pretended subjects, by means of whom
they sought for some temporal occasions against us, lived, they thought it not
safe to come out against us, having show of nothing against us, but only our
Religion; therefore seeing themselves disappointed in that design, wherein
their Coadjutors, had wrought to bring them in, to make an inr^ad upon us, they
then wrought by these their Agents, who traded for them with the Indians, to
insinuate themselves into two, or three Indians amongst us, to become subjects
to the government of the Massachusetts, hereby withdrawing them from their
lawful and natural Prince, Myantonomy; and the name of these his subjects,
who now became subjects to the Massachusetts, were Pumhom, and Soccononocco; and
when this was accomplished, then they again sent forth their warrants unto us,
as formerly to command our appearance at their Courts, in the Massachusetts, and
that without any consideration or delay, at the first time of their sending
unto us after our removal, the Court being then siting at Boston in the
Massachusetts.

Here follows a true Copy of the first Warrant sent unto us, by the General
Court assembled at Boston, in the Massachusetts, after our remove all unto, and
planting upon our Land at Shaw-omet, verbatim, the Warrant under their hand
being still extant.
To our Neighbors, Master Samuel Gorton, John Wickes, Randall Houlden, Robert
Potter* Francis Weston, Richard Carder, John Warner, and William Waddle.
WHereas we have received upon good ground, into our Jurisdiction, and
Protection, two Indian Sachims, whose names are Pumham, and Soccononoco, who
have lately complained unto us of some injurious and unjust dealing, toward
them by your selves; and because we desire to do equal right and justice to
all, and that all parties might be heard, we have therefore thought good to
write unto you, to give you notice hereof* that so you might make present
answer in the General Court now assembled at Boston to their complaints, who
are now here with us, to attend your coming: And because some of you have been
denied the liberty of coming amongst us, and it may be, others are not willing
in other respects, personally to appear, They having banished some of us five
or six years before, and threatening, that if some of us were amongst them we
should hardly see the place of our abode any more.
we do therefore hereby give and grant safe conduct for your free egresse and
regresse unto us, whereby there may be no just excuse, for withholding you to
give satisfaction in this particular.

Dated the 12th. 7th. Mo. 1643. Per cur. general. Incr. Nowell Secret.

This Warrant being delivered unto us, by some of their forenamed Agents, the
English, we presently returned them this answer by word of mouth, by their
Messenger, telling them, that we being so far out of their jurisdictions, could
not, neither would we acknowledge subjection unto any in the place where we
were; but only the state and government of old England, who only had right unto
us, and from whom we doubted not but in due season we should receive direction,
for the well ordering of us in all civil respects; and in the mean time we
lived peaceably together, desiring and indevouring to do wrong to no man,
neither English nor Indian, ending all our differences in a neighbourly and
loving way of Arbitrators, mutually chosen amongst us: They receiving our
answer, took it disdainfully, as their intent was to take any we sent, without
our personal appearance, being resolved what course to run concerning us;
whereupon they sent us another Writing immediately from the Court, to inform
us, that they were resolved to come down amongst us, to exercise Justice there.

Here follows a true Copy of the Writing which they sent unto us, verbatim,
being still extant.
To Samuel Gorton, John Wickes, John Warner, John Green, Randall Houlden,
Francis Weston, Robert Potter, Richard Waterman, Richard Carder, Sampson
Shotton, Nicholas Power, and William Waddle.
WHereas upon occasion of diverse injuries, offered by you to us, and the people
under our jurisdiction, both English and Indians, we have sent to you to come
to our Court, and there make answer to the particulars charged upon you, and
safe conduct to that end: To which you have returned us no other but
contemptuous and disdainful answers; and now at the last, that if we would
send to your selves, that the cause might be examined, and heard among your
own Neighbors, we should then have justice and satisfaction: We have
therefore, that our moderation and justice may appear to all men, agreed to
condescend herein to your own desire; and therefore intend shortly to send
Commissioners into your parts to lay open the charges against you, and to hear
your Reasons and Allegations, and thereupon to receive such satisfaction from
you, as shall appear in justice to be due. We give you also to understand,
that we shall send a sufficient Guard, with our Commissioners, for their
safety against any violence, or injury; for seeing you will not trust your
selves with us, upon our safe conduct, we have no reason to trust ours with
you, upon your bare courtesy: But this you may rest assured of, that if you
will make good your own offer to us, of doing us right, our people shall
return, and leave you in peace; otherwise we must right our selves, and our
people, by force of Arms.

Dated the 19th. of the 7th. M. 1643. Per cur. Increase Nowell, Secret.


The next news we had, immediately upon the receipt of this Writing, (being
about our necessary employments, in provision for our families) was thi^; that
one Captain George Cook, with a company of armed soldiers, accompanied with
many Indians, having Commission from the Massachusetts, either to bring us away
by force of Arms, or else to put us to the sword; which when we heard, we
partly believed, in regard they had given order by public Court, long before,
that no Gunpowder should be sold into those parts where we lived, but only to
such as would become subjects to them, whereby the place was not only hindered
of means of defense from a foreign Enemy, but also to furnish their families
with such provisions as the country ^ffords: we hearing of their approach,
immediately sent a Letter to those which we heard they styled Commissioners,
which proved to be the Captain, together with his officers, desiring to know
their intent, and what their Commission was to do in those parts, signifying,
that if they came to visit us in way of neighborhood, and friendship, to
clear any matter or cause, they should be welcome to us* but if otherwise, we
wished them not to set a foot upon our Lands, in any hostile way.

A true Copy of our Letter verbatim, sent to the Commissioners, as they were
upon the way coming from the Massachusetts toward Shaw-omet.
Shaw-omet the 28th. of September, 1643. To certain men styled Commissioners,
sent from the Massachusetts, now upon the way toward Shaw-omet, whose names we
know not.
WHereas you are sent by the government of the Massachusetts, under pretense of
having things ordered amongst us, in way of justice, and equity, to be
distributed unto themselves, (consisting as they say) of English and Indians,
That is, their united body which they so much delight, and glory in, consists
by their own confession of such mixture of Members, as that part are Heathens
by their own report.
and that upon this ground, that we have given them an invitation to that
purpose; Know therefore our whole intent, and meaning therein, which may not
bear any other interpretation in a rational mind; that as they invited us
unto them, as Clients to have our causes tried by them, and not as Warriors to
fight with them, so did we, and no otherwise invite them: Mistake us not
therefore, neither deceive your selves through their or your own pretenses;
for if you come to treat with us, in ways of equity and peace (together
therewith, shaking a Rod over our heads, in a Band of soldiers:) Be you
assured, we have passed our Childhood and nonnage in that point, and are under
Commission of the great God, not to be children in understanding, neither in
courage* but to quit our selves as men; we straightly charge you therefore,
hereby, that you set not a foot upon our Land in any hostile way, but upon your
peril; and that if any blood be shed, upon your own heads shall it be; and
know, that if you set an Army of men upon any part of our Land, contrary to our
just prohibition herein, we are under command, and have our Commission sealed
already, to resist you unto death; for this is the Law of our God, by whom we
stand, written in all men's hearts, that if you spread a table before us as
friends, we sit not as men invective, envious, or malcontent, not touching a
morsel, nor looking for you to point us unto our dish, but we eat with you, by
virtue of the unfeigned Law of relations, not only to satisfy our stomachs, but
to increase friendship and love, the end of feasting: So also if you visit us,
as ^ombatants, or Warriors, by the same Law of relations, we as freely and
cheerfully answer you unto death; not to kill, and take away the lives of men*
but to increase wrath and horror, the end of war, in the souls of all men
that seek after it, where the peace of our God appears not; and they that
work otherwise, and answer not unto this Law, they are not men of truth, but
base dissembling Hypocrites; shadows, and abominable Idols, set up in the
form of men.

By us owners, and Inhabitants of Shaw-omet.


This Letter being sent unto these Commissioners so styled by them, though as
yet unknown unto us, by the hand of one John Peise, who lived amongst them in
the Massachusetts, who having a Father in Law amongst us, was willing to come
and declare unto his Father, out of his tenderness toward him, of the
n^^rnesse of the soldiers approach, and as near as he could, the end of their
coming, to persuade his said Father to escape for his life.

And when the Captain, and the rest of the Commissioners had read our Letter,
they returned us this answer (by the same Messenger) namely that they desired
to speak with us, to see if they could convert us to be of their minds,
(bringing a Minister with them, to accomplish their ends in such designs) which
if they could not, then they would account of us, as men ^itted for the
slaughter, and with all convenient speed, would address themselves for our
dispatch in the ruin of us, and of our families.

Here follows a true Copy of the answer made by the Commissioners, unto our
Letter, verbatim, under their hands* which is still extant.
To our friend John Peise. Having considered of the Writing you brought to us
the last night, our thoughts concerning it, are as follows.
FIrst it is our great desire, that we might speak with them, concerning the
particulars, which we were sent to them about; This Letter does plainly
declare, the proper intent of the Massachusetts in sending out this band of
soldiers against us, namely in the falsifying of our faith to God, to subject
our selves unto them, (who never named the least word unto us, as though they
came against us in the name of the King, and State of old England, but in the
name of the government of the Massachusetts) or else to pay the tribute of our
Lives unto them, in the utter ruin of our wives and children, which these men
having received in Commission, together with instruction how to accomplish and
effect the same, from those that sent them, count it their glory to reveal, and
make manifest the same, which the Massachusetts had so long gone about to hide,
under the color of some civil miscarriage in our course of walking toward
men, in regard themselves had professed, to remove into those parts merely for
the liberty of conscience, which now they so zealously deny unto their
neighbors.
certainly persuading our selves, that we shall be able through the Lords help
to convince some of them, at least of the evil of their way, and cause them to
divert their course, that so doing they may preserve their lives and liberties,
which otherwise must necessarily lead to eternal ruin of them and theirs;
for however, through an evil spirit, that has possessed some one, or two of
them, others are drawn into such desperate evils, as is monstrous to think
of; yet having better counsel, we hope they will be brought to see their
weakness, and repent of it, that so we might return, and leave them and
theirs in peace, which is our great desire, and the contrary most grievous; but
if there be no way of turning them, we then shall look upon them, as men
prepared for slaughter, and accordingly shall address our selves, with all
convenient speed, not doubting of the Lords presence with us, being clear in
the way we are in: This being our minds, we entreat you to acquaint them with
it speedily; and if they shall, who have set their names to their book, do
come to us, and speak with us, we shall give them leave to return without
hurt.

Your Friends and Commissioners sent by the government of the Massachusets-Bay
into these parts. George Cook. Edward Johnson. Humfrey Athart^n.



The return of this answer from the Commissioners, as above, affrighted our
wives and children, forcing them to betake themselves, some into the Woods
among the Indians, suffering such hard-ship, as occasioned the death of diverse
of them, As the wife of Jo. Green, as also the wife of Robert Potter, other
women miscarrying to the loss of their children. So also Francis Weston,
through cold and hardship in prison, fell into a consumption, and in short time
after dyed of it.
and others going to take water, to depart to other plantations for succor,
the soldiers approached before they could take boat, who presented their
Muskets at women great with child, forcing them and their children to run
deep into the water, to get into the boat for fear of them The wife of S.
Gorton, and some of her children, she being ready to lie down in child bed,
was so dealt with by the soldiers, the boat hasting off for fear, if one of
her sons could not have swimmed, had been left behind her, so was glad to
betake himself to the water, though young to recover the Boat.
; we betaking our selves to one of our houses, for our defense, they presently
appeared in sight; S. Gorton being out of the house to convey his Wife (who was
great with child) toward the waterside for her escape, espied them about
Musket Shot from the house, the way which they came being full of wood; they
were not sooner discerned but he called unto them, to keep without the
distance of Musket Shot, calling to his friends in the house also to stand to
their Arms, for a band of soldiers consisting of English and Indians were in
sight; so committing his Wife to some of Providence, which came along with them
to convey her to the boat, betook himself to the house with the rest. These
our loving neighbors, inhabiting near unto us in that Town where Master
Williams sat down, being deeply affected with the proceedings of the
Massachusetts, coming down unto us along with them, to be eye and ear
witnesses how things were carried at our meeting; who instantly urged the
Captain, and officers for a parley, who denied to yield o^ grant any such
thing, but professed they would fall upon us presently, unless it might be
private betwixt themselves and us, and none else to hear it, professing to
make dispatch of us in one quarter of an hours work, They had so animated, and
encouraged the soldiers, yea, so incensed them against us, that they were loath
to entertain speech or parley, though they say in their last writing they came
to examine cases of right and wrong which could not appear without parley, nay
some of their soldiers, picked out to be at the parley, professed to some of
us, when they came to visit us as we lay in bolts and irons amongst them,
coming in the night, not daring to see us in the day, professed in these
words; When we came first to the ground we were ma^^ to ^ight, and to fall upon
you without speech or parley, but after we saw you, and heard you speak, many
of us had rather have been on your side, then for the cause we came, and the
Captain seeing some of us discouraged to fight, would not permit us to
discourse with any of Providence men, ^est they should speak on your behalf;
and this we know, that some that did signify unto them any small thing
concerning the equity of our cause the Captain seized on them for prisoners,
and kept them in bonds, during the time of their abode there, and much ado to
release them, that they had not taken them down into the Massachusetts, to
undergo further punishments.
which we understanding refused to enter into parley, unless our said
neighbors of Providence might be present to witness the passages of it; but
at the last after much affectionate urging, they yielded to a parley; and four
of Providence men to be chosen out as witnesses, which we freely consented unto
the mutual choice of them, and accordingly we met together; and we demanding
of them the end of their coming, they pretended we had done some wrong unto
certain of their subjects, as also that we held blasphemous errors, which we
must either repent of, or go down to the Massachusetts to be tried at their
Courts, or else they had Commission to put us to the sword, and to pay
themselves out of our goods, for their charges in coming thither; to which we
made answer, we could not yield thereunto, that they that were our professed
adversaries should be our Judges, we being so far out of all their
jurisdictions; but freely tendered our appeal to the honorable State of
England, in any thing that could be objected against us, which they
peremptorily refused: We then offered to put our case to arbitration, by
indifferent men, mutually chosen in the country, engaging our goods, our
lands, and our persons, to make full satisfaction for any thing that could be
brought in, or appear against us; which Propositions seemed so reasonable, not
only in the eyes of the witnesses, but also to the Captain and the rest, that
there was a truce agreed upon, until such time as a Messenger being dispatched
into the Massachusetts, might return with the answer of the Governor, and
Assistants, during the time of which truce, they broke open our houses, and our
desks, taking away our Writings, killed our Cattle for themselves and the
Indians, whom they brought with them, to live upon taking the bedding, with
other necessaries in our houses, for the soldiers to lie upon, and make use
of, not only at that time, but afterward in their trenches, during the time of
their league, assaulting some of our friends, both men, women, and children,
who only came to see us, in that sad time of extremity, hearing there was a
truce concluded for a season, endeavoring to cut them off, upon the water,
(being in a small vessel) by shooting half a score or a dozin Muskets at
them, before they could get out of their reach, which they very narrowly
escaped; during the time of this truce, the men of Providence (unknown unto
us) sent a Letter to the Government of the Massachusetts, to inform them how
things had been carried at our meeting, whereof they were eye and ear
witnesses.

A true Copy of the Letter se^^ by the men of Providence, chosen to be
witnesses* of all passages in way of our parley, to the Governor of the
Massachusetts, in way of mediation for peace, to prevent Contrymen from
spilling one an others blood, it is here set down verbatim, according to the
original Copy still extant.
Providence the 2. of the 8t. Mo. 1643. so called.
WOrthy Sir, let it not seem absurd, that we whose names are here under
written, present you with these ensuing lines; we lately hearing read a Copy
of your writing, directed to Samuel Gorton, and that company, as also some of
us being requested by our neighbor Cole (your subject) and (all requested by
Samuel Gorton, and his company, to hear and see) the truth of proceedings on
both sides, our consciences persuading us, that these desires were reasonable,
and for ought we know, might be a means (if God so wrought) to prevent the
shedding of blood; these things we say considered, may (as before) cause our
boldness. We therefore being filled with grief at such a spectacle, that the
English should shed English blood, do desire to acquaint you with what we did
observe, during that respite, that was condescended to, for a treaty;
therefore to proceed, after your Commission read, S. G. his company did desire
to know in what particulars, you did demand satisfaction; the propositions
being declared were four.

Frst to get them off the Indians ground, which your Commissioners said, they
had but intruded.

Secondly, for satisfaction about a Book, wherein your Commissioners said,
were gross things penned.

Thirdly, for satisfaction for wrong done, both to English and Indians, under
your subjection.

Fourthly, for charges, which your Commissioners said, they had caused by
forcing this Army.

Unto the first they answered, that the ground was theirs, and they were the
true owners, and that by the same right that you did claim it, it being long
before subjected to the Nanhyganset Sachim, and purchased by them of
Myantonomy, and (to take away all color of claim) of Pumham also, and they
having quiet possession of the same* until this trouble; and therefore did
conceive you had wronged them, by bringing an Army, to force them from their
ground; your Commissioners pleaded, it was your right, by the Indians
subjecting to you, and thereupon were very resolute to take them off by force;
which they questioned not but immediately to perform; the other as resolute,
considering, they said they had bought it, and vowed to stand upon their
lawful defense, though to the last drop of their blood, the resolution on both
sides being so hot, that we thought immediately the Battle would have began;
they did then appeal to the highest Court in old England, for the trial of
their right, which when your Commissioners refused, they did again offer to
put it to the trial of indifferent Judges in this Country, which were parties
of neither side, and counted it unreasonable, that force should be offered
before the cause were tried, which they judged you could not do, being parties
in the cause, and promised to stand to the determination of those Judges, to
the utmost of their estates and persons.

Secondly, being demanded by your Commissioners, satisfactioin for the Book,
wherein they declared gross things were penned, they answered, that they would
put it, as the former, to be judged by indifferent Judges, both the terms, and
satisfaction.

To the third, for satisfaction for wrong done, both to Indians and English;
they answered, they would give full satisfaction.

Concerning the fourth, wherein was great expense and charges required; they
answered likewise, as in the former, that they would pay and give to the utmost
satisfaction, if the Arbitrators judged, that they were the cause of raising
it, and would as fully and freely submit* as to eat and drink: These being in
short the heads, we leave the more ample relation to your Commissioners; Sir so
fair Propositions offered, we hope will work your affections to the utmost
end, of preventing blood-spilling: Nay, we hope, if it be but upon the point of
honor, rather that you will be losers, then take the utmost; the case we
cannot but ^e sadly affected with, knowing it will be dishonorable to the
Lord, if those who profess themselves Christians, should not take the best
means for peace; we hope you will not in the least measure take it unkindly for
any hint unto you; neither that you will despise Abigals counsel, for Nabals
churlishness; let the Lord smite them, and his hand be upon them, if they
sin against him; If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him,
but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2. 25.
Now their Proposition is for man to judge, as that first part of the alleged
Scripture does declare; some of their wives and children (if ^ mornfull
Spectacle might move you) do beg for a serious consideration of their
husbands, and fathers Propositions; which if not hearkened unto, were like in
man's eye to be left miserable; we would they were able to write their own
grief, which now in pity we have respect unto: Oh, how grievous would it be
(we hope to you) if one man should be slain* considering the greatest Monarch
in the world cannot make a man; especially grievous, seeing they offer terms
of peace: Sir, we know not how to end, nor what to say, we must abruptly
leave desiring your wisdoms to cover on^ defects with love, and answer for us,
if any shall challenge us, 2 Timothy 2. 7.

Chad. Brown. Thomas Olney. William Field, William Wickenden.



Here follows a true Copy of a Letter written by the Governor of the
Massachusetts, in answer to the men of Providence, of their Letter written unto
him, in way of mediation for peace, which is here set down verbatim, the
Letter being extant under his own hand.
Neighbors of Providence,
I Have received a Letter subscribed by four of you, whom I hear are not of the
confederacy with Gorton, Holden, and the rest of that company, wherein as
Mediators you intercede between them and us, in the differences now between us;
the return of the Messenger is so hasty, that I cannot make a full answer to
every thing you have mentioned in your Letter; only you may rest satisfied with
this, that the Commission, and instructions given to the Commissioners now at
Providence, was not rashly and inconsiderately drawn up; but by the mature
advise of the wisest and godliest amongst us* assembled in a general Court,
which I have not power to reverse or alter; and for the justness of the Courts
proceedings therein, you may do well to take further notice, that besides the
Title of Land, between the Indians, and the English there, there are twelve of
the English, that have subscribed their names, to horrible and detestable
blasphemies, against God, and all Magistracy, who are rather to be judged as
Blasphemers* (especially if they persist therein) rather then that they should
delude us, by winning time, under the pretense of Arbitration; I doubtnot, but
you well know, that we have often sent to them, to plead their title to the
Land, and to make answer for their Blasphemies, and that we lately sent them
safe Conducts for their coming, and returning, Which was only words expressed
in their paper formerly sent unto us*
for all which we have received from them, nothing but scorns, contempt, and
revilings in the worst expressions they could cast them into; so that the
promise of protection made by us, to Pumham, etc. the vindication of Gods
honor, and many reasons concerning our safety, have necessarily put us upon
this course with them; notwithstanding which, if any of them will in peaceable
manner, repair unto us, under the conduct of our Commissioners, no violence
shall be offered to them, by our soldiers there* and our justice here; but if
they refuse, and offer violence* let the hurt they receive be upon their own
heads; further (which I had forgotten) where you say their offer of arbitration
is fair, you may do well to be better informed, and to know that the botome
of it is easily sounded, which is to win time, to discourage the Indians,
Fearing lest the true and natural Prince of these their Indian subjects should
show them their folly in this their subjection, and to win them again unto
himself, and thereby leave them without this color and pretense to work out
their own ends upon us.
under our subjection, and to give them time, and opportunity, to stir up (as
much as in them lies) the other Indians against Behold here their guilt, in
that they had unjustly drawn by insinuation the Indians from their lawful
Prince, as also that subtle wrong they did to us, suggesting secretly unto the
people, as though there were fear of some combination between the Indians and
us, to stir up soldiers by that means to come out against us.
us; for to whom would they refer their matters? to your selves whom we know
not, but have just cause to fear, in respect of your vicinitie unto them, and
your now mediation for them; and to those of Road-Iland, diverse of whom we know
too well, to refer any matters unto; Behold how these men can evade all fair
Propositions to prosecute, and bring forth their own spirit; yea, even to the
death of their country men, if it be but by casting aspersions upon those that
hold not just length and breadth in religion with them.
the best office you can perform unto them, is to persuade them to attend
their own safety, by yielding to the lawful demand of our Commissioners, from
which as I said before I cannot vary. So I rest

Your loving Neighbor, Io: Winthrope.
Boston 8. 3, 1643.

Now after the enterchange of these Letters, between the men of Providence, and
the Governor of the Massachusetts, which we at the present were ignorant of,
when certain days were expired, the Messengers sent by the Commissioners into
the Massachusetts to acquaint them with our Propositions, returned, which we
perceived by their shooting off of Guns at his coming: And the first thing we
discerned in them, they sent out and gathered all our Cattle together, and
took them into their own custody, sending two soldiers unto us to give us
notice, that the time of truce was expired, and that our Propositions could in
no cause be accepted or embraced by the Massachusetts* we then desiring to
speak with the Captain and the officers, they utterly denied to have any
speech with us; but immediately entrenched themselves, and the same day gave
fire upon us; whereupon to show our allegiance to the State of old England, we
hung out the English colors, which they perceiving shot the more violently
against us* shooting the colors many times, through and through: Now when the
Messenger from the Massachusetts returned, coming through the Town of
Providence* two of the men of Providence came along to Shaw-omet, to see how
things were carried, and what the news was at his return; and however the
Commissioners would not speak with us; yet the men of Providence went unto
them, and had speech with them* whom they warned to come no more unto us, upon
their peril, for they were resolved of their course; therefore who ever came
near unto us, they would take them for their enemies: For when the Governor
and Assistants of the Massachusetts perceived that the Commissioners had
declared their errand unto us in plainer terms then, then they intended it
should have been; they thought to make the house we were in our grave, was the
best way to vindicate the moderation of their equal Justice toward us, as
plainly appeared by their practice, and course held concerning us.

Here follows a true Copy of the testimony of the two men of PROVIDENCE who
came to SHAVV-OMET at the return of the Messenger out of the MASSACHUSETTS
verbatim, extant under their own hands.
WE testify that upon the return of the Answer, from the Bay, the Captain
refused the former offer of appeal to England, or Arbitration in the Country,
with the said Samuel Gorton and his company, but immediately dissolved the
truce, and the same day proceeded to give fire upon them.

Richard Scot William Harrisse.


And so continued for diverse days together in their fierce assalt, the Sabbath
approaching, we imagining they would not have continued their assalt upon that
day, and were very confident that they would go about no such work upon the
night before the Sabbath; being we knew well that they held the Sabbath begins
in the evening going before, and that they had no less ground for it then
Master Cottons judgment; as also that it was one of their laws that the breach
of the Sabbath is to be punished with death. Now what they may judge the
killing of their Countrymen causlesly upon that day is, whether to keep or
break the Sabbath, we leave to all men to judge.

But contrary to our expectation, early in the morning, having prepared their
fireworks, they attempted to burn the house wherein we were, seconding their
fire with the discharge of above four hundred shot against us, according to the
Soldiers account, who afterward told us how many shots they had made that
morning, according to the emptying of their band^l^ers; all which time they
told us Captain Cook stood behind such a great white oaktree, whom we heard
encouraging his soldiers to come on with courage, thinking himself in safety,
and so he was, for we discharged not a Gun that morning, nor of all the time of
their siege, but onlytwo in the nighttime at random, to scar them from working
their trenches near unto us; for we had concluded to take away the lives of
none of our Countrymen, unless they offered to enter violently upon us, which
we only ^itted our selves to prevent such assalt, or else that we were forced
out upon them by the firing of our house; only we perceived our words to be
shot good enough to keep them aloof. For we called cheerfully upon the Captain
to come on and bring up his men; for he should find us very cheerful spirits
to deal with, and that we would make him as good a Sabbath days breakfast as
ever he had in his life; our care was only to quench the fire which they had
laid to the wall before we were aware; But we saw the wind took the flame so
from the wall that it kindled not upon the house* when the day began to break
Captain Cook called to the soldiers to go on with a fresh assalt; but we heard
some of his Soldiers deny to come on again, being the fire took not; and the
day beginning to be light they thought we might shoot from the house at some
certainty; we called on the Captain to animate his soldiers, for we understood
(we told him) his charret wheels began to drive very heavy, and were in danger
to fall off, and that was all the violence we offered to our Countrymen in this
their so eager an assalt, though we heard the Captain in the beginning of it,
give strict charge to the soldiers that they should not let one escape alive,
but to put all to the sword, thinking the fire would have taken, and so we have
been a prey for them: But however we discharged not a piece against them, being
loath to spill the blood of our Countrymen, though to the hazard of our own
lives, yet were we well provided and could easily have done them much hurt;
only stood upon our defense so, as they durst not make entry upon us:
afterwhich assalt they sent back into the Massachusetts for more aid: But in the
mean time another parley was procured wherein we consented to go down into the
Massachusetts upon Composition to prevent the spilling of blood, which we could
no longer refrain in the defense of our selves, they having approached so near
unto us; The condition whereof was this, that we should go along with them, as
free men, and neighbors, as though such passages had never been betwixt us,
which the Captain and his Company consenting unto, beat up the Drum, and
gathered his soldiers together, seeming joyful that things were so concluded;
whereupon the Captain desired to see our house, which request we lovingly
embraced, thinking he intended to refresh him self and his soldiers with such
provisions as we had, before we set upon our journey toward the Massachusetts;
but no sooner was he come into the house, but contrary to the Articles of out
agreement, he seized upon our Arms, using us as captives, and presently
carried us away, not suffering us to dispose of any of our goods, that were in
or about our houses, having not so much as a servant left behind, and so left
them all as pillage to the Indians, Which they had promised to do as they came
on the way toward us to encourage the Indians to come with them against us, in
the hearing of some of our friends*
the Captain giving charge unto the soldiers, that if any of us spoke a word
in our journey, to give any of them discontent, that they should presently
knock us down, and if they saw any of us step aside, out of the place designed
unto us, that they should run us through, and he would bear them out, in that
their action: And withal they drove away our cattle into the Massachusetts,
dividing and disposing of them amongst themselves; only some of them they had
disposed of to such of their subjects, as lived near unto us, who had been
instruments and assistants unto them, to bring about and effect this work. The
number of ^attle which they took from us was foure-score head, or thereabouts,
besides Swine and Goats, which they, and the Indians, lived upon during the
time of their siege, also breaking violently into our houses, taking away our
corn with other provisions provided for our Families to live upon.

Here follows an other Testimony, of diverse of the men of Providence, given
under their hands, set down here verbatim, for the clearing of these matters,
which writing is extant.
Providence this present January the 30. th. 1644.
We whose names are here under written, Inhabitants of the town of Providence
in the Nanhyganset- Bay in New England, being requested by Samuel Gorton,
Randal Houlden* John Wickes, and John Warner, with diverse others of our
country men, to testify what we know concerning their late sufferings, from
the Bay of the Massachusetts, we take our selves bound in conscience, to answer
their request, and in a word of truth, impartially to witness.

FIrst, that our* Contrymen aforesaid, were peaceably possessed of a
Plantation, at Shaw-omet, amongst the Natives, some ten or a dozen miles beyond
this Town of Providence.

Secondly, that the Bay of Massachusetts, sent up through this Town of
Providence, one Captain Cook, and his company, in warlike manner, who actually
assaulted, and besieged our foresaid Contrymen, who stood upon their own
defense.

Thirdly, that the wives and children, of our foresaid Contrymen upon these
hostile courses were affrighted and scattered in great extremities, and diverse
since are dead.

Fourthly, the said Captain Cook and his company, carried captive our
foresaid Contrymen through this Town of Providence, to the Bay of
Massachusetts.

Fifthly, Their goods, cattle, houses, and plantations were seized upon, by the
foresaid Captain, and his company; their cattle were part killed by the
soldiers, and the rest by Agents from the Bay disposed of, and driven away to
the said Bay of Massachusetts.

Richard Scot. William Harris. William Field. Stutley Wastcote. Hugh Bewit.
Thomas Harris. William Barrowes. Joshua Winssor. John Field. Thomas Angel.
William Reighnalds. Adam Goodwin.


Now as we passed along on the way to the Massachusetts, which was about
threescore, or threescore and ten miles, in the common account of men, from
our Plantation at Shawomet, after they were come into the Towns within their
own jurisdictions, in some Towns their Minister which the soldiers brought
along with them against us, gathered the people together, in the open street
went to prayers, that the people might take notice, what they had done, was
done in a holy manner, and in the name of the Lord; and when they came to
Dorchester, there being many people gathered together, with diverse of their
Ministers, as Master Cotton, and Master Mather, etc. there they placed us at
their pleasure, as they thought fit to have us stand; and made vollies of shot
over our heads in sign of victory, [z] and when we were come to Boston, x A
great triumph for a whole country, to carry away eleven men (and that upon
fair composition also, if they had kept touch with us; for one of us, that is
Sampson Shotton, was dead before by hardship, which some of their spirit had
put him upon) and but ten of us that handled arms.
and brought before the Governors door, the soldiers placing themselves and
us, as they thought fit, and orderly; the Governor coming forth, walking
throughout, all the company of soldiers blessed them; the word which he used
as he still passed along was this, God bless you, and prosper you: God bless
and prosper you; We thought he did it to imitate Melchisedeck, coming out to
bless Abraham, when he came from the slaughter of the Kings, in the rescue of
Lot, he did it so gravelyand solemnly, only the Captain wanted the spirit of
Abraham for all his good success, yet we thought he was not incapable to
communicate, in that prayer or blessing of the Governor; for his errand to us
was, to utter and exerciss the spirit of the government in his Commission made
manifest*
when this was done, we were brought into the Governors Hall, before the
Governor, Mr. John Winthrope, unto whom we complained, how the Captain had used
us, contrary to our Articles; but he told us, what ever the Captain might
express unto us, his intent was to have us as captives, and their captives now
we were; and unto the common Goal we must go, without either Bail or
Mainprize, where we continued until the Court sat, and the Country coming
in on every side, to understand the cause, why they had so proceeded against
us; and they laboring to give the country satisfaction, rehearsed in the ears
of the people, diverse gross opinions, which they had compiled together, out of
our writing, which we abhorred: As that we should deny the humane nature of
Christ, which they gathered from this, that we professed his death to be
effectual to the Fathers, before the time of his incarnation in the womb of
the Virgin; also that we denied all the Churches of Jesus Christ, because we
could not join with them in that way of Church order which they had
established amongst them; Again, that we denied all the holy Ordinances of
Christ, because we could not join with them in their way of administration; as
also, that we denied all civil Magistracy, because we could not yield to
their authority, to be exercised in those parts where we lived, (that place
being above four and twenty miles out of their bounds) which we should not
once have questioned, if we had been within the compass of their
jurisdictions, as it well appeared by our carriage, all the time we were
amongst them, as also by our sundry appeals unto this state, which have been
denied unto us; yea, and since that great favor granted, and given unto that
people of Providence plantations, in a late Charter of civil government, from
this State, our humble respects unto al such authority, has been made manifest
to all men: not only in our unanimous and joyful embracing of it, but also
some of us by the general vote of the whole Colonie, have been chosen into the
place of Judicature, for the orderly execution of the authority of the Charter;
yea, some of us that are now here present, at the publication hereof: Now when
we desired liberty to speak in the Court, to answer to such things as were
alleged, and read in the ears of the people, such as is above, with diverse
more to the number of about six and twenty, all drawn from our writing formerly
mentioned in this Treatise, we denied that we either held, or had writ any such
thing* and desired our writing might be read in open Court, that it might
appear what was in it, which was denied unto us; only their charges must
appear, by the affirmation of the Bench; for no other man nor woman appeared
to testify a word against us; and when we continued to deny the constructions
they had given of our writings, and abstracted from them, denying them to be
ours, we were commanded silence; Master Thomas Dudley, one of the Bench,
standing up, charging us to be silent, and told us if we were not, they would
lay irons upon our legs, and upon our hands, and also upon our necks; whereupon
the Court for that time was dissolved, no man objecting against us in the
least, in any wrong or injury betwixt man and man; neither at that time, nor in
any time of all our trial amongst them. After which they brought us forth
diverse times before their Court, which then sat more privately in a Chamber,
the door being kept very carefully, that none should enter, but only whom they
thought fit to permit, their Court then consisting of about a dozin
Magistrates, and about forty Deputies chosen out of several Towns, as were
thought fit, and many of their Ministers usually present with them to assist in
the work; they then questioned, and examined us apart* to the uttermost they
could, to get some matter against us from our own mouths, and also usually
sending their Agents as Elders, Old M. Ward once Lecturer at S. Michael in
Corne-hill, London, came to the prison window, and called to him one of our
society, namely Richard Carder who had once lived near together in Essex, Mr*
Ward seemed to be much affected, being a man knows how to put himself into
passion, desired the said Richard, that if he had done or said any thing that
he could with good conscience renounce, he desired him to recant it, and he
hoped the Cour would be very merciful* and says he, it shall be no
disparagement unto you, for here is our Reverend Elder, Mr. Cotton who
ordinarily preaches that publicly one year, that the next year he publicly
repent* of, and shows himself very sorrowful for it to the Congregation, so
that (says he) it will be no disgrace for you to recant in such a case.
and Members of their Churches, Usually coming to us into the prison, many of
them together; As also, when we were put apart in the time of our examination,
one of the Members of the Church of Boston, telling some of us in his own
house, that he was persuaded, that we did not worship the true God; for, says
he then, he would not have permitted you to be brought down from your own
Plantation amongst us; for (says he) I am persuaded, that our Churches shall
not be overcome by any people that should come out against them; his wife
standing by, being an ingenuous woman, made answer to our content, before we
could speak; Husband (says she) pray do not b^ast before the victory be
known, it may be the Battle is not yet ended.
unto us in prison, frequently putting questions unto us to get occasion
against us; thus continuing for the space of two or three weeks together,
during which time Master Wilson ordinarily in his Sermons, pressed the
Magistrates and the people to take away our lives, from that text of the King
of Israel letting Benhadad go, applying it unto them; that if they let us
escape with life, their life should then go for our life, and their people for
our people, urging them from that of Samuel and Agag, to hew and cut us in
pieces; Master Cotton also in his Sermons, encouraged the people in the
lawfulness of their dealings with us, from that in the Revelations, where it
is said, the Kingdoms of this world are the Kingdoms of the Lord, and his
Christ's, whence he observed, that they being the Kingdom of Christ, they were
bound to go out against all people, to subdue all such unto themselves as are
weaker then they; otherwise they might stay at home within themselves, and
serve God with all their hearts; but they could not serve him with all their
might, unless they went out to subdue others, and so would be guilty of the
breach of that command, viz. Thou shall serve the Lord thy God with all thy
strength. Now after our many consultations, and debating of matters with the
Magistrates and Ministers, not only in the Court, sometimes one of us answering
and declaring of his mind, only in matters of Religion a whole day together,
yea part by Candlelight, besides all their more private conferences in the
prison, and at other houses, where we were put apart, in custody one from an
another in the time of our examination: at the last the Court sent for S.
Gorton, out of prison, to appear before them; and when he came before them,
the Governor told him, he heard there was exception taken, that there should
be a rumor, that it was for some civil things they had so proceeded against
us, and yet no man appeared to object the least against us, in any civil
respect; unto which the Governor himself gave answer (not expecting an
answer from Gorton) that they had set their subjects the Indians in their own
Land, and that was all they looked after in that respect, but they never
questioned in public, whether it was right or wrong, to take it from us, only
had privately called one of us, which was one of the Interpreters, at the
buying of it, and the Indians their subjects together, to see what could be
said in it, and found the Indians by their own confession, to make things so
clear on our behalf, that they thought it not fit to bring it into public
scanning of the matter.

The Governor then told Gorton, he was now to answer some things that should
be propounded unto him upon his life, for it was upon his life that now he was
to answer; unto which Gorton made answer, that he was to show unto them all
dutiful subjection that might be, being under the government of their
jurisdiction, as he had done since his coming amongst them, to give them their
due honor and respect to the utmost, which he could not do but as he looked
upon them with relation unto the State of old England; by virtue of which
power, they sat there, as executioners of justice, unless he looked at them,
and carried himself toward them, as they had respect unto that State, (from
whom what power they had was derived) else he could not give them their due
honor and respect; for it could no way appear to be such, but as it was
derived from that noble State of old England; and therefore, however he had
according to what they had demanded, for the clearing of any thing, been free
to answer unto them: So now if it was his life that they would now put him
upon, he did as freely, and in the presence of them all, appeal to the State
of old England for his trial in that point, by virtue of which State only he
conceived they sat there as Ministers of justice; and therefore might not deny
unto him his just appeal (understanding that the denial of an appeal, must
either presuppose a superiority in them that deny it, or an equality at the
least, with the ^tate appealed unto) unto which the Governor made answer* as
also Master John Indicote, deputy Governor, and bad Gorton never dream, or
think of any such thing, for no appeal should be granted unto him.

Now the Ministers and Magistrates, having weighed better our Writings, our
Examinations in Court, answers to questions more privately, with any thing,
spoken in the prison amongst our selves, which daily ear was lent unto, or our
carriage and demeanure in any respect; they had now summed up, and drawn all
into four questions, which were now to be answered in case of life and death.

The Questions were these that here follow, not a word varying in any one of
them.
1. Q. Whether the Fathers, who dyed before Christ was born of the Virgin Mary,
were justified and saved only by the blood which he shed, and the death which
he suffered after his incarnation. 2. Q. Whether the only price of our
Redemption, were not the death of Christ upon the Cross, with the rest of his
sufferings, and obediences in the time of his life here after he was borne of
the Virgin Mary. 3. Q. Who is that God whom he thinks we serve. 4. Q. What he
means, when he says, We worship the Star of our God Remphan, Chion, Molech.
To these four questions the Court told Gorton he must answer speedily upon
life and death, and that under his hand writing; he told them he was not
willing to answer in any thing but as before he had done; they told him he must
give in speedy answer under his hand writing; he asked what time he must have
for the answer of them; they told him a quarter of an hour; he told them he
could answer them in so short a time, but he knew not whether it could give
them satisfaction; for it was as much as for a man to describe Jesus Christ
what he is, and the way of Autichrist also, which might be done in few words;
but not to be clear to every man; for a man may describe the whole world in
these words; in the beginning God created heaven and earth, and the earth was
without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep, and the
spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters; all the whole work of
creation is in this mass or heap; but to set out the glory and beauty that
comes out of this, needs many Phrases to express it; even so it is in the
description of the Son of God, Jesus Christ, borne of the Virgin, it may be
done in few words; but to lay out the nature, benefit, and glory of it, no
smalspeech, or time can serve to express: and therefore desired in word (as
before he had manifested his mind unto them) so he might give that present
answer which God gave unto him in this point also; but they told him it must be
done in writing, and so commanded the Go^ler to convey him to an other room to
dispatch the same; but as he was going out from them, they called unto him, and
told him he should have the liberty of half an hours time to perform i^ in;
when he was come into an other room, pen, ink and paper being brought unto
him, as he was going to write, word was sent from the Court, that if it was
brought in, on the second day in the morning, it should suffice, for the Court
considering of it, that many of them had far home, and it being the day of
Preparation for the Sabbath (for it was now Saturday in the afternoon) and they
thought not fit to sit any longer; so Gorton was conveyed again into the
Prison to the rest of his friends; who continued cheerfully together, all the
Sabbath day, as they had done before in the Prison; only some part of those
days, they brought us forth unto their Congregations, to hear their Sermons,
of occido and occidio, which was meant not to be digested, but only by the heart
or stomach of an Ostrich: But upon the Monday morning, Gorton took pen and
ink, and writ in answer to every one of the four questions given unto him, as
here follows.

This is a true Copy of answers, given to the Court of the Massachusetts to the
four questions, which they required to be answered in writing upon life, and
death, in case of Blasphemy, which we were charged with, and sentence so far
passed, as to take away our lives by the sword, in case of not disclayming of
our Religion, or erroneous opinions, as they were pleased to call them; the
answers are truly set down, verbatim.
TO the first question we answer affirmatively (only assuming the l^berty of
our explanation) namely, The Fathers who dyed before Christ was borne of the
Virgin Mary, were justified and saved, only by the blood which he shed, and the
death which he suffered, Note, that in this answer there is a word added to
their question, which was done of purpose (knowing how they looked) to regulate
them, it if were possible, as it was declared unto them, in the first reading
of the answer, how they fell short in it, which they yielded unto; they say,
the death which he suffered (after) his incarnation, the answer says (In) and
after his incarnation. For to speak of the sufferings of Christ, after his
incarnation, without respect unto that which was before, we may as well spe^ke
of his sufferings before his incarnation, without respect to that which is
after; for the Cross of Christ is not, but with respect, both to humane nature
and divine, and we cannot know the two natures in Christ, what they are
distinctly in themselves, to give each its proper due, and what they are
jointly united in one, no otherwise, but as they are considered in the very act
of Incarnation, in which appears the Sufferer, and that which is suffered, the
Sufferer is the Son of God made man, the creator becoms a creature; the thing
suffered, is to be made a curse, that is to be made such a thing as is in it
self, by nature accursed, and so Christ* was made a curse* the sufferings of
Christ then, and the shedding of his blood (as he is known after the spirit)
are properly in that one act of his incarnation, which is the proper act of the
humiliation of the Son of God, so that to spe^k of his sufferings after ^is
incarnation, you may as well speak of his sufferings before his incarnation,
for it is no suffering of Christ, but with respect, both to the one, and the
other, and only in the act of incarnation they are made one; and to speak of
the sufferings of Christ visibly, in his humane nature, in the days of Herod,
to be the proper sufferings of the Son of God, any further, but as a true
doctrine (as in all other holy Writ) to teach what that suffering is, in the
act of his incarnation, you may as well speak of sufferings of Christ
invisibly, before that act of his incarnation, for the Cross of Christ is not,
but with respect, both to divine and humane nature; nor can it be said to be in
time, no more then it may be said to be before al time; for the humiliation of
the Son of God, admits not of any bounds or limi^s, for then were it not of
infinite value; and if not of infinite value and virtue, then not the humiliation
of the Son of God, nor could it be said to be the blood of God, as the Apostle
calls it; so that as he himself is not, but as the first and the last become
one, even so his sufferings are not, but in that one act, of the curse and
blessing, being made one. This being premised which* was signified unto them by
word of mouth, the answer runs clear, to understand Christ according to the
spirit, otherwise a man may carnalize the answer unto himself as he knows
Christ after the flesh, as the world does the whole word of God, so also the
seed of Abraham, is to be understood as Abraham himself is; Abraham is the
Father of Christ, as in the Genealogy it appears; so says David in the person
of Christ, our Fathers trusted in thee, meaning Abraham for one, and Christ
also is the Father of Abraham, therefore he is called the everlasting father;
and Christ himself says, before Abraham was I am, such also is the seed of
Abraham, it produces and brings forth the Son of God, and the Son of God
produces and brings forth it; so is it with the Virgin, she is the mother that
gives form, and being to Jesus Christ, he also gives form and being unto her;
therefore she calls him her Lord and Savior; the woman brings forth the man, a
Virgin conceives and bears a Son; the man brings forth the woman, made of a
rib, out of his innocent side; so that the man is not without the woman, nor
the woman without the man in the Lord; these two being separated, the Contract
is broken, the Devorce is made, and not being rightly united, the word is
adulterated, we are in our sin. The mystery of this answer then lies in this,
(which Pharasies understand not, if Christ be the Virgin Mary's Son, conceived
in her womb, and born of her, how does the Virgin Mary in* spirit call him her
Lord God, and Savior?
in and after his Incarnation (that is on this wise; that the guilt and stain
of man is not, but with respect unto the holy word of God, the disobedience
whereof, by eating the forbidden fruit, breeds an infinite distance, between God
and his own work, without the least defect or blame to be found or imputed
unto the Word of God, but the sole defect and blame is in the creature, even in
man himself, yet could he in no case be so miserable, but with respect unto
the holy Word; even so the justification and salvation of the Fathers, was by
the holy word of God, not but with respect and relation unto the seed of
Abraham, and the Son of David, ( conceived and borne of the Virgin Mary) in
whom they were justified and saved, and yet no virtue nor power, arising out of
any thing that is humane; m^n therefore is a sinner of infinite guilt, with
respect unto that word, which was before all time, and no fault to be found in
the Word at all; the word of God is a Savior of infinite value, with respect
unto the seed of the Virgin Mary, borne, suffering, dying, and rising again in
the fullness of time, and yet no virtue in that seed at all, unto whom all the
Prophets bear witness, having an eye unto him in all their holy Writings, and
the faith of the Fathers comprehending Christ, both in the one, and in the
other respect, were justified and saved by him alone, his death being real and
actual unto faith, God having the same coexistance with the creature in all
ages, though the creature cannot have the same with him but in time.

To the second Question depending upon, or rather involved in the former we
answer.

Man's rejection of the Word of God, being his sin and separation from God, is
the only forfeiture of himself, which could not be, but with respect unto the
word of eternity; even so Gods Righteousness revealed by taking man into
unity with himself, is the only price of our Redemption, with respect unto
the death of Christ upon the Cross, with the rest of his sufferings, and
obedience, from the time of his Incarnation, in the womb of the Virgin Mary, to
his ascension into Heaven, without which there is no price of our Redemption.

To the third Question, who we think that God is, that men serve, that are not
of the faith above said: we answer that all men's hearts are awed (by the true
God) to bow in worship: therefore when the Apostle looking upon the inscription
upon the Altar at Athens, it is said, he beheld their devotion (or as the word
is) the God which they worshipped, though ignorantly, yet it was he only that
he declared unto them: So the Apostle James, thou beleevest, that there is one
God, thou do well, the Devils also believe and tremble.

The fourth Question therefore is the explanation of the third, namely what we
mean by Molech, and the Star of that God Remphan: to which we answer, that the
Scripture alluded unto, * makes difference between those Gainsayers of the
Act. 7. 43.
Fathers which fell in the Wilderness, and those of the true seed, that gave
faithful Testimony unto the Oracle of God; the Rebels of the sons of Levy,
would not take up, nor bear the Ark of God, as their duty was, nor give the
light and luster of a Star in the Tabernacle, when it was pitched ( for the
seven Stars are the seven Angels:) But as they had the power of a worldly
Ruler, or Governor to defend them in their work, and to subdue all that were
not of their mind under them: therefore they took up the Tabernacle of Molech,
or bore the Booth of the King, and gave the light of Remphan (alluding unto
Rapha, who in David's days had four sons, were mighty Giants, warring only by
the strength of the Arm of flesh) so that they would not give Testimony unto
the holy way of God; but as they had a King set over them, besides Moses, to
defend them, when as a greater then Moses was there: And in this they turned
back in their hearts, unto Egypt, looking unto the way of Pharaoh, that would
subdue all that were not of his own way, and be a defense unto his wise men in
what ever they wrought; but the faithful seed of Abraham, had the Tabernacle
of witness, or witnessed unto the Tabernacle, even in the Wilderness, where
there was no worldly Governor to defend them, but all came out against them,
Ammon and Amaleck, Balack, Ogg, and Sihon, and the rest; in the which condition
Stephen perceived himself, when he witnessed unto the word of truth, in
alleging that place of the Prophet *. Amos 5. 26.


Samuel Gorton.

Upon the finishing of these answers on the Monday morning, the Court sent for
S. Gorton to come before them; and when he was come, the Governor asked him,
whether he had brought in his answer to the questions propounded unto him (at
their last sitting) in writing, he answered he had brought them; then the
Governor asked him, whether he had put his hand unto them, he answered he had
not, not thinking it would be required, else he had done it; the Governor
called for pen and ink, and caused him to put his hand unto them, and then
demanded them of him, Gorton desired he might have liberty* to read them first
in the Court, that he might pronounce the Phrases and words according to the
true meaning, and intent, having had experience of wrong done, in reading (in
way of pronunciation of things not plainly) before, to the giving of true
intelligence to the hearers, when the answers were read in the audience of the
Court, the Court paused, and no man said any thing unto them, only bade Gorton
withdraw, which being done, they hade some consulta^ion among themselves, and
shortly after called for Gorton to be brought in again: Master Saltingstone
found fault, that it was written in the answer, what is the Star of ( that) God
Remphan, whereas it was in the writing ( your, God Remphan) Gorton answered,
the Phrase was only changed for modesty; for indeed (says he) it is the phrase
of the Apostle, your God Remphan, and so it rested to clear that scruple. The
Governor told Gorton, that they were one with him, in those answers; for they
held as he did; Gorton answered he was very glad of it, for he loved not
differences and divisions amongst men: the Governor then asked him whether he
would retract the writing that was formerly written unto them; Gorton answered,
that nothing was written before, but would suit and agree, with these answers;
so that if there was cause to retract one, there was cause to retract all; the
Governor said, no these answers they could agree with him in; but not in the
former writing; whereupon Master Dudley stood up, seeming to be much moved, and
said he would never consent to it whilst he lived, that they were one with him
in those answers; the Governor then asked Gorton what Faith was: to which he
answered, that was nothing that concerned what they had formerly written, and
that he and the rest had only undertaken to answer to any thing that was in
their writing: the Governor told him, he was bound, and ought to be ready to
give an answer to any that should ask him a question of the hope that is in
him; Gorton made answer, that the difinition which the Apostle gives of faith,
was sufficient, as he thought to give any man satisfaction; he asked him what
that was, he told him it was this; that faith is the hypostasis or subsistence
of things that are hoped for, and the evidence (or argument demonstrative) of
things that are not seen, nor demonstrated at all; the Governor told him that
was true, but he could say more of faith then so; Gorton told him, it gave him
satisfaction, and being an other point then they had had to deal about, since
their coming amongst them, and being no question produced from former
writings, desired to be spared from any further answer then the plain words of
the Apostle; whereupon Master Broadstreet made answer, that he thought it was
not fit to put him upon any new questions, unless he were free to speak unto
them, and so they dismissed him from the Court to the Prison again.

Shortly after this, there was a day appointed, wherein we were to receive our
sentence from the Court, which was to be given in the afternoon, and in the
forenoon Master Cotton preached, having gathered up the minds of the people, in
what they had observed, and perceiving the people took notice, that in what we
dissented from them, was out of tenderness of conscience, and were ready to
render a reason and ground for what we held and practiced, and diverse such like
things; to which he answered, that if we had done i^ out of ignorance, then
there had been hopes of regaining us* but if out of tendern^sse of conscience,
and able to render reason for what we did ( and other things of like nature)
then were we ripened for death, urging them to agree together, and consent in
one thing, that so it might be, else would not the Angels carry their souls to
heaven; for he was then speaking of the office of the Angels in that point; and
when by all their examinations in Court, Inturgatories put upon us in Prison,
and public preaching, they could find nothing against us, for the
transgressing of any of their Laws, they then proceeded to cast a lot for our
lives, putting it to the major vote of the Court, whether we should live or
die, which was so ordered by the providence of God, that the number of two
votes carried it on our side; and whereas both by Law, Equity, and act of
Providence, they ought to have set us forthwith at liberty, yet notwithstanding
they proceeded further to censure; namely, confined us to several Towns, and
to wear bolts and irons, and to work for our livings, though it was i^ the
extremity of winter, and not to speak of any of those things which they had
dealt with us about, and all this during the pleasure of the Court, and that
upon pain of death.

Here follows a true Copy of the censure, and of the charg as it was given
unto us in writing by the Court, being extant, and here set down verbatim, as
it was given to Samuel Gorton, the rest being the same, but only the change of
the names.
For Samuel Gorton.
IT is ordered that Samuel Gorton shall be confined to Charlstowne, there to be
set on work, and to wear such bolts or irons, as may hinder his escape, and so
to continue during the pleasure of the Court; provided, that if he shall break
his said confinement, or shall in the mean time, either by speech or writing,
publish, declare, or maintain any of the blasphemous or abominable heresies,
wherewith he has been charged by the general Court, contained in either of
the two Whereas they name two books written unto them, there was an other
writing sent unto them by us, but it was no ground of any of their proceedings
against us, therefore we thought it not ^it to bring it into this treatise; for
they had concluded upon, what they would do unto us, and were gone out for
execution before that writing came unto them for it only met the soldiers on
the way toward us, with Commission to put us to the sword; we shall desire to
publish it by it self; for we are willing to have it known, and we made answer
to any thing in it, they could seem to object, when we were amongst them. The
Massachusetts promised the people, that however they might not hear our writings
read then among them, yet they should see them shortly in print, but they put
us to the labor and cost of it; else they cannot be content to have them lie
buried, but render them, and their dealings with us, in all places where they
come, to be other things then indeed they are.
books sent unto us by him, or by Randall Houlden: or shall reproach, or
reprove the Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ in these united Colonies, or the
civil government, or the public Ordinances of God therein (unless it be by
answer to some question propounded to him, or conference with any Elder, or
with any other licensed to speak with him privately, under the hand of one of
the Assistants) that immediately upon accusation of any such writing, or speech,
he shall by such Assistant, to whom such accusation shall be brought, be
committed to prison, till the next Court of Assistants, then and there to be
tried by a Jury, whether ^e ^^th so spoken or written, and upon his conviction
thereof, shall be condemned to death, and executed.

Dated the 3o. of the 9o. Month, 1643. Per. cur. Increase Nowell, Secret.

A Copy of the Charge.
SAmuel Gorton, being convict as a blasphemous enemy to the true Religion of
our Lord jesus Christ, and all his holy Ordinances, and also to all civil
authority among the people of God, and particularly in this ^^risdiction, as
appears by writings and speeches.

This charge being laid upon us* ^t the Ba^^^ before we heard of the censure
(though they came as above in writing to us:) the Governor asked us, whether
we bowed under it, and whether we would retract; we answered and told them ( as
in the presence of God) that the charge neither bowed nor touched us at all,
for we were free, and fa^^e from being guilty of any such things, and for our
r^tracti^n, we told them we came not there to deny our Religion, in any ^oint
of it, but to testify and bear witness unto it; then did they read our
censure, for our confinement, as i^ above said* and when the bolts and chains
were made ready, they put them upon us, in the prison at Boston, that so we
might travel in them to the several Towns to which we were confined, some of
us having fifteen miles, and some thirty to go from Boston; only we were to
stay till Master Cotton his Lecture day, and then were all brought to the
Congregation in that our iron furniture, for the credit of the Sanctuary, which
had set the sword on work to such good purpose, and after that were with all
speed sent away; yea, some of us among the people that went from the Lecture,
that so we might be a spectacle unto them.

In which condition we continued a whole winter season; in which time their
Ministers stirred up the people in their public Sermons to famish us to death,
out of that place of the Prophet Zephany, ^. 10. 11. This shall they have for
their pride, because they have reproached, and magnified themselves against the
people of the Lord of Hosts; the Lord will be terrible unto them, for he will
famish all the Gods of the earth, and men shall worship him, every one from his
place, even all the Isles of the Heathen. Samuel Gorton having intelligence,
from Boston, to Charlestown, to which he was confined* that Master Cotton
preached from that text in the prophecy of Zephany, and how he applied the
doctrine from it to have all necessaries withheld from him, telling some
eminent members of the Church, that i^ they either went unto us, to visit us,
or sent unto us, to minister to our wants, the curse of God would abide both on
them and their posterity, for so doing; the said Gorton hearing of these
things, writ a Letter to the ruling Elder in Charles-Towne, We had liberty to
speak or write to Elders, or such as the Magistrates lycensed to speak with
us, in way of question, whom they tho^ght were fi^test to insn^^e us, so that
this writing is but a question, only it has a large preface.
a Copy whereof ( verbatim) here follows, which was consulted upon, by the
Ministers immediately, together with the Governor, as intelligence was brought
unto him, but never answer given unto it, neither by word nor writing.

Charles-towne, January the 12. 1643. Mr. Green
FOr as much as we know that the Ruler of the Congregation has power to give
utterance, and to authorize speech unto edification, Psalm. 6. ii. Mat. 28. ^,
19. 20.
and that none ought to hinder, where ever or whomsoever he permits or gives
Lycense unto, Act. 4. 18 19. 20:
and in as much as we also profess, that there is one thing that is needful,
and whosoever shall make choice of that, it shall never be taken away from him
Luke 10. 41. 42
, which is to hear the words of Christ. Neither are we ignorant, that none are
truly sensible, o^ know the necessity, use, and benefit of hearing the word of
Christ, but only such as are sensible, and see the necessity; (yea, and that
in the same subject) of speaking and delivering the words of Christ 1 Cor. 9.
16.
, for the heart of every Saint is equally balanced with these two; the same
necessity he finds to speak, he also finds to hear; the same necessity he
finds to hear, he finds to speak also the word of God, for faith is in
hearing, and hearing is in speaking the word of God Romans 10. ^7.
;] if we deny either of these unto a Christian, we deny him the power of ^aith,
which does consist in them both; nay, if he want a tongue to speak, or an ear
to hear (and that equally, the one as the other) we deny him to be complete in
Christ 2. Cor. 4. 13. Collos. 2. 10.
,] who as he had an ear open to the voice of the Father in all things Psalm. 40.
6.
,] so had he a tongue to divulge and declare them unto the world; Ioh. 17. 6. 26
even so with the heart man believes unto righteousness, Romans 10. 10.
that is, gives credit to that which he hears, to be in another, and with the
mouth confession is made to salvation, Romans 10, 9 10.
that is, preaches, or professes that which God hat^ made him to be by faith,
Psalm. 116. 10.
therefore if thou shall confess with thy mo^th the Lord Jesus, and believe in
thine heart that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved Rom, 10. 9
,] nor a^ I ignorant of the minds of the people, (amongst whom I now so journe,
and am a stranger as all my Fathers have bee^^) Psalm, 39. 12.
How earnest they are I should get my bread with ^^^^ile work, or else to
have hunger and famine to cleave unto my bonds, which they profess themselves
to be very clearly instructed in, though in times past it has been thought
sufficient work for a man to be exercised in (at one time) to lie in ^etters
and irons amongst strangers, though wife and children were not deprived of all
necessaries at home. Nor do I doub^, but they may find a time to alter their
judgment (it may ^e before they are aware) especially if the Bridegroom be at
the door Mat. 25. 6 10.
,] and it is well known, that I have not been acc^^^omed to any servile work
in any part of my life till now of l^^e in New England, where through the
kindness of my country men, in taking from my family the things of this life,
(which God had bestowed on us) I have been necessitated thereunto* which I am
so upbraided with in this place.

But it is not grievous unto me, whilst they cannot but see in it (if God have
not blinded their eyes) the vanity of those Idol shepherds of the Church of
Rome Wheresoever the doctrine, spirit, and power of it does appear.
, who cannot speak unto the people, but in a way of so much study and ease; nor
had I ever desire, to be set up in the world, through gatherings and
contributions of the people* Therefore have these hands ministered to my
necessities Cor. 4. 11, 12. Acts 20. 34.
. But however I have been exercised about the bread that perishes Joh. 6. 27.
* yet has it not been but with respect unto that which endures unto
everlasting life Joh. 6. 33. 36. 5^.
, which I have endeavored to bre^^ Acts 20. 7.
, and faithfully to impart unto my wife, children, and servants, and to any
that had an ear open to listen unto that whol^some word of life Joh. 6* 63, 68
, which has made all other travells or losses, whatever, to be light and easy
unto me (as at this day) Mat. 11. 28 ^9, 30.
, which I profess to be the only errant I have to do in this world: and
however we do preach the Gospel, yet have we nothing to rejoice in 1 Cor. 9 16
or to glory and praise our selves for, to lift up our selves above our
Brethren: for necessity is laid upon me Ibid.
; That is, I am in want, and stand in need of all things; and woe is me if I
preach not the Gospel: That is, if I receive not this grace from Christ, as well
as any other: for the same necessity I have of any other grace, I have of this
grace also: For of his fullness we all receive, and grace for grace John 1. 16.
, for the graces of God are a bundle of life in Christ Jesus 1 Samuel 25. 29 Cant.
1. 13.
: So as, that if I reject, or neglect, or put off any one of them to another,
as no privilege or prerogative of mine, I do the like to all: For his
seamlesse coat may not be divided, but all goes by lot or portion the same way
Math* 27. 35
: And in like manner I am destitute of this, I am destitute of all other grace,
that proceeds from him: For if I preach the Gospel willingly, I have a reward 1
Cor. 9. 17.
: That is, if I do it out of any ability, skill, or wi^ of my own, gotten and
acquired by any pains or industry, as men attain to arts, and trades, wherein
they are to be preferred before, and above others, then I have a reward: that
is, something is to be attributed and contributed to me for the same, then go I
about to deprive my Lord of his right, showing my self an unfaithful steward
Luke ^6. 1.
* for where an hundredth is due to him, I bid write fifty, that I may take the
rest my self to live upon Luke 16. 4, 5, 6, 7.
; for even as I propound my own deserts, demerits, and eminency unto a people*
so do I propound the undeserving estate and condition of my Lord; proclaming
his baseness whilst I set forth my pains and good-wil in so doing, but if I
do it against my will 1 Cor. ^* 17*
: That is, if it be contrary to the mind and will of all men, to undergo the
cross of Christ, to preach the Gospel in necessities, reproaches, hard labors,
and persecutions 2 Cor, ^3, to 28.
, then is the dispensation committed unto me 1 Cor. 9. 17
: that is, the right of all administrations (wrapped up in that fountain of
dispensing, the Gospel) do of right solely belong unto him, and not unto me in
any case, yea, it is the will and power of another Romans 1. 16.
and not my own, unto whom the praise and glory of right belongs and wholly
appertains Psa. 105. 1.
, and not unto the will, ability, or skill of any man whatsoever James 1. 18.
John 1. 13.
: and hence it is that the Cross is easy unto us Math. 11. 28 29.
, because we know that he, as truly, and totally takes our reproaches and
^ardships upon himself Math. 8. 17
, which are only due unto us: as he commits the dispensation of his grace
and glory unto us: that is none of ours, but only due and belongs unto himself,
so that we remember him that suffered such gainsayings of sinners, ^ast we
should be weary and faint in our mind Heb. 12. 3.
: yea further, there is a necessity of preaching the Gospel upon every soul:
for as there is not any that can believe, for another, unto righteousness Romans
10. 10.
, the party being destitute of that grace himself, so there i^ not any that can
preach or confess for another unto salvation Ibid.
, the party himself being destitute of that grace of confession or preaching:
Indeed the Saints communicate in these graces one with an other, as all of them
being heirs and inheritors of the same grace i^ Christ Rom 8. 17.
, but one cannot perform any office for another* ^s for such as are destitute
of the same grace and office themselve* 1 Cor. 12. 2
: for that were instead of a girdle arent Isa. 3. 24.
: Therefore the preaching of the Gospel is the discovering of what men are in
Christ Jesus, and not only what they may or shall be 1 John 4. 17
, also what men are under* the wrath of God that abides upon them, being out of
Christ John 3. 36.
and not only what they shall be: So that every Christian having received this
(as an ingrafted word James 1. 21
growing up together with it) that is, that I may be mutually edified and
comforted by the communicacation of your faith and mine ^om. 1. 11 12.
, he grows up in this also, namely, that I may be mutually edified and
comforted by the communication of your preaching and mine, for i^ the day of
the Lord which is the day of salvation, and behold no^ the accepted time,
behold now the day of salvation 2 Cor. 6. 2.
wherein we give no offense, or lay not any stumbling block before our brethren
2 Cor. 6. 3
; we villifie not that sacrifice once offered up for all Heb. 9. 26. 27.
. That our ministry may not be reprehended 2 Cor. 6. 3.
. Or that our ministry be not blemished, for so ^he word is ( momo^) that is
we can acknowledge no sacrifice, but only that which is without ^ither
superfluity or defect; and in that day the feeblest i^ Jerusalem, is as Davi^
Zech. 12. 8
; A King Psalm. 2. 6.
, a leader Psalm. 78. 70. 72* 73.
, a valiant warri^r, 2 Samuel 18. 3. 1 Samuel 18. 7
a sweet finger in Israel Sam. 23. 1.
, and the house of David as God, ^r as the mighties (for the word is plural)
yea as the angel of the Lord before them; Zech. 12. 8
every one is as the angel or messenger of the Lord, before the rest of the
congregation, or as the angel of the Lord before (him) as the word will also
bear, that is to say, as the messenger of the Lord, like unto his servant
John, to prepare or make ready his way before him Mal. 3. 1. Mat. 11. 10.
forth messenger of the Lord, and he only knows how to bring down the highest
mountain, and how to lift up the lowest valley, and that only is a high way for
the Royalty of our King to pass upon Luke 1. 17. Luke 3. 5. 6.
in the wilderness. And this is a glory that the world cannot receive, neither
can it give it John 14. 17. 27. John 16. 22.
: and it is our rejoicing that we borrow nothing from the world, nor stand in
need of any thing it has, to make the Gospel of God glorious, for it were
better for us to die, then that any man should make our rejoicing vain, or
empty 1 Cor. 9. 15.
. For it were not full in Christ, if we borrowed any thing of the world, which
were death to us to think of; what is our rejoicing then, or our reward, when
as the whole world affords nothing at all unto us? verily this that when we
preach the Gospel, we make it free, 1 Cor. 9. 18.
which could not be, if it laid claim to any thing the world has in the
publication of it self; for then by the Law of relations, the world might lay
claim unto, and challenge something from (it) which were to bring the Gospel
into bondage, But as the Lord Jesus wrought that great work of reconcilia^ion
freely, so as the world could challenge nothing of it at his hands at all, so
is that word of reconciliation, to whomsoever it is committed 2 Cor. 5. 18. 2
Cor. 11. 7. 8 9.
, published freely, so as the world can challenge nothing of them at all Mat.
10. 8. 1 Cor. 9. 1. 1 Cor. 7. 23. 1 Cor. 9 19
; So that the servant of the Lord is free from all men, though he makes himself
servant unto all, that he might gain the more. s Thence it is that he abuses
not his authority in the Gospel but keeps his power unspotted 1 Cor. 9. 18.
, when the world can require nothing at his hands; hereby showing also the
transcendencie of that kingdom, wherein his authority is exercised, beyond the
kingdoms of this world which must borrow one of another, else cannot any be
glorious in the height of glory concerning the things of this life; therefore
had Solomon himself Gold, Silver, Ivory, apes, and peacocks, brought from other
nations to augment his glory 1 Kin. 10. 22. 2 Chr. 9. 21*
, But he that is greater then Solomon Mat. 12. 22.
beautifieth himself with none of the things of this life Mat. 8. 20 Isa. 52.
14.
, though he had right to them all, Romans 4. 13 14. Gal. 4. 7.
that so he might make it manifest that his Kingdom is not of this world; John
18. 36
therefore gives charge unto his disciples, that as they had freely received,
so they should freely give: Mat. 10. 8
for by how much we enjoin people to contribute unto us for preaching the
Gospel, by so ^^ch we proclaim, that we have given unto God for what we have
received of him, Job. 35. 7. 8
and teach others: so to do* Mat. 5. 19.
namely to bring some preparations, operation, or fitness to receive his
grace* which is as far from man to attain unto, as it was to prepare and fit
himself for his creation at the first, Genesis 2. 7.
so that the benevolence of the Saints in communicating of the things of this
life, is ^o part of the glory or beautifying of the house of God; for then a
wicked man might add somewhat thereunto, no^ shall the glory in the least
measure be diminished, when these things s^all have an end. But it is a
declaration of their vilification of the things of this present life, as things
of no account or reckoning, when they come into competition with the well being
of the Saints; and as these things are consumed, and turned into ^shes, upon
that golden altar, Levit. 9. 24.
so does there ascend up a perfumatory sacrifice of sweet savor unto the Lord,
Phil. 4. 18
for according to our vilification of the things of this life, so is our
valuation of the Lord Jesus, who is either all or none at all in our estimation
and account, and if he be all Col. 3. 11. Ephesians. 1. 23.
, then he that gathers much of the things according unto man has nothing
over, 2 Cor. 8. 15.
or above him that has the least, and he that gathers little has no la^k 2
Cor. 8. 15.
or falls short of him that has the most, for the one, and the other consume
them in the act of the present supply of their necessity, knowing that if they
keep them, in making any accoun^ o^ reckoning of them, for the time to come,
they presently putrify and corrupt Exodus 16. 19. 20.
. Learn this parable therefore, that there is that in the heavenly Manna that
the rebels may eat in the wilderness and die eternally John 6. 5. 8
, as well as that which whosoever ^a^eth sha^ never die, but live for ever John
6. 58.
, yea there is a seed to be sown in giving away to another, as well as food to
receive for the nourishing of our selves; and he that sows sparingly in that
shall reap sparingly 2 Cor. 9. 56
, yea he that knows not how to minister carnal things, cannot have Spiritual
things ministered unto him Romans 15. 27.
, no m^^^ ^h^n ^ man can keep his sin, and have the righteousness of Christ
also. 2 Cor. 14. 15. 16.
Those only therefore that in giving and receiving know how to perform all in
the same act* as the woman in casting her two mites into the treasury, Luk 21.
2. 3 4.
and out of deep poverty can see the abounding of the riches of liberality 2.
Cor. 8. 2.
; Such can perform an acceptable service to the Lord; but such as only
exercise themselves in piece mealing of the things of God, and the things of
man, to serve at times and turns, for advantage, and reserve the rest, this is
as the cutting off of a dogs head, or the offering of swines blood in the house
of God Isa. ^6. 3.
how ever else where they may be done without any such abomination, the Saints
therefore depend not upon neither desire the worlds benevolence, knowing well
what their mercies are in the winding up, Prove. 12 10.
nor can they expect from them ought else, but bonds, imprisonments, Acts 20.
22. 23.
and spoiling of their goods Heb. 10. 34.
(which through the secret supplies their master makes unto them) they suffer
joyfully, Isa. 43. 2.
not looking for so much as a shoe latchet from the King of Sodom to enrich
themselves with all Genesis 14. 21. 22. 23.
knowing that the blessing of the Lord upon their indevours Prove. 10. 22.
shall yield sufficient to convey them through this valley of Bac^ Psalm 8^. 5.
6.
which indevours, God directs unto times and seasons to use according to
strength, and constitution, without any to lay tasks upon them, Exodus 5. 6. to
14.
even as he teaches the husbandman when to throw in the cummin, and the
fitches Isa. 28. 23. 24. 25. 26.
, though they know (notwithstanding) what it is to have power, not to work, and
to lead about a wife, that is a sister as well as others. 1 Cor. 9. 3. 4. 5. 6.
But I am longer in my introduction, then I did intend, my Question therefore
in short is this, namely whether I may have liberty to speak and express the
word of the Lord in the public congregation freely without interruption,
either on the Lords day, or the ordinary Lecture, now whilst I am kept from my
family, and friends, with whom I have been formerly exercised: for seeing our
days as a shadow decline, Psalm. 102. 11.
and we are presently withered as grass, Psalm. 102. 4.
when in a moment we go hence, and are no more Psalm. 39. 5. 13:
: We are earnest therefore to express the word of life that fades not, nor
waxes old as does a garment, Psalm* 1^2 25. 26 27.
that Gods memorial may abide with our posterity Psalm. 102. 12
when we are gone the way of all the earth, 1 Kings 2. 1. 2.
and that you shall not need to fear my touching upon any of those things
which it seems are to lie sealed as in the grave for the present, Mat. 27. 65.
66.
I shall tell you what Scripture urges my heart for the present to impart, of
God lead not into another, Dan. 6. 16. 17.
before the opportunity be attained, for we cannot treasure up to bring forth
at our pleasure unto profit, no more then we can fetch down at our pleasure
for our supply, but only as our God performs, both the one and the other,
John 14. 26.
for we depend not upon Baal O both as Saul did, 1 Samuel 28. 7.
but upon the Lord Jehovah as David did. Psalm. 36. 9.
The Scripture intended is the founding of the fifth trumpet, Revel. 9, out of
which I ^esire (as God shall assist) to open and declare these points
follovving.

1 What the sound of the trumpet is, ^ who the angel is, 3 why the Point. 1.
fifth.

1 What that star is that falls from heaven to the earth, 2 P. 2.
what the fall of it is, 3 how it falls from heaven unto the earth.

1 What the key of the bottomless pit is. 2 To whom it is given P. 3.
3 The manner how it is given. 4 How the pit is opened. 5 How it can be said to
be bottomless, seeing nothing can be without banks and bottom but the Lord
himself.

1 what the smoke of the bottomless pit is. 2 The cause and P. 4.
manner of its rise, even as the smoke of a great furnace.

1 What the Sun and the air are* 2 How they are darkened by the smoke of the
pit. P. 5.


1 What those locusts are that come ou^ of the smoke. 2 The nature of their
power, as the scorpions of the earth have power, 3 how this P. 6.
power is given unto them, seeing that all power is of God.

1 What the injunctions are, that are laid upon the locusts. P. 7.
2 The rise of those injunctions: 3 The exercise of them: 4 The extent of them.

1 What the nature and property of the locusts are, declared by P. 8.
the several forms ascribed unto them, furniture, ornaments, and their
carriage in them.

What their King is, as he is described, ^ by his office assigned, P. 9.
2 by his titles given unto him. 3 How ^e is a King, seeing the locusts are
said to have no King over them*

1 What that woe is, that i^ said to ^e past, and how it can be P. 10.
said to ^e past, seeing there is ever woe to the wicked. 2 What the two woes
are, which are to come, and how they can be said to come hereafter, seeng the
wrath of God abides upon him already, that believes not.

Thus you have my question, both with its introduction and Sequel, and I attend
your answer, which I hope will not only be speedy in respect of time, but
speeches also in regard of matter, to the satisfying and fulfilling of my
desi^es,

Per me Samuel Gorton.


Now during the time of our confinement, being dispersed abroad into several
towns in the country, the people came to be informed of the truth of
proceedings, whereupon they were much unsatisfied with what they had done
against us, which being perceived, they called a general Court, and without
any appearance, or questioning any of us, concluded upon our release sending us
a writing of it, together with a further banishment, not only out of all their
own jurisdictions, but also that we should not come in, nor near Providence,
nor our own plantations at Shawomet, with other parts thereto adjoining, out of
all which places we were to depart within the space of fourteen days, and that
upon pain of death, which were places out of all their jurisdictions, as Master
John Indicote (at that time deputy Governor) confessed, standing up in public
Court, and professed that God had stirred them up to go out of their own
Jurisdictions, to fetch us from our own places unto them.

Here follows a true Copy of our release and banishment, sent to us from the
General Court, set down verbatim, and is extant under their hands.
At a General Court at Boston the 7th of the first month 1643 or 1644.
IT is ordered that Samuel Gorton and the rest of that company, who now stand
confined, shall be set at liberty, provided that if they or any of them, shall
after fourteen days after such enlargement, come within any part of our
Jurisdiction, either in the Massachusetts, or in, or near Providence, or any of
the Lands of Pumhom, or Soccononocco* or elsewhere, within These were there two
Indian subjects lately enti^ed to renounce their own Prince, there* by to find
a way to subject us unto their own wills, or else to execute death upon.
our Jurisdiction, then such person, or persons, shall be apprehended
wheresoever they may be taken, and shall suffer death by course of Law;
provided al^o thus during all their contiuance in our bounds inhabiting for the
said time of fourteen days, they shall be still bound, to the rest of the
Articles o^ their former confinement, upon the penalty therein expressed

Per C^^. Increase Nowel Secret.

When this order of the Court wa^ presented to Samuel Gorton, by the Constable
of Charles town, bringing a Smith with him, to file off his bolts, he told the
Constable he was not willing to part with his irons on these terms, but
expected other news in fairer terms of release, then were therein expressed,
desiring him to go to Master Nowel who lived in that town, and declare so much
unto him. In short time, the Constable returned, bringing diverse of the chief
men in the town with him, and commanded the Smith to fall to work to file off
his bolts, who did accordingly, and so took them from him, leaving the said
Gorton either to walk abroad, on such conditions, or else to stay at his peril.

Now two or three days after our release, Some of us being returned to Boston,
desiring to stay for the rest of our friends, that we might return together,
accompanying each other in our journey, the people showing themselves joyful
to see us at liberty, and entertaining us kindly into their houses, which the
Governor perceiving presently sent out his warrant, with strict charge to
depart from the town, within the space of two hours, (it being about ten of the
clock in the forenoon when the warrant came unto us) otherwise further penalty
should be laid upon us.

This is a true copy of the Governors warrant extant still under his hand,
word for word.
To the Marshall or his deputy,
I Am informed that Samuel Gorton, and his company are now abiding in the town,
and go to diverse houses, giving offense thereby, and cause of suspicion, of
attempting to seduce some of our people; you are therefore to command them to
depart ou^ of the town, before noon this day, upon pain of being apprehended
and futher proceeded with, according to their deservings.

(i) 10. -- 43. John Winthrop* Governor.

Now although by the General Court, we had fourteen days allowed u^^o us to
inhabit within their Jurisdictions, not limited to any place, nor excluded from
any place for the space of so long time yet notwithstanding upon notice given
unto us by this warrant we presently departed the town* though upon a sudden As
we passed along the way a matter of three* or four miles from Boston, we cam^
to some* Indian wig. wammes, the Sachim being the prime Sachim, that lives
near them, and familiar among them, we came into his wigwam accidentally, and
he having taken notice of us amongst them how we had been dealt with, as soon
as we came in, called some of us by our names) his name being C^shanakin, we
a^ked him whether Captain Cook were a good Captain, he answered I cannot tell,
but Indians account of those as good Captains, when a few dare stand out
against many.
when we were unprovided for victuals and other provisions for our journey, and
being there was no place inhabited by the English near the place where our
wives and children were scattered, out of which they had not expelled us, but
only a little Island, called Road Island, situate in the Nanhyganset Bay, upon
which we arrived, within the time limited unto us, but the night before we came
to Road Island we lodged at Shawomet in our own houses there, and considering
of the act of their court in our expelling and banishment out of those parts,
we observed that they had not expressed our land at Shawomet, but only named
the lands of Pumhom* and Soccononocco, (the Indians whom they claimed as
Subjects) we thought good therefore to write unto them for a further
explanation of the Courts act* that so we might understand their true intent
being very unwilling to discover their dealings toward us in seeking redress,
if we could but see a way, that through our hard labors, our wives and little
ones might find a way to subsist*

Here follows a true Copy of the Letter sent unto the Governor of the
Massachusetts, verbatim, as it is still extant under the hands of the witnesse^,
which were taken, lest they should put us off, and not make answer to our
letter.
Shawomet, March the 26. 1644.
THe order of your Court last held, made concerning us, being dark and
obscure, which beseems not a matter of that concernment, which you h^ve now
entered upon, and made some short progress therein; the issues whereof are
pressing on unto perfection, whose arri^all is waited for, with that hope that
never makes ashamed, we may not therefore forbear To require an explanation of
what you intend, by the Lands of Pumhom and Soccononocco, for we know none they
have, or ever had within your jurisdiction; if you should therefore, so far
forget your self, as to intend thereby our Land lawfully bought, and now in
our possession, and inhabited by us, called Shaw-omet, together with other
parts near adjoining: Give us your minds, and meaning in plain terms, under
your hands: And whereas you conclude, for such our lawful abode, and
residence, to prosecute against us by course of Law unto death; we resolve upon
your answer, with all expedition, to wage Law with you, and try to the
uttermost, What right or interest you can show to lay claim, either to our
Lands or our Lives; and shall take it as your own Act, urging us and
constraining us thereunto, to look^ after our right, in the havoc and spoils,
you have already made among us, which otherwise God has taught us, to suffer
joyfully the robbing and spoiling of our goods, if you did not necessitate us
to look after recompense from you: We expect your answer by this Bearer, and in
case you return it not speedily, we conclude your order of Court to intend no
such thing, as to drive us from our lawful possessions, as abovesaid, but
that you used such te^mes, as scar-crows, imagining you had children to deal
with, or as a starting hole to evade part of that danger that may ensue: nor
can you put us off for answer, till the Court sit again, being a general Act,
and you but one; now to answer, for we know you may better open unto us the
in^^nt of the Court for our satisfaction, then you could expel us out of any
part of your jurisdiction, before the time set by the Court, contrary to the
liberty it had given unto us.

By the order or government of Shaw-omet, John Warner, Secretary.

Sufficient witness being taken of our plain and man-like dealing with you
herein. A true Copy of a Letter sent to the Government, and Governor of the
Massachusetts, the day and year above said: In witness of, or in presence of
Ralph Earl. John Anthony.



Here Follows a true Copy of the Governors answer to our Letter abovesaid,
set down here verbatim, and is extant under his own hand.
To Samuel Gorton, John Warner, and the rest of that company.
FOr satisfaction of what you require, by your writing of March, 26, 1644. This
is to let you know, that the expression and intent of the order of our last
general Court, concerning your coming within any part of our jurisdiction,
does comprehend all the Lands of Pumhom, and Soccononocco, and in the same are
included the Lands which you pretended to have purchased, upon part whereof you
had built some houses, (be the place called Shaw-omet or otherwise) so as you
are not to come there upon peril of your lives. This I testify to you*

Boston 2. (i) 1644 John Winthrope.
You must know withal, that the C^urt did not intend their order should be a
scar-crow (as you ^^^i^^) for you will find it real, and effectual, if you
shall tr^^sgress^ it*




Thus far the Governors Letter, written with his own hand.

Now upon our coming to Road-Iland, the Indians of that great Country of the
Nanhyganset ^earing of our return without the loss of our lives, they won^red,
having observed the causeless cruelty they had offe^^d unto us, some of them
being within the hearing of the sho^ of the Guns, whilst they lay entrenched
against us, as also ^ow we were used in the Massachusetts, and the constant
report, whilst we lay amongst them, that some of our lives should be taken
away, or else kept as slaves so long as we lived; considering these and the
like things they marvelled much at our deliverance and release, from amongst
them: Now our country men having given out formerly, amongst the Indians, that
^^ were not English men, to encourage them against us (b^^ause the awe of the
English, has been much upon them) and being they could not father the name of
any Sectary, or Sect upon us, but we could clearly demonstrate, we were no such
opi^ionated persons, they then called us Gortoneans, and told the Indians we
were such kind of men, not English: now the Indians calling the English in
their language Watta^onoges, they now called us Gortonoges, and being they had
heard a rumor of great war to be in Old-England, and that it was a land s^
furnished with multitudes of people, they presently framed unto themselves a
cause of our deliveranc^, im^gining that there were two kinds of people in
Old-England, the one calle^ by the name of English men, and the other
Gortonoges; and concluded that the Gortonoges were a mightier people ^he^ the
English, whom they call Wattaconoges; and therefore the Massachusetts thought it
not safe to take away our liv^s, because how ever there were but a few of us in
New England, in comparison of those that came out against us, yet that g^^at
people, that were in Old-England would come over, and p^t them to death, that
should take away our lives from us, without a just cause.

Whereupon the Sachims of the Nanbyganset cons^lting together, presently sent
Messengers unto us, to come and speak with them, and being they were those of
whom we had bought our Land (which now the Massachusetts had taken away from
us,) as all that inhabit upon that Bay have done) they being very importunate
to have us to come over to speak with them, we not knowing what the occasion
was, yielded unto their request, a matter of half a dozin, or seven of us took
boat to go over the Bay to them, they seeing the vessel come* news was
brought to the Sachim, who sent aband of lusty well armed men, who met us, as
soon as we were come to Land, to conduct us to old Sachim Conaunicus his house,
multitudes of Indians, as we passed along, coming forth, and seemed joyful,
which we taking notice of, (neither the one nor the other being usual amongst
them) some of us began to be a little jealous* that the Agents of the
Mssachusets, who lived near unto us, had gone about to betray us into their
hands, upon some false suggestion concerning the death of their Sachim
Myantonomy, who lost his life immediately before the Massachusetts came against
us; and however he was suddenly sl^ine by an Indian coming behind him, as he
marched upon the way, yet there were English present at the doing of the act,
which we were a little jealous, the abovesaid Agents might have suggested,
that we might be consenting thereunto, which all the Indians took for a most
injurious act, not only because he was so famous a Prince amongst them, but
also how ever he was taken in a stratagem of war by the Indians, yet a great
ransom was paid for his Redemption, and his life taken away also, and they are
very conscientious, to recompense the shedding of blood, (especially of such
personages) with blood again: But when we were come to the old Sachims house,
we were courteously entertained, and from thence conducted to the house of
Sachim Pessecus, Brother, and successor in government to the late Myantonomy,
when we were there, diverse Sachims, and their chief Counselors, took us aside
to consult with us, and asked what we intended to do, or how we could live,
seeing the Massachusetts had not only taken our estates from us in goods and
^hattels, but also our houses, lands and labors, where we should raise more,
for the preservation of our Families, and with^ll, told us that their
condition, might (in great measure) he paraleld with ours, else they would
willingly have done any thing for our help, in regard that our Land was bought
of the^, and we had faithfully paid them for it, according to our contract: But
they told us, they had not only lost their Sachim, so beloved amongst them, and
such an instrument of their public good; but had also utterly impoverished
themselves, by paying such a ransom for his life, (as they then made u^ an
account of) notwithstanding, his life taken away, and that detain also; we
made answer unto them, that for our p^^ts, we were not discouraged, in any
thing that had b^faln^ us, for we were subjects to such a noble State in
Old-England, that however we were far off from our King and Stat^, yet we
doubted not but in due time, we should have redress* and in the mean time we
were resolved, to undergo it with patience, and in what way we could, labor
with our hands, for the preservation of our wives and children: the answer that
they made unto us was this, That they thought we belonged to a better Master
then the Massachusetts did: whereupon, desiring our stay, they called a general
Assembly, to make known their minds, and to see the minds of their people, and
with j^y^t and unanimous consent, concluded to become subjects to the State and
Government of Old-England, in case they might be accepted of; we told them, we
could promise them nothing, nor take any engagements upon us, not knowing the
minds of that Honorable State; but if they would volunt^rily make tender of
themselves, as they themselves thought* meet, we would endeavor to convey it
safely (in case we went over about our own occasions) and bring them word what
was the pleasure of the State therein; whereupon they chose four of us, as
Commissioners in trust for the safe custody, and conveyance of their Act and
Deed unto the State of Old-England.

The Act and Deed of the voluntary and free submission of the chief Sachim,
and the rest of the Princes, with the whole people of the N^n^ygansets, unto
the government and protection of that Honorable State of Old-England, se^ down
here verbatim, the Deed it self being extant.
KNOW ALL MEN, Colonies, Peoples and Nations, unto whom the fame hereof shall
come; that we the chief Sachims, Princes or Governors of the Nanhyganset (in
that part of America, now called New England) together with the joint and
unanimous consent of all our people and subjects, inhabitants thereof, do upon
serious consideration, mature and deliberate advise and Counsel, great and
weighty grounds and reasons moving us thereunto, whereof one most effectual
unto us, is, That noble fame we have heard of THAT GREAT AND MIGHTY PRINCE,
CHARLES, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, in that honorable and Princely care he has of
all his servants, and true and loyal subjects; the consideration whereof
moves and bends our hearts with one consent, freely, voluntarily, and most
humbly, to submit, subject, and give over our selves, Peoples, Lands, Rights,
Inheritances, and Possessions whatsoever, in our selves and our heirs,
succ^ssively for ever, unto the protection, care, and government of that WORTHY
AND ROYAL PRINCE, CHARLES* KING OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND, his Heirs and
Successors for ever, to be ruled and governed according to those ancient and
honorable Laws, and customs established in that so renowned Realm and
Kingdom of Old-England; we do therefore by these Presents confess, and most
willingly, and submissively acknovvledge our selves to be the humble, loving,
and obedient servants, and subjects of His Majesty to be ruled, ordered, and
disposed of, in our sel^es and ours, according to his Princely wisdom,
counsel, and l^vves of that honorable State of Old-England, UPON CONDITION OF
HIS MAIESTIE^ ROY^^E PROTECTION, and righting of us in what wrong is, or may be
done unto us, according to his honorable Laws and customs, exercised amongst
his subjects, in their preservation and safety, and in the defeating, and
overthrow of h^^, and their enemies; not that we find our selves necessitated
hereunto, in respect of our relation, or occasion we have or may have with any
of the natives in these parts, knowing our selves sufficient defense, and able
to judge in any matter o^ cause in that respect, but have just cause of
jealousy and suspicion, of some of His Majesty's pretended subjects: Therefore
our desire is to have our matters and causes heard, and tried according to his
just and equal Laws in that way, and order His Highnes^e shall please to
appoint; NOR CAN WE Y^^^D OVER OUR SELVES UNTO ANY, THAT ARE SUBJECTS
THEMSELVES IN ANY CASE, having ourselvs bin the chief Sachims, or Princes
successively, of the country, time out of mind, and for our present, and
lawful enacting hereof, being so far remote from His Majesty, we have by
joint consent made choice of four of his loyal and loving Subjects, our trusty
and well beloved friends, Samuel Gorton, John Wickes, Randall Ho^lden, and John
Warner, whom we have deputed, and made our lawful A^^^rnies, or Commissioners,
not only for the acting and performing of this our Deed, in the behalf of His
Highness: but also for the safe custody, careful conveyance, and declar^tion
^^ereof unto his grace, being done upon the Lands of the Nanhyganset, ^t a
Court or General Assembly called and assemble^ together of purpose, for the
public enacting, and manifest^^ion hereof: And for the further confirmation,
and establishing of this our Act and Deed, we the abovesaid Sachims, or
Princes, have according to that commendable custom of Englishmen, subscribed
our names, and set our Seals hereunto, as so many Testimonies of our faith and
truth, our love and loyalty to that our dread Sovereign, and that according
to the English men's account.

Dated the nineteenth day of April, One thousand six hundred forty four.
Pessicus his Mark, Chief Sachim and Successor of that late deceased
Myantonomy. The Mark of that Ancient Conaunicus, Protector of that late
deceased Myantonomy, during the time of his nonage. The Mark of Mixan, son and
heir of that abovesaid Conaunicus.
Indians
Witnessed by two of the chief Counselors to Sachim Pessicus. A^washo^sse his
Mark Tomanick his Mark
Sealed and delivered in the presence of these persons English
Christopher Helm. Robert Potter. Richard C^rder.


Here follows a Copy of a Letter sent to the Massachusetts* by the Sachi^ns
of the Nanhygansets (shortly after their subjection to the State and Government
of Old-England) they being sent unto by the Massachusetts, to make their
appearance at their General Cour^, th^n approaching.
We understand your desire is, that we should come down into the Massachusetts,
at the time of your Court now approaching; our occasions at this time are v^^y
great, and the more, because of the loss (in that m^nner) of our late deceased
brother, upon which occasion, if we should not stir our selves, to give
Testimony of our faithfulness unto the cause, of that our so unjust
deprivation of such an instrument, as he was amongst us, for our common good,
we should fear his blood would lie upon our selves; so that we desire of you,
being we take you for a wise people, to let us know your reasons why you seem
to advise us as you do, not to g^e out against our so inhumane, and cruel
adversary, who too^e so great a ransom to release him* and his life also, when
that was done. Our Brother was willing to stir much abroad to converse with
men; and we see a sad event at the last the^eupon: Take it not ill therefore,
though we resolve to keep at home (unless some great necessity call us out)
and so at t^is time do not repair unto you, according to your request: And
the rather because we have subjected our selves, our Land^ and Possessions,
with all the right and inheritances of us and our people, either by conquest*
voluntary subjection, or otherwise, unto that famous and honorable government,
of that Royal King Charles, and that State of Old-England, to be ordered and
governed according to the Laws and Customs thereof; not doubting of the
continuance of tha^ former love that has been betwixt you and us, but rather
to have it increased hereby, being subjects now, (and that with joint and
voluntary consent) unto the same King and State your selves are: So that if any
small thing of difference should fall out betwixt us, only the sending of a
Messenger may bring it to right again; but if any great matter should fall (
which we hope and desire will not, nor may not) then neither your selves nor we
are to be Judges, but both of us are to have recourse, and repair unto that
honorable and just Government; and for the passage of u^ or our men, to and
again amongst you, about ours or their own occasions, to have comerse with
you, we desire and hope they shall have no worse dealing or entertainment then
formerly we have had amongst you, and do resolve accordingly to give no worse
respect to you or yours, then formerly you have found amongst us, according to
the condition and manner of our country.

Nanhyganset this present, May the 24. 1644. PESSICVS his Mark. CONAVNICVS his
Mark.



Now before the assembling of the next general Court, in regard the Indians
had expressed themselves as above we heard, there were fears and jealousies
raised up in the minds of the people, of the Massachusetts, and other of their
united Colonies, as though there was some danger of the Nanhygansets coming
against them to do some hurt unto them: So that when we heard their Court was
assembled, we writ unto them, a^ follows.

A true Copy of a Letter sent to the M^ss^chus^ts, at a general Court held
shortly after the submission of the people of the Nanhygansets, unto the State
of Old-England, by the Commissioners put in trust, for the further publication
of their solemn Act.
THese are to let you understand, tha^ since you expelled us out of your
Coasts, the Sachims of the Nanhyganset have sent for certain men of the Kings
Majesty's subjects, and upon advised Counsel amongst themselves (a general
Assembly being called of purpose for that end) they have jointly voluntarily,
and with unanimous consent, submitted and subjected themselves, with their
Lands and Possessions inherited by lineall descent, voluntary subjection, right
of Conquest, purchase or otherwise, what ever lands or privileges appertain
and belong unto them, unto that honourab^e and famous Prince Charles, King of
Great Britain, and Ireland, in that renowned State and Government of
Old-England, to be ruled and ordered, according to those honorable Laws and
Customs, in themselves and their Successors for eve^, which is performed and
done, in that solemn, durable, and commendable custom of Record, under diverse
and several han^^ and seals, witnessed sufficiently, both by the Natives and
English, solemnly delivered and received on His Majesty's behalf* holding
correspondencie with the Laws and Customs of th^^ honorable State of
Old-England in all points: We thought good therefore to give notice hereof, at
your general Court now assembled, that it may serve to inform your selves,
and all your united Colonies, of the performance of this Act done, without any
further pains or trouble, that so not our selves only, that are eye and ear
witnesses hereof (but you also) may follow our occasions and employments,
without any extraordinar* care, or fear of the people abovesaid, to offer to
make a^y in-road, or give any assault upon us: But with that indigni^y offered
and done unto their Sovereign, which cannot be borne, nor put up, without a
sharp and Princely revenge; nor may we upon the like penalty, offer to
disturb them in their bounds and territories, in their ordinary and accustomed
employments among themselves, or with any of their neighboring Natives, whose
grounds of proceed causes and occasions are better known unto themselves, then
we can be able to judge of. But if either you or we find any thing amongst them
too grievous to be borne; they not making any violent assault upon us* we know
whither, and to whom we are to repair, and have recourse for redress, as we
tender our allegiance and subjection unto our King and State, unto which they
are become fellow subjects with our selves; and therefore of necessity his
Majesty's Princely care must reach unto them. Furthermore, that it may appear,
that our dealings toward you, and all men, have been, and shall prove just,
and true, whatever your dealings may, or have manifested themselves to be
toward us: Know therefore, that being abroad of late about our occasions, we
fell to be where one of the Sachims of that great people of the Maukquogges
was, with some of his men, whom we perceive are the most fierce and warlike
people in the country, or continent where we are, furnished with 3700. guns,
men expert in the use of them, plenty of powder and shot, with furniture for
their bodies in time of war, for their safety, which other Natives have not;
we understand that of late they have slain a hundred French, with many Indians,
which were in league with the French, putting many of them to cruel tortures,
and have but lost two of their own men; these being as we understand deeply
affected with the Nanhygansets* in the loss of their late Sachim, unjust
detaining also of so great a ransom, given and received for his life* and
else, are resolved (that if any people offer to assault them in their
accustomed courses amongst the Natives, or seeking after their ancient rights
and privileges, not offering wrong to any of His Majesty's subjects, nor
violating their subjection to that Noble State, which they seem to respect, and
much to adore) to wage war with them unto the uttermost, which it seems is
the very spirit of that people to be exercised that way, which as we desire to
make use of it our selves, so do we hereby give no^ice to you also, to make
the best use of it unto your selves in all your Colonies united.

June the 20th, 1644. By ^^ the true and lawful owners of Shaw-omet. John
Warner Secret.


These things being done, we residin^ upon Aquethneck* alias, Road-Iland,
hiring houses and grounds to plan^ upon, for the preservation of our Families:
The Governor of the Massachusetts perceiving that we still abode among the
English, and were not gone to the Dutch as others formerly did, he then writ a
Letter privately to some in the Island, whom he thought they had interest in,
being he continued a Member of their Church, however removed from them, telling
him, that if he and others (who were in like relation unto them) could work
the people of the Island to deliver ^s ^p into their hands again (at least some
of us) it would not only be acceptable unto the Court then sitting, but unto
most of the people in general; the people of the Island having notice of this
Letter, did altogether dislike and detest any such course to be held with us,
knowing very well what they had already done, and how causelessly; So that we
abode still upon ^he Island, and followed our employments, until such time as
there appeared amongst us a ^harter of civil government, granted by the State
of Old England, for the orderly* quiet, and peaceable government of the people
inhabiting in those parts of the country, called Providence Plantations, in
the Nanhyganset Bay, which Charter being joyfully embraced* and with all
expedition, an orderly and joint course was h^^d for the investing of the
people into the power and liberties thereof unanimously, for the exercise of
the authority, in the execution of Laws, for the good and quiet of the people,
which thing gave great encouragement unto the Planters, to go on in their
employments, hoping to enjoy their lawful ^^ghts and privileges without
disturbance, which the Massac^usets, together with Plymouth understanding, they
go about by all means to discourage the people, by their endeavoring to
weaken, and invalid the authority of the Charter, in the eyes of the country,
intrenching upon those places, to frustrate and make void the Charter, as by
maintaining their Co^djutors, as aforesaid in opposing of us, giving them order
to set up writs upon our houses, where formerly we lived, prohibiting all men
for entermedling with those Houses, Lands, Peoples, either English or Indians
(which they call their own people) without their consent and approbation in
those parts, which all plainly fall within the confines of the forenamed
Charter, and far out of all their jurisdictions.

Here follows a true Copy of a Warrant set upon our houses at Shaw-omet
verbatim, being extant, which was done after the Charter appeared amongst us.
WHereas we understand that some of our country men about Providence, or those
parts, do intend to sit down upon our Lands at Show-omet, or those parts: This
is therefore to give notice to any such, that they forbear, without license
from us, to attempt the same, or to meddle with any of our people there, either
English or Indians; for let them be assured, that we resolve to maintain our
just rights.

Given at the Court at Boston, the 16th. of the 8th. Mo, Ann. 1644. By me
Increase Nowell, Secret.

After this they ceased not to send out their Warrants amongst us, after the
Charter was established amongst us, sending diverse, and serving them upon the
men of Providence, expressly commanding their appearance at their Courts in the
Massachusetts*

A Copy of one of their Warrants to the men of Providence here followeth^ word
for word, and is extant under their hand.
To the Executors of Franci^ Weston.
YOu are required to take notice of an Attachment against the Lands of Francis
Weston, so as to bind you to be responsall, at the next Court at Beston, to
answer the complaint One of their now coined subjects amongst us.
of William Arnald, * for withholding a debt of thirty shillings due to him,
and hereof not to fail at your peril.

Dated the 5. (4) 1645. Per cur. William Aspinwall.


And as they thus go beyond their bounds, not only to entrench upon the
liberties and labors of their country men, ( but also upon that authority
transferred upon that people by the State of Old-England, for the quiet and
peaceable ordering and government of themselves) not only in ^rovidence and
Shawomet, but like wise upon Road-Iland, both in Portsmouth, and Newport,
specified in the Charter; the Colonie of Plymouth joined in league with the
Massachusetts, to such ends and purposes, sent their Messengers to Road-Iland,
as namely, one Master John Brown, an Assistant in government amongst them
there, who went from house to house (b^th in Portsmouth and Newport)
discouraging the people for yielding any obedience unto the authority of the
Charter, giving them warning ( as from the Court of Plymouth) not to su^mit
unto any government that was established by virtue of a late pretended Charter,
(as he very presumptuously called it) nor unto any other authority, or
government, but only such as was allowed and approved of by them, although
formerly they have many times confessed and acknowledged both by Word and
Writing, that it was out of their Jurisdictions* without which acknowledgement,
the people would never have adventured to lay out their estates, and to have
planted themselves and families in those parts, some of them having too great
and costly experience of Plimouths dealings with their country men, to be such
as may be fitly* paraleld with the dealings of the Massachusetts, and their
practice springing from the same spirit, has brought them into league and
band, when they were clearly manifested each to other, who before at the time
of their first Neighborhood there, they were at a distance, and stood aloof,
one from the other, as each thinking I am holier then thou, the men of
Plymouth, coming thither from Amsterdam, and the other out of hot persecutions
of the Bishops in Old England.

Now that these men do not only entrench causelessly upon their contrymen,
but also upon the poor Indians, inhabiting in those parts, it is very plain
by their proceedings against that people of the Nanhyganset* whose country
falls within the confines of the Charter, which people only going about to right
themselves upon such Indians as they conceive have mightily wronged them in
taking away the life of their Prince, after so great a ransom given, and
received for his rescue; this they make their occasion to go out against them
to cut them off, and so to take their country into their own jurisdiction;
whereas the Indians, of our knowledge hold themselves bound, to revenge the
blood of their Prince, it being so unlawfully (in their eyes) taken away; nay,
they are not quiet in themselves, unless they do revenge it, or else spill
their own, in their endeavors thereafter; in the mean time they are in a
continued act of mourning, as we know, for the space of one whole year, and an
half, they mourned continually, not only by blacking their faces, in token
thereof; but every day their mourning women, morning and evening upon their
knees, with lamentations, and many tears along time together, as our selves
have been eyewitnesses, when we have had occasions amongst them, and in houses
that were more public, where the wife and children of the diseased Prince
were, there did a man continue a speech (during the time of the women's praying,
sighing and lamenting with abundance of tears) declaring what their loss was
in being deprived of such a Sachim, and how wrongfully it was done by the
enemy, as also how they were all of them engaged to revenge his blood, else
would it so lie upon their own heads, as to bring more miseries, and evils upon
them: Now for this their proceeding against their adversary the Indian, that
thus deprived them of their Sachim, and so wrongfully (as they conceive) the
Massachusetts, and Plymouth have offered to go out against the people of the
Nanhyganset, to cut them off by the sword, sending word to Providence
Plantations, that if they should stand as Neuters, and not go out with them in
th^^ work, they would make plunder of them: So Captain Stan^ish sent word in
the name of Plymouth (now since we cam^ out of those parts) unto the men of
Providence, as we are credibly informed by Letters from diverse hands, as also
by word of mouth from persons of good note, who were in the country there
present amongst them, when these things were done, informing us of many
passages, of the proceedings of the Massachusetts, and Plymouth, both toward
the people of Providence Plantations, as also the Indians of that country of
the Nanhygansets; only one Letter that concerns the I^dians, we desire to set
down, ^o give further intelligence t^ the Reader of these men's dealings, who
seemed so meelt, and so mild in their native country, Old* England, in the
time of their abode there, as though they could not heave a h^nd, or wag a
tongue against any thing but a Bishops Ceremony, that being only offensive
unto them.

Here follows a true copy of a letter s^nt unto us since our coming from
those parts of America called New England.
WE are all in health at this present and cheerful, (the greatest want is your
company) though men generally more invective then ever, the Bay had provided an
Army to go against the Nanhygansets, had they not been prevented in the very
interim thus, Captain Harding informed the Court of the difficulty of the
enterprise upon which the Court employed him, and Mr. Wylbour, to go to
Nanhyganset and take Benedick One of their aforesaid subects or agents dwelling
in Providence.
to interpret; when they came to Benedick he refused to go without a hundred
men in arms, only to possess them with danger, to effect his bloody plot,
upon which Mr. Williams being sent for to Nanhyganset, and also my ^ell, to
inquire of us, what the minds of these mad people were to kill men for nothing;
upon which I went to Providence a, thinking to go with Master Williams, but,
when I came there, he was gone, with the Captai^ and Master Wylbour, upon
Benedicks refusal; I stayed their return, and their agreement was to have
Pessecus Chief Sachimof the Nanhyganset
go into the Bay, and Master Williams was necessitated to put himself Hostage
till his return; this news coming into the Bay did so vex the Ministers, that
Master Cotton preached upon it, that it being so wicked an act to take Master
Williams with them, being one cast out of the Church, It was all one as to ask
counsel of a witch, and that those that did it, were worthy to die; upon which
Master Wylbour was ready to die, for fear he should be hanged; so then the
Indians went down, and they compelled them to cease wars with Unkas That is,
the the Indian who slew their Sachim Myantonomy, when he had received a ransom
for his life.
and to pay them five hundred pounds for charges of Court, and provision for
Soldiers The Court called to consult how to cut them off, and Soldiers they
had raised up for that purpose.
, and to leave four of the chief Sachims children, till the money be paid, and
to leave four of his chief men till the children came, and ^^ promise them not
to sell any land* without their consent: Thus to get interest in their land,
either to people it with whom they please, or else to get occasion to go out
against them again.
this being done they came home again, and sent a man ^o ^ell me what was done,
telling me that if the Lords in England help them not, they are like to suffer
at present, ou^ still they say they are not afraid of them, but only giv^ them
their demands, rather then to war, before the Lords hear of i^, that all may
see they mean no hurt to English, but will submit to the Laws of England,
concluding it is but ^ent* it will come home with advantage both to their
wisdom and profit. Pessecus has been often with me to desire me to inform you
of these things with great desire to see you again. Thus in haste I rest.

Your ever loving friend J. W.
This 20th of November 1645.

Thus have we given a true report* and made a faithful relation, as briefly as
we could, of what passages have fallen out betwixt the people of Providence
plantations, and the rest of our countrymen inhabiting about them, which we
have sensibly fel^, and our families are now pressed under, laying it unto
heart, and seriously taking it into con^^deration, has not only occasioned,
but necessitated some of u^ to be here at this present with the consent of many
others, according to our bounden duty, and allegiance, to present the truth
hereof to this State.

LONDON the 14th of Ia^^ary 1645.
Here comes a letter to hand, was wri^ten in the time of our confinement, and
lying in bolts, and irons in the Massachusetts, occasioned by one of our wives,
she hearing doctrine delivered (in that part of the country where she was
d^iven with her children) questioning the truth of it, writ to ^er husband to
desire his thoughts of it; i^ was gathered from Mat. 24. 29. and ^lluding also
to Hob. 12. 26. 27. for the explication of it, the substance of the doctrine
was, that such a time of reformation, and restoration of the church of God,
here on eart^* was coming, the glory whereof should darken the Sun and Moon,
and cause the stars to fall from heaven, that is, says he, make the Apostles
doctrine and order of the Churches in those days to appear as darkness in
comparison of that light which should now appear, showing also, that the
ministry of the Apostles was that which might and should be removed, that a
more excellent glory might be brought in, and remain, concluding that the
ministry of the Apostles, was but a ministry of witness^, but one should
hereafter appear having the presence and ^^ality of that which they but only
witnessed, and gave testimony unto.

Here follows a true copy of the answer given unto the things propounded as
above, in way of satisfaction, how we are to think of such kind of doctrine,
which the world is so taken up with, and see^s to stand in such expectation and
hopes of.
COncerning that point you wri^ from Mat. the 24 29. as also Heb. the 12. 26*
27. N^m^^^, that the Apostles ministry, was a ministry of witness, ^^
^^^dily grant; but that it was no more then a ministry of witness, we utterly
deny, for it had not only witness, but judgment also of condemnation and
absolution in it, therefore the Apostle says, God shall judge you according to
my Gospel; for the Apostles are not, but through the Spirit of the Son, who
is that faithful and true witness, yea, and the judge of all, also; and
higher then his ministration (who comes out of the bosom of the Father) we
look nor nor ever desire to go, Therefore we only confess him, who is, and
who was, and who is to come, and therefore reject such a Gospel as professes
such persons, times, and ministrations past, as never shall come again, and
such persons, times and ministrations to come as yet never were, as a cunning
device and sleight of Satan to beguile the souls of men, either to stand in
expectation of things to come* or else in admiration of things past, whiles in
the mean time they are kept void of faith, which gives being unto the things,
yea even at the present time; otherwise it is but to know persons and things
after the flesh, but henceforth know we no man after the flesh, no though we
have known Christ Jesus after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more.

And for the Sun being darkened, to be the ministry of the Apo^tles becoming
dark in respect of a greater light appearing, we may in no case allow; for the
Sun there spoken of, is that Sun of righteousness, a greater then which
shall never appear, but when the cross of Christ (spoken of in that Chapter)
is evidently set forth, and declared to be that which indeed it is; then is
that sun of Righteousness, that is light in it self, turned into darkness,
in all the men of the world, even as the Saints, which are darkness in
themselves, become light in the Lord; for as the wicked turn the truth of God
into a lie, which is truth in it self, and ever will be, so they transform the
light of the Lord into darkness, which in it self is light and can never be
darkness: the Moon also, whose time is to appear, and her place to have
dominion in the night, shall not give her light* she shall fail in her office
to shine, wax, waine, and ^o set bounds to times and seasons, that is, the
wicked shall see themselves deprived of all hope to attain to a change, time or
season, which shall alter their woeful condition, or remove the wrath of the
Lord from them, yea in their looking back to the changes of their life before,
wherein they have thought themselves so well exercised* the Moon in that
respect shall be turned into blood (as Joel speaks in the same case) all times
shall affor^ them no hing else but to see how they have been practicing the
shedding of that innocent blood, even from the blood of Abe*, whom his brother
slew ^n the field, where they were exercised in ordinary employments, in the
things of this life, unto the blood of Zacharias slain (between) or in the
middle of the temple and the altar, ^^en in the very height of their worship
and ordinances, so much stood for at this day. Nothing but such manner of
light, or such a time or season (shall that light of heaven) the times and
changes which they have passed through afford unto them* ye^ the stars shall
fall from heaven, even cease to afford their various glories and lights, yea
that day star shall never give notice of that day springing from on high to
visit them, or the rise of that Sun of righteousness, with healing under his
wings, nor shall their several operations, and virtues yield any refreshment
unto these terrene and sublunary things, that is, all those ^everall glories,
and various virtues and operations that are in that bright morning star the
Lord Jesus, and in those seven sta^rres which he holds in his right hand, they
shall all fall off, and lose their luster, light, and influence, in and toward
the earthly sons of Adam, as though they had never been; for as the rejoicing
of the lamp of the righteous is a putting out and cess^tion of all sin and
sorrow, even so the putting out of the candle of the wicked, is a cessation,
and utter de^olishing of all the ^ertues and excellencies of Christ unto them,
as though they were not at all, nay more then so, for as the sin and miseries
which non are by nature subject unto, are made througe the wisdom of God, a
means whereby we see the height and depth, yea all the dimensions of the love
of God do appear unto us, so are the excellencies that are in Jesus Christ,
made (through the wisdom of that serpent) means of torture and torment to the
wicked for ^ver, even as the excellencies of these visible heaven^ would be a
greater torture to man to lose them then if he had never seen or enjoyed them;
and thence it is, that the powers of heaven are shaken or the dominions of
heaven; for every thing in the heavens has its Lordship, the Sun has
dominion of the day, the Moon and the stars; the dominion of the night; the
Su^ne has Lordship in shining, when the Moon hides her face; but not in
setting bounds to times and seasons; for the Moon has Lordship in that, but
not in affording virtue and influence ^o herbs and plants, for the stars have
power and dominion in that, yea every star has its particular power and
virtue, yet can they not water the earth. The clouds have their dominion in
that, yet cannot they serve man to breathe in; the air bath dominion in that;
so it is in the heavenly powers of our Lord Christ, whatsoever is in him has
its dominion, so as all the rest have not their glory without it, so that
whatsoever is declared in the Kingdom of heaven it is the first and the chief,
and all the rest do serve to make up all its power or chief^ie, so as all the
Elders cast down their crowns before ^t; all the excellencies that are in
Christ Jesus, as love, wisdom, righteousness, holiness power and glory, all
things in him have dominion and power, and all these heavenly powers whatsoever
are shaken, that is removed out of their places, not to appear in them any
more, for the place wherein God declared his image at the first, in the
beginning was man; but when the cross of Christ is truly declared, then are
all these heavenly powers shaken out of man, yea, removed out of that proper
place given unto them in the beginning; therefore it is said, immediately after
these tribulations, or immediately with these tribulations, (as the word will
also bear) that is, the preaching of the cross and thse things are
inseparable; no marvel therefore, that when ever the cross is preached, the
champions of that man of sin come out against it, striving to retain their
god; for ^s it would be to nature in things of this life to see all chief
powers and heavenly bodies so shaken, as to remove them out of their place for
ever; the very thoughts whereof are dismal to the mind of man; so, and
infinitely more is it to the soul of a man to have the excellencies and noble
powers and dominions of God removed out of his heart where he placed them in
the act of his first creation, are so that the exellencies of Christ, are ever
shaking and ever removing out of their place in the wicked, that the heig^^ of
their torment may ever appear and remain: for these things are shaken and
removed in them, through the wisdom of the Serpent, that those things that
cannot be shaken, namely, the wrath and vengeance of God may remain; even so it
is in the godly, their sins and miseries are ever shaking and removing out of
their proper place, that those things that cannot be shaken, namely, the grace
and righteousness of Christ may rema^^ for ever; therefore the voice o^ the
Gospel shakes both heaven and earth, in that place alluded unto in your letter
Hebr. 12* ^6. 27. alluding both to Mount Sinai, and Mount Sion, so th^^ the
word yet once more declares a double removal, yea, and that of things that are
made; for man was made in the image of God, yet the wisdom of the Serpent
removed this image, that man's righteousness which is nothing but abomination
in the sight of God, might ever remain, So also Christ was made sin, but the
wisdom of God removed this sin in the very act of his being made so that the
righteousness of God might remain and abide for ever; and then, and then only
shall or does appear the sign, or the miracle or wonder of the son of man in
h^aven, in those clouds of, witness* or in that cloud of witnesses with power
and great glory* so as all earthly kindreds shall mourn and wail before him,
Even so Ame^* Now the sign or wonder of the Son of man is this, that God made
him a wo^ld of life at the f^^st, for he breathed into his face, the breath of
life's, (as the word i^) for the life of all the world was in him; and yet thi^
world of life is become nothing else but a world of death in ^^e wicked, and no
life of God found in them at all; so is that son of man in the second Adam made
a world of sin and death, and yet this world of sin and death is become a
world of righteousness and life unto the godly, and no sin nor
unrighteousness of man found in them, for never was guile ^ound in his ^outh,
Even so. Amen, and this is the sign or miracle of the Son of man, which the
world knows not of, and therefore ^^th so many empty conj^ctures what it may
be thought to be, g^^i^g up into Heaven after it: when as it is come down unto
us, and they know it not. Rom 10. 7. 8.

Thus have I given you my thoughts as brief as I could concerning what you
propounded unto me, and bless the Lord that you ministered occasion to look
into the text. However we are set apart as a forlorn people in the eyes of, and
by the world, yet doubt I not, but our God has singled us out for other ends
and uses, who has put us into the Isle of P^^mos, or among the nation of the
dead, or deadly, (as the word signifies) to reveal unto us the great mysteries
of his Kingdom, that we may declare unto those that now be h^re, how to have
their hope in God, and that it may be told unto our childrens children that
noble work that he has wrought for us in our Lord Christ, who is over all, God
blessed for ever

Amen.
Your loving husband in bonds, and yet free, Samuel Gorton.


A Post script.
Diverse Letters were written to friends in answer to questions, and resolution
of Scripture^, which now are not at hand; otherwi^e we are very free to publish
them to be seen of ^^l, that the wise hearted might judge of what our spirits
and practices rellish^d, and how they were employed in the time of our durance
amongst these men, that were so eagerly minded to make us blasphemers, that so
they might take away our lives, as a part of the glory, and beautification of
their Religion.

Only we desire the Readers p^ins to take a view of one other Letter, in answer
to a friend, who seemed to be troubled about that Scripture, in John 6. 53.
verse, what the meaning of it might be, desiring resolution thereit, since we
arived in England.

The words are these.

Then Jesus said unto them, verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. IN
these words consider, first the occasion of them. Secondly, the sum of them,
and thirdly the parts.

First for the sum, it is a divine sentence exclusive, of all men, from the
life and spirit of God, save only such as do eat the flesh of the son of
man, and drink his blood.

Secondly, the parts of them for order sake are four. First the occasion of
this sentence, in these words, then Jesus said unto them; secondly, the
confirmation of this sentence, laid down in these words, verily, verily;
thirdly, the manner of the sentence, contained in these words, I say unto you,
fourthly, the sentence it self, excluding all from the life of God, such only
excepted as do eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood.

For the first, which is the occasion of this divine sentence; that is, the
reasonings within themselves, which the Jews had in the operations of their
natural hearts, upon the delivering of this manner of doctrine unto them, even
by the son of God himself, employed in this word ( Then) looking back upon
the verse immediately going before, from which Christ takes occasion to utter
this sentence; whence we observe, That the word of God takes occasion, to utter
and make it self manifest, even from the natural reasonings, and
argumentations framed in men's minds; though they are not the cause, yet they
are the occasion of the manifestation of it, even as the truth, righteousness,
power, and authority that is in God, breeds occasionally, fear, terror,
jealousy, and wrath, in men's hearts and minds, though these excellencies that
are in God, are no proper cause hereof, but only an occasion, without which
they would not be; For if there were no Judge, the Malefactor would not have
terror; even so, the very natural reasonings of men's hearts, are the
occasions of the manifestation of the word of God in us, but no proper cause of
it, for the cause is only in God himself; but without such reasonings, and
Characteristicall impressions in man's mind, the word of God could never have
been implanted, written, or translated in us whereby we come to have the
argumentations, and conclusions of sons of God, and not simply, or merely of
creatures in our minds, being once enlightened by him who is God, and the Father
of lights, where ever it appears: So that the soul of man is of far
greater sublimitie, and natural excellency in its creation, then any other
creature under heaven ever had vouchsafed unto it; So that there is an utter
impossibility that any creature should receive the impressions of God, but man
alone.

This is a large field to walk in, for according to the variety of the
reasonings of the mind of man by nature, which is set forth in all those ways,
wherein men have walked, and manifested themselves in this present world, such
it that wonderful Epistle of Jesus Christ, in the various writing and
expression of it in the souls, hearts, and lives of the Saints that are in
light through Jesus Christ; instance in one for all, the spirit of a natural
father reasons thus, if my child ask bread (to supply nature in the suppressing
of hunger) I cannot put a stone into his mouth, (that were cruelty) but bread;
if so be that I have it or can procure it; if the child ack fish, the father
cannot put a serpent into his bosom to bide and sting him, but somewhat to
cure and refresh him, if he have it. Now do but change this argument into the
way of Christ, and let God be the father, and my self the child, and then is
God, not man, the father; the bread heavenly and not from the earth; the
writing, reasoning or argument, divine and eternal, not humane and temporary;
and so the reasnings and dictates of our spirits are translated into the
arguments and dictates of the Spirit of God, and the arguments and dictates of
the Spirit of God are translated into a mind and spirit that speaks the very
same things naturally in it self, though only in a way of death, through its
natural ignorance, that now it speaks in that way of life, through that
light and knowledge that is in the Lord; and thus, Christ by sin condemns
sin in the flesh: for by those reasonings wherewith we justify our selves
naturally, through that ignorance that naturally is in us, by the very same
arguments and reasonings we condemn our selves, and justify the Lord, through
that light and knowledge we have in him by Jesus Christ.

2 The second thing to be observed, is the certainty of this sentence laid down
in the form o^ an oath, verily, verily, that is, so it is or so it shall be, as
if he should say Amen, Amen, so it is and so it shall be without alteration or
change, and in that the word is doubled, it is for the certainty of the thing,
as Joseph said of Pharaohs dream, and of no less certainty is all true
exposition and interpretation of holy Scripture, whatever men may dream as
Pharaoh did and knew not the meaning of it, and speak at uncertainties* not
being resolved whether things may come to pass now or then, or fall out to be
thus, or so in the things of God; for the same spirit of truth and certainty,
that gives the Prophecy, Proverb, Parable, and advise, that records the
History, or gives sentence divine, must also interpret, expound, and declare
the meaning thereof; else is the Book shut and sealed up unto us; great folly
therefore to conclude of certainty of Scripture, and of no infallibility in
the interpretation thereof; For no more then we know the truth of an
interpretation, no more do we know the truth and certainty of any History,
Prophecy, Proverb, or Parable, which is propounded unto us, but take things
upon repo^t, as we do other Chronologies of this world, having only the
traditions of men for the ground of our worship of God.

The third thing, is the manner of pronunciation of the sentence, I say unto
you, or as the word is, I say (in) you; the word used here, translated (I say)
signifies such a saying as a Judge speaks upon the Bench, when he gives
sentence in a cause, upon due proof and evidence, which stands fast in Law,
being irrevocable; such is the saying and speech of Christ, the truth whereof
can never be altered; and whereas he says, I say unto you, or as the word is,
I say (in) you, it signifies that what ever the Saints utter in point of
Religion, it is, and must be, the voice of the Son of God, and not of
themselves; so that as he suffers in them, else can he have no death at all,
and then no Savior; even so he speaks in them, or else has no voice, nor
language at all; and therefore without them, no Revealer of the will of his
Father; for where Christ is silent, there can be no Revelation* therefore is he
the word, or expression of the Father; and what he says of him, he says it in
them: therefore he says, I say in you, as in that very Epistle, or writing,
wherein I express my self in the Father unto the world, for my Father and I
are one.

The fourth thing to be observed, is the sentence it self, excluding all from
the life of God, such only excepted at do eat the flesh of the son of man,
and drink his blood; wherein observe five things briefly, first why he is
called the Son o^ man, by his flesh and blood in this place; eating and
drinking; by life in this place; and That of our selves we are n^^ able to
think a good thought, how can we then perform such a weighty worthy, and
unknown action, that is no less then life it self, in the doing of it.

For the first, viz. why he is called the Son of man?

Answ. Not only, nor properly, because he had a soul and a body as all men
have, which indeed was good in the creation, and so man is called the son of
God: But he is called the son of man, because he is so produced and brought
forth, as none can be, but such as proceed of man alone: Nor can he be a
Savior, but in way of such production and sonship, for Christ in respect of
his death ( without which no Savior) is brought forth and produced no other
way, but only in, and by man; for there is no death to be heard of in God, nor
can he bring forth or produce of himself, any thing that is deadly, for he is
that Fountain of life; yea, life it self, in the abstract; nor can it be
proper, or competible ^o the Son of God, to be brought forth in his death, in
any, No, nor in all other creatures in the world, but only in man; for as no
other creature in the creation was made in the Image of God, but man alone, so
no other creature in regard of degeneration, can bear the Image of death and
hell b^^ man alone: Therefore it is that Christ is said, to descend into the
lower-most parts of the earth for our redemption, or in our redemption, which
is wrought in us, or in our nature only; Therefore he says, thou will not
leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see
corruption; therefore of necessity must he be brought forth, in respect of his
death by man alone.

flesh and blood?

Answ. By flesh in Scripture, sometimes is meant, that which our Lord, or any
of his were never nourished, nor in the least refreshed by, and that is the
^^^me of flesh, which is a curse to all them that strengthen themselves by it in
the things of God; for in that sense, shall flesh and blood never inherit the
Kingdom of God; nay add further, in that sense it is true, That if you live
after the flesh, it is death, which is to live according to the wisdom, skill,
strength, study, and forecast, about the things of God, that a creature
(merely as he is a creature) is able to produce and bring forth, which is to
live according to the wealth, power, and honor of the creature; whose
goodlinesse is as the flower of grass that withers, consumes, and is
brought to naught; for the best thing that is in it (which is his wisdom) is
emnitie with God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
be. But secondly, we are to understand by flesh, that weakness, frailty, and
imbecility of man, when he is deprived, and laid waste in himself, of all
created glory, which is only then; when the spirit of the Lord blows, or
breathes upon him; and so becoms nothing in himself but weakness and
infirmity: And in this sense the Prophet says; Now the Egyptians are men, and
not God, their Horses flesh, and not spirit: So says the Psalmist in the same
sense, my flesh also rests in hope, that is my weakness, and tired out
condition, has rest, and strength in an other, though not in my self; for
hope that is seen is no hope, so that my nature affords no such thing, but only
that nature to which I am united: And in an other place, Thou art a God that
hears prayers, and unto thee shall all flesh come, that is* thou art
strength, and able to supply abundantly in all things, for thou art God, and we
bring nothing but weakness and infirmity unto thee, for unto thee nothing but
flesh comes; and so the Son of God is truly said, to be made flesh, that is
weak and ^rayle, in regard of our nature which he took, or (as a continued
act) takes upon himself.

Again, by blood is here meant the life, spirit, and power of the Son of
God, as he descends from the Father, even as the vigor, life and spirit of the
creature runs in the blood, in the heat thereof: such is the life, spirit,
power, virtue, and vigor of the son of man, as he is of the life, descent,
and power of the Father from above, and so is God blessed for ever Amen; and in
this sense is blood taken by our Apostle, where he says, This is he that came
by water and blood, that is, by weakness and strength, not by water only, but
by water and blood; that is, not by weakness only, but by weakness and
strength, that is, weakness in us, or in our nature, but power in God, or in
that nature divine; so is he said in the like sense, to be crucified in the
flesh, but quickened in the spirit; and so is it also said, That what the Law
could not do, i^ that it was weak concerning the flesh, yet the Son of God
taking upon him that similitude, and by sin condemned sin in the flesh,
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, that is, even as
he became flesh in us, so do we become spirit, and life in him, which is the
fulfilling and perfection of the Law.

The third thing observed is, what it is to eat this flesh, and to drink this
blood?

Answ. Is that as it is in the body of a man naturally in that respect, even so
also it is in that mystical body of Christ spiritually; for if a man should
eat, or communicate in (as the meaning is) only in food for the body, and not
take in moisture, or drink, for the digestion thereof, it is the destruction
of the body, because moisture, as well as heat, must be maintained, those being
the two Radical humors; else does the Lamp go out, and is extinct; yea,
meat without moisture does suffocate, and choke the spirits, to the surfeiting
of the body, and so becomes the overthrow of it, which otherwise would
maintain and uphold it. Again, if we should take in only drink, without
meat, upon which it operateth, and works, then does the moisture presently
overflow to the quenching of the heat, and so breeds either some dropsy in
the body, to the sinking and overthrow of it in that way, or else it ^umeth up
into the head, and breeds madness, and giddiness in the brain, unto all
foolish, wanton, and lascivious wickedness: Even so it is in that mystical
body of Christ: And hence it is said ( by an ^legant allusion) to eating and
drinking naturally) that we eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood; that is, if we ^^^ or communicate with that weakness and frailty which
i^ naturally in man, and which the Son of God assumed and took into unity
with himself, without alike drinking in, or communication with, that spirit
and life wherein he visits us, and comes into our nature from on high (even out
of the bosom of the Father) then do we surfeit, and suffocate the spirit, and
die in our selves, and in our sins; and so also, if we neglect that weakness
that is in us (as though no such thing were) and dream of a high and spiritual
estate, which does not arise out of, and is the result, (through the wisdom of
God) of that weakness that is in us, then do we either sink in our folly,
and become sottish in the things of God, being drunk up only with the things
of this natural life, else are we puffed up, and become giddy in our selves,
thinking we know something, when as indeed we know nothing as we ought to know,
but are merely, and vainly puffed up in a carnal, aspiring, proud,
vainglorious, and fleshly mind. So that to eat the flesh, and drink the
blood of the Son of man, is to communicate in the things that are of Jesus
Christ, both as he is God, and as he is man, and to hold the unity of strength
and weakness; that is, how he is made weak in taking our nature, and so
carries and bears our infirmities away for ever (he being that Scapegoat,
whose office it is so to do:) And also, how our nature is, thereby made strong
and mighty, througth that strength of the Son of God, in whom we find no
infirmity, but are furnished with his power everlastingly, so that death which
is naturally in us (as we are the sons of men) is swallowed up of that
victory and life, which is in him, as he is that victorious, and eternal Son
of God, and without a suitable correspondent, and hermonious feeding of these
two, as in one individual subsistence, we cannot have life in us, no more then
our bodies can be sustained by meat without drink, or by drink only without
meat: and else we cannot have life in us, that is, we can have no life, spirit,
or breathings of the Son of that living God in us: For as the body without
the soul is dead, so also the soul without the life, and spirit of the Lord
Jesus is dead, and as the body lives not without meat and drink, heat and
moisture, so the soul lives not without communicating alike* in this strength
and weakness, or in this life and death, which is in the Son of God, who
dies concerning the flesh, but is quickened in the spirit, and the spirit of God
proceeds ever from these two, when ever it utters it self, in that lively
Oracle or speech from off the covering Mercy-seat, it is ever from between
these two Cherubims, and never speaks evidently, what perilous times are in
the last days, but only as it proceeds from these twain, that is, from a dying
unto the flesh; and a being quickened in, and living unto the spirit, by which
life, spirit, or breath it ever preaches, from the days of Noah, even until
now, both in our selves, and by our selves to others; for as it is a Maxim,
that the spirit proceeds both from the Father and the Son; so is it here, for
the flesh, or infirmity of Christ is the Father, and the spirit or power is the
Son, as he is brought forth in that way of his death, without which he had
never been a Savior, and the Spirit or power is the Father, and the flesh is
the Son, in as much as he brings forth life in this death, without which he had
never been as he is man, in respect of that life, by which he lives the life
of God, never to dye any more, so have we eating and drinking made one in that
way of the faith of the Son of God, without which we cannot live the life of
that Saint or holy one of Israel.

that we eat this flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood; in which
consider two things, first who are meant in that he speaks plurally, except ye
eat, etc. Secondly, how we can be said to eat and drink in such a high nature,
seeing that we of our selves cannot think a good thought, much less perform
such an act as this.

For the first, who are meant in that he speaks in the second person plural,
Ye.

Answ. It is not properly to be understood, as being meant of man and man, no
not as of Saint and Saint, but of one Saint as he consists of a twofold
nature, according to that faith of the Son of God; so is it, Ye, that is,
every one that is in Christ, and so through those precious promises, or
gracious Covenant, is made partaker of that nature divine; ye^, who ever is one
of those children that have flesh and blood, of which the Son of God also
took part with them, namely, they that are partakers of those two natures by
faith, that are in Jesus Christ, to every one of those this is spoken, as to
such as are eaters, and drinkers in this case; for Christ as he is God, feeds
upon nothing but our infirmities; that is, strengthens himself in point of our
salvation, with nothing but our frailties and imperfections, and so of weak
becoms strong, yea of an abject, the Lord of all, For he in no case takes hold
on Angels, that is, of any power or excellency in the creature to deliver us
thereby, but only on the seed of Abraham (a Pilgrim and stranger in the Land)
he takes hold; that is, on our weaknesses, and imperfections, and out of them
he brings his own power and strength and other food the Son of God never
took into unity, nor digested, to gather strength unto himself by. Again,
as he is man he drinks the blood, that is, takes in, or receives that blood,
life, spirit, and power of God, whereby he is enabled to do all things,
according to the purpose of his will, and other drink he never drunk, as he
is man; for our poor nature is of that vast emptiness, that nothing but the
fullness and power of an infinite and all-sufficient God, can possibly supply and
perfect it, and so there is a complete eating and drinking, which is that full
satisfaction and nourishment, that can be found in none, save only in the Son
of God himself, for it is a weakness of that nature and latitude, that
nothing can supply and make up but God himself; and it is a power of that
fullness and perfection that can take nothing into unity with it self that
may be thought to add any thing (no not in the least) unto that strength and
vigor that is in God; for then it were not an Almighty power of God that saves
us.

And so it is ( We) that eat and drink, that is, We, humane nature and divine;
for in eating, the word eats up, and consumes our infirmities, and so there is
a plurality in the act, not only of natures in that one act, but of eating also
in sundry kinds and ways; for as our infirmities are multiplied, and that
aptitude that is in us to fall, such is the multiplication of that restoration
which is in that good word of God; it is ( We) also in drinking, that is, our
vast emptiness, drinks and takes in that fullness, power, and spirit that is
in the word of God, in which we are expressed and made manifest to be the
sons and daughters of God, and in that mutual eating and drinking our life,
strength, and comfort does consist.

The fifth particular, how it is said ( that we do eat) that are not able to
do any thing; alike answer is to be given to this as to the former, when he
says, Ye, he means not only diverse men, but he means every one as
considered, in him, who is not only of man, but also of God; so that if we
speak of man separated from the Word of God (which has sufficient power in it
self) we miss of the meaning, and of the mind of God, and so of that
communion or eating that is in the faith of Jesus Christ; and if we speak of
God divided and separated from man, we commit the like error, and are in the
same default; but we must hold and maintain the unity of them both, in that way
of faith in the Son of man, then is there power and ability, both to eat and
to drink, even as there is power and ability in the Heavens and the earth,
united in their operations, to bring forth fruit plentifully, which work
cannot be done, if either of them were set apart, and separated one from the
other: So that the word of God is made strong through our weakness, that so it
may appear and make manifest it self: and our weakness appears, and is
acknowledged through that word of God, that so all may be given unto God, and
he may be all in all; so that it is ( Ye) as man considered, in and with the
power and spirit of God, in which he is enabled to do all things, and not (
Ye) as considered one man, in and with an other, for so all flesh is grass,
surely in that respect the people is vanity.

S. G.

FINIS.

