SOME MODEST AND HUMBLE QVERIES Concerning a Printed Paper, Entitled, An
Ordinance presented to the Honorable House of Commons, etc. for the preventing
of the growing and spreading of Heresies* etc*

ROMANS 14. 5. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. ISA. 59. 9.
Therefore is judgment far from us, neither does justice over ^ake us: we
wait for light, but behold obscurity, etc. JOB. 8. 1. Who is this that
darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? HOS. 5. 1. Hear ye this, O
Priests, and hearken ye House of Israel -- for judgment is toward you;
because you have been a snare on Mispah, and a net spread upon Tabor, HOS. 9. 8.
The watchman of Ephraim was with my God: but the Prophet is the snare of a
Fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his God. Quid prodest
habere zelum Dei, and non-habere scientiam Dei? Orig. Quid ergo saviunt, ut
Stulticiam suam dum minuere volunt, augeant? Long diversa (...) carn^^^^ and
pietas -- Defendenda Religio est* non occidendo, sed moriendo; non savitia, sed
patientia. non scelere, sed (...) illa enim malorum sunt, haec bonorum.
Lactant. De Just. c. lib. 5 cap. 20. Omnis Lex debet (...) suae equitatis.
Calv. Published by Authority.

LONDON* Printed by Matthew Simmons for Henry Overton, and are to be sold in
Pope's Head Alley, 1646.

To the Reader.
BEing accidentally encountered by a vagrant* Paper, printed though without
Authority, yet with this Inscription; An Ordinance presented to the Honorable
House of Commons, etc* and conceiving partly by the frame and spirit of the
discourse, partly from some un-clerklike expressions in it, that certainly
those worthy Gentlemen, whose names are specified in the said Inscription, were
more or less wronged by the publishing and spreading of it under their names;
and that it was some other spirit that breathed in it, not theirs; I supposed
that possibly I might do the said Gentlemen some right, by a proposal of some
Queries upon occasion of some particularities in it, by means whereof they may
the better consider, in case it relates to them either in whole, or in part,
whether it be not unworthy of them; or whether, and to what degree those have
injured them, who issued the said undeserving Papar with such a badge of honor
upon it, as the two names of two such well-deserving men.

QUERIES about the ORDINANCE.
WHether it be agreeable to the Spirit of Christ, came into the world, as
himself says not to destroy men's lives, but to save them Luke 5. 56.
,) to make snares of any of his Doctrines for the destruction of the lives of
men?

Whether it be agreeable to the mind of

Whether it be agreeable to the will of Christ, for Civil Magistrates Rabbi,
or Masters, when as he has so expressly charged men, yea* his Apostles
themselves as well as others, not to be called Rabbi, or Masters Mat. 23. 8. 10.
* or whether to injoyne and compel men (especially upon the penalty of
death,) to preach and teach in many the most weighty and difficult points of
Religion, nothing but the dictates of their own judgments and wills, be not
much more then simply to be called Rabbi, or Masters, i. then simply to connive
at, and comply with those, who profess in all things to submit their
judgments and Consciences unto them? yea, whether is it not, to threaten men,
and that in the ^orest manner of all other, if they will not call them Rabbi,
or Masters, i. if they will not sin against the Commandment of Christ?

Whether is it Christian to maintain that Religion, by putting Lactantius
says) men ought to defend, non occidendo, sed moriendo, i. not by slaying
others, but by dying our selves for it?

Whether is it not evident from Tertullian, Lactantius, and other

Whether our best Records of later times do not clearly show,

Whether are errors and Heresies any other things; then some strong holds and
imaginations in men, which (as the Apostle says) exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God 2 Cor. 10.
? Or whether can they be better thrown down then by those weapons* which (as
the same Apostle speaks) are mighty through God* for that very purpose? And
whether are these weapons carnal, or spiritual?

Whether to enjoin Ministers or others upon pain of death, imprisonment,

Whether they, who inflict the heavy sentence of death upon

Whether did Luther (with diverse other worthy Assertors of the Zuinglius,
Calvin, etc. the erroneous opinion of Consubstantiation; an error far more
gross and dangerous then many particularized in the Ordinance; besides many
others not inferior in evil unto this, as concerning free will, election etc?

Whether did Calvin deserve either imprisonment or death, for, the observation
of the Lords day, as it is enjoined by the Ordinances and Laws of this Realm,
is not according to the Word of God?

Whether does a Minister, in case that in the performance of his

Whether a mistake in judgment, (as suppose a man verily and Infants ought not
to be Baptized, or that Presbytery is unlawful, or the like) joined with a
public and free profession of his judgment in this kind, be more sinful,
or more deserving imprisonment, death, etc. then an open and manifest denial
in works, of such Truths, which yet men profess in words; as when men profess
that they believe Jesus to be the Son of God, and that the Scriptures are the
word of God, etc. and yet live loosly, profanely, in drunkenness, riot, etc.
Or whether the Ordinance makes not the former denialls, which at most are but
of Truths very questionable and obscure, yea and but of inferior consequence
neither (at least comparatively) punishable by imprisonment or death; whereas
it inflicts no censure at all upon these latter denialls (except it be in the
case of blasphemy) which are every whit as full and public as the other, yea
and of Truths both more generally received, and far more easy to be proved;
yea and of a far greater and more formidable consequence, then those other?

Whether Ministers, truly faithful and conscientious, being fully England)
shall do well to comply with the Ordinance, (so called) against their
judgments; and publicly hold forth to the people those things for truths,
which they are absolutely persuaded in their judgments, to be nothing less?
Or whether the said Ordinance, threatening them with imprisonment or death, in
case they shall declare themselves otherwise, be not a dangerous temptation
upon them, to draw their foot into that snare of death?

Whether, the public holding of any such opinion, which Corinth, (yea and in
other Churches besides in the Apostles days) who publicly held some opinions
of far worse consequence, then very many of those, which the said Ordinance
censureth, either with imprisonment, or with death; Of whose excommunication,
notwithstanding the Apostle is silent, even then when he argues against, and
condemns their errors. Yea does he not entreat them graciously,
notwithstanding the danger of their error, calling them beloved Brethren 1 Cor.
15. 58.
and admonishes them to take heed of being deceived; to be steadfast and
unmovable? etc.

Whether is it not very possible, that persons, who may hold,

Whether is not such an Ordinance, (were it an ordinance indeed) for a good
conscience sake, then other men; by how much the more likely they are to
discover the common errors and misprisions of the present age in matters of
Religion, then they?

Whether is not the said Ordinance, in the example of it, a direct Popish
Magistrates, to persecute the faithful servants of God, who live in their
territories with fire and sword, for professing the truth of God amongst them?
And whether do not they, who here seek to pluck up the tares, by such an
Ordinance, pluck up the wheat also there, by the same?

Whether was there ever any such Ordinance, or State act, ever heard of, or
known, in any the Reformed Churches? I

Whether was there ever any thing done in the Bishops times,

Whether the said Ordinance ministers not an advantage, of opportunity to the
worst and wickedest of men, who commonly hate the best and faithfullest
Ministers most, to accuse them unduly of such things, which according to the
ordinary course of Law, may touch their lives, or otherwise bring much
affliction, and vexation to them?

Whether twelve simple Countrymen, such as our ordinary

Whither an ordinary Judge of Ass^^e, who either does not pretend, free will,
of the Trinity, of the hypostaticall union, concerning the death of Christ, the
condition of the soul after death, etc. be a competent Judge in such Questions
and cases as these, especially over, and against such men (to the bereaving of
them, either of life or liberty) who are known to be men of able parts, and
to have made the study of Divinity, their sole employment all their days,
being otherwise, grave, and sober, and conscientious men in all their ways?

Whether these two opinions, (both of them attainded for errors, That the
morrall Law contained in the ten Commandments is no rule of a Christian life.
2o That the observation of the Lords day, as it is enjoined by the Ordinances
and Laws of this Realm, is not according, or contrary to the word of God; can
possibly be both errors, or justly punishable; since the Observation of the
Lords day, as it is enjoined by the Ordinances and Laws of this Realm, is no
where to be found in the Moral Law contained in the ten Commandments; this
Law requiring the observation of another day, differing from that, the
observation whereof is enjoined by the Ordinances and Laws of this Realm? Or
if the Law contained in the ten Commandments be the rule of a Christian life,
whether do they walk Christianly, who do not conform themselves unto it?
nay, who place a great part of their Christianity, in walking, if not contrary
to it, yet quite beside it? as all they do, who observe the Lords day, as it
is enjoined by the Ordinances and Laws of this Realm; and celebrate the two
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Loods Supper, mentioned likewise in the Ordinance?

Whether does the Ordinance, making this a punishable error, that a man by
nature has free will to turn unto God, by this expression, of having free
will to turn unto God, intend to grant any will at all in men by nature to
turn unto God, though much encumbered and oppressed with corruption, and
indisposition to such an act, and in that respect, means that it is not free;
or else to deny all, and all manner of will in men, in respect of this act; so
that when God purposes to make men willing to turn to him, he must create a
new faculty of will in him, as also a new disposition or propension in this
will, whereby it may be freely carried upon this act of conversion?

What does the Ordinance mean, by blasph^ming the name of God, or any of the
Holy Trinity? does it mean any kind or degree of sin, against the third
Commandment? or any, and every kind of swearing* as by Faith, Troth, or the
like; so that upon the second offense committed in this kind, after, and
contrary to admonition, the party offending is to suffer death? or does it by
blaspheming the name of God, etc. intend only the highest kinds of Blasphemy,
as the calling of God, or of Jesus Christ, accursed, wicked, unjust,
unfaithful, etc?

What does the Ordinance mean, by impugning the word of God? the Word of God?

In what sense does the Ordinance make it erroneous and punishable, that God
sees no sin in the justified? inasmuch as there is a sense, (if not more then
one) wherein it is most certainly true, that God sees no sin in such persons (
Numb. 23. 21. Jer. 18. 23. Psalm. 32. 1. etc.
)?

In what sense does the Ordinance adjudge it an error, worthy to a man is bound
to believe no more, than by his reason he can comprehend? Does it intend to
make men of this Faith, that they are bound in conscience to believe more than
they can comprehend, that is, clearly and fully conceive any reason why they
should believe? If so, then how much, or to what proportion of object are they
bound to believe, beyond what they are able to comprehend by reason, sufficient
and clear grounds of believing? Are they bound to believe in this kind (I
mean, beyond what they are able to comprehend by reason) without measure,
bounds, or limits? If so, are they bound to believe all things without
exception, that shall any ways, or by any hand be presented unto them? Or, if
Reason ought not to regulate or limit men about the object or matter of their
believing, then are they bound to believe those things, concerning which, there
is no ground or reason at all, why they should be believed? If so, whether is
Divine Revelation, or the asserting of things by God, any ground or reason,
comprehensible in that relation, by that faculty of Reason, or understanding in
a man, for the believing of all things so revealed, and asserted? If so,
whether is not Reason, able to comprehend and judge of all things required by
God as necessary to be believed, so far, as they are necessary to be
believed, i. e, as far as they are revealed by God? Or is any man bound to
believe that, concerning which it is unpossible for him, or any man, to
comprehend, or conceive any reason, why it should be a Truth; and consequently
worthy or meet to be believed? Or what instance can be given in any particular
branch of the object of Faith, which ought to be believed, and yet is
unpossible to be comprehended by Reason, that it is a Truth? Or whether ought
any man (at least, in sensu composito,) to believe the deepest or highest
mystery in Religion, any further, or any otherwise, then as, and as far, as
he has Reason to judge it to be a Truth?

What does the Ordinance mean, by publishing Doctrines with obstinacy?
publishing of them, contrary to the will, pleasure, or prohibition of the
Assembly of Divines, or of any particular man, whether they show unto the
Assertors or Publishers of such Doctrines, any sufficient reason to convince
them, or no? Or what kind, or manner of Reasons does it intend those shall be,
upon the tender whereof, either by the said Assembly, or others, the publisher
of the Doctrines shall be judged obstinate, in case he shall still publish
them? Or if, by publishing with obstinacy, be meant, a publishing contrary to
the desires, or injunctions of men, without any sufficient reason given of
their desires, or injunctions in this kind; then in what sense or notion does
the Ordinance understand the word Obstinacy? or how many desires, prohibitions,
or injunctions of men to the contrary, must precede and be administered, before
a man shall according to meaning and intent of the Ordinance, be said to
publish a Doctrine obstinately?

Whereas the said Ordinance makes it an error, and the publishing Government
by Presbytery is unlawful; whether does it mean, that Government by Presbytery
which the Parliament has established, or that Government by Presbytery, which
is so importunely desired and defended by the Ministers; because there is (it
seems) a strong opposition, and vast difference between the one and the other,
at least in some things? Or does it intend, all, and all manner of Government
by Presbytery, in what sense or notion soever?

What does the paper mean, by blaspheming the Name of God, or impugning
wittingly, and presumptuously, considering, that (as Mr. Prynne informs us at
Truth Triumphing over falsehood, p. 109*
large) the word, presumptuously admits of a strange variety of significations?
And since the sin of blaspheming the Name of God (with the other) must be
committed wittingly, and presumptuously, or contrary to Admonition, before the
Ordinance (so called) takes hold of it, or makes it punishable; upon what
testimony, evidence, or indication, one or more, shall the said sins be
adjudged to be committed wittingly?

Again, inasmuch as the said sins committed contrary to Admonition, Admonition
must be given, to bring the said sins under the dint and stroke of the
Ordinance? whether by a Magistrate only, or by a Minister, and that either in
his public Ministry, and in general, or in private, and in personal
address, or by any man, of what rank or quality soever?

God having appointed an express punishment (by way of remedy whom I have
delivered up unto Satan, says Paul, that they may learn not to 1 Timothy 1. 20
blaspheme,) whether is it either reasonable or Christian, to decline this
punishment of so sovereign a nature for the healing of the sin, and to prefer
a punishment mentioned only in the Old Testament, which, though appointed by
God for those times, yet has no such Evangelicall virtue or property ascribed
unto it?

Whether the Ordinance, in ordering the Delinquent or party accused, intends
only this renunciation, when the complaint of the error Preached or
maintained, comes from, or out of such a public Congregation? or in case it
comes from, or out of another Congregation, viz. which is not Parochial, or
held in a Parish Church, whether then does the Ordinance intend any such
Renunciation at all? or in what Congregation does it intend it? Or whether is
any complaint of an error published or maintained, admittable by the Ordinance,
but only those, that come from some public Congregation of a Parish Church?

In what sense desires the Paper to be understood, when it makes it is not
lawful to teach children to pray? or whether does it measure children, by age,
or by understanding? If by either, at what age, or under what line or scantling
of understanding must they be, when it shall be punishable by the Ordinance,
for any man to affirm, that it is not lawful to teach them to pray? For
doubtless it is not lawful to teach children, or whosoever, to pray, unless
we can reasonably judge them capable of our instruction in this kind, and of
learning how to pray.

The Scriptures not having clearly determined or defined, what is erroneous,

Whether did God ever give any power or Authority to civil Magistrates,

FINIS.

