RIGHT And MIGHT well met, OR, A brief and unpartiall enquiry into the late
and present proceedings of the Army under the Command of His EXCELLENCY the
LORD FAIRFAX.

Wherein the equity and regularnesse of the said proceedings are
demonstratively vindicated upon undeniable Principles, as well of Reason, as
RELIGION.

TOGETHER With satisfactory Answers to all material Objections against them.

By JOHN GOODWIN.

Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment,

John 7. 24. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
even they both are abomination unto the Lord,

Prove. 17. 15. Plus togae laesere Rem-publicam, quam loricae,

Tertul. Necessitas, quae cogit, excusat.

Sen. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for Henery Cripps in Pope's Head
Alley, 1648.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LORD FAIRFAX, And his Honorable Council at Wars,
I make no question but your EXCELLENCY, and Honorable Council; have, without
putting any stumbling block of iniquity before your faces, consulted all
Oracles of Conscience and Honor, about your present, and late procedings,
before you lifted up an hand unto them. The cleernesse and integrity of your
hearts herein, cannot (I presume) but laugh to scorn all the hard sayings, and
clamorous imputations of men, who^ot the knowledge of Truth, Facundum saciebat
amor.
but love to themselves; makes eloquent i^ diclaiming against you. The import
of your actions standing in full conjunction with that great and public
Interest of the Kingdom, must needs carry in it an opposition to the
irregular and by interests of such men, who fear that they must scatter, if
the Kingdom once begins to gather. And it need not seem at all strange to you,
that men of wit and parts otherwise, having the advance of such an
antiperistasis, as the tenor of your proceedings accommodates them with,
Grande doloris ingenium est.
should be able to misfigure the liberal and ingenous face of your actions
into an absolute deformity. There is no heart of Oak, or other timber, though
never so sound, but that a cunning Painter, especially under some particular
elevation of fancy for such a work, will put into a color of rottenness, and
make it look as if it were stark naught. That the glorious work of casting
out Devils by the finger of God, was represented unto the people under the
notion of as vile and hateful an action, as lightly can be imagined; no
better, then a working by Beelzebub the chief of the Devils. But the best is,
that they that speak evil of worthy actions, double their reward in heaven.

Hearing and observing the tongues of your enemies hard at work on every side,
in making your sweet things, bitter, your smooth things, rough, and your
straight things, crooked, in the imaginations of men, I betook my self to my
Pen to Counter-worke them, what I may, by resolving your actions into their
proper and clear principles of righteousness and honor. If I had only the
reasons and judgments of men to encounter, I should not question a conquest by
satisfaction; but when men's judgments are steeled with interest and affection,
force of reason and dint of argument, prove (for the most part) but like
arrows shot against a wall of brass. The Holy Ghost takes special notice,
that the Pharisees, being covetous, Lu. 16. 14.
derided our Savior, notwithstanding his most heavenly and convincing Doctrine
and discourse against that sin.

I make bold with your Names for countenance to these papers, and humbly
present them unto your hand, not to inform you of the righteousness of your
Actions (wherein I doubt not but you were satisfied from Heaven, before they
were in being) but partly to obtain the safer conduct for them to pass
abroad, and partly to account with you for those respects of honor which are,
and have bin long due unto you from

Your Faithful Servant in the Lord
From my Study Jan. 1. 1648.
Right and might Well met.
THat the children of prey, and men lately under hope of dividing the spoil of
this miserable Kingdom, when it should be reduced under the iron rod of
enslaving tyranny and oppression (between which sad condition, and it, there
was now but a step) should rise up with passionate outcries, and be ready to
curse the Army and their late proceedings, with bell, book, and candle, is no
matter of wonder, or much observation. But if the body of the people of the
Land, or such who have no mind to be gratified with the sorrows or sighings of
innocent men, should profess any dissatisfaction, or stond in conscience about
the lawfulness or justness of such their engagements; it would argue, either
first, that they always lived not only free from oppression, but from the
fear of it also, and so never had occasion to enquire, either upon what
grounds, and by what means, oppression imminent may lawfully be prevented, or
incumbent, be shaken off and suppressed; or else, in case they have suffered
under oppression, that they never saw any visible or probable means of
deliverance, and so wanted an inviting opportunity to consider, whether these
means might lawfully be improved in order to such an end, or no. For
certainly the grounds and principles upon which the said proceedings of the
Army stand clear and justifiable, are no parables, no dark, or disputable
notions, or conceptions, but such, wherein even he that runs, may read
equity and truth; and which have been asserted for such, by grave, learned, and
judicious men, who neither lent, nor took upon usury; I mean, who were no
ways interested in any such concernment, or case, as that now upon trial.

Though some other things have been of late acted by the Army, Sect. 2.
wherein many pretendingly complain of want of conscience and justice; yet I
suppose they have done nothing, either more obnoxious to the clamorous tongues
and pens of their adversaries, or more questionable in the judgments and
consciences of their friends, then that late garbling of the Parliament,
wherein they sifted out much of the dross and soil of that heap, intending to
reduce this body, upon the regular motion whereof, the well being, indeed, the
(civil) life of the whole Kingdom depends, to such members, who had not
manifestly turned head upon their trust, nor given the right hand of fellowship
to that most barbarous, inhumane, and bloody faction amongst us, who for many
years last past have with restless endeavors procured the deep trouble, and
attempted the absolute enslaving, (which is, being interpreted, the utter
undoing) of the Nation. So that if this action of theirs shall approve it
self, and appear to be regular and conformable to such laws, and rules of
justice, which all considering and disingaged men conclude ought to be followed
and observed in such cases, as that which lay before them; especially if it
shall appear to have been the legitimate issue of true worth and Christianity;
I presume all their other actions of like tenor and import, will partake of the
same justification, and honor, with it.

Let us first take into consideration the substance of such exceptions, Sect. 3.
which can with any pretense of reason, or color of conscience be levied
against the lawfulness of it; Afterward if it be needful, we will consider
further, whether those that be with it, be not more, or at least more weighty
and considerable, then those that are against it.

The firstborn of the strength of those, who condemn the said act of the
Army, as unlawful, lies in this; that the Actors had no sufficient authority
to do what they did therein, but acted out of their sphere, and so became
transgressors of that Law, which commands every man to keep order, and
within the compass of his calling.

To this I answer 1. Sect. 4.
as our Savior says, that the Sabbath was made for man (1. for the benefit of
man) and not man for the Sabbath Mar. 2. 27.
; so certain it is, that callings were made for men, and not men for callings.
Therefore as the law of the Sabbath, though enacted by God, was of right, and
according to the intention of the great Lawgiver himself, to give place to
the necessary accommodations of men, and ought not to be pleaded in bar
hereunto; in like manner, if the law of callings at any time opposes, or lies
cross to the necessary conveniences of men, during the time of this
opposition, it suffers a total eclipse of the binding power of it. It is a
common saying among the Jewish Doctors, that peril of life drives away the
Sabbath; yea Master Ainsworth cites this saying out of the Hebrew Canons:
Pericusunt vitae pelli Sabbati^.
Circumcision in the time thereof drives away the Sabbath; and afterward,
that peril of life drives away all Genesis 17. 12, 13.
. So that as there were several cases, wherein (as our Saviors expression is)
they who polluted the Sabbath were blameless Mat. 12.
; In like manner, there are very many cases, wherein men may transgress the
ordinary law of Callings, and yet be no transgressors. Therefore unless it can
be proved, that the Army had no necessity lying upon them to garble the
Parliament as they did; their going beyond their ordinary callings to do it,
will no ways impair the credit or legitimatenesse of the action.

2. Sect. 5.
Nor did they stretch themselves beyond the line of their callings, to act
therein as they did. Their calling and commission was, to act in the capacity
of Soldiers for the peace, liberties, and safety of the Kingdom. What does
this import, but a calling to prevent, or suppress by force, all such persons
and designs, whose faces were set to disturb, or destroy them? Nor did their
Commission (I presume) limit or conclude their judgments to any particular
kind of enemies, as if they had only power, or a calling thereby, to oppose or
suppress, either such, who should confess themselves enemies, or such, who by
the Interpretation or vote of any one party, or faction of men in the Kingdoms,
should be reputed and deemed enemies: but all such, without exception, whom
they, upon competent grounds, and such, as upon which discreet men in ordinary
cases are wont to frame acts of judgment, and to proceed to action
accordingly, should judge and conclude to be enemies. Or if it shall be
supposed, that by their Commission they were limited to judge only those
enemies to the Kingdom, with their abbettors and supporters, who were in Arms
with the King, or on the Kings behalf against the Kingdom, in their
Representatives; those Parliament Men, whom they have excluded from sitting in
that house, having notoriously discovered themselves to be men of this
engagement, friends and abettors of those, who very lately were, and yet in
part are, in arms against the peace and safety of the Kingdom, in this
consideration fall directly and clearly under their commission; and
consequently, by warrant hereof, they have, and had a calling, to proceed
against them as they did.

3. Sest. 6.
If the calling which the Parliament it self had to levy Forces against the
King and his Party, to suppress them, and their proceedings, as destructive to
the peace, liberties, and safety of the Kingdom, was warrantable and good,
then was the calling of the Army to act as they did in the business under
debate, warrantable and good also. But the antecedent is true, therefore the
consequent also. The minor proposition, viz. that the calling of the
Parliament, to levy Forces against the King and his Party, in order to the ends
mentioned, was every ways warrantable and good, I presume will not be denied
by the Parliament Men themselves. Or if they should deny it, they would but
deny the Sun to be up at noonday, inasmuch as the truth thereof has been
brought forth into a clear and perfect light, by many pens, Mr. Prynne
Sover. Power of Parliame^ts and Kingdoms.
yea and by their own (in many of their Declarations) yea, and Mr. Prynne
himself has set it up in a great Volume as upon a mountain, that it cannot
be hid; though by the fervency of his late Devotion to the Kings interest and
cause, he has attempted the melting down of that mountain.

The connection in the major proposition is valid upon this consideration. Sect.
7.
The Parliament (or at least the Parliament men who did the thing) had no other
calling, to oppose the King and his, by force, but only the general call of
the major part of the people, by which they were enabled to act in a
Parliamentary capacity, [i. more effectually, and upon more advantageous
terms, then singly, or out of such a capacity, they could] for their good. By
this call by the major part of the people, they were enabled only in a
general, implicit, and indefinite manner, to raise forces against the King and
his accomplices, for the safety, and behoof of the Kingdom. So that the
particularity of this action was not warranted simply by the nature, or tenure
of their call, but by the regular and due proportion which it had to the
accomplishing of the end, for which they were chosen or called, viz. the
peoples good. From whence it follows, that whether they had been in a
Parliamentary capacity, or no, yet if they had been in a sufficient capacity of
strength, or power for matter of execution, their call to do it, for
substance, had been the same, though not for form. And suppose there had been
no Parliament sitting, or in being, when the King and his party rose up in
arms against the Peace, Liberties, and safety of the Kingdom; doubtless if
any one man had been able to have secured the Kingdom in all these against
them, his action had not been censurable for want of a calling to it; in as
much as every member, as well in a body politic, as natural, has a
sufficient call, yea an engagement lying by way of duty upon it, to act at any
time, and in all cases, according to its best and utmost capacity, or ability,
for the preservation and benefit of the whole. Now then, supposing the same
proportion to the peace, benefit, and safety of the Kingdom, in what the Army
did in purging the Parliament, and in what the Parliament it self did, in
opposing the King by force (which is a point of easy demonstration, and is ex
super abundanti, proved in the large Remonstrance of the Army lately published)
let us consider, whether the call of the Army, to act for the Kingdom as they
did, be not as authentic, clear, and full, as that of the Parliament to act
as they did, in reference to the same end.

First, Sect. 8.
the authority and power of the people [or rather the present exercise and
execution of this power] to act for their own preservation and well being in
every kind, was as well formally, and according to the ceremony of the Law, as
really, and according to the true intentions and desires of the people, vested
in the Parliament. So that the Parliament by virtue of this investiture, and
during the same, had the same right of power to raise an Army, and to give
unto it what Commission they judged meet, in order to the benefit of the
people, or to act any other thing of like tendency, which the people themselves
had, to choose for themselves a Parliament. Therefore whatsoever lies within
the verge of the Armies Commission derived from the Parliament, relating to the
Kingdoms good, they have as full and formal a call, or warrant, to act, and
put in execution, as the Parliament it self had, either to raise an Army, or
to do any other act whatsoever. If then first, the ten or of their Commission
stood toward any such point as this, (which I presume is no way questionable)
viz. to suppress by strong hand, all such persons, whom upon rational grounds
they should judge enemies to the peace and welfare of the Kingdom; and
secondly, that those Parliament Members, whom now they have cut off from that
body, were upon such grounds judged such by them, (of the truth whereof they
have given a supersufficient account in their said late Remonstrance;) it is as
clear as the Sun that their calling to act as they did in cutting off these
Members, is every whit as legitimate and formal, as that of the Parliament it
self is to act any thing whatsoever, as a Parliament.

Nor is it of any value to pretend here, Sect. 9.
and say, that it is not to be believed, that a Parliament should give any
Commission unto men, to act against themselves, or in a destructive way to
their privileges, or honors. For to this I answer.

First, that Lawgivers, whilst they are sober, and in their right minds, may
very probably make such Laws, for the ordering and restraint of persons
distracted and madd, which, in case they afterward become distracted, may, and
ought to be put in execution, upon themselves. And in case any of those
Parliament men, who joined in granting that Commission unto the Army, by which
they were enabled to fight, slay and destroy all those that were in arms
against the Parliament, should afterward have turned Cavaliers themselves, and
been found in arms against the Parliament (as some of them, If my memory
fails me not, were) they might very lawfully have been encountered and
destroyed by the Army, by virtue of that Commission which was granted by
themselves.

Secondly, Sect. 10.
what only one Emperor explicitly spoke to an inferior Officer created by
him, when he delivered him the Sword; Si just egero, hoc utar is pro me: Si
injuste, contra me.
If I do justly, use this for me; if unjustly, use it against me; the same
implicitly, and according to the exigency of the turst committed by Office,
does every superior Magistrate say unto him, whom he chooses and admits
into a place of subordinate office, or power under him. For the punishment of
evil doers, and so the procurement of the public good, does notlye by way of
Office, or duty, upon the chief Magistrate only, but upon all subordinate
Magistrates also, and Officers whatsoever. This is evident from this passage in
Peter: Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether
it be to the King, as supreme; Or unto Governors. [i. inferior Magistrates
or Officers] as to them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
So then, the punishment of evil doers, and this simply. without all
partiality, or distinction of persons, (which are things sinful in all
Magistrates whatsoever, as well subordinate, as supreme) and likewise the
protection and encouragement of those that do well, lying by way of Office and
duty, upon all those, who by the King, or supreme Officer, are invested with
any power of authority, though subordinate; evident it is, that whenever a
King, or other Supreme authority, creates an inferior, they invest it with a
legitimacy of magistraticall power to punish themselves also, in case they
prove evil doers; yea and to act any other thing requisite for the praise or
encouragement of the good. Nor is there any pretense here for such an
exception, as the Apostle Paul finds, in the grand Commission of Christ. But
when he says all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is
excepted, which did put all things under him. 1 Cor. 15. 27.
God the Father being incapable of sin, is not capable of losing that
sovereign dignity, which is native and essential to him; and consequently,
not capable of coming into subjection under any creature, as Christ Mediator,
in respect of his humane nature, is. But Kings and Magistrates of the highest,
being very capable even of such sins, which are destructive to the peace and
welfate of the people under them, and repugnant to the encouragement of those
that do well, and consequently, which appertain to the cognizince of every
Magistrate, to whom the care of such things is entrusted, are very capable also
of forfeiting that dignity, which is natural and essential to them, as Kings,
or Supreme, and of rendering themselves obnoxious to those authorities and
powers, which out of such cases, are under them, but upon such miscariages, are
above them; as Reuben forfeited that excellency of dignity, which appertained
to him, as the first borne of his Father, by going up unto his Fathers bed.
Genesis 49. 3.
Upon this very ground Calvin himself, Zuinglius, and other reformed Divines,
and the Scottish Ministers themselves (more generally) and Master Prynne more
voluminously then they all, determine and adjudge it, not only lawful, but
matter of duty and charge lying upon the subordinate Magistrates, to curb and
bridle the tyrannous extravagancies and incursions of Kings and Princes against
their people. See Calvin and Zamglius cited by Mr. Prynn, with approbation,
upon the account. Sover. Power of Parl. and Kingdoms, p. 199. And the Scottish
Ministers in their brief Thesis de majestatis jure, M. S.
But

Secondly, suppose the Army had not a call to act as they did, in the case
under debate, every ways as full of formality, as the call of the Parliament
to act as they did, in opposition to the King, yet might their call be (and
indeed was) as material, as weighty, as considerable, and as justifyable in
the sight of God, Sect. 11.
and of all unprejudiced intelligent men, as the other. The call of the
Parliament we spoke of, was from the persons of the people, expressed by
formality of words, or other ordinary gestures, testifying such a call from
them: and this call they (or most of them) received from the people, whilst as
yet they (the people) were in no visible, at least in no imminent or present
danger of being fwallowed up in slavery and tyranny. But the call of the Army,
to deny the opportunity of the house, to those Members of Parliament, whom they
sequested, was from the strong and importonate cries of the peoples Liberties,
yea and of many of their lives, being now laid upon the Altar, ready to be
offered up in sacrifice upon the service of the lust and revenge of a most
inhumane gencration of men, who (it seems) thirsted after them with that
furiousness of thirst, that they made no spare of their own dear lives
themselves to make the purchase, and were now under a great additionall
enragement, as having been for a long time chased up and down in their own
blood, and by a strong hand kept fasting from their desires. Now the calls of
the miseries and extremities of men for relief, are more authorizing, more
urging, pressing, and binding upon the consciences of men, who have
wherewithal to afford relief unto them, then the formal requests or
elections of men to places of trust or interest, when the electors have no such
present or pressing necessity upon them, for the interposall of the elected on
their behalf: The necessities of men call more effectually, then men
themselves; yea, the truth is, that the calls of men, calling there is to help or
assist them, being in a tolerable condition of subsisting, without receiving
the help they call for, are but dallyings, or sportings, and shadows of calls,
in comparison of the loud, vehement, and importunate cries of the exigencies
and extremities of men, though the men themselives should hold their peace.

Fourthly, Sect. 12.
(and lastly to the first objection) the common saying, In casu extremae
necessitatis omnia sunt communia.
that in case of extreme necessity all things are common, extend's unto
callings also. In cases of necessity, all callings are common, in order to the
supply of the present necessity. David and his men being hungry, Aqu. 22 ae:
qu. 32. art. 7.
were all Priests, in reference to the satisfaction of their hunger, and did,
and that lawfully, eat that bread, which (as our Savior himself affirms)
was lawful only for the Priests to eat. Mat. 12. 4.
Polanus a reformed Divine of good note, grants, that when Bishops and
Ecclesiastiques are defective either in will, or skill, for the reformation of
Religion, and the Church; laics or private men may law fully supply their
defect herein, and act the part of Bishops or Ecclesiastical persons, in such
reformations. Laicis licet curam de Reformand a Religione, and Ecclesia
suscipere, cessantibus, vel non facientibus officium, vel facultate destitutis
Episcopis and Ecclesiasticis. Polan. Symph. c. 19. These. 2.


When the Pilot, or Master of a Ship at Sea, be either so far overcome and
distempered with drink, or otherwise disabled, as through a phreneticall
passion, or sickness in any kind, so that he is incapable of acting the
exigencies of his place; for the preservation of the Ship, being now in present
danger, either of running upon a quick sand, or splitting against a rock, etc.
anyone, or more of the inferior Mariners, having skill, may, in order to the
saving of the Ship, and of the lives of all that are in it, very lawfully
assume, and act according to the interest of a Pilot, or Master, and give
orders and directions to those with them in the Ship accordingly, who stand
bound at the peril of their lives in this case to obey them. By such a
comparison as this, Master Prynne himself demonstrates how regular and lawful
it is for Parliaments, yea and for particular men, to turn Kings, I mean, to
assume that Interest and power, which the Law appropriates to the Office, and
vesteth only in the person of the King, when the King steereth a course in
manifest opposition to the peace and safety of the Kingdom.

The passage in Master Prynne, though it be somewhat large, yet being through
and home to the point in hand, I shall present Verbatim. Go too now (says this
Anti Protyrannievll Spirit) in this our Politic Ship, the Master gluts
himself with Wine, most of his Assistants either asleep, or drunk with
mutual cups, sportingly behold an imminent rock. The Ship in the mean time,
either holds not that course, which is expedient for the owner, or seems
speedily to be wracked. What think thou is here to be done under the Master,
by one who is vigilant and solicitous? Shall he pull those by the ears, who
are asleep, or only jogge them by the sides? but in the mean time, lest he
should seem to do ought without their command, shall be not afford his help
and assistance to the endangered Ship? Truly what madness, or rather impiety,
will this be? Seeing then (as Plato says) TYRANNY IS A CERTAIN FRENZY and
drunkenness, the Prince may utterly subvert the Republique, the most of the
Nobles may collude, connive, or at least are fast asleep; the people, who are
Lords of the Republique, by the fraud and negligence of their Ministers, which
is their fault, are reduced into greatest streights: in the mean time, there
is one of the Nobles, which considers the incroaching tyranny, and detests it
from his soul: what think thou is now to be done against him by this man?
Shall be only admonish his Colleagues of their duty; who themselves do as
much hurt as they may? But besides, as it is perilous to admonish, and in that
state of things it may be deemed a capital crime: shall he do like those,
who contemning other helps, casting away their arms, shall cite Laws, and
make an Oration concerning Justice, among thieves, in the midst of a wood? But
this truly is that which is commonly said, to be mad with reason. What then?
shall he grow deaf at the peoples groans? Shall he be silent at the entrance
of thieves? Or shall he finally grow lazy, and put his hands into his bosom?
But if the Laws appoint the punishment of a Traitor against one wearing
buskins on his legs, who counterseits sickness for fear of the enemies,
what punishment at least shall we decree against him, who either through
malice, or slothfulness, shall betray those whom he has undertaken to
protect? But rather he shall command those things that are needful to such as
are wary, by a Mariners shout: he shall take care lest the Commonwealth
receive any detriment, and shall preserve the Kingdom even against the Kings
will and resistance, by WHICH HE HIMSELF BECOMES A KING and shall cure the King
himself as a frantique man, by BINDING HIS HANDS AND FEET, if he may not
otherwise do it. Thus far Mr. Prynne; and full far enough to justify
whatsoever is said in these papers for the justification of the Army in their
binding the hands and feet of some frantique Parliament men (as himself in a
Platonic strein phraseth those, who either thorough malice, or slothfulness,
shall betray those, whom they have undertaken to protect.)

It were easy to multiply instances of like import. But by what has been
argued, the nullitie of that argument against the proceedings of the Army,
drawn from the defect of a calling to act as they did, fully appears.

A second Objection is this: Sect. 13.
They resisted Authority, or the powers lawfully set over them; The second
maine objection.
and therein, the ordinance of God: therefore their fact is to be condemned and
cannot be justified: I answer,

First, To resist Authority, imports either a detracting or denial of
obedience to the just commands of Authority, or else the engaging of a man's
self to dissolve, and take away Authority. Now certain it is that the Army,
in that act of theirs now in question, neither did the one, or the other.
First, the authority of Parliament, had made no such Act, passed no such Vote,
that none of their Members, though voting, or acting never so palbably, or with
never so high an hand against the Interest, peace, and liberties of the
Kingdom, should be debarred sitting in their house. In which respect, the Army
debarring those Members, which had thus voted and acted, from sitting in that
House, did not resist Authority in the former sense. Or in case it should be
supposed, that the authority of Parliament, had made such an act, or passed
such a Vote, as that mentioned, unless the equity and justness of it could be
sufficiently cleared, the crime of resisting authority could not upon any
sufficient ground be imputed to those, who should decline obedience to it.

Secondly, Sect. 14.
neither did the Army in the aforesaid act, resist authority in the latter
sense; because what they did, no way imported any dislike of Parliament
authority, nor had any tendency toward the abolition, or taking of it away;
but only employed a disapprovement of the factious carriage of things in this
present Parliament, as evidently bent against the safety, liberties, and well
being of the Nation; and tended withal toward a prevention of the like, or
worse, for the future. But as for their approbation of, and resolutions to
maintain Parliaments, and Parliamentary authority (stared and formed in a
regular and due proportion to the behoof and benefit of the Kingdom) they
stand abundantly declared to all the World in their late Remonstrance.

If it be here yet further said; Sect. 15.
yea but though it should be granted, that they did not resist Authority, in
either of the two considerations specified, yet they did that, which was worse,
or every whit as bad, as either of them. For they offered violence to persons
in authority, and would not suffer them to act in that authoritative capacity,
which was lawfully vested in them; To this also I answer;

First, it is lawful for any man, even by violence, to wrest a Sword out of
the hand of a mad man, though it be never so legally his, from whom it is
wrested. The reason is, because in case a man that is mad, should be let alone
with a Sword in his hand, either until he be willing of himself to part with
it, or until it can be recovered from him by a due process and course in Law,
there is a probability in reason, and according to the frequent experience of
the workings of such a distemper, that he will do much mischief with it in
the mean time: and the lives and limbs of men, are to be preferred before the
exorbitant wills, or humors of men underdistemper. This is the very case in
hand. The Members of Parliament dis-hous'd by the Army, were strangely struck
with a political frenzy (as Plato terms it;) they acted as men bereaved
of their senses, that had quite forgotten the business committed unto them,
and that knew, or understood nothing of matters relating to the peace or well
being of the Kingdom, or of those who had entrusted them with their power:
their counsels and votes of late still smiled upon their own enemies, and the
grand and most inveterate enemies of the Kingdom, but frowned and looked
ghastly upon their friends, and those that had constantly guarded them with
their lives and estates. Hic furor haud dubious; haec est manifesta phrenesis.
i. This madness is without all doubt,
And frenzy manifest throughout.


Now then Parliamentary power being in the hands of these men, but as a sword
or spear in the hand of a man distraught in his wits and senses, wherewith he
is like to do little or no good but in continual danger of doing much harm,
it might very lawfully, and with the full consent of all principles of reason,
equity, and conscience, be se'zed upon, and taken from them by a strong hand,
for the prevention of such mischiefs and miseries, which, remaining in their
hand, it daily and hourly threatened to bring upon the whole Nation and
Kingdom.

Secondly, Sect. 16.
The King had as legal and formal in investiture into to the power of the
Militia, of sitting in Parliament, etc. as these men had unto their
Parliamentary places and trusts: yet did not the Parliament unjustly, or
contrary to rules of equity, upon a plenary discovery of a bent in his will and
counsels to suppress the liberties of the Nation, to deprive him, and that by
force, of the enjoyment and exercise of those interests and privileges,
notwithstanding the legality of their investiture in him. Therefore upon a like
discovery of the same bent in the wills and counsels of these Parliament men,
the lawfulness of their elections into their places of trust, cannot reflect
any unlawfulness upon that act, by which they were removed from, or debarred
of them.

Thirdly, Sect. 17.
(and lastly) there is no Clyent that has enterteined a Lawyer, or Advocate to
plead his cause, but upon discovery, yea or jealousy, of prevarication, and
false-heartednesse to him in his cause, may lawfully discharge him, his
entertainment notwithstanding. There is the same liberty in a Pupil, or
person in his minority, to dis-entrust his Goardian, how lawfully soever
chosen, upon suspicion of maladministration, or unfaithfulness. And why
should the like liberty be denied unto a people or Nation, for the removing of
such persons, whom they have chosen for Guardians to their Estates and
Liberties, from these places of trust, when they evidently discern a direct
tendency in their proceedings, to betray them, both in the one and the other,
unto their enemies?

But two things (it is like) will be here objected. First, that the Parliament
were Judges lawfully constituted, of the Kings delinquency against the
Kingdom; but the Army were no Judges of such a constitution, of the
miscarriages of the Parliament. Therefore there is not the same consideration,
in point of lawfulness, in the proceedings of the Army against the Parliament,
which is of the Parliaments proceeding against the King. There is the same
difference likewise between the act of a Clyent and Pupil, wherein the one
discharges his Advocate, and the other his Guardian; and the act of the Army,
in dethroning the Parliament men. To this I answer,

First, Sect. 18.
That whether we place the lawfulness of a Parliamentary Judicature in respect
of the Kings Delinquency, either in their Election by the people, or in the
conformity of this their Election unto the Laws of the Land, certain it is
that the Army were Judges of every whit as competent, and lawful a
constitution of their delinquencies in the same kind. For,

First, If we measure the lawfulness of Parliamentary Judicature by the call
of the people thereunto, the Army (as was formerly proved) has every whit as
lawful a constitution to judge who are enemies to the peace and safety of the
Kingdom, as the Parliament it self has. Nor does it at all argue any
illegality in their judgments about the Parliament men, that they had not the
explicit and express consent of the people therein, or that they had no call
by them so to judge; no more then it proves an illegallity in many Votes and
Ordinances of Parliament, that they were both made and published, not only
without the particular and express consent, but even contrary to the minds and
desires of the people, or at least of the major part of them. Besides it is a
ridiculous thing to pretend a want of a call from the people, against the
lawfulness of such an act, which is of that sovereign necessity for their
benefit and good, which the actings of the Army were; especially at such a
time, when there is no possibility of obtaining, or receiving a formal call
from the people, without running an eminent hazard of losing the opportunity
for doing that excellent service unto them, which the providence of God in a
peculiar juncture of circumstances, exhibit's for the present unto us. Men's
consents unto all acts manifestly tending to their relief, are sufficiently
expressed in their wants and necessities.

If it be yet said; But the people do not judge the proceedings of the Army
against the Parliament men, as tending to their relief, or welfare in any
kind, but as contrary unto both, nor do they give so much as their subsequent
consents thereunto; I answer (besides what was lately said to the nullifying of
this pretense) that Physicians called to the care and cure of persons under
distempers, need not much stand upon the consents of such patients, either
subsequent, or antecedent, about what they administer unto them. If the people
be incapable in themselves of the things of their peace, it is an act of so
much the more goodness and mercy in those, who being fully capable of them,
will engage themselves accordingly to make provision for them. It is a deed of
Charity and Christianity, to save the life of a lunatique or distracted person
even against his will. Porro si paulatim idem populus depravatus habeat venale
suffragiam, and regimen flagitiosis seeleratisque committat, recte adimitur
populo talis potestas dandi honores, and ad paucorum bonorum redit arbitrium.
Aqu. 12 ae. qu. 67. art. 1.
Besides it is a ruled case amongst wise men, that if a people be depraved and
corrupt, so as to confer places of power and trust upon wicked and
undeserving men, they forfeit their power in this behalf unto those that are
good, though but a few. So that nothing pretended from a non-concurrence of the
people with the Army, will hold water. Or,

Secondly, If we estimate the lawfulness of that Judicature, by the conformity
of their elections thereunto, to the Laws of the Land, the investiture of the
Army into that Judicature, which they have exercised in the case in question,
is conform unto a Law of far greater authority, then any one, yea then all
the Laws of the Land put together; I mean, the Law of nature, necessity, and
of love to their Country and Nation: which being the Law of God himself
written in the fleshly tables of men's hearts, Sect. 19.
has an authoritative jurisdiction over all humane Laws and constitutions
whatsoever; a prerogative right of power to overrule them, and to suspend their
obliging influences, in all cases appropriate to it self. Yea many of the
Laws of God themselves, think it no disparagement unto them, to give place to
their elder Sister, the Law of necessity, and to surrender their authority into
her hand, when she speaks. So that whatsoever is necessary, is somewhat more
then lawful; more (I mean) in point of warrantablenesse. If then the Army
stood bound by the Law of nature and necessity, to judge the Parliament men as
they did, viz. as men worthy to be secluded from their fellows in
Parliamentary interest, this judiciary power was vested in them by a Law of
greater authority, then the Laws of the Land; and consequently the legality,
or lawfulness of it was greater, then of that in the Parliament, which derives
its legality only from a conformity to the established Laws of the Land. Yea
the truth is, that that Law of necessity, by which the Army were constituted
Judges of those Parliamentary Delinquents we speak of, cannot (in propriety of
speech) be denied to be one of the laws of the Land, being the law of nature,
and consequently the law of all Lands, and Nations whatsoever, established in
this, and in all the rest, by a better, and more indubitable legislative
Authority, then resides in any Parliament, or community of men whatsoever.

If it be here further objected; Sect. 20.
yea but what necessity was there lying upon the Army, to assume that
judicative power unto themselves, which they exercised upon the Members of
Parliament? It is an easy matter to pretend a necessity (almost) for every
unjust, and unrighteous thing; but not so easy to judge what such a necessity
is, which is authorized by God with a suspensive power over humane laws. To
this I answer,

First, That they cannot (at least in the ordinary signification of the word)
be said to assume a power of judicature unto themselves, who only judge either
of persons, or of things, in respect of themselves, and with relation to what
concerns themselves by way of duty, either to do, or to forbear. The
exercise of such a judging, or judicative power, as this, is imposed by God by
way of duty upon all men: and woe unto them, who do not judge, both persons
and things, in such a consideration, as this. The neglect, or non-exercise of
that judging faculty or power, which is planted in the souls and consciences
of men by God, upon such terms, and with reference to such ends as these,
draws along with it that sin, which the Wise man calls, the despising of a
man's ways, and threatens with death. But he that despises his ways shall
dye Prove. 19. 16.
Now certain it is, that the Army did exercise no other judiciary power then
this, about, or upon those Parliament men, nor in any other respect, nor with
any other consideration, then to their own duty concerning them; which every
other person in the Kingdom, either did, or ought to have done, as well as
they. Every man is bound to consider, judge, and determine, what is meet, and
necessary for him to do, either to, with, for, or against, all other men; or
at least all such, to whom he stands in any relation, either spiritual,
natural, or civil. That judgment then which the Army passed in their own
breasts and consciences upon those Parliament Men, as viz. that they were such,
whom they stood bound in duty, having an opportunity in their hand to do it,
to cut off as unsound members from their body, was nothing else but the issue,
fruit, and effect of that consideration of them and of their ways, which they
stood bound to levy, raise, and engage themselves in, about the one and the
other. If the judgment which they passed in this kind was erroneous, it was
not erroneous through an usurpation of an unlawful power to judge, but either
through a defect and weakness of those discerning, or judging abilities,
which they stood bound (however) to use; or else through an oscitancy,
carelessness, or sloth, in not improving or acting these abilities, as they
might, and ought, to the discerning of the truth. Certainly they who judge
these Parliament Men worthy Patriots or Members of their House, or meet to have
been let alone without disturbance in their way, do assume the same power of
judicature concerning them, yea and concerning the greatest and weightiest
matters of State, which the Army did, when they judged them meet to be
sequestered. Yea they who judge, and condemn the Army as evil doers, for what
they acted about these men; and not only so, but smite them also with the sword
of the tongue, reviling them without any just warrant or ground, do they not
every whit as much usurp, and assume to themselves a power of judging, without
any authority at all, as the Army did in that very act of judgment, at which
they make themselves so highly agrieved? Insomuch that to all such, that of the
Apostle may be justly applied. Therefore thou art inexcusable O man, whosoever
thou art that judge. For wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy
self: for thou that judge, do the same things. Nay, if we speak of an
authoritative power to judge, they who presume to justify and absolve the
Parliament-ment from the crime charged upon them, and to condemn the Army for
charging them, are far deeper in the usurpation of such a power, then the
Army. For the Army (as has been said) had a legal commission from the
Parliament it self, to oppose, slay, and destroy the enemies of the Kingdom,
and therein a kind of authority derived unto them, to judge of these enemies,
when they should mere with them (for a Commission or warrant to apprehend, or
destroy such and such persons, without a liberty, or power, either granted, or
supposed, to judge them such, when they are found, were a ridiculous nullity)
whereas they, who being private men, shall undertake, not only to censure,
judge, and sentence the Army as Malefactors in what they have done, but to
proceed likewise to the execution of this their sentence by inflicting the
penalty of stigmaticall and opprobrious terms upon them; by casting them out of
the affections of their friends, by firing the spirits, and strengthening the
hands of their enemies against them, do all this without the least color,
shadow, or pretense of any lawful authority whatsoever. But

2. Sect. 21.
That the judgment or sentence which the Army passed upon those men, as meet
to be dispossessed of their Parliamentary interest, was not erronous in either
of the considerations mentioned, or in any other, but every ways just, and
according to the truth, stands clear upon this ground, viz. that they were
become Renegadoes from their Trust, and acted by their counsels, debates,
votes, and interests, in a diametrall opposition to the peace and safety of the
Kingdom, and to public good. Yea the tenor of their Parliamentary actings
before their removal from the House, in the known dialect of political
prophecy, presaged nothing but ruin and destruction to the liberties of the
freeborn Subjects of the Kingdom in general, and to the lives and estates of
many thousands in the Kingdom, whom they stood bound in conscience, in a
special manner to protect. For what could that grand encouragement, which they
administered by their Votes to a potent party of men in the Kingdom, who had so
lately, and with so high an hand, acted hostility against the peace and
liberties of the people, and against the lives of those who stood up to protect
them, not having given the least overture of any relenting in their old
principles, but were now through that extremity of pain which they lie under,
having been so often, and so deeply bitten, and stung by the fidelity and
valor of the Army, more enraged in their spirits, then ever; what could (I
say) such an encouragement, given by such hands, unto such men, but portend,
either a re-imbroyling of this already miserably-wasted Nation, in Wars and
blood, or else the necessity of a patient and quiet subjection of the Nation to
the iron yoke of perpetual tyranny and bondage, together with the certain
ruin of the lives and estates of those, who had showed most faithfulness and
courage in the defense of the Parliament and the Kingdoms liberties, in
opposing the King and his party, if the Army had not preventingly interposed,
as they did? The by past actions of men, especially such, which they have for
any considerable space of time in-ured themselves unto, are prophetical of
what their future actions are like to be, if opportunity parallelth. The civil
Law says, that he that has injured one, has threatened many: and by the rule
of proportion, he that has injured many, has threatened all. It is the saying
of that late great Scholar and Statesman, Sir Francis Bacon; that men's
thoughts are much according to their inclination: their discourse and speeches
according to their learning, and infused opinions: but their deeds are after as
they have been accustomed. Insomuch as afterward he says, as a man would
wonder to bear men profess, protest, engage, give great words, and then do
just as they have done before Essaies. Ess. 27,
Yea the Scripture it self gives testimony to this maxim, that what men have
been by custom, they are like to be by continuance. Can the Ethiopian (says
God himself to the Jews) change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may
ye also do good that are accustomed [or, taught] to do evil Jer. 13. 23.
. And elsewhere (speaking of the same people) they hold fast deceit, they
refuse to return -- no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have
I done? Every one turned to his course [or race] as the horse rusheth into the
battle Jer. 8. 5, 6.
, meaning, that as the warlike horse, having been for a while curbed and held
in by his Rider with a sharp bit, and strong hand, rusheth with so much the
more violence and fury into the battle, when he feels his liberty; In like
manner these men, (and it is the case generally of all men) when they had been
at any time restrained for a while, whether by my word, or my judgments upon
them, from these vile practices; still upon the first opportunity that they
found themselves loose, they re-practised their former wickedness with so much
the more eagerness and keenenesse of spirit.

It were easy to bring Authorities in great numbers, Sect. 22.
both divine and humane, and these attended with a like train of examples,
both ancient and modern, for the farther confirmation and credit of this
axiom, that men generally are much more like to practice on their own vices,
then to fall off to the exercise of other men's virtues. But by what has been
delivered in already upon this account, most evident it is, that the men
deparliamented by the Army, were in their full carreire to the utter undoing of
the Kingdom, when they were dismounted: and consequently, that the judgment
of the Army looking upon them, as persons meet to be discharged from that great
Trust, wherein they so prevaricated, was according to righteousness and truth.
Therefore

3. Sect. 23.
(And lastly as to the objection last propounded) it is no such great matter of
difficulty, clearly to discern, and judge of such emerging necessities (at
least of many of them) which are authorized by God with a prerogative interest
of suspending humane laws. Hunger is by the holy Ghost himself enrolled
amongst those necessities, which are invested by God with a faculty and right
of suspending his own laws, so far and in such cases, as they oppose the
relief of it. Have ye not read (says our Savior to the Pharisees) what
David did when he was an HVNGRY, and they that were with him, how he entered
into the house of God, and did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for
him to eat (viz. in ordinary cases) neither for them that were with him, but
for the Priests only (...) at. 12. 3, 4, 5.
? meaning, and yet were innocent and unreprovable, notwithstanding the
transgression of a divine law (as touching the plain and express letter of it.)
Now if God has asserted such a privilege unto the necessity of hunger,
whereby to supersede the conscientious obligation of his own law, in order to
its present satisfaction, much more has he authorized it to the superseding
of any constitution or law, merely humane, in reference to such an end; unless
we shall think, that he is more jealous for the observation of the laws of
men, then of his own. So then if it be no great matter of difficulty for a man
to judge when he is an hungry, evident it it, that there are some cases of
necessity obvious enough, whereunto the laws of men ought to give place, and
to be content to be, as if they were not. For the reason why hunger is invested
with such a privilege from God, as we speak of, is not simply, as, or because,
it is hunger, i. such a peculiar and determinate (...), which in a way proper
to it self, threatens and endangereth the life of man; but in respect of the
general nature of it, and as it simply threatens and endangereth this life,
if it be not timely healed by the application of food, or nourishment. It was
the preciousnesse of the lives of men in Gods sight, not any respect he bare to
any paricular way, or means of endangering them, which obtained from him the
grant of such a privilege unto hunger, that in order to it is necessary
satisfaction, it should overruled his own law. So that whatsoever else it be,
as well as hunger, which so apparently menaceth, or portendeth ruin and
destruction to the lives of men, partakes of the same indulgence and grant of
privilege from God, with hunger, and is facultated by him, in order to the
prevention of the mischief menaced, to transgress a Law without guilt of
sin. By the clear warrant of this consideration and deduction, the Jews
extended that grant of privilege, which God (as we have heard) made, or
indulged explicitly unto hunger only, unto all manner of things and cases
whatsoever, whereby, and wherein life was exposed to imminent hazard and
danger. Their common maxims were (as they were formerly mentioned, Periculum
vitae pellit Sabbathum. Periculum vita pellit omnia.
Sect. 4) that danger of life drives away the Sabbath: Peril of life drives
away all, etc. Now if the peril of the life of one man, or of a small parcel
of men (as David, and those that were with him, were no great party) was
privileged from heaven with a sinlesse transgression of a special law of God;
certainly, the imminent danger of bloody combustions in the midst of a great
Nation, wherein the lives of many thousands were like to be sacrificed, besides
the hazard of beinging many other most deplorable and sad calamities upon the
whole Land, which (as has been proved) wrought effectually in the counsels
and actings of the disseated Parliament Men, is a broad and unquestionable
ground of equity and right, for the Army to build a prevention or diversion of
them upon, though it be with a temporary disobedience to such laws of men,
which were never (doubtless) intended by the Lawmakers themselves, for the
binding, either of men's consciences, or their hands, in such cases.

Only, Sect. 24.
lest the truth we assert, should possibly suffer through any man's mistake, I
shall add one thing by way of caution, or explication about the premises. When
we seem to approve of that principle of the Jews, wherein they say, that
Peril of life drives away all, and speak many things concerning the
privileges of necessity, we do not suppose, nor intend to say, that men may
lawfully transgress every law or precept of God whatsoever, for the saying of
their lives, being in danger, as for (example) that they may lawfully lie,
forswear themselves, deny Christ, or the like, in such cases; for men
(doubtless) ought rather to accept of death, then deliverance, upon such
tearmts as these. But that which we suppose upon the account specified, is
only this; that hunger, or any parallel exigence or necessity, have such an
indulgencie of privilege from God, which extends to the suspension of all
such Laws, as well Divine, as humane, in order to the safety of men lying
under them, which the light of nature, and that sense of equity and of what is
reasonable, planted in men by God, may well judge to have been intended by the
respective Lawmakers, not for Laws of an absolute and universal obligement,
without all manner of exception, but only for the regulating of men in
ordinary cases, and such as are of more frequent and usual occurrence. Now
certain it is, that as there are some Divine Laws which fall under this
consideration (as we have seen) so there are scarce any (if any at all) of
humane constitution, but are subject unto it; I mean, which may not, according
to the regular intentions of the Lawmakers themselves, lose their binding force
and authority for a time, Sect. 25.
as cases may be; it being a true Rule, subscribed as well by Lawyers as
Divines, Omnis Lex obligat secundum rectam voluntatem legislatoris obligantis.
Daven. Determine. p. 100.
that Every Law bind's only according to the regular and due intention of the
Lawmakers.

The reason why no humane Law, Omnis Lex ordinatur ad communem hominum salutem:
Et in tantum obtinet vim and rationem legis: secundum vero quod ab hoc deficit,
virtutem obligandi non habet. Aqu. 12 ae. qu. 96. art. 6.
can reasonably be judged to be of universal obligation (no, not according to
the intention of the Lawmakers themselves) is, first, because the adequate end
and scope of Lawmakers in their Laws, is presumed to be, the public and
common benefit and good of the community of men, who are to obey them. Now (as
Aquinas the Schooleman well observes) it often falls out, that that, which
ordinarily, and in most cases is much conducing to common good, in some
particular case would be most repugnant and destructive to it: Contingit autem
multoties, quod aliquid observari communi saluti est utile, ut in pluribus,
quod tamen aliquibus casibus est maxim nocivum. Ibidem.
whereof he gives an instance; unto which many others might readily be added.
Therefore in such cases, wherein the observation of a Law, cannot but be of
dangerous consequence, and prejudicial to the public, it is to be presumed,
that it was no part of the intention of the Lawgivers that it should be
observed, or bind any man.

Secondly, Sect. 26.
it being out of the Sphere of all earthly Lawmakers, to foresee, or
comprehend all particular cases, Quialgitur Legislator non potest omnes
singulares casus intueri, proponit legem secundumea, quae in pluribus accidunt,
ferens intentionem suam ad communem utilitatem. Unde si emergat casus in quo
observatio talis legis sit damnosa communi saluti, non est observands. Aquin.
ubi supra.
that may possibly happen, they generally content themselves with framing such
Laws, the keeping whereof ordinarily, and in cases of a more frequent
occurrence, is conducing to public benefit and safety, not intending by any
of these Laws to obstruct or prejudice the public, in any anomalous or
unthought of case, but to leave persons of all Interests and qualities at full
liberty, to provide for the public in such cases, though with a practical
contradiction to any, or all of their Laws.

Thirdly (and lastly, Sect. 27.
for this) If it could, or should be supposed, that humane Lawgivers are able
to comprehend and make provision for all possible emergencies and cases,
Nullius hominis sapientia tanta est, ut possit omnes singulares casus
excogitare: and ideo non potest sufficienter per verba sua exprimere ea, quae
convenient ad finem intentum: and si posset Legislator omnes casus considerare,
non oporteret ut omnes exprimeret propter confusionem vitandam: sed legem far
deberet secundum ea, quae in pluribus accidunt. Ibid.
yet were it not expedient (says my Author) for the Commonwealth, that they
should multiply Laws to such a number, as the particular stating and
regulating of all such cases would necessarily require. Confusion in Laws
ought to be avoided, which yet could not be avoided, if particular and
express provision should be made in them, for the regulation of all persons,
of what different capacities, or conditions soever, under all possible
occurrences, in a due proportion to the common interest and benefit of men.

These things considered, Sect. 28.
evident it is, that there was never yet any Lawgiver amongst men, who,
understanding himself, ever intended to impose any Law of a politic
constitution upon men, without a reserve for those, on whom it was imposed, to
provide for themselves, or for the public good in cases of necessity,
besides, yea and against, the literal import of such a Law. Therefore peril
of life, which is the most confessed case of necessity of all others, though it
cannot claim exemption from under some of the Laws of God (such as were
lately intimated) yet may it challenge this privilege in respect of the Laws
of men. The reason of the difference has been already in part signified, but
more completely is this: viz. because those Laws of God, which we now speak
of, prohibiting such actions, which are intrinsecally, and in their proper
natures, as being contrary to the essential purity and holiness of God, and
not only because they are prohibited, matter of defilement unto men, must
needs be of universal obligation, in as much as no necessity whatsoever can
be greater then, nor indeed equal to, this, that a man refraines all such
actions, which are morally, essentially, and intrinsecally corrupting and
defiling: whereas the civil or politic Laws of men restrain only such
actions, the forbearance whereof, as in ordinary cases, it is commodious for
the public Interest, so in many others, possibly incident, would be
detrimentous and destructive to it. In which respect all the necessity of
obeying such Laws as these, may for the time, not only be balanced, but even
swallowed up and quite abolished by a greater necessity of disobeying them. And
concerning such Laws of God himself, which we call typical, or ceremonial,
because they restrain only such actions, which are not intrinsecally, or
essentially sinful, or defiling, as not being in themselves repugnant to the
holiness of God, but had the consideration of sin put upon them by a Law, in
reference to a particular end; hence it comes to pass, that God was
graciously pleased, and judged it meet, to subject such Laws as these to the
pressing necessities of the outward man; or rather (indeed) to those other
Laws of his, by which he commanded relief for them; as it is written; I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice. This by way of caution. But

Secondly, Sect. 29.
Another thing, that (its like) will be objected, upon, and against what has
been answered to the second maine objection, is this: That the Parliament men
disturbed in their way by the Army, at least many of them, were Religious and
conscientious men; voted, and acted as they did, conscientiously, really
judging the course they steered, to be the safest and most direct for bringing
the great Ship of the Commonwealth into the harbor of rest and peace. And is
it not contrary, as well to principles of reason, as Religion, that such men
upon so fair an account as this, should be so foully handled? To this I answer;

First (not to question that, which I make no question but will be sufficiently
proved in due time, I mean, the Religiousnesse of the Gentlemen spoken of)
Religious men, are as well men, as religious: and consequently, are not yet
baptized into the spirit of that divine prerogative, which should make them (in
the Apostle James his phrase) (...), Jam. 1. 13.
persons un-temptable by things that are evil. They that are capable of
receiving gifts, or of any inordinacy in their desires after earthly
accommodations, how wise, or just soever they be otherwise, are subject both to
have their eyes blinded, and their words perverted. A gift (says God
himself) does blind the eyes of the wise [i. of those that are religiously
wise, as well as others; the Scripture not often tearming any men wise, but
upon that account] and pervert the words of the righteous. Deuteronomy 16. 19.
A gift, or any thing equivalent to a gift, and that not only after it is
received, but much more whilst it is yet desired, and expected, is apt to have
both these sad operations even upon the best of men. For who can be better then
those whom wisdom and righteousness join hand in hand to make excellent?

Secondly, Sect. 30.
When men are religious only to a mediocrity, and withal servile in their
judgments to some principles, which are commonly and with great confidence and
importunity obtruded upon the consciences of professors, for sacred Truths, and
yet are extremely discouraging, and full of enmity to a thorough, stable, and
quiet dependence upon God, by being religious upon such terms as these, they
become twofold more the children of fear, then otherwise they were like to be,
and consequently, so much the more capable and receptive of sad and dismal
impressions from the World upon all occasions. And it is not more commonly then
truly said; Pessimus Consiliarius Timor.
that Fear is a bad Counselor.

Thirdly, Sect. 31.
When religious men sin against the common Interest and liberties of a free
borne Nation, and make one purse with the known and thrice declared enemies of
their Land and people, whether they do it, with, or against, their judgments
and consciences, the Law of nature and necessity, cannot (for the present)
stand to make, either a scrupulous inquiry after such a difference, or a
regular assignement of favor to the qualifying circumstances of demerit; but
calls, yea and cries out immediately, and commands all men without exception,
that have a prize in their hand, to give it for the redemption of their Nation
out of the hand of Oppression and Tyranny. And when this Law has been obeyed
to the securing of the Nation, she presently resigneth, and this freely and
willingly, all her authority and command, into the hand of positive and
standing Laws, calculated for the ordinary posture and state of things, until
there be another cry of like danger in her ears. When these standing Laws
come to resume their authority and power; there will be an opportunity to
inquire, if it shall be thought convenient, who sinned, with, and who against,
their consciences: and their assesments, which were we uniformly rated by the
Law of necessity, may be reduced to terms of more equity by those other
laws. But

Fourthly, Sect. 32.
According to the Notion of that maxim in natural Philosophy, Corruption
optimi est pessima.
that errors of the best men, of worst consequence (in many cases.) The
digressions of men religious, are many times worse, then the thorough
discourses of other men. When conscience and concupiscence meet (as often they
do in religious men) the conjunction is very fiery. It was the saying of
Gregory long since, When men conceive of sin under the notion of a duty,
there it is committed with an high hand and without fear. Cum vitiu^ virtus
putatur, culpa sine meta cumulatur, Greg. de Pastor. cur. l. 3. c. 1.
Nor ever was (nor is ever like to be) the persecution of the Saints more
grievous, then when those that shall persecute them, and put them to death,
shall think that [therein] they do God service. Joh. 16. 2.
So that whereas the objection in hand plead's, on the behalf of those
Parliament men, who were religious, that they followed the light and dictate of
their judgments and consciences, in complying with the King and his accomplices;
the truth is, that though it may reasonably be thought so much the less sinful
in them, if they did it upon such terms; yet was it a ground so much the more
justifiable for the Army to proceed upon to the dis-interessing of them, as
they did. For when religious men break out of the way of righteousness and
truth, with the renitency and obmurmuration of their judgments and
consciences, it is a sign that their judgments and consciences are yet at
liberty, and in a condition to reduce them. But when these are consederate with
their lust, there is little hope of their repentance. But

Fifthly (and lastly, Sect. 33.
for this) whereas the objection intimates some hard measure offered unto them,
being men of conscience, and acting according to their judgments, the truth
is, that I know not how the Army could walk toward them with a softer foot,
to secure the liberties of the Kingdom, together with their own lives and
estates, against the menaces of their judgments and consciences, then they did.

A third grand Objection, Sect. 34.
wherewith some encounter that action of the Army, The third maine objection.
hitherto justified, is this: they therein (say these men) made themselves
Covenant-breakers, and sinned against the Solemn Vow and Oath which they, or
at least some of them, swear unto God with hands lifted up to Heaven, (if not
with hearts also.) In this Covenant they promised and swear, that they would,
endeavor with their estates and lives mutually to preserve the rights and
privileges of Parliaments, whereas by that violent dismembring of the
Parliament, they brake and trampled upon them. To this we answer (more briefly.)

First, That most certain it is, that it is no right or privilege of
Parliament to Vote or Act in opposition to the benefit and good of the
Kingdom, and those who have entrusted them. It is unpossible that any things
that is sinful, should be the right or privilege of any person, or society of
men under Heaven. Therefore if the Army did nothing more, but only restrain
from acting in such a way, they did not herein violate a Right or privilege of
Parliament.

If it be replied, Sect. 35.
that though it be no right or privilege of Parliament to Vote or Act contrary
to their trust; yet it is a right and privilege belonging to this house, that,
in case any of the Members shall at any time so act, or vote, they should not
be questioned, or suffer for so doing; at least not by any other power, but by
that of the House it self only; To this also I answer.

1. By concession, that this is indeed a right and privilege of Parliament,
taking the word Parliament in a due and proper signification; viz. for a
Parliament consisting of a competent number of men not dead to their trust, who
are in a capacity of faithfulness and integrity to discharge the office and
duty of a Parliament, in endeavoring at least to relieve the pressures and
grievances of the people, to protect their liberties, etc. It is the manner of
the holy Ghost himself in the Scripture, frequently to deny the common Name of
things, to such particulars in every kind, which are defective in those
properties for use and service, which should be found in them, and which are
found in other particulars of the same kind. Thus Paul expressly, He is not a
Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in
the flesh: But he is a Jew which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of
the heart in the Spirit, not in the letter, etc. Romans 2. 28, 29
. So elsewhere: when ye come together into one place, this is not to eat the
Lords Supper 1 Cor. 11. 20.
This is not, etc. meaning, that as they went to work, that which they did,
deserved not the Name, of an eating of the Lords Supper. Therefore

2. By way of exception, Sect. 36.
I answer further, that if by Parliament, be meant any number of men
whatsoever, chosen by the people into Parliamentary trusts, and sitting in that
House, where Parliaments (truly and properly so called) use to assemble about
the great affairs of the Kingdom, whether these men, or the major part of
them, love the interest of the Kingdom, and be cordially affected to the
liberties of the people, or no, I know no such right or privilege of
Parliament, as that specified. A Parliament that is unusefull and unserviceable
for Parliamentary ends, is no more a Parliament, then a dead man, is a man, or
a Virgin defloured, a Virgin. And as a dead man has no right or privilege of
a man (truly so called) belonging to him, unless it be to be so ordered and
dealt with, that he may not be an annoyance or offense unto others: so neither
do I know any right or privilege of a Parliament indeed appertaining to a
Parliament politically dead, and which is not animated with a spirit of
faithfulness to the public, unless it be to be so entreated and handled,
that it may not destroy the public Interest, or endammage their Trustees (the
people) in their liberties. A terminis dimiuuentibus non valet argumeutatio.
It is a rule in Logic; that an argument drawn from terms of diminution, is
of no validity, or force. As for example, when a man is dead, it does not
follow; that because he is a dead man, therefore he is a man, or has the
properties of a man, as that he is rational, risible, or the like. By the
reason which rules in this principle or maxim, our Savior denies that
inference of the Jews, who argued themselves to be the children or seed of
Abraham, because they were his carnal seed, or came from him according to the
flesh. If ye were Abraham's children (says he to them) ye would do the
works of Abraham John 8. 39.
: implying, that because they did not the works of Abraham, they were not his
children [viz. in that proper and emphaticall sense, wherein the Scripture is
ordinarily to be understood, when it speaks of Abraham's children, and of the
great promises and privileges belonging to them.) In like manner the Apostle
Paul, when he speaks of the privileges and blessedness settled by promise
upon Abraham and his seed, still understands the word, seed, not in that
diminutive or equivocall sense, wherein it comprehends as well his carnal or
wicked seed, as that of a more noble descent, but in that emphaticall,
weighty, Gal. 3. 7. 9. 16. 29.
and appropriate sense, wherein it only signifies the children of Abraham
indeed, i. spiritually such, and who resemble him in his faith and holiness.
Romans 4. etc.
See the Texts in the margent. After the same manner, when either the laws or
people of the Land, in their accustomed discourse, (and consequently the Solemn
League and Covenant) speak of rights and privileges of Parliament, they
(doubtless) do not take the word, Parliament in an equivocall and
comprehensive sense, wherein it may be extended to any thing, which in any
sense or consideration may be called a Parliament, but in an emphatical and
restrained sense, viz. as it signifies a political body, consistory, or court
of men, chosen by the people into Parliamentary Trust, faithfully prosecuting
and discharging the import of the Trust committed to them. If this property be
wanting in them, they are but a Parliament so called, not having the worth or
consideration, whereunto such Rights and Privileges which are called,
Parliamentary, either according to principles of reason and equity, or
according to the intention of the first Donors or founders of them, do belong
or appertain. The premises considered, evident it is, that the Army did not
violate or break any the rights and privileges of Parliament, properly, or
Covenantly so called, when they reduced the Parliament to the true nature,
dignity, and honor of a Parliament; by secluding such Members from it, who
altered the property, and turned the glory of it into a lie.

2. Be it granted, Sect. 3.
that the Army stood bound by their Covenant and Oath, to preserve the rights
and privileges even of such Parliaments as that was, which they divided, yet
they stood bound also by the same Covenant and Oath, to such a duty or
engagement, the faithful application of themselves whereunto, in the case in
hand, did fairly both in the sight of God, and men, discharge them from that
other obligation: even as the duties of circumcising, Cum duo praecepta
co^currunt, majus debet servari: In ipso Decalogo, cum videmus duo inter se
praecepta co^fligere et alterum ab altero impediri, illud, quod legis latoris
ipsius sententia, videbitur esse majus, praserri debet. Pet. Mart. in 1 Samuel c.
21. 3.
and of sacrificing, when the seasons appointed for them by the law, fell on
the Sabbath, privileged those from guilt in breaking the law of the Sabbath,
who performed them on that day. It is a common rule avouched by the best of our
Divines, and by the light of nature and reason it self, that when two duties
or commands meet in such a straight or exigent of time, that they cannot both
receive that honor of observance, which belongs unto them, that which in the
judgment of the Lawgiver is the greater, ought to be observed, and the lesser
to give place, for the time. Now in that Covenant and Oath which the objection
speaks of, there are these two duties or engagements (amongst others) imposed
upon those, who take it. 1. An endeavor to preserve the rights and privileges
of Parliament. 2. The like endeavor to preserve THE LIBERTIES OF THE KINGDOM.
The Covenant in both these, at in all other particulars contained in it, the
takers of it stand bound by the express tenor thereof (in the sixth Article)
to promote according to their power against all lets and impediments
whatsoever: and what they are not able THEMSELVES TO SVPPRESSE or overcome,
they shall reveal and make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed:
all this they shall do as in the sight of God. Which last words (compared with
the words mentioned from the third Article) clearly import, that the
Covenanters stand bound, to promote the liberties of the Kingdom against all
lets and impediements even in Parliaments themselves, if any be sound there:
yea and further suppose, that they may THEMSELVES SVPPRESSE and overcome what
they are able (viz. of whatsoever opposes the intent and end of the Covenant,
which doubtless, was the benefit and good of the Kingdoms) especially when
they know not where, or to whom to reveal or make known the obstructions they
meet with, in order to any probable or likely prevention, or removal of them,
in due time. Therefore if the duty of preserving or promoting the peace and
liberties of the Kingdom, be greater, then that of preserving the rights and
privileges of the Parliament; and the Army could not perform the former,
without making such a breach as they did, upon the latter; evident it is, that
in making this breach they are innocent and blameless. For the latter of
these, it is as clear as the Sun from what was laid down Sect. 21. that had
not the Army interposed to such a breach of rights and privileges, at is
charged upon them, the peace of the Kingdom, had (in all humane likelihood)
been swallowed up in blood, and the liberties, in oppression and tyranny.
Concerning the former, there is full as little, or rather less, question. That
common maxim, which rules especially in political affairs, Bonum quo
communius, co melius, the more common or extensive a good is, the greater or
better it is, does sufficiently confirm it. T^ preservation of the liberties
of the whole Kingdom, is without peradventure a greater duty, then the
maintenance or preservation of the liberties or privileges only of a part of
it; especially of such a part, which, for number, is inconsiderable. Besides,
that which gives a kind of sacred inviolablenesse unto the rights and
privileges of Parliament, is that typical relation which they bear to the
rights, privileges, and liberties, of the Kingdom, and Commonwealth. Now
types are always inferior to the things imported, and represented by them, as
servants are unto their Masters; and when they occasion, or threaten any
damage, to their anti-tipes, they may and ought so far to suffer a defacement,
as the brazen serpent was beaten to powder by Hezechiah, when it occasioned
Idolatry against him, whom it represented.

Thirdly (and lastly) suppose there had been no express clause in the
Covenant, injoyning the preservation of the liberties of the Kingdom, as well
as of the rights and privileges of Parliament, yet had the Army a more then
warrant sufficient to have stood up for the preservation of them, as they did,
and that without any breach of Covenant. Men by the tenure of their very lives
and beings, which they hold of the God of nature, their great Creator, stand
bound to obey the Laws of nature, and that against all other obligations or
bonds whatsoever: yea the truth is, that all other obligations cease in the
presence of this, all Laws, Covenants, and engagements besides, being homagers
unto it. Now there is no Law of nature that speaks more plainly, or
distinctly, then this; that the strong ought to stand by the weak in cases of
extremity, and danger imminent, especially when relief cannot reasonably be
expected from other hands. Nor is it credible that either the Covenant-makers,
or the Covenant-takers, did thereby intend, either in the general, any
disobligation from the Laws of nature, or from duties, otherwise then by the
said Covenant, lying upon men: nor in particular, any such preservation of the
rights and privileges of Parliament, which should be inconsistent with the
liberties of the Kingdoms. Scire leges, inquiunt Jurisconsulti, non est verba
earum tenere, sed vim ac potestatem, quia prior atque potentior est, quam vox,
men's dicentis.
and it is a common rule amongst Lawyers, for regulating the interpretation of
Laws, as likewise of all other Declarations of men by words, whatsoever; that
the mind or intent of the speaker, is to be preferred before, and is more
potent [and consequently rather to be obeyed] then his words.

Nor does the Act of the Army in that dissociation of the Parliament under
debate, color, or shadow (in the least) with the act of the King, breaking
into their House, and demanding which, Hug. Grot. in Mat. 12. 3.
and how many of their Members he pleased, to be sacrificed upon the service of
his will. For

First, It was more civility in the Army, to deny admission, or entrance into
the House, unto those Members, whose sitting there they judged of desperate
consequence unto the Kingdom, then it would have been, by force and violence
to have pulled them out from thence; which was the Kings act, in actu signato
(as the School men distinguish) though not in actu exercito, the providence of
God and men comporting to prevent this. And we know the old saying, Turpius
ejicitur, quam non admittitur, hospes.
i. A guest we like not, it is more commendable
To keep, then cast, out from our doors and table.


Secondly, The Members which the King sought to lay hold of, and to
disparliament, were such, who THEN were (or at least were so looked upon by
him) as the greatest Patrons and Protectors of the Kingdoms Interest, and who,
like the cloudy and fiery pillar of old, kept the Egyptian prerogative from
coming at the Israelitish liberty, to destroy it. Whereas the Members, who
were denied the House by the Army, were turned Proselytes to prerogative, and
had renounced the Law and Doctrine of the peoples liberties. Therefore

Thirdly (and lastly) the clear tendency of the Act of the King, was the
violation of the Law of nature, by seeking to advance the will and power of
one, or of some few, above, and against, the peace and comforts of many,
whereas the act of the Army held a loyal conformity with the royal Law, the
face of it being manifestly set to subject the power, interest and will of one,
unto their lawful Superior, the just Interest or comfort of many. Therefore
to go about either to justify the Kings act, by the act of the Army, or to
condemn the act of the Army, by the Kings, is as if I should undertake to
prove, that the night is lightsome, because the day is so, or that the day is
dark, because the night is so.

A fourth objection in the mouths of some, Sect. 40.
against which they conceive the Army cannot be justified in the business in
question, The fourth grand Objection.
is, that all such actions are contrary unto, and condemned by the Laws of the
Land. But to this objection, at least to the weight and substance of it, we
have already answered over and over; and particularly have asserted and proved,
First, that all humane Laws and constitutions, are but of a like structure and
frame, with the Ceremonial Laws of old made by God himself, which were all
made with knees, to bend to the Law of nature, and necessity. Secondly, That it
is to be presumed, that the intent of all Lawgivers amongst men, is,
notwithstanding any, or all their Laws seemingly commanding the contrary, to
leave an effectual door always open for the common good, and in cases of
necessity, to be provided for by any person, or persons, whatsoever. Thirdly,
that all Laws bind only according to the regular and due intentions of the
Lawmakers. Fourthly, that the Laws of nature, and necessity, are as well the
Laws of the Land, as those commonly so called. Fifthly, that when any two
Laws encounter one the other in any such exigent, or strait of time, that
both of them cannot be obeyed, the Law of inferior consequence ought to give
place to that of superior, and the duty enjoined in this, to be done, though
that required in the other, be left undone. We now add,

First, That we charitably suppose, that there is no such Law of the Land,
which prohibiteth or restrains any man, or for of men, from being Benefactors
to the public; especially from preserving the public liberties in cases of
necessity, when they stand in extrema tegula, and are in imminent danger of
being oppressed for ever, there being no likelihood of relief from any other
hand. And if there be no such Law as this, there is none that reaches the case
of the Army, no not in the critical or characteristicall circumstance of it.

Secondly, That in case there be any such Law as this, that it is a mere
nullity, and the matter of it no more capable of the form of a Law, i. of an
obliging power, then timber or stone is capable of information by a reasonable
soul, which according to vulgar Phylosophie, rather then the truth is, the
proper form of a man. The Laws of nature and of common equity, are the
foundation of all Laws (truly and properly so called) and whatsoever
venditateth it self under the name or notion of a Law, being built besides
this foundation, wants the essence and true nature of a Law, and so can be
but equivocally such.

Thirdly, Sect. 42.
If there be a Law, which makes force, offered to Magistrates, or persons in
Authority, in any kind, or any interrupting or disturbing them in their way,
punishable; yet neither does this evince the act of the Army, we so much speak
of, to have been contrary to the Laws. The reason is, because it is the
constant genius and manner of Lawgivers and of Laws, to lay down only the
general rule, and to conceal the exceptions; which they still suppose, are, or
may be. Now the exception does not break the Rule, nor is it properly contrary
to the rule, I mean, so as to evince a nullity, or crookedness in it, only
it is not comprehended within the verge or compass of the rule. All cases
(says the Roman Orator and Statesman) are not provided for by written Laws,
but only those which are plain, the exceptions being left out, or omitted.
Non omnia scriptis, sed quaedam, quae perspicua sunt, tacitis exceptionibus
caventur. Cicero. de Invent. l. 2.
Consonant hereunto is that of Grotius: In Laws prohibitorie (says he) the
words are commonly larger, then the mind or intent of the Law. In legibus
prohibitorijs plerunque verba latius patent, quam men's ipsa legis. in Mat. 12.
3.
Upon which occasion, that virtue, which the Grecians call (...), we, Equity,
appears to be most necessary in a Judge, or any other, to whom it shall
appertain to expound Laws; the property hereof being (as Aristotle long since
observed) to rectify [or right state] the Law, (...)
where it is defective, through the generality of it. By rectifying the Law, he
means nothing else, but a limiting and restraining the binding force of it to
cases intended by the Lawmakers; together with an exemption of such cases from
it, which upon grounds of reason and equity it may be conceived never were
intended by them to be concluded in it. So that in some cases to press and
urge the rigorous extent of the letter of the Law, is to turn the waters of
the Law into blood, and to overturne the true intent and meaning both of the
Law, and Lawgiver, at once. Such urgings and pressings of Laws without due
limitation, gave occasion to that Proverbiall saying in Tullie; Summum jus,
summa injuria. Idem facit, ac is qui legem transgreditur, qui saeva verborum
prerogativa fraudulenter contra juris sententiam abutitur. God. 1. tit. 1. le.
5.
that the Highest justice, is the Highest injustice. And the Imperial Law it
self makes him no better, then a transgressor of the Law, who fraudulently
abuses the stern prerogative of words contrary to the sense and meaning of
the Law. And elsewhere: no reason of Law, or fairness of equity will endure
it, that thorough hard construction [of words] we should turn those things
against the benefit of men, which were wholesomely brought in [amongst them]
for their profit and good. Nulla juris ratio, aut aequitatis benignitas
patitur, ut quae salubriter pro hominum utilitate introducuntur, ea nos duriore
interpretatione, contra ipsorum commodum producamus ad severitatem. Digest. l.
1. tit. 3. de leg: leg 24. Sect. nulla.
Doubtless they stumble at this stone, who pretend to find any such Law
amongst the Laws of the Land, by which the Army should be denied a liberty, or
lawfulness of power to secure the peace and liberties of the Nation, by such a
method and course, as they steered, necessity lifting up her voice, and crying
unto them with such importunity, to do it. For (as the aforementioned Grotius
well observes) amongst all the exceptions, which are tacitly included in
Laws, there is none, either more usually, or more justly admitted, then that
which arises from necessity. Inter omnes autem exceptiones quae tacit insunt
legibus, nulla est aut justior, aut receptior, quam eaquae fluit ex
necessitate. Hug. Grot. ubi supra.
By what we have argued, and related from learned and judicious men in this
point, evident it is, both by the light of reason, as also from the testimony
of very competent witnesses, that whatsoever the Laws of the Land be, the Army
could be no transgressors of any of them in standing up, and interposing as
they did, to vindicate the public liberties of their Nation, in such a case
of necessity, as that before them.

A fifth Objection, Sect. 43.
wherewith some strengthen and comfort themselves against the deportment of the
Army, The fifth great Objection.
hitherto justified, is this. The example of the fact must needs be of very
dangerout consequence to the Kingdom. For by the same reason, and upon the
same account, that the Army opposed the present Magistracy, and proceedings of
the public affairs amongst us, any other party of men, making, and finding
themselves strong enough for the undertaking, may at any time attempt the like
disturbance, and confusion: and so the Kingdom shall be always in danger of
the like combustions and broils. I answer,

First, That the lawfulness or goodness of an action is not to be measured or
judged, by what may follow upon it, by way of sequel or event, but by what is
like to follow upon it, and this not by accident, or by misconstruction, but
according to the native tendency, proper ducture, and inclination of it. It is
wittily said by one, that he that goes about to read the badnesse, or
goodness of an action by the event, bolds the wrong end of the book upward.
Christ did not amiss in giving a sop to Judas, though presently upon the
receiving of it, the Devil entered into him, and prevailed with him to betray
him very suddenly. Nor would it argue any thing amiss in what the Army did,
though never so many troubles, and tumultuous risings of people should break
out upon pretense of it. The reason is, because, as the grace of God it self,
though a thing of most incomparable sweetness and worth, may nevertheless be
(yea, and daily is) turned into wantonness, and much sin and wickedness
occasioned by it in the World; so, and much more, may the most worthy actions
and services of men, be compelled to pretense the worst and vilest deeds that
lightly can be perpetrated. Therefore,

Secondly, Sect. 44.
Suppose the Army should have apprehended, not only a possibility, but even a
probability, that that fact of theirs we speak of, would beget out of its own
likeness, and occasion disturbances of quite another genius and spirit from it
self; yet might it have been sinful and unworthy in them notwithstanding, to
stand still, and not to have acted as they did. The reason is, because when
seed-time is come, men must not observe the winds; nor regard the clouds, when
it is time to reap. As men must not do evil, that good may come of it, so
neither must they forbear the doing of good, because evil may come of it. Men
are bound to sow the seed of good actions, though they had some cause to fear
that an increase of Dragons would spring from it. But,

Thirdly, Sect. 45.
That no action of any bad consequence to the Kingdom, can truly plead
legitimacy of descent from this of the Army, is evident thus. Where there is
not a concurrence of the same circumstance (I mean, either formally, or
equivalently the same) there can be no place for exemplarinesse, or likeness
of action. And when there is, or shall be, the like political constellation
with that, under which the Army acted, the like action cannot in the direct and
native tendency of it, be of any ill consequence to the Kingdom. The killing
of a man by Titius being assaulted, and in his own defense, is no ground, so
much as in color or pretense for Sempronius to flay a man traveling peaceably
by him on the way.

Fourthly, Sect. 46.
Nor is it like, that the action of the Army we speak of, should by any
back-doore of misconstruction whatsoever, let in mischief or disturbance into
the Kingdom; considering that it was performed and done, in due order to such
a provisionall settlement of affairs in the Kingdom, that as far as is
possible, there may, neither occasion be given, on the one hand, nor
opportunity left, on the other, to any party or number of men, to attempt any
interrupture, distraction, or disturbance therein. Therefore, to pretend or
plead, that the said action of the Army, is like to cause future trouble or
disturbance in the Nation, is as if a man should say, that to build an house
strong, walls, doors, and windows, were of dangerous consequence to invite
thieves to assault, and break into it.

Fifthly (and lastly) The action of the Army is not disparageable by any
possibility or likelihood of evil, Sect. 47.
that it may occasionally bring upon the Kingdom afterward, more then the
preservation of a man from imminent death is reproveable, because by it he is
occasionally exposed to dye another time: They who conceive that it had been
better for the Kingdom, and more conducing to the peace of it in after times,
that the Army should have sat still, and not interpose, as they did, argue at
no better rate of reason, then I should do, in case I should persuade my
friend being dangerously sick, not to use the help of a Physician for his
recovery, because in case he did recover, his recovery might prove a probable
occasion of more sickness unto him afterward. -- Quis furor est, ne moriare,
mori?
i. What madness is it, through fear of future death,
To wish my self deprived of present breath?


If the Army had not applied that plaster of fteele to the boil, or
plague sore of the Kingdom, which they did, there had been little, or no hope
of the recovery thereof, from that political death, the symptoms whereof, had
so strongly seized the vital parts of it. So that though the cure, in process
of time should prove an occasion of a relapse, or bring the like distemper
again upon it; yet, as Hezechiah was not without cause thankful unto God, who
made an addition of fifteen years unto his life, after his sickness unto
death, though this addition did not excuse him from dying afterward. So shall
the people of the Nation have just cause of thankfulness unto the Army for
those days of freedom and peace, be they fewer, or be they more, which they
shall enjoy, though slavery and oppression should return upon them afterward
like clouds after the rain.

Another Objection, Sect. 48.
deemed by some impregnable, and above answer, The sixth main Objection.
is framed by way of inference from Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every soul be subject
to the higher powers -- Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
Ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.
From hence the Army are concluded Transgressors, and liable to condemnation,
because they resisted the higher powers; and therein, the Ordinance of God. But
with this Objection we are not behind hand, having given a sufficient answer
unto it already, the substance of it being nothing but what the second
Objection offered. Notwithstanding because we desire to give heaped measure of
satisfaction, especially to such arguments, which pretend to the Scriptures; we
thought it not amiss to lay the words themselves before you, out of which the
objection is framed, and so to give in the surplussage of a further answer unto
it. Therefore

1. We answer, by distinguishing (with the Ministers of Scotland, in their
brief Theses de Majestatis jure) between the power of Magistrates, and the
abuse of this power The power (say they) is from God, and so his ordinance, but
not the abuse of it. Yea, he no whit more allows the abuse of a lawful power
in one Tyrant, then [the use of] an unlawful power in another Secundo igitur
distinguendum inter potestate^ ipsam, and potestatis abusum: eam, non autem
hunc, ordinavit Deus Imo non magis ab eo probatur abusus potestatis legitimae
in uno tyranno, quam potestas illegitima in altera.
. So that if it were the abuse only of a lawful power, which the Army
resisted, they resisted no Ordinance of God, nor are they, for such an act,
made liable to any condemnation by the Scripture mentioned. Now that it was not
any power, but the abuse of pewer, which the Army resisted, has been more then
once, clearly enough evicted in this Apology; and is further evidenced from
hence; no other power, but that which is Parliamentary, can be pretended to
have been resisted by them, in that act so often mentioned. But that they did
not resist this power, but the abuse of it only, appears; 1. Because this
power remains at this day quiet and undisturbed, in the midst of them. Yea 2.
Their great care and desire is, to settle this power upon better terms for the
due government of the Nation, then those, on which it has been continued
hitherto.

If it be said, Sect. 49.
that that the Parliamentary power now in being, in no lawful power, because
it is under force; I answer, 1. that it is no more under force, then it was,
whilst all the Members now secluded, had free liberty to sit and vote in that
House. The same Army, which is now pretended to overawe, or keep under force
the present Parliament, was as near, and did as much to the Parliament then, in
matter of force or awe, as now it is, or does. Therefore if it were a lawful
power then, it is no less lawful now. 2. Nor is the Parliament at this day
under any more force, by reason of the Army, then it was for the space of about
two years together before, by reason of the continual tumultuous engagements
and practices, both in City and Country. Nay 3. I verily believe, that if the
Members of Parliament now sitting, would please to declare themselves upon the
point, they would acknowledge and confess, that they are as free from force, or
fear (at least in respect of the Army) now, as they have been at any time
since their first meeting in their House. But to the maine objection in hand, I
answer.

2. Sect. 50.
The ordinance of God in Magistraticall power, being the adequate foundation,
upon which that subjection, or obedience, which he requires of men unto it by
his command, is, and ought to be built; evident it is, that this subjection is
not commanded or required to this power, beyond the ordinance of God in it; i.
unto any act, or injunction of men invested with this power, which swerveth
from, especially which opposes, this ordinance of God (in the end and intent
of it.) Now the end and intent of the ordinance of God in magistraticall power,
being (as the Apostle clearly asserteth, verse. 4.) the good of those that are
subject to it [For he is the Minister of God to thee, for good] it is evident
yet further, that there is no subjection commanded by God unto any higher
powers, further, or otherwise, then they act and quit themselves in a due order
and proportion to the good of men. And where subjection is not commanded,
resistance is not prohibited; and consequently, is not unlawful. For where
there is no law, there is no transgression. Therefore if those higher powers,
the resistance whereof the objection charge upon the Army, were found acting,
and apparently bent to act on, in a way of manifest prejudice and opposition to
the good of those, from whom they expected subjection (which I presume, is
little questionable to him; that has read and weighed the premises) and
consequently, quite besides the end and purport of the ordinance of God, the
Army, in that resistance which they made against them, transgressed no law, or
precept of God.

Nor does it follow from any thing that had been said, that a Magistrate for
every error in the administration of his power, may be deposed from his place
of Magistracy by any party of men: but this is that, which only follows, that,
when the supreme Magistracy of a Kingdom shall be so far, whether blinded
in judgment, or corrupted in affection, that such counsels and actings put
forth themselves in them from time to time, which are apparently detrimentous
and destructive to the general and great interest of the due liberties of the
people, reasonable security may be taken of them by any party of this people,
having the opportunity, and all others wanting it, that they shall proceed and
act no further in such a way.

3. (And lastly) that resisting the ordinance of God in the Higher Powers,
which the Apostle (in the Scripture in hand) condemns, is not a deteyning of
men in Authority, though with a strong hand, from doing mischief in their
places; but either (as was formerly said) a refusing obedience unto their
lawful commands, or awards: or rather a complotting or attempt-making to shake
off the yoke of all obedience unto civil Magistracy. Calvin upon the place
seems to incline to the latter; Paraeus, unto the former, whose words are
these: Yet every disobedience is not to be termed rebellion, or resistance; but
only that, which out of malice is practiced, or admitted, contrary to the
laws, by those, who refuse to satisfy the law, by suffering such punishment,
as they have deserved Non quaevis tamen in obedientia, dicenda est rebellio,
vel resiste^tia; sed ea solum, quae contra leges, ex malitia admittitur ab ijs,
qui per poena^ commeritam legibus satisfacere detrectant.
. If either of these interpretations of the place be admitted, certain it is,
that it reflects no bad color at all upon the action of the Army; who neither
refused obedience in what they did to any command (much less to any lawful
command) of their Superiors, nor yet declined the giving of satisfaction unto
the lawer, by refusing to suffer any punishment, which they had deserved.
Pareus lays down this position upon the place, and maintains it by argument;
v z. That it is lawful for subjects, though mere private men, in case a
Tyrant shall assault or set upon them, as Thieves use to do, and offer them
violence, in case they want opportunity to implore the ordinary power for their
relief, and can by no other means escape the danger, to defend themselves and
theirs, in the case of present danger, against this Tyrant, as against a
private robber upon the high way Subditis tamen mere privatis, si tyrannus
tanquam latro et grassator, aut stuprator, in ipsos faciat impetu^, et ipsi nec
potestatem ordinariam implorare nec alia ratione effugere periculu^ possint, in
presenti periculo se et suos contra tyrannum, ficut contra privatumgrassatorem
defendere licet.
.

But concerning the true sense of the place, Sect. 53.
Calvin's apprehensions are of best comportance with the words; which properly
and primarily speak of magistraticall power or Authority in the abstract, and
this under such a circumscription and consideration only as it proceeds from,
and is authorized by God, and not of the persons of Magistrates at all,
otherwise then they administer this power in a regular and due order to the end
intended by God in it, which is (as has been showed from verse. 4.) the good
of those, that live under it. First, he does not say, let every soul be
subject to the higher Magistrates, but, to the higher powers. 2. Nor does he
say, There is no Magistrate, but of God; but, there is no power but of God. Nor
3. does he say, the Magistrates that are, but, the powers that are, are
ordained of God. Nor 4. Whosoeer acsisteth the Magistrate, but, whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist [viz.
the power, not the person] shall receive to themselves damnation, 5. He
demands, Will thou then not be afraid of the power? not, of the Ruler or
Magistrate. Chrysostom takes special notice of these expressions, and
thereupon commentarieth the place, thus: What say thou [Paul.] Is then every
Ruler ordained by God? No (says he) I say not so: nor do I now speak of
particular Rulers, or Magistrates, but of the thing [or, matter] it self [1.
of the order, or power of ruling] For that there should be powers [or
Magistracy] and that some should rule, and some be ruled, and that all things
should not run loosely and hand over head, or the people be like the waves
[of the Sea] carried hither and thither, I affirm it to he the work of the
wisdom of God. (...)*
Pareus himself likewise carries the words directly to the same point: He
names powers (says he) rather then Kings, Princes, etc. because he would be
understood to speak, not so much of the persons, as of the order [or ordinance
it self of ruling] For in the persons [of Rulers] vice often times, and causes
of not obeying, are found: therefore he would have the powers, to be
differenced from the persons. Vocat autem potestates potius, quam Reges,
Principes, etc. ut non tamde persoins, quam de ordine ipso loqui intelligatur.
Nam in personis saepe sunt vitia and caufa non obediendi: ideo a personis
discerni vult potestates.


It is true, the Apostle names Rulers, ver. 3. where he says, Rulers are not a
terror to good works, but to the evil: And ver. 4. of the Magistrate or
Ruler he says, that he is the Minister of God to thee for Good; and
afterward, that he is a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.
But evident it is, that in these passages, he speaks of Rulers and
Magistrates not simply, or at large, but under the precise consideration of
persons exercising the power, which they have received, in a due subordination
unto God, and with a single eye to the procurement of that good, which God
intended unto those, who are to obey, in his ordination of such powers. So that
nothing can be more clear, then that the adequate scope of the Apostle, in the
Scripture before us, was to persuade Christians to own, and to subject
themselves unto, civil Authority, as the ordinance of God, so far, Sect. 54.
and in such cases, as it should be administered by the persons invested in it,
in a regular and due proportion to the benefit and good of those. i. of those
communities of men respectively, who live under them, and from whom obedience
and subjection are, upon such an account, due unto them. This supposed, we may
safely, and without the least occasion of fcruple, conclude, that there is
nothing applyable in the Scripture in hand, to the ease of the Army hither to
argued; unless (happily) it should be supposed (and the supposition will not be
altogether without ground) that the Apostle enforcing subjection unto civil
Authority, merely as, or because, the ordinance of God, and as administered
according to the gracious intentions of the founder and ordainer of it,
tacitly, and in a consequentiall way, implies a liberty in men to decline this
subjection, when the administrations of it are irregular, and the gracious
intentions of God violated in them. For in many cases, when an action is
pressed in the nature of a duty, upon a special consideration or ground, the
consideration failing, the action loses the nature and relation of a duty. Now
if this supposition be admitted, it is a clear case, that the Scripture under
debate, is altogether with, and not at all against, the Army.

I know nothing of moment, Sect. 55.
that can be opposed against the lawfulness of the action, hitherto apologized
and justified in these papers, beyond what has been already bought and sold (I
mean, urged, and answered) at sufficient rates. The lawfullnesse of the action
we speak of, being supposed, the honor and worth of it are of much more easy
demonstration. For what better savor can a Christianly-heroique Spirit spread
abroad of it self, then when men shall put their lives in their hand, and in
this posture stand up to take Lions by the beards, when they are ready to tear
in pieces, and devouce the Sheep of the fold? to attempt the wresting of an
Iron Scepter out of those hands, which were now lifting it up to break a poor
Nation in peecs like a potters vessel? What the Army has done in this
behalf, calls to mind the unparallelable example of the Lord Jesus Christ,
blessed for ever, who descended into the lower parts of the Earth, went down
into the chambers of death, from thence to bring up with him a lost World. It
was the saying of Plato, (...).
that to do good to as many as we can, is to be like unto God. But to do good
to as many as we can, as well enemies, as friends, by an exposall of our own
lives unto death for the accomplishment of it, is a lineament of that face of
divine goodness, which Plato (it is like) never saw. It was the manner of
almost all Nations (as the Roman Orator observes) to place the Assertors of
their Countries liberties, next to the immortal Gods themselves, at the Table
of honor. And I make no question, but when the Inhabitants of this Nation
shall have drank a while of the sweet waters of that Well of liberty, which
the Army have dig'd and opened with their Swords, after it had been for a long
time stopped and filled up with earth by the Philistims, they will generally
recover of that Mallgnant fever, which now distempereth many of them, and be
in a good posture of sobriety and strength to rise up early, and call their
Benefactors, Blessed. However, the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, be
upon the head of such Warriors, who pursue that blessed victory of overcomming
evil, by doing good; and according to the method of the warfare of Heaven,
feeke to reconcile a Nation unto themselves, by not imputing their
unthankfulness, or other their evil entreaties unto them, but in the midst of
their own sufferings from them, set themselves with heart and soul to set
them at liberty from their Oppressort.

Faulit escaped.
P. 11. l. 19. for palbably, r. palpably. p. 19. l. 28. for these, r. their. p.
26. l. 11. dele, we. p. 35. l. 35. for dangerout, r. dangerous.

FINIS.

