Os Ossis and Oris. OR A COLLECTION OF The most remarkable passages in a book
entitled, Os Ossorianum. OR A bone for a Bishop to pick,

Written By a worthy Minister of the Word, JOHN GOODWIN, of Coleman street.

Viz. 1. The most grave and weighty Sentences and Proverbs. 2. His most meek
and charitable demeanor. 3. The most home and reverent similitudes. 4. The
neatest phrases, and most queint expressions. 5. His excellency in the
allegorical use of the Militia. 6. The most concordant, and consonant
passages. 7. His most modest, and mannerly behavior toward his Adversary.
viz. The Reverend Father in God, Gr. Williams, Lord Bishop of Ossory.

Printed in the year. 1643.

A Collection of the most remarkable passages in a Book entitled, Os
Ossorianum.
HAving fallen upon this Tract, written by a most judicious Divine of this City,
by which I seriously profess my self to be more improved then by any other of
the same nature; and considering that books of that bulk and value are not so
generally dispersed, or so thoroughly read in these nimble and dispatchfull
times; I have thought it not unworthy my Christian pains to cull out the most
useful and edifying passages, as well for the ease and benefit of this City
and Kingdom, as for the more speedy advancement of the Cause in hand, and the
reputation of the grave, learned, modest, ingenious, humble, and charitable
Author. Which are as follows.

1. The most grave and weighty Sentences and Proverbs.
1 THe Country Proverb is, that Good Ale never wants a friend on the Bench,
(applied to the Episcopal chair) Page 1 2 Much like a Rat, before he is aware,
He squeaks himself into a trapping snare.
p. 8 3 You will never thrive by hogs, if you bring them to no fairer market
then this. p. 13 4 It may be he was afraid of the end of an old Saw. Pauperis
est numerare pecus. p. 17 5 I see it is ill halting before a cripple, however
the common saying is, Set a thief to take a thief. p. 19 6 But in the mean
time let the saddle be set on the right horse, and he that cries out against
the thief, be laid hold of for the thief himself. p. 40 7 They tell you they
have a needle of nine-pence in a bottle of hay, disprove them if you can. p. 55
8 Therefore Sir you are fallen into the Praemunire of the old Proverb, Suitor ultra
crepidam, having played the Cobbler beyond your Last. p. 61 9 They have laid your
wallet upon your own neck, and have concluded Stop the thief, to be the
thief himself. ibid.
II. His most meek and charitable demeanor.
1 INtending chiefly to abuse the consciences of the weaker, he blusters, and
thunders, and arms himself with hellfire. p. 9 2 Which is an accusation of
that desperate malice, that the Accuser of the Brethren seems to have given him
his power and his throne, as being more able to manage them for his advantage
then himself. p. 36. 3. Let the Bishop bear testimony against me, and upon
due proof made Satiet se sanguine, quem semper sitivit. let the Anti-cavalier
be sacrificed upon his Antichristian and bloody Spirit. p. 40. 4. Bishops
surely are more afraid of scruples, and qualmes of conscience, then they are of
hellfire. p. 50 5. He is enforced to furnish his pen with the rankest slanders
and lies he could rake off from the Devils dunghill. p. 54. 6. Surely he has
good correspondence with Pluto; for we have here stamped together, as the
principal ingredients in the composition. p. 58. Oris Cerberei spumas and
virus echidnae. (i. e.) The foamy froth of Cerberus triple chaps,
Mixed with the poison of a female aspe.
Brai^ and Stairs.
III. The most home and reverent similitudes.
1. AS Peter and John had neither silver nor gold, but gave the poor cripple
such as they had; so this man has neither learning nor modesty, but such as he
has he gives his poor brother, Ignorance and Impudence. p. 14. 2. To say that
any Magistrate, has any power at all from God to lay punishment unjustly upon
any man, is as like the sound of an empty tub as may be. p. 15 3 When Herod had
killed James, because he saw that it pleased the people, he proceeded further
to take Peter also, Act. 12. 2, 3. The Bishop it seems has either so pleased
himself or his friends, with confuting the Anti-Cavalier (over the shoulder)
once, that he proceeds to the like confutation of him the second time. p. 36 4
However the Lamb has no great cause to be sorry if the Wolf knew her not; nor
has this Goodwin any cause to be troubled, that these great overseers
overlook him. p. 37 5 This is but a saying of like notion with this, that all
the fishes in the sea that are fowls in the air, are able to fly: Or this,
all the lambs in the fold, that are Lions in the forest, will be able enough to
deal with the wolf. p. 44 6 But is he as strong in his evidence as he is in
his judgment? Not by as many degrees as the Sun went back in the dial of Ahaz
in Hezekiahs days. p. 47 7 In this Nation your credit is broken in pieces like
a Potters vessel, whereof there remains not so much as a sheard or piece,
wherewith to take either a little fire from the harth, or a little water out of
the pit. p. 56 8 His angry Lordship in joining the Anti-Cavalier with M.
Buroughs, has accommodated him with the like honor, wherewith the blind man
restored to sight by our Savior, ( Joh. 9.) was gratified by the Scribes and
Pharisees, who excommunicated him, and cast him out of their society to Christ
and his Apostles. p. 57 9 It may be you are best in the dark, and the light is
to you that which Job says it is to thieves, in the shadow of death, Job 24.
17. p. 60
IV. The neatest Phrases and most queint Expressions.
1. I Wonder what crotchet has fallen in conjunction with the Rotcher. p. 21
2. The ruin and destruction of the land by those walking sacks of blood the
Cavaliers. ib. 3. Hence it fully appears how left handed the Bishop is in his
understanding of Scriptures. p. 31 4. The design of this confession seems to be
to indigitate his adversary, as a filius terrae, and himself brother to the
Sun and Moon. p. 37 5. He casts out his sacred anchor, betakes himself to
his bottom answer. p. 45 6. I profess ingeniously I have not so bad an
opinion of the man, as to set the foot of my judgment by his in this. p. 48
7. A man would have thought that what the Anti-Cavalier has written should
have been a bridle in the lips of this man's pen. But jacta est alta, he has
adventured upon a Bishopric. p. 50 8. Sir let me tell you one thing which may
be worth many a two that are told you otherwise. p. 56 9. When this heaven
falls he makes no question but he shall have larkes enough to feast the Bishop.
p. 57 10. I wonder a little how the Bishop came by his simples for this
receipt. p. 58
V. His excellency in the Allegorical use of the Militia.
1. HE shelters himself behind Kilkenny as his bulwark, and lets fly at the
Parliament in England. p. 8 2. In the contents of the 2. Chap. he has the
first encounter of the 3. Chap. the second encounter of the 4. the 3. assault
of the 5. Chap. the 4. encounter of the Bishop with the Anti-Cavalier, in which
he charge him with lies, and of the 6. Chap. the last encounter wherein he
charge him with little less. 3. The quarter in this discourse which the
Philo-Cavalier falls upon is this. p. 36 Against this the Bp. advances with
this answer. p. 37 The forlorn hope or first advance of his answer is, etc.
ibid. In the next place comes on the van of his answer. ibid. 4. Now to the
heat and strength of the battle, his first charge is, etc. p. 41 5. Thus we
see the Episcopal batteries and assaults are of no value, to pierce or shake
the fortifications and bulwarks which the Anti-Cavaleir has raised for the
defense of the cause undertaken by him. p. 49 6. But because in this encounter
he quits his intellectuals and falls on with his patheticals, I will be at no
further expense of words upon him. p. 53
VI. The most concordant and consonant passages.
1. THe man is so well experienced in the point of impudency, that he
discernes it where it is not, yea where there is not the least color or
appearance of it. p. 19 2. To make your conscience leave muttering, you seal
up your resolution with another egg of the same bird. p. 29 3. Nor would any
man who has not his forehead fenced with iron and brass, ever have
adventured his reputation in such a rotten bottom. p. 21 The like follows. p.
51 4. Now I would know of a man that had not made shipwreck of his forehead,
whether, etc. p. 51
VII. His most moderate and mannerly behavior toward his Adversary.
1. HE that affirms Gregory or Griffeth Williams (or whatever the name of the
hobgobling Gr. be,) etc. p. 23 2. Juglers can hide and find at pleasure. This
man I believe has learned his Terence. Si sapis quod scis necis, and his Cato
too. p. 43 3. Whether God will assist any man, much more a colloguing Bp, etc.
p. 44 4. I answer, If this be his meaning, then have at the butcher with his
own hatchet. p. 46 5. He that thus turns him self every way, and cuts and
lashes him self like Baals Priests for an answer, it is a plain sign he
knows not which way to turn him. ibid. 6. Therefore the Bp. goes out in a
snuff here. p. 47 7. May not a man eat Oisters without disturbing the Bp. at
his roast beef? p. 48 8. For the maintenance of his cause he presently eases
his foul stomach, by disgorging this vomit in the Anti-Cavaleirs face. p. 49
9. It is a slander worthy that order of men from whence it comes, whose tongues
and pens are no slander. p. 5^ 10. I presume the Bp is nescient (not to rub him
with the coorse towel of Ignorance, wherewith not withstanding he bescrubs the
poor Anti-Cavaleir over and o^ over.) p. 53 11. The oil in his cruce being
formerly spent, the Bp. here comes to his Vinegar bottle, having run himself
out of his small stock of learning before he was aware, etc. p. 54 12. The man
by this time has reasond him self quite out of al his learning, reason, and
patience, into a moody, choleric, and bloody passion. p. 58 13. The man is
here in his rhetoricals, and we do him some wrong to make him speak Logic,
that is reason and truth against his will. p. 59.
FINIS.

