THE GREAT INTEREST OF States and Kingdoms.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, At their Late Solemn
FAST, Feb. 25. 1645.

By THO: GOODWIN, B. D. One of the Assembly of Divines.

REVEL. 17. 14. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them: For he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with
him, are called, and chosen, and faithful.

LONDON, Printed for R. DAWLMAN. M DC XLVI.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
I Here present you with one piece of the Counsels of God, next those of his
disposing the eternal conditions of persons of all other the greatest, as
which concerns the temporal salvation or destruction of Kingdoms and
Nations, which next to his Saints therein, are dearest to God, as his patience
toward them shows. A subject, which had it been set out according to the merit
of it, would of it self have fallen at your feet, who are the Representative Body
of this Nation and Kingdom, and entitled it self to no other Dedication then
to you. But Providence having brought it forth in the way of an ordinance of
God, preaching, in your ears, (though rudely) and you having been pleased to
own it, it is become yours by all sorts of Interest.

It is certain, that God did not bring that last and fatal desolation upon
the Jews, until all states and ranks of men amongst them had conspired against
the Lord and his Anointed, and his followers: nor did he bring upon them that
their first captivity, until all sorts had corrupted themselves, the great men
had broken the yoke, Jer. 5.
the Prophet prophesied falsely, the Priests did bear rule by their means, and
the people loved to have it so: and then as the Prophet adds, What will you do
in the end thereof? And yet therein God did not regard so much what the People,
as what their Rulers did. I said, (speaking of the people) Surely these are
poor, ver. 4,
these are foolish, I will get me to the GREAT men, but THESE have ALL TOGETHER
broke the yoke, 5.
and burst the bands. Our comfort therefore is, we cannot be undone without
you, nor you without failing in this, which is our GREATEST INTEREST. An
Error, which if this Kingdom should after so much bleeding err a second
time, is like hereafter never to be mended. Your preservation and guidance in
this, is, above all other, the constant and daily prayer of

Your most

THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND.
A Sermon preached at the late Fast, before the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.
PSALM. 105. 14, 14. He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved
Kings for their sakes: Saying, Touch not mine anointed. --


THe words I have read, and those from the 10. verse, as they hold forth the
first rearing of the Church of the Jews in Abraham and the Patriarchs; so, they
are intended as the first Primitive Instance and Original pattern of Gods
care and protection over his people in all Ages; and likewise of his
proceedings with all States and Kingdoms, according unto their dealings with
his people, where ever cast among them, to the end of the world: exemplified in
what was done for their sakes, and toward them and their Families.

The Story it self of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, which these words refer to,
and how God reproved Abimelech King of Gerar, and Pharaoh King of Egypt, and
others for their sakes, you may read in the 12, 20, and 26. Chapters of
Genesis; and of commands given forth concerning them to do them no wrong, yea
not to touch them; Genesis 20. 7.
declaring also of Abraham, that he was a Prophet, and so not to be injured:
Only what in the Story is uttered scatteredly and in several places, is by
the Prophet David summarily put together, Touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm.

There is a Controversy upon these words, Touch not mine anointed, that they
should be intended principally of Kings, and of these Patriarchs, as under the
notion of Kings. I shall but clear it in a word.

Whether these Patriarchs were Kings or no, I will not now dispute; Abraham is
called a mighty Prince by the children of Heth, Genesis 23. 6. yet however here
the holy Ghost speaks of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as representing the people
of Israel; and his scope is to show Gods care and protection of his people by
their example, which is clear, 1. by all the current and stream of the whole
Psalm; all that goes before, and which follows after, is wholly to show his
care of the people of Israel from first to last. But as for Kings, or Gods care
over them as such, we may say as Paul in another case, Heb. 7. 14.
Of that Tribe the holy Ghost speaks nothing, that is, in this Psa nothing as
touching Monarchy, (as he there says nothing as concerning the Priesthood.)

And 2. then the words in the 12. verse, which speak of the persons of these
Patriarchs, when they were but a few men in number, yea, very few, refer not to
Kings, nor unto these Patriarchs as such, for he speaks of their whole
families, their wives, children and servants: Yea, these three Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they were all alive at once; Isaac was above 70.
years old, before Abraham dyed, and Jacob 15. and but one of these could have
been King at once, and yet you see he speaks of them all complexedly, and as
making a company together, when they were few, and very few, he said, Touch not
mine anointed,

Yea 3. It is so far from being meant of them as Kings, that it is expressly
said in the words of the Text, He reproved Kings for their sakes, therein
speaking of them as of a sort of people distinct from Kings, and yet of a
higher and dearer value with God, then those Kings reproved for them.

But it will be said, that if it should not be meant of them under the relation
of Kings, yet however as of persons extraordinary, and therefore this charge
and instance cannot be drawn into a pattern of Gods care and protection over
all Saints, and the people of God, which is the scope which I have put upon the
words.

I answer, that though indeed their persons were extraordinary, yet here they
are withal set forth as representing the people of God, whom they were the
fathers of. It is clear by the eighth verso; He has remembered his Covenant
for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations: The
performance of which Covenant, to confirm the truth of it, he exemplifies by
the story of Gods providence over these. What therefore he says of these
anointed ones here, it extends to a thousand generations to come: and as
Abraham in other things was a Common person, in faith justifying he is made
such, Romans 3. In faith as sanctifying, Jam. 2. In being heir of the world,
Romans 4. 13. so is he here also: and Isaac and Jacob with him in their anointing.

But you will yet say, It is true, they may be understood as Common persons,
representing indeed the Nation of the Jews; but yet will what is here said, be
warrantably extended to the Believers of Jews and Gentiles under the New
Testament to the end of the world?

I answer, Yes; For the Covenant that God made with Abraham, was to be heir of
the world, as well as heir of Canaan; so Romans 14. 13. And accordingly in other
things the Analogy holds for them with these here: For as these, so the
Saints, they are called Strangers and Pilgrims, scattered and dispersed in all
Nations; So Peter speaks of them; even as here he calls these strangers, ver.
12. when they were but few in number, and strangers in the land, as the Saints
in the world. To give parallel places of Scripture, to strengthen this. In the
Old Testament. In the forty fifth Psalm, you have a Prophecy of the Church of
the New Testament, under the type of Solomon, taking Pharoahs daughter, who was
a Gentile, into his bed, as Christ, of whom he was the Type, one day should do
the Gentiles: which Church is made that great mother that shall have such
multitudes of children, Gal. 4. Now of those children, of the Church of the New
Testament as the Mother, and of Christ as the Father, the 16. verse of that
Psalm thus speaks, Instead of THY FATHERS shall be THY CHILDREN, whom thou
may make Princes in all the earth. The meaning whereof is this, that in the
stead of these great Patriarchs, and other the Fathers of the Jews, (spoken of
in the Text) shall succeed others, the children of the New Testament, even all
the Saints, as Successors of them; and as they were as Princes in all Lands
they came into, here, so shall thy children be, says the Psalmist there. And
the 7. verse of that Psalm calls them anointed, and so speaks also in the
language of the Text, when under that notion he commands not to touch them;
That verse speaking of Christ, says, He is ANOINTED with the oil of gladness
above his FELLOWS: namely, these his fellows and children, spoken of ver. 16.
you have at once, as the great anointed one, Christ, so all his children called
anointed ones also: and as they are his fellows, so anointed too. Thus you
have all meet: Abraham and the Fathers, the anointed ones of the Old Testament,
Christ and his Saints the anointed ones in the New, in their stead; and both
Princes and Strangers in all Lands; and so of the one as well as the other this
charge is here intended, Touch not mine anointed, etc. And to this accords the
language of the New Testament, the whole mystical body is called Christ, 1
Cor. 12. 12. and Believers his fellows are said to have received an anointing,
2 Cor. 1. 21. 1 John 2. 27. yea and elsewhere the reason of this their
preservation, and Gods protection over them, is put upon this very anointing,
Esaias 10. 27.
The burden shall be taken off thy shoulder, (speaking of the oppression of
Gods people) and the yoke shall be destroyed BECAUSE OF THE ANOINTING.

Having thus explained the words, I come to those Observations which I shall
make out of them, and insist on at this time. I resolve the words into these
three parts.

1. Here is the neerenesse and the dearnesse of the Saints unto God; They are
dearer to him then Kings and States, simply considered; that is, otherwise then
as they in their persons are also Saints; for you see that for their sakes he
reproved Kings, and so shows that he prefers them to Kings.

2. Here is the great danger to Kings and States, to deal with his Saints
otherwise then well. Which appears many ways: For he does not only in words
give a charge not to touch them, but he carries it in a high way, (for so God
may do when he pleads their cause) Touch them not: as if he had said, Let me
see if you dare so much as touch them: and it is with an intimation of the
highest threatening if they should; upon your peril, if you do; for that is
the scope of such a speech: and accordingly in deeds he made this good, for the
Text says, He suffered no man to do them wrong; Not that he did altogether
prevent all wrong and injuries, for they received many as they went through
those lands; but at no time did he put it up at their hands, or let it go
unpunisht: in that sense he suffered them not. You know how he plagued Pharaoh
King of Egypt with great plagues, and all his household, for Abraham's wives
sake, Genesis 12. And so Abimelech King of Gerar, the Lord comes upon him with a
greatness, and his first word is in Genesis 20. 3. Behold, than art but a dead man,
before he had first told him why or wherefore; though then he adds the reason;
he brings him upon his knees, ver. 4. bids him look to it, that he give
satisfaction to Abraham, and restore his wife to him again, ver. 7. and well
he escaped so; and tells him also that he must be beholden to Abraham's prayers
for his life; He is a Prophet, says he, and he shall pray for thee, and thou
shall live.

The third is the care and protection which God had over them, set out and
amplified 1. by the number and condition of the persons whom he defended:
though few, men of number, that is soon reckoned, for their power and
strength, a few, or very small, (...), so the Septuagint in the parallel place,
2 Chro. 16. 19. As also 2. by what he did for them, He suffered no man how
great soever to do them any wrong, how small soever; not without recompense
and satisfaction not to do it, though they had a mind to it, though the people
had an ill eye at them, Genesis 26. 11. God causes Abimelech to make a Law on
purpose, Abimelech charged all his people in Isaacs behalf, and of his family,
(which I mention, because it gives light to the Text) and speaks in the very
words of the Text, He that TOUCHES this man or his wife, shall be put to
death: although they envied him, ver. 14. strived with him, ver. 20. hated him,
ver. 27.

I shall pass over the set handling the first of these, namely, The neernesse
and dearnesse of the Saints to God, it will after come in well enough, under
the second, as the reason thereof.

That maine thing which I have singled forth to insist upon, is, the danger
that is unto States, to deal otherwise then well with the Saints, Gods
anointed. And the Observation is plainly this,

That the dealing well or ill with the Saints of God, Obser.
it is the greatest and highest INTEREST of Kings and Kingdoms, on which their
welfare or their ruin depends.

I have the story of the whole world before me, to gleane Demonstrations and
instances out of, to make good this truth. But I shall endeavor to present it
to you under that prospect that runs through the story of the whole Bible. My
Observation out of the Story of which, and the sum and issue of all, is this,
That God from the beginning has in his Providence so ordered it, that the
greatest and most flourishing Kingdoms and States should still have to do
with his Saints and People in all Ages, and either they have been broken by
their ill using of them, or they have prospered by their well dealing with
them. You shall find this I say throughout the whole Scripture. My Text leads
the round to all the rest, and I therefore indeed chose it rather then any
other, though otherwise as a bottom to this point, I might have pitched upon
others perhaps more full.

We will begin with the very first Kings and Kingdoms that you read of after
the Flood. How he reproved the King of Egypt, and the King of the Philistines,
for the sake of Abraham and Isaac, that I mentioned before. Besides those there
is mention of four Kings, Genesis 14. Amraphel King of Shinar or Babylon, which
was the first Kingdom in the world after the flood, Genesis 10. 10. and was one
of, yea the first great Monarchy. There is likewise Chedorlaomer King of Elam,
or Persia, which afterward likewise proved a Monarchy. For as Assyria and
Babylon made the first, so you know Persia was the next. You have two other
Kings more there confederate with these. These four Kings they brake in upon,
Giants.
and smote all the Countries about; they smote the REPHAIMS in Ashteroth
Karnaim, Terrible ones.
and the ZUZIMS in Ham, and the EMIMS, Deuteronomy. 2. 10, 11.
and the Horites in Mount Seir, And they returned and came to Enmishpat, The
Observation exemplified in all States and Kingdoms through the Scriptures.
which is Cadesh, and smote all the Country of the AMALEKITES, and also the
AMORITES, that dwelt in Hazezon tamar, as you may read, verses 6, 7, 8. And
all the while they overran these vast Countries, 1. Four Kings overthrown by
Abraham.
where there was not one Saint to be found, they found no resistance, having
but to do with Nations, not Saints in them; but unhappily to them, when they
came to fight against the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah, they light upon one
Saint, and but one, and that is Lot, so the 12. verse, They took Lot, Abraham's
brothers son, (who dwelt in Sodom) and his goods, and departed. Alas to
them; little thought they what a Prisoner they had: they took him in the crowd
amongst the wickedest people under heaven, a people so wicked, that one would
have thought God should so little have considered this one Saint, to save him
from perishing, as that his vengeance should have taken the opportunity to
ruin these, though this one poor Lot had been involved in their destruction.
But you shall see how tender God is of his Saints. Jerem. 3.
They had unawares devoured an hallowed thing, one righteous Lot, and had taken
him but Prisoner; they had drunk poison, and all the riches, and all the goods
they had taken, they vomit up again, together with their own blood. The Lord
in this giving demonstration of that his care and skill which Peter makes
observation of upon the story of Lot and the Sodomites, The Lord knows how to
PRESERVE the righteous, and RESERVE the unjust, 2 Pet. 2. 9. And whom should
God use to be the instrument to do this too? God had not many more Saints then
in the world, but only Melchisedechs we read of, and Abraham and his family,
and God uses that one Abraham; and he had an Army but of a few, and a very
few, (even as the Text has it) but three hundred and eighteen men, borne in
his house, ver. 14. he pursues them, and smites them, ver. 17. with a great
slaughter, and brought back all the goods, and his brother Lot and his goods,
etc. Genesis 20. 16.
ver. 18. And thus they were reproved. You see the Text made good from the very
first beginning of Kingdoms, He reproved Kings for their sakes indeed.

Thus he began the world at first; and this very victory is made a leading
case, a standing encouragement to the sons of Abraham, the Saints, for ever
after. So you have it applied in Esaias 41. 2. Who raised up (says God, to raise
up his peoples hearts) the RIGHTEOUS MAN from the East? namely, this one
Abraham? and called him to his foot, Follow me, I Will be thy General, said God
to him, Gave the Nations before him, and made him rule over Kings; he means
these very Kings you have heard the story of: He gave them as the dust to his
sword, and as driven stubble to his bow; he pursued them, and passed safely,
etc. Did God do thus then for one or two of his Saints, and will he not go
on? What says the 4. verse? Who has wrought and done it, calling the
generations from the beginning, and so having ordained all the generations of
Abraham to do the like exploits in their several ages. I the Lord am the
first, and with the last, I am he. I began to do this with Abraham, and I will
go on to do so, even to the last, for the sons of Abraham. And that this is
plainly his meaning, appears by ver. 8. where he makes a general application
of it to his seed, But thou Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen,
the SEED OF ABRAHAM my friend. Therefore says he, ver. 10. Fear thou not,
(thou worm Jacob, ver. 14.) for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy
God: I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with
the right hand of my righteousness. Behold, all they that were incensed
against thee, shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing, and
they that strive with thee shall perish. All the whole Chapter is nothing else
but encouragement to all the seed of Abraham, from this very instance I have
now given you. And the Text here confirms it, premising unto all those
instances, He has remembered his Covenant, the word he commanded to a thousand
generations.

The next Kingdom in the world that flourished in those first times, 2. Egypt.
that grew to any greatness that we read of, was that of Egypt; and though
Cham the founder of Egypt was cursed, yet as usually those God lays the
greatest curse upon, he first begins to bless with outward blessings in the
world; so he did the seed of Cham, in that infancy of that new world. How
renowned a Kingdom that then was, both for continued succession of Kings in a
race, (which Esaias insinuates) and for other greatness, Chap. 19. 11.
the story of Moses, and Herodotus, and other profane stories do celebrate: it
was as would seem in those first times more flourishing then Assyria, (the
Territories of Assyria could not then be great, when such other three Kings
forementioned bordered about it, and when Chedorlaomer of Persia was the chief
of all the four) Now see how still the Lord does follow on this his great
design, Genesis 14. 4, 5.
he will have his Saints to be cast upon this Kingdom, and to live therein;
and not only Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, but in the end all their
posterity. It Is the next story the Psalmist gives instance of to the purpose in
hand, and let us take it, but as he relates it: says he, ver. 17. He sent a
man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a servant, whose feet they hurt
with fetters; (Potiphar only did it, yet God lays it upon the Nation) But as
the Psalmist observes, the Lord was even with them for it; ver. 21. and 22. He
made this man not only Lord of Pharaohs house, but he adds, to BIND HIS
PRINCES at his pleasure, as they before had done him. As Abraham before, so
Joseph now is another leading instance, To BIND their KINGS with CHAINS, their
Nobles with fetters of iron, Thou have saved our lives, Genesis 47. 25.
such honor have ALL HIS SAINTS, Psalm. 149. He made this man a Savior to
them, (as themselves acknowledge) and whilst they dealt well with him and his
Brethren, as he blessed Potiphars house for his sake, so he blessed the Prince
and all Egypt also for his sake. And whilst Egypt was the Nursery, or rather
the Granary (as it was called anciently Horreum Romani Imperii) to these
anointed ones, the people of God, so long it greatly flourished. But verse. 25.
God turned their heart to hate his people, and to deal subtly with his
servants, (for malice and cunning always go together in oppressing the
Saints) and how they oppressed them, you all know. But as he had reproved Kings
for their sakes before, and Pharaohs Progenitors among the rest, saying, Touch
not mine anointed, as here, so he begins with a message by Moses his
Ambassador sent to that King of Egypt, and therein uses the same kind of
language, Ex. 4. 22, 23. Thou shall say unto Pharaoh, Thus says the Lord,
Israel is my son, even my firstborn. There is only this difference in the
expression; the Psalmist here calls them his anointed; there, his firstborn.
And it is as if he had said, Tell Pharaoh I Jehovah am a greater King then thou
art, and therefore my firstborn is greater then thy firstborn; And Let my
son, my first borne go, that he may serve me; he carries all high: And if
thou refuse to let him go, I will slay thy son, even thy firstborn, and so
indeed he did in the end. They left not oppressing the people of God (and the
great quarrel was to let them go to worship) till such time as God did
overthrow that Nation, with so great an overthrow, as no Kingdom could have a
greater not totally to be destroyed; and indeed so great, as you hear no more
of them till Solomon's time. There is not a word of Egypt in all the time of
Joshua, and of the Judges, till you read of Solomon's marrying Pharoahs
daughter. Here you see Egypt, both blessed while they dealt well with the
people of God, and broken when they dealt ill with them.

To let pass those petty Kings of Canaan, Assyria and Babylon.
overcome by Moses and Joshua, let us come next to Assyria, which together with
Babylon is reckoned the first great Monarchy. The beginning of the Assyrian
Monarchy being from Babylon, Genesis 10. 10. and the Kingdom returning again to
Babel, both are justly reckoned but one, though in their several revolutions
they were distinct. This Monarchy in the Infancy of it, Abraham had to do
with, and as you heard, overcame the King thereof: Egypts King was also
reproved for their sakes, and Persia, and two Kings more: God ordering it, that
the Father and representer of the faithful should reprove and chastise those
Kings, whom his seed should after ruin. How the people of God were oppressed,
first by the Assyrian kings, and then by the Babylonians, the story of the
Kings and Chronicles do show: The Assyrian often oppressing them, and at last
carrying the ten Tribes captive, as Babylon did the other two. Now to make
short work of both, you shall find one Scripture, Jer. 50. where you shall
see them both put together in their ruin, and the ruin of both put upon this,
their oppression of the people of God. I mention that Scripture only, because
it summarily contains the whole: ver. 17. says God, Israel is a scattered
sheep, the Lions have driven him away: they were a scattered people: or as
Junius and Piscator has it, they were parva pecus, a little flock, few, and
very small, in comparison of the Nations, as the Psalmist has it here: and the
Lions drove them away. Who were these Lions? First, says he, the King of
Assyria has devoured him, he seized as it were on the flesh, 2 King. 15. 16,
20, 29. and 16 7. and 17. 3.
( Pull, Tiglath Pileser, and Salmanazar, oppressing and captivating them, 2
Kings 15.) and last This Nebuchad-nezzar King of Babylon, (he speaks of him
with scorn and indignation, This Nebuchadnezzar) has broken the bones: And
because that he came last, and took away all, as a sweeping rain, therefore
his anger rises most against him, Ver. 18. Thus says the Lord of Hosts,
Behold, I will punish the King of Babylon and his Land, as I punished the King
of Assyria. Sulianus Anna^ Tom. 4. An. Mund. 3333. and An. 3452.
Merodach of Babylon subdued the Assyrian, Nebuchadnezzer utterly ruins Nineve
the head City thereof, and then Babels time comes to be wasted also, and the
whole Land therewith. Here is that Monarchy gone you see, both Assyrian and
Babylonian, and whosoever were the instrument, this was the cause from Gods
own mouth. Add unto which, that in the next Chapter. Jer. 51. 11. Because
(says that Text) it was the vengeance of the Lord, and of his Temple. And take
in also verse. 35. The violence done to me, and to my flesh, be upon Babylon,
shall the inhabitants of Zion say, and my blood upon the inhabitants of Caldea,
shall Jerusalem say, then when they are destroyed.

Now there are a great many other kingdoms and Nations, 4. All the
neighboring Kingdoms about Judea.
that bordered about the Jews, whom God (as I remember) calls his evil
neighbors, for their ill will to Zion: these all fell either by or with
Babylon. Of these you shall read in the 25, 26, 27, and 28, Chapters of
Ezekiel, and so on: God there sends the cup round to all the Nations: All those
Nations certainly had infinite provocations of National sins of all sorts,
against God, amongst them; but you shall see still God there lays his suit and
quarrel against them only for their ill dealing with his people, to whom they
were neighbors round about.

He begins with the Ammonites, 1 Ammon.
Chap. 25. 2. and what was her sin that ruined her? Ammon was but glad at the
fall of the Jews. Behold ( says the 3. verse.) thou said AHA, against my
Sanctuary, when it was profaned, and against the Land of Israel, when it was
desolate, and against the House of Judah, when they went into captivity, they
did not help it forward, only cried Aha. Therefore, says God, v. 4. I will
deliver thee to the men of the East for a possession; and ver. 6. Because ( as
in speech (as before) so in gesture they expressed the like joy at it) thou have
clapped thy hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart, with all
thy despite against the Land of Israel; Behold, therefore, I will stretch out
mine hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to the Heathen, I will
destroy thee, etc.

The next that he mentions is Moab. 2. Moab.
She did but cast out a word; so verse. 8. She did but only say this, Behold,
the House of Judah is like unto all the Heathen, now laid wast as they, and
there is no difference in the protection of their God over them, more than over
the Heathen themselves; it was but this word cast out: yet therefore says the
Lord, ver. 9. Behold I will open the side of Moab: He would break through and
open his strong Frontier Cities, (as the next words explain it) break his ribs,
and so enter into his bowels; and ver. 10. the Ammonites shall be no more
remembered among the Nations. No other sin in mentioned, but this word, about
his people.

He comes next to Edom, 3. Edom.
ver. 12. who was the posterity of Esau, and their brother, (as you shall hear
anon) and of them he says, Because that Edom has dealt against the house of
Judah by taking vengeance, and greatly offended, and revenged himself upon
him; THEREFORE says he, ver. 13. I will cut off man and beast from it, and
make it desolate. He rises still in his punishments proportionable to their
sins, and to their dealings with his people. And I will do it, says he, by
the hand of my own people, ver. 14. that were oppressed by them.

From Edom he carries the cup to Philistia, 4. Philistia.
who because they had an old grudge against the Israelites, a despightfull
heart to destroy them for the old hatred, ver. 15. THEREFORE I will execute
great vengeance on them, ver. 16, 17.

In the next place, 5. Tire.
he comes to Tire, poor Tire, I call her so, because as of all the Nations
they were the most ingenious in themselves: (In so much as Christ says, They
would have repented, etc.) and most ingenuous of all Nations else unto the
Jews, that helped them to build the Temple, and were confederates with David
and Solomon. And what was her fault? A mere temptation of love to her self,
such as might befall any in the like case. Read Chap. 26. 2. Son of man,
because Tyrus has said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken that was the
gates of the people, I SHALL BE REPLENISHED now she is laid waste. The meaning
is this, I shall now have all the trade. You know Tire lay nigh to Jerusalem,
and it was a place of the greatest trade and merchandise then in the world, she
was the Mart of Nations, (so she is called in Esaias 23. and in Ezekiel. 27. 3.) and
though she had the greater trade of the two already, yet she rejoiced in this,
that Jerusalem should be laid waste, who had been the gates of the people,
whither much people came for traffic, as well as to me. Now thinks she (and
it was but a selfe-loving thought) all the trade will wholly come to me, and I
shall be replenished and increased. No more. Yet, because it fell out to be
uttered against the Church, for this, and for no other sin (there mentioned)
must Tire be destroyed, as she was by Nebuchadnezzar, though to fulfill the
Prophecy, he served twelve years in the siege thereof. And see how God
proportioned her punishment to her sin; Would thou have more customers?
Thou shall have enough; Behold, I will cause many Nations to come up; What, for
traffic? No, to come up against thee, as the sea causes his waves to come
up: the Babylonian Soldiers shall be thy Merchants that shall take off thy
goods off thy hands. And because that Tire, was a most glorious people, he
therefore spends two or three Chapters upon the description of her ruin.

In the 26. 6. Egypt.
Chapter he comes to Egypt. Egypt had been broken once before (as you heard) by
the people of Israel, and reproved for Abraham's sake. They were a false-hearted
Nation, that even Rabshekah could aforehand prophecy so of them, in Esaias 36.
6. Lo, says he, thou trustest on the staff of this broken reed, whereon if a
man will lean, it will go into his hand and pierce it; so is Pharaoh King of
Egypt to all that trust in him. It Was the Genius of that Nation to all that
dealt with them. And as Rabshekah had foretold of them, so it fell out: and
therefore the Prophet Ezech. utters their sin against the Church in Rabshekahs
language, Chap. 29. 7. Because they have been a staff of reed to the house of
Israel. It is a most elegant comparison; the similitude it looks many ways: 1.
A Reed was a Hieroglyphick of that Country. Sanctius upon those words, Psalm.
68. 30. Rebuke the company of the Spearmen, (so we translate it) but look in
the margent of your Bibles, and likewise the Original will bear it, it is,
Rebuke the beast of the Reeds, and he interprets this to be meant of Egypt,
the Chaldee Paraphrase also interpreting it of that Nation, it being a Country
of Reeds. On the bank of Nylus, and so throughout the whole Country, (through
the overflowing of that River) there were, and are such Reeds and Canes
growing, Lib. 16. ^. 36.
as no where in the world again besides, (so Pliny says) serving for Pens,
Spears, Arrows Hence Arundo for Sagitta with the Latins, and the same word
for a Reed and a Spear (as here) in the Scripture.
(as Pliny there) so for Staves, Arkes, Exodus 2. 3. And Egypt is called a
BEAST of reeds, alluding further (as I take it) to the Crocodile, the proper
beast of that Country, which is an Amphibion, living both in land and water;
and so usually lies amongst the reeds by the river side, As the Elephant also
is said to do, Job 40. 21.
and there shrowds her self against the heat. And suitably we find that
Augustus having conquered Anthony and Cleopatra the Queen of Egypt, caused by
way of triumph to be stamped on his Coin a Crocodile and a Reed, And in
Adrians coins of gold also.
as that which was put for the Hieroglyphick of that Country, as the manner of
the Romans was. And the holy Ghost here in Ezechiel long before seems to have
given the same Coat of Arms for that Country and Kingdom, (perhaps according
to the common use) using both these apart of Egypt also. For first, in the
third verse of this Chap. 29. he calls Pharaoh King of Egypt, The Dragon of
the Rivers, (which I believe has reference to the Crocodile, in those Rivers,
which is a kind of Serpent, and beast also) and in the 7. verse after, which we
are now upon, to a staff of reed. Whereas in that 68. Psalm. you see both are
put together, The beast of reeds: Here in this 29. of Ezechiel, the Prophet
having in his eye the common Hieroglyphick of the Country, turns the
similitude to their being a staff of reed; that suiting his present scope,
which was to express their failing that confidence the people of God reposed
in them, and so becoming the fatal occasion of their misery. BECAUSE (says
he, verse 6.) thou have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel, when
they took hold of thee thou did break: They (as Cornelius a Lapide upon the
place) had provoked the Jews to rebel against Nebuchadnezzar, promising to
assist them; But though thou were Baculus in promissione, a staff in promises,
yet but Arundinens in executione, a staff of reed, vain and helpless in the
performance, (as he speaks.) The Prophet goes on. Yea thou did not only
break, but run up, and rend all the shoulder, and made their loins to be at
a stand; did not only hinder, but hurt and weaken them. The Lord comes upon
them with his former THEREFORE, ver. 8. says the Lord, I will bring a sword
upon thee, and will cut off man and beast. And so he goes on in three or four
Chapters to set forth their punishment, and that relating as the former had
done, to this their unfaithful dealing with Gods people, as that sin that
was the cause thereof, which is the point in hand.

When the Prophet had thus dispatched Egypt, 7. A special threatening against
mount Seir and Edom.
and threatened the like to Assyria and Babylon, (of which enough was touched
before) he falls afresh upon mount Seir and Edom, and contents not himself to
have put them into the common catalogue (which we have gone over) with the rest
of the Nations in the 25. Esau, of whom both came, was called Edom for his
Redness, Genesis 25. 30. and Seir from his hayrie hands. Esau dwelt in Seir, Genesis
33. 14, 16. and was given as a possession to his seed by God, Deuteronomy. 2. 5. and
Esau was the father of Edom, Genesis 36. ult.
Chap. but he returns again to a peculiar, special reckoning with them in the
35. Chapter, (the reason of it we shall see by and by, because they were their
brethren) Because (says he there, ver. 5.) thou have had a perpetual hatred,
and have shed the blood of the children of Israel by the force of the sword in
the time of their calamity, in the time that their iniquity HAD AN END, that
is, when they had already suffered so much for their sins, that it might have
been thought God had punished them enough, yet then do they begin their misery
afresh: Therefore as I live, says the Lord, I will prepare thee unto blood,
and blood shall pursue thee, etc. And ver. 10. he adds another reason, Because
thou have said, These two nations, and these two countries shall be mine,
(namely, their own, and that of Israel adjoining) and we will possess it:
when Nebuchadnezzar had laid it waste, they promised to themselves the
possession of it, whereas THE LORD WAS THERE, (as the Prophet adds) They
thought they might as easily conquer, and enter upon the possession of it, as
any of the other Nations, whereas the Lords presence was there, to keep
possession for himself and his people that belonged unto it: This was their
sin, then follows their punishment. Therefore as I live, says the Lord, I
will even do according to thine anger, and according to thine envy, which
thou have used out of thy hatred against them, I will proportion my punishment
accordingly. And he does not content himself only with this bringing of them
in again here, but besides he spends a whole Prophecy upon them, the Prophecy
of Obadiah, whose message is taken up with nothing but threatenings against
Edom, and resolving all into the same quarrel, For thy violence against thy
BROTHER Jacob Deuteronomy. 2. 4, 5. God said to the Jews, You are to pass through
the coast of your BRETHREN the children of Esau. Meddle not with them, etc.
Edom and Seir (as was said) coming of Esau were brethren to the Israelites,
and God takes it infinitely more unkindly at their hands, then at the hands of
the other Nations, THEREFORE shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off
for ever. In the day that thou stoodst on the other side, that is, behavedst
thy self as a neuter that stood aloof: in the day that strangers carried away
captive his forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon
Jerusalem, thou wast as ONE OF THEM, did as much mischief as the Babylonians.
The Psalmist also has it, Psalm. 137. 7.
Thou should not have entered into the gate of my people in the day of their
calamity, yea thou should not have looked on their affliction, (that is, as
idle Spectators, much less rejoycers in it) nor have laid hands on their
substance, not have spoiled them of their goods, in the day of their calamity
etc. Therefore is their punishment to a perpetual ruin, more heavy then any
of the rest. Thus now you have also seen an end of all these Kingdoms that
were neighbors about Jerusalem, and how they were all reproved, yea destroyed,
upon this quarrel of touching, and meddling with his anointed, as the Text has
it.

Now let us go on to the other Monarchies, V. The Persian Monarchy an instance
of Gods blessing for his peoples sakes.
the Persian and the Grecian: you shall see still that the story of them also
makes good this great point in hand. The Persian and the Grecian both had to
do with the Church: But the first of these, the Persian, seems rather an
instance on the other hand, viz. of the welfare, and of the raising up of a
Nation and of a State for the people of God: (For God has given some instances
of blessing as well as he has given of ruin.) The very raising up of Cyrus,
and of that Monarchy in him, it was for his peoples sake. The Scripture is
express for this, read Esaias 44. 28. Thus says God of Cyrus, He is my
shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, Thou
shall be built, and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid. And go on to
Chap. 45. ver. 1. Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right
hand I have holden, to subdue Nations before him, etc. He calls Cyrus His
ANOINTED: He calls Tire An anointed covering Cherub also, Ezekiel. 28. and no
other Heathen Princes else in all the Book of God: First, Tire an anointed
Cherub, because he was propitious to the Jews, even as the Cherub covering the
Arc: Occolampad. in loc.
Then Cyrus was Anointed, because as Sanctius well says, Non minus studiose
res curabat Iudaicas quam si Iudaeorum esset, and non Persaru^ Imperator. He
took as much care for the people of God, and the building of the Temple, as if
he had been King of Jury himself. And God calls him likewise his SHEPHERD,
even as he had done David, that was to look to his sheep. In the place I quoted
before, concerning the Assyrian and Babylonian Kings, Ier. 50. you heard how he
called them LIONS, because they scattered his sheep, so the expression is
there, but here he calls Cyrus HIS SHEPHERD, that shall perform all his
pleasure: and for that end raised him to all this greatness: for, for whose
sake was it, he had the Nations given him? Read the fourth verse, For JACOB my
SERVANTS SAKE, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name, I
have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me: not for thy sake, but for
my peoples only. And although for a while some of them Kings made Edicts to
interrupt the building of the Temple, yet the generality of those Kings went on
in that course of favor which Cyrus had begun, and were more favorable to the
Jews then all of the other Monarchies. Darius Histaspis mentioned Ezra 4. ver.
24. permitted the Jews to go on in building it, as their poverty would suffer
them; and after another interruption, Darius Nothus, Thus Calvisius and Master
Mede in his account of Daniels Weeks, page 5, 6, 7. which does fall in the best
to accord all the years of Daniels Weeks. But if (as most other Chronologers)
it had been Darius Histaspis that made that Decree in Ezra 6. for the
finishing the Temple, then it affords a greater Observation to my purpose in
hand, namely, That God did take away Cambyses, Cyrus his son, (whom they
would have to be that Artaxerxes, Ezra 4. that hindered by force of Arms the
building the Temple both in his Fathers days (whilst he was Prince of Persia,
as Dan. 10. 13. he is called, or Prorex in his fathers absence) and in his
own) and that without issue, and so Cyrus issue male ended, being punished for
recalling the favor granted. But Darius Histaspis being chosen by the Princes,
God established the Kingdom in him and his seed, for his reviving Cyrus his
Edict. And however, almost all agree in this, that this Darius he hindered it
not, but gave liberty for his time, and is that Darius mentioned Ezra 4 24. See
Mede, Daniels Weeks. page 7. in his marginall note, whom therefore God blessed
accordingly, and yet regarded Cyrus also in this, that by his daughter Atossa
wife to this Darius, his race continued.
Ezra 6. did put Cyrus his Decree in force again, and allows the expense of
the finishing it out of his own revenues, and inserts this in his revived
Decree, that the Jews might pray for the life of the King and of his children,
ver. 10. They also had of the seed of the Jews great men at Court with them, as
Daniel, Mordecat, Ezra, and Nehemiah, the two latter of whom were sent by
Artaxerxes to build the City of Jerusalem; yea, and another of their Kings
admitted one of that Nation (through the providence of God) to the royal bed:
Ahasuerosh married Hester, of the seed of the Jews, under whom, and under other
of these Kings they had the greatest prosperity. Now as this favor to the Jews
was the cause of the erecting that Monarchy at first, so surely of the
continuance of it so long: Historians wonder that it should stand so long, it
being so loose and dissolute a Court and State Therefore Daniel compares him to
a slow unweildy Ram, as it were heavy with, wool and flesh, Chap. 8 7.
and having so many great shocks. I can attribute it to nothing but this, the
eminent favor they showed to the Jews, the people of God. And I shall but
cast in this Observation more about it. When was it that it came to be ruined
and destroyed? but in the time of the latter Darius, then when Cyrus (who had
been Gods Shepherd) his seed was wholly extinct? Diodo. imitio. lib. 7.
For though his seed by the Male issue continued not to a Grandchild, yet in
the seed of Atossa, Cyrus daughter, wife to Darius Histaspis, the Kingdom was
continued in his race. And to make the providence the more remarkable, whereas
Darius had sons before by another wife, yet the intrest of Atossa (...), says
Herodotus of Atossa, giving it as the reason of this succession.
for Cyrus sake, carried the succession to Xerxes her son, Cyrus Grandchild.
But that last Darius, in and with whom that Empire was destroyed by Alexander,
was of another race Alexander the Great in his Letters to Darius, and his
speech to his soldiers against Darius, affirms it. Arrianus Cu^tius, lib. 6. us
also Justin.
. Such regard had God to Cyrus his Shepherd, and his seed, that favored the
Jews. But then it was, and not before, that God threw down that Monarchy,
whether for any thing done against the people of God or no, the Scripture is
silent.

Let us come to the Grecian Monarchy, VI. The Grecian Monarchy.
for that was the third; some of the story of which, you have mentioned in
Zech. 9. which is an apparent Prophecy of the expedition of Alexander: D.
Jackson 8. Book of Commentaries on the Creed, sect. 3 6. 17.
and as a late learned Writer rightly says, you may better know the meaning of
the first part of that Chapter out of Quintus Curtius and Josephus, then out of
most Commentators. You read there of a Prophecy of Tire that it must be taken
again, so verse. 3. Now Zechariah writ after the Babylonish Captivity,
therefore it is not that former taking of Tire by Nebuchadnezzar, but that
latter by Alexander. And what he says in the 5. ver. of Gaza, and those other
Cities in Philistia, Askelon shall not be inhabited, and the cutting off the
Governor of Gaza, Quintus Curtius exactly relates the performance of it, and
his cruelty therein; and it is usually noted as the first and greatest act of
Alexanders degenerating to barbarous inhumanity: Now all that his rage against
all those Cities that were neighbors to the Jews, was ordered by God, and
foretold by the Prophet, but only to set forth the wonderful care and
protection of God toward his people, recorded ver. 8. that although Alexander
was as much incensed against the Jews, (for their answer sent him of their
resolution to cleave to Darius, to whom they had sworn) yet as that 8. verse
foretold, I WILL ENCAMP ABOUT MY HOUSE, says God, because of THE ARMY, because
of him that passes by, and because of him that returns. When Alexander went
by, and when afterward many other Armies went to and fro, God still encamped
about his house. And though Alexander plundered or destroyed all the Cities
round about, yet still Jerusalem and the Temple were preserved. Yea Alexanders
heart was so changed, (as Esaus) that he went in peaceably. And the High Priest
showing him the Prophecy of Daniel, how the King of Grecia, that is, himself,
should overcome the King of Persia: he was thereby encouraged to the conquest
of the King of Persia, and not only spared them, but gave many immunities to
the Jews: and in that his expedition against Darius, prospered accordingly.

Now that Monarchy thus raised by him, was divided into four parts, Dan. 8.
22. all which are accounted to make up that Grecian Monarchy: And in the
latter end of their Kingdom, says the 23. verse, when the transgressions are
come to the full, Joseph. Antiq. Jud li. 11.
that is, when God meant to begin to break it, and to put a period to it, and
to reckon with them for their other sins. This his wonted design sets his
providence awork, that they should fall foul upon his people, and so be
broken, as the former had been; and eminently among and above the rest, you
have a little horn arising, Antiochus, the successor of one of them; (the
story is clear in Dan. 8. who magnified himself against the people of God,
the daily sacrifice, against the truth, etc. ver. 11, 12. and in this God laid
the foundation not only of his ruin, but of the rest of the Grecian
Monarchy. This I might show out of Daniel, ver. 25. He shall be broken without
hand, etc. but I will rather do it out of the 9. of Zachary, (having already
begun with that, and showed out of it the rise and proceedings of that
Monarchy in the first horn thereof, Alexander) let us see what it says of
the ruin of it, in that which follows, ver. 13. When I have bent Judah for
me, and filled the bow with Ephraim, (it is an elegant similitude) and raised
up thy sons, O ZION, against thy sons O GREECE, and made thee as the sword
of a mighty man: And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go
forth as the lightning, etc. Here the Grecian Monarchy in the last remainders
of it (the Kings of Egypt and Syria, the Longidae and Seleucidae who both
oppressed the Jews, being therefore called GREECE, They are called Greece, as
the King of Persia is called King of Ashur, Ezr. 6. 22. and as Cyrus, Ez. 5.
13. and Artaxerxes Neh. 10. 6. are called Kings of Babel, because successors
to these Kings.
because they were the Successors of it) is ruined: and by whom? even by the
people of the Jews, or for their sakes. God raised up the sons of Sion
against these sons of Greece, God made Judah his bow, and Ephraim his
arrows: (and when God himself will be the Archer, weak arrows and
instruments will do wonders) And besides, that for their sakes God used
miraculous and wonderful ways to ruin these enemies, The Lord shall be seen
over them, etc. ver. 14. God used the Jews themselves, the Maccabees, to
vindicate themselves against these relics of the Grecian Empire, as the story
in the book of the Maccabees shows plainly, (as Interpreters upon the Text
have observed) and particularly how Antiochus came to his end: And afterward
the ruin of the whole by the Romans, it was for the Jews sake, and their
quarrel, and at their prayer; it was by Ephraim being his arrow, and Judah his
bow, and God himself appearing from heaven against them. So then here the
GRECIAN MONARCHY is likewise broken upon the Jews. And thus we have done with
the Old Testamet.

Now let us come to the New Testament. NEW TESTAMENT. The Observation
exemplified in the Jews state and Roman Empire.
Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ who was the eminent anointed one, he comes
obscurely, and as it were stealing into the world, who was to be King of all
the world, in the days of him, who laid the first sure foundation, and
settlement of the Roman Empire, namely, Augustus; and he comes to his own, to
the people of the Jews, over whom the Romans having the power, and a
President amongst them, our Savior came to have to do at once with both these
States.

And first for the Jews. 1. The Jewish.
Because that which befell that State for their dealing with Christ and his
Disciples, is the leading case of the New Testament, as what was done to these
Kings and Nations here in the Text, and in the story of Genesis, for their
carriage toward Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, was the leading case of the Old: I
will therefore begin therewith, and spend a little time in the opening of it,
so far as it concerns the point in hand.

And now you shall see that Nation and State, of which hitherto you have heard,
that it had been for the rising or falling of all the Monarchies, and also
lesser Kingdoms round about it; it self to be the first of all other that was
broken and ruined under the New Testament, as an example to all the rest that
follow: and broken not upon another whole Nation like it self, but upon a few,
and a very few anointed ones in that Nation, namely, Our Lord and his
Disciples. God altering now the way of his dispensation under the New
Testament, using but a few Saints in Nations, (which is the more glorious) to
effect the same design he did before by that whole Nation of the Jews under
the Old. Revel. 5. 9.
He has redeemed us (say they) out of all Nations, (who are to him a royal
Nation, 1 Pet. 2. 9 compared with Chap. 1. 1.
typified out by that whole Nation of the Jews) whom now he makes to be to
all Kingdoms (where they are found) either a stone of stumbling, whereby they
shall be broken, or a sure Basis and foundation of their welfare, according to
their usage of them.

How the Jews used Christ and his Disciples, we all know. The interest of that
Nation, wherein stood it? Not so much to have entertained Christ for their
Temporal King, he avoided that; but to have received him for their Messiah,
and anointed Savior: and that this was the interest of the Nation and its
welfare, is clear by that speech of Christ, Luke 19. 42. Oh that thou had
known in this thy day the things that belong unto thy peace! He therein
intending as well the Temporal peace of that Nation, as the eternal peace of
their souls. As Tire had stood to that day if they had repented, (as Christ
speaks) so had Jerusalem also if they had known and kept to this their
INTEREST. But they were so far from doing this, that they clean diverted from
it, and took up other worldly and politic interests of their own, to save
themselves by, which were their ruin. Yea (which I beseech you mark and
observe) the Lord did order it so in his providence, that even REASON OF STATE,
and a word lie cross INTEREST, to this should be the chief motive to them of
crucifying Christ, and so of the final desolation on of that Nation. For
which, consult first the 11. of John, ver, 49, 50. say they (generally) If we
let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, and the ROMANS will come and
take away both our place and Nation. And what says the great High Priest
further upon it? Ye know nothing at all, nor consider that it is expedient for
US, that one man should dye for the people, and that the whole Nation perish
not. And although this is there said, to be spoken as a Prophecy, (God guiding
his mouth therein) yet withal, if you look into the 18. of John, ver. 14. it
is charged upon him to have been a wicked council given, (take it as it was
intended by him) for there he is branded, This is THAT CAIAPHAS that gave
COUNSEL to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the
people. How it might be both these, as directed by God, and intended by him,
would be too long to show. But take it as it thus came from him, and he takes
on him as High Priest to speak as a deep Oracle of State, and to utter a
State-Maxime, with sleighting of his fellows, You know nothing, and his Maxim
follows, Better that one man, who is not considerable, be taken away, then a
Nation perish. And yet he therein had an eye to the Priests interest, that is,
of himself and his fellows, to keep up their honor; as well as to the
preservation of the Nation, though he colors it over with that of the whole
Nation. For in John 11. 50. the words are, It is expedient FOR Us, (namely,
Priests) that one man should dye for the people. They were jealous of Christ
getting the people from them. You shall likewise find, that when the matter was
brought to Pilate, it was State interest also caused Pilate to come off to
condemn him, The Jews cried out, If thou let this man go, thou art not
Caesar's friend: Whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar: And
the Text adds, When Pilate THEREFORE heard that saying, He sat down and
condemned him, John 19. 12, 13. When I read and considered this story, it made
me understand that in 1 Cor. 2. 6. We speak not the WISDOM OF THIS WORLD, nor
of the Princes of this world, that comes to naught; but we speak the wisdom of
God in a mystery, which NONE OF THE PRINCES OF THIS WORLD KNEW, for had they
known it, they would NOT HAVE CRUCIFIED THE LORD OF GLORY. He speaks of these
very Princes the Rulers of the Jews, and of Pilate; and the holy Ghost you see
makes the very same Observation upon it, that I have now done to you. They
thought themselves wise, and they went upon axioms of State in doing of it, but
had they known their interest, they would never have crucified the Lord of
glory. And the Apostle, you see, gives this as the greatest and most eminent
instance of the folly, of State-policie which often Princes take up, against
Christ, and the Wisdom of the Gospel, the true Wisdom. And it is farther
observable to this purpose, what likewise the Apostle says in the following
Chap. 3. 17. applying the same in substance which he here had observed upon
their crucifying Christ, unto the defiling or destroying the Church of God, the
Saints, which is the point in hsnd) whom Christ has left behind him, out of
the like Carnal wisdom and worldly policy, IF ANY MAN DEFILE OR DESTROY THE
TEMPLE OF GOD, HIM SHALL GOD DESTROY: for the Temple of God is holy, WHICH
TEMPLE ARE YE. Let no man deceive himself; If any man among you SEEMS TO BE
WISE IN THIS WORLD, let him become a fool that he may be wise; for the wisdom
of this world is foolishness with God; for it is written, HE TAKES THE WISE
IN THEIR OWN CRAFTYNES. As God caught those Jewish Princes and Priests in
their own craftiness against Christ, so will he for ever do those, It is the
Interpretation of Doctor Jackson, which because it opens a Scripture, I will
give in his own words: Out of this undoubted prenotion, that this was the very
time wherein the Lord had promised to deliver this people from the hands of
their enemies, they became so prone (as the event proves they were) to take
Arms and rebel against the Romans, partly about the time of our Saviors
birth, but especially after his Resurrection. There was no man of great might
or potency among them, which did not take upon him, to promise this peoples
deliverance from the Roman yoke; and the multitude were as prone to believe
every one that would take upon him the name and title of a Savior, or
Deliverer. The fore-fight of this pronenesse in great ones to promise salvation
to this people, and the peoples pronenesse to believe them, did occasion our
Savior to give those admonitions to his Disciples, Beware of false Christ's,
Matthew. 24. ver. 4. Mark 13. ver. 6. Luke 21. ver. 6. which would arise in Jury
before the destruction of Jerusalem, with such fair enticing promises and
pretenses of deliverance, that if it had been possible, the very Elect should
have been deceived by them. In a Sermon upon Luke 21. 25.
that offer violence to his Saints, especially when out of state and worldly
interests. That these Jews were taken in their own craftiness, if it needed,
might largely be shown; the thing they feared and avoided was brought upon
them; the Romans came and took away their place and Nation to this day: yea and
it was greatly occasioned by the same motive which in policy they embraced,
whereby to avoid it. For as the rising of many false Christ's was the curse of
that Nation for refusing the True, and is made the sign of their destruction
by our Savior, Mat. 24. so it was the Jews pronenesse to believe that their
Messiah should come about that time, and deliver them from the Roman yoke,
that the more encouraged them in their Rebellion and revolt from the Romans,
which occasioned their utter destruction by them. And so Tacitus, yea and
Josephus also did thereupon, interpret that Jewish Prophecy of the King of the
world to come out of Jury, of vespasian himself, that was the destroyer of
them, (he coming a Victor out of Jury, who was Lord of the world) God thus
retorting out of the mouths of these two witnesses, a Heathen and a Jew, their
former sin in rejecting their natural Lord, the true King (indeed) of all
the world, his son: Thus returning it (I say) with the highest Reproof upon
these Jews, by this, that that Emperor of Rome Vespasian.
(their enemy and destroyer, together with his son Titus.
) should obtain and carry away the repute of that Prophecy (they relied upon,
too late) and this because they came out of Judea, from the executing that
vengeance the Jews had by this brought upon their own heads. His blood be upon
us and our children, said they, who had formerly said of the greatest Kingdoms
in their ruins, My blood upon Caldea shall Jerusalem say, Jer. 51. 35.
This having been manifestly the destruction of that Nation, and being
likewise the pattern of the New Testament. Give me leave to give you this
further observation by the way about it: That God disposed it in his providence
so, that all States and sorts of men among them should have their hands in it,
because Gods purpose is not to destroy any Nation, for his peoples sake, till
all sorts therein concur in their ill using of them. The second Psalm
Prophesying of the crucifying of Christ, says, that the Heathen, the people,
the Kings of the earth, the Rulers, took counsel against the Lords Anointed,
which the Apostles in their Prayer (of which by and by) Acts 4. 27. interpret,
That Herod, Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were
gathered together against his child Jesus: both the Ecclesiastical and the
Civil state among the Jews, concurred in it. The Sanedrim first, and Elders
of the people; and they with much ado persuade the people; The chief Priests
and Elders persuaded the multitude, Mat. 27. 20.
and when that was with difficulty done, it was long ere Pilate did consent; he
kept off, and washed his hands, though the people, Priests and all sought to
him; but in the end yielded. And what was the reason that Pilate came in at
length also? Because God would have the Roman Empire, (which he meant to break
upon Christ and his Saints as the former) to be wound in, even in the guilt of
Christ's blood, and to embrue their hands in it, as Pilate the Roman Governor
did by his sentence, and the Roman Soldiers by execution. And therefore we
find, Rev. 11. 8. Rome to be called the City where our Lord was crucified;
because by the power and jurisdiction of that State: that so the blood of all,
yea even of Christ himself, might be found in her at her destruction, Revel.
18. ult.

But to proceed in this Jewish story. When our Lord was ascended, we read Acts
4. that when Peter and John were preaching to the people, the Priests and the
Captain of the Temple, and the Sadduces came upon them, ver. 1. and they laid
hands on them, and put them in hold, ver. 3. And then ver. 23. they being let
go (only with threatening to speak no more in his name) they went to their
own company, and there they went to Prayer: and what do they urge to God but
the second Psalm. and spread that before him merely upon this occasion, that
they were fallen upon, and interrupted in his worship, and threatened to preach
no more in that name, which they (being the relicts of Christ left behind him
here) were to hold forth. They prayed over with one accord the second Psalm,
Lord thou art God which have made heaven and earth, who by the mouth of thy
servant David have said, Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain
things? The Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together
against the Lord and against his Christ. For of a truth, against thy holy Child
Jesus, WHOM THOU HAVE ANOINTED, (and now anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows) both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the
people of Israel, were gathered together, etc. These his Disciples being his
fellows in his anointing, did accordingly (as you here see) interest their
cause in his, by putting God in mind what they did unto their Lord, in
crucifying him, to provoke him thereby to consider what was now done to
themselves, by the Rulers, Scribes, and Elders, Priests, and Band of the
Temple, ver. 1. 5.

Well, still the Jews go on, and follow the same trade, as our Savior Christ
in Luke 21. 10, 11. foretold his Disciples that they should; and withal, he
foretold them that there should be wars upon this, and commotions, Nation
rising against Nation, etc. BEFORE ALL THESE (says Christ) they shall lay
their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues, and
into prison, being brought before Kings and Rulers for my Names sake. Our
Savior therein showing that this persecution of the Saints, should be the
cause of all these wars; and so, of that Nations ruin, as well as his own
death, (so involving his cause and theirs together.) But they, as before the
wars, so after the wars, and during the time of them, (Christ says) should
go on and take no warning, this you find in Mat. 24. 7, 8, 9. verses compared,
And this, says Christ there, shall be a testimony unto you.

Now that second Psalm (whither the Apostles have brought us, and which the
Apostles in the beginning of the Gospel prayed thus over, against the Jews)
was by the holy Ghost intended against all Nations and Kingdoms that should in
like manner deal injuriously with the Saints, (as the Jews had done with
Christ) to the end of the world, so making this instance the pattern and
example to the rest. In the next words (if you read on) you find a solemn
inauguration of Christ, as King, now, when ascended into heaven, I have set my
King on my holy hill, with a Proclamation and Declaration of Gods Decree, and
great Design under the New Testament, to be effected and accomplished by this
his new King set up, I WILL DECLARE the DECRE. etc. ver. 7. which (as a
Preface) refers to all that follows, and is in effect no other then the same
you have all this while heard out of the Old. He gives Christ as a boon, upon
his Inauguration, all the Kingdoms of the world, I will give thee (says he)
the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy
possession. What to do? Either to break them, or convert them. Thou shall
bruise them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a potters vessel:
and this drift the Apostles well knew, and therefore pertinently urged it in
their Prayer to God against the Jews, which Prayer of theirs had a concurrent
influence into their ruin. Now as the destruction of Jerusalem is made by
Christ the fore-running type of the end of the world, so the destruction of
that Nation for these their doings to Christ and his Apostles and their
followers, is an example to all Kingdoms that shall do the like afterward
unto the Saints: for which Christ has and will break them also. Therefore how
ends the Psalm? BE WISE O YE KINGS, AND INSTRVCTED YE JUDGES OF THE EARTH,
etc. That is in effect, All ye States and Princes of the world, learn to know
this your INTEREST. Although this might be enough in the general, for the
whole New Testament:

Yet come we to the Roman Empire. 2. The Roman Empire.
The Book of the Revel. is a Prophecy of the destruction of that Empire,
either as Heathenish in the whole, or else when Christian (yet persecuting
then) in both the parts of it, East and West. That Book is a Tragy-Comedy,
which begins with a Kingdom given to be won by conquest Revel. 6. 8. When the
seals begin to be opened, Christ goes forth conquering and to conquer.
, and ends with the Coronation of a King, and the marriage of his Bride: and
all between, is but the removing of all such lets and impediments, namely, of
the Roman Monarchy, and all other Kingdoms which that was broken into; so far
as they stand in his way, and possess the room of that Kingdom which he is
to set up. That this is one main argument of that Book, I refer you to what
that great and learned Interpreter, Master Mede, has largely opened.

And herein Christ, when he first began (the whole world then worshipping
Idols) had work enough to do. He sets first upon conquering the whole Roman
Empire, as it was Heathenish, and the worship of Satan and Idols in it, and in
three hundred years he dispatcheth that, and throws down all both
Idollworship, and Princes, Chap. 6.
that did uphold it. This the first six seals do show. And then when the
whole Empire was turned Christian, yet (as one well said) the devil did not
turn Christian: But under the name and profession of Christ, he stirs up
the Arrian Christian world to persecute the Orthodox Christians as much as
Heathenish Rome had done. But Christ takes farther vengeance for this
persecution under both these; Heathenish and Arrian Rome It was the cry of the
blood of the Saints slain underboth, that brought on them the vengeance that
followed See Cha. 6. 10, 11.
. The Empire having been divided before into two parts; the Eastern (all which
now the Turk possesses) and the Western; this in Europe: He falls first upon
the Western European part, breaking that by the incursion of those barbarous
Nations the Goths and Vandalls; and this the four first trumpets do sound
forth: Chap. 8.
Then for the Eastern part of the Empire, (although his revenge was slower,
yet) he reserved them to the sorest vengeance that could befall the Christian
world, Chap: 9.
the conquest and tyranny of the Saracens first, and afterward the Turks, and
these the fifth and sixth Trumpets successively held forth. Thus here is an end
of the Roman Monarchy under the Emperors in the whole, and in the parts of
it. Chap. 12.
The Western part in Europe, was by occasion of the Goths invasion, broken
into ten Kingdoms, which though helping the woman against the flood of Arrian
persecution, yet (through Satan's seducing of them) they set up the Beast, or
Antichristian Rome, and these all together did join together to make as great a
war against the Saints in the 13. Chap. 13.
Chapter, as the Heathens and Arrians had done: And so Christ was in a manner
as far off his Kingdom as at the first. What then is the next great
counter-plot of Jesus Christ? It is to overcome these ten Kingdoms; so you
find, Revel. 17. 14. They shall (says he) make war with the Lamb, and the
Lamb SHALL OVERCOME THEM, for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they
that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful. The world, though
turned Christian, yet in all the variations of it, goes on still to persecute
the Saints; For why? the world will be the world still, and the Devil who is
the Prince of the world, is the same still, and so he still follows that trade
he had formerly practiced, the same which you read of, Chap. 12. ver. 17. even
to make war with the remnant of the woman's seed, which keep the commandments
of God, and have the testimony of Jesus. This is his design, and let the world
turn never so much, and refine as much as it will, Satan endeavors still to
form a party up amongst them, whom he turns against the Saints, (or some of
the Saints) for that is the great interest of his Kingdom, (as that place
shows) it is more to persecute the Saints, then to carry men on to sin. And
he will be content to fall but upon a few sometimes, rather then be put out of
this his trade. And therefore now besides plain Popery which is prophesied of
in 1 Timothy 4. to arise in the latter days: You have in 2 Timothy 3. 1. another
Prophecy of a sort of men that shall arise in the LAST DAYS, (Popery is
Prophesied of to be in the latter days) who, shall have a form of godliness,
and be despisers of them that are good: Thus the Devil has carried on his
design Age after Age, and Jesus Christ pursues more closely his great design
also, and will never leave till he has overcome: And HE SHALL OVERCOME, for He
is the King of Kings, and those that are with him are called chosen and
faithful. And all this (if it were not the scope of that Book of the
Revelation) yet story would make good. Why should I instance in more? you know
the little stone, Christ and his Saints, shall dash all in pieces, Dan. 2. But
enough.

You have heard the truth of this point exemplified by all these instances. As
for Reasons of it, the Scripture affords a far greater plenty then of
Instances: and in many of the instances given, you may find Reasons adjoined
by God himself: as here in the Text, they are Gods anointed; in that example
of Egypts overthrow, Gods firstborn; in that of Babels, 'twas the vengeance
of Gods Temple, and so on. The time will give me leave to single out but a very
few of many. The Doctrine was this, That the greatest interest of all States
and Princes, lies in their usage of the Saints; to deal ill or well with them,
is that whereon their misery or welfare does depend.

One reason of it is, 1. Reason.
(that which should indeed have been my first Observation out of the Text,
viz.) The neerenesse and dearnesse of the Saints to God. You see how tender he
is of them, TOUCH them not. If you would understand the tenderness of Gods
heart expressed in that word, parallel it with that, He that TOUCHES them,
touches the APPLE OF MINE EYE: and you have the expression twice. Ps. 17. 8.
and Zech. 2. 8. there is nothing more dear then the eye: you would have pulled
out your eyes, says Paul: and of the eye, the pupa, the black of the eye most.
When the Ammonites required of the men of Jabesh Gilead, that they should
thrust out all their right eyes, 1 Samuel 11. 2. the Text says, ver. 6. that
when Saul heard of it, the Spirit of God came upon him, and his anger was
greatly kindled, and he went and cut them off, and scattered them, so that not
two of them were left together. If Saul their King, a tyrannical King, was
thus moved for this offer of an injury to the eyes of his Subjects, much more
God for those, who are to him as his own eye, yea as the apple of it. Or if you
will have this Reason in an expression more nearly akin to the doctrine it
self, they are dearer to God then Nations simply considered: the reason is
strong, That therefore, the Interest of all Nations must needs lie in these
Saints. Esaias 43. 3, 4. I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for
thee, since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I
have loved thee, therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life.
Thus he valued them under the Old Testament. But did he give Nations for them
then? They have cost him more since, they have cost him the blood of his Son:
He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us: how shall he
not with him freely give us ALL THINGS? Romans 8. 32. All things are theirs, the
world, etc. because they are Christ's. Look what reasons the Old Testament gives
of this point in hand, from their neerenesse to God, the New Testament uses
the same. They are my first borne, said God to the Kingdom of Egypt, and
therefore I will take away thy firstborn: The New Testament speaks the same;
they are the Church of the firstborn, written in heaven, Heb. 12. 23. Was it
the vengeance of the Temple was Babels overthrow? the New Testament utters the
same, and to the same purpose, If any man destroys the Temple of God, him
shall God destroy: FOR THE TEMPLE OF GOD IS HOLY, which Temple are YE, 1 Cor.
3. 17. Again, Israel is Holiness to the Lord, the first fruits of his
increase, and therefore all that devour him shall offend, (offend greatly) and
evil shall come upon them, says the Lord, Jer. 2. 3. Thus speaks the Old
Testament. The same reason and expressions are given you see in the New, The
Temple of God IS HOLY, and they are the FIRST FRUITS of all his creatures, Jam.
1. 18. These are the redeemed from among men, and the FIRST FRUITS to God and
the Lamb, and therefore prevail, Revel. 14. 4.

And as because they are thus dear to God, therefore if they be dealt ill
withal, it is the cause of the ruin of a Nation: so on the contrary likewise,
if a Nation deal well with them, it is a cause of his blessing upon them; Yea
he does give Nations and States their being for their sakes. They are a
blessing in the midst of the land, Esaias 19. 24. In so much as God spares the
tree for a small bunch of grapes, (so he compares his people in respect of the
rest of a Nation) Destroy it not, for there is a blessing in it, Esaias 65. 8. or
rather as the same Esaias, they are to the whole tree, (the Nation they live in)
what the pith, the heart, the substance is. As an oak whose substance is in
them when they cast their leaves, so the HOLY SEED (the Saints) shall be the
SUBSTANCE OF IT. Esaias 6. ult. That preserves life in a Nation, when the
branches of it are hewne, or it cast its leaves. These things are spoken in
relation to their being the cause of the preservation of a nation in both these
places. Saints that are as strangers to a Nation, and only make it their
refuge, yet their presence is in such a case a preservation to them. Moab,
(says God) Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, and be thou a covert to them,
Esaias 16. 4. And ver. 5. And in mercy shall the throne be established. But much
more NATIVE Saints procure this blessing, their relation being nearer and
dearer; Of Sion it shall be said, This and that man was BORN in her; And what
follows? The highest himself shall establish her, Psalm. 87. 3.

Secondly, 2. Reason.
another reason is taken from the great interest the Saints have in God the
Governor, and the privilege which themselves have vouchsafed them by God, in
ruling and governing this world, and the providence of God therein. They are
Privy Counselors to the great King of Kings, who governs all the States and
Kingdoms in the world; and God does give these his Saints a Commission to set
up and pull down by their prayers and intercessions. The Old Testament speaks
in a high language, in Esaias 45. 11. (I might have quoted it before, for it
comes in as the reason of Gods setting up Cyrus for his peoples sake) Ask me
of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the WORK OF MY HANDS
COMMAND YE ME. Who speaks this? The words before, are, Thus SAYS the Lord, the
holy One of Israel, and his Maker. It would have been blasphemy for us to have
said it, but that the Lord himself first has said it, and given them this
privilege, Concerning the work of my hands command ye me. And which makes it
the more observable, before he does in this place mentioned confer this honor
and privilege upon them, he first (as on purpose) minds them of that infinite
distance and disproportion betwixt himself and them, (so to put the more wonder
upon it) he tells them, ver. 9, 10. that they were but the clay, he the Potter,
that could not (therefore of right) say so much unto him about his matters, as
Why made thou me thus? Yet behold, I that am thus your Maker, give you leave
to dispose by your prayers the great works of my hands, which concern my
children, my sons, the affairs of Kingdoms, even so far as they relate to
their good. And he speaks it upon this occasion, that for their sakes he had
raised up Cyrus, and pulled down the Babylonian Monarchy, because they by
their prayers had sought this. They are said elsewhere to decree a thing, Job
22. 28.
so Job, and to bring it to pass, and God is said to fulfill their counsels.
Psalm. 20.
And this interest they have either for good or evil to the nations they live
in. First, for evil. Thus Revel. 11. 6. the two Witnesses have power to smite
the earth with plagues as often as they will: And if any man WILL hurt them, in
THIS MANNER he shall be killed, that is, with the highest and sorest vengeance,
and God avengeth them speedily, Luke 18. 8. And so for blessing, The innocent
delivers the Island through the pureness of his hands, Job 22. 30. Thus one
righteous Lot was (for the present) the cause of the rescue of the Sodomites,
the wickedest people in the world, and afterward ordained to the greatest
judgment.

A third reason, 3. Reason.
is, the INTEREST of Jesus Christ himself. And to show that he is King, even
King of Kings, and has a Kingdom ordained to him and his Saints, supreme to
all theirs, in the mean while, his design and practice is, and has been, to
break all Kingdoms that do oppose him, or oppress his Saints. This reason I
might enlarge out of Daniel, The God of heaven shall set up a Kingdom which
shall break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, but it shall stand for
ever, Cha. 2. 44. and Chap. 7. but I shall insist (in this Head of Reasons)
only upon that eminent title of Christ's, (which holds forth this his INTEREST)
that he is entitled KING OF SAINTS, Rev. 15. 3. which title is there given him,
as in relation to the setting up his Worship, so to the overthrowing and
overcomming the Nations that do oppose his Saints, and this by the seven
Vialls which their prayers have filled. And at that time (it is likewise there
said) he does mavelous works, being King of Saints. In the Old Testament he
is called the King of Nations, (though he was King of Saints also then) so Jer.
10. 7. and he gave demonstration of it to purpose, by setting up that one
Nation of the Jews, which he had chosen of all nations, that that one nation
should ruin all the nations round about them: for he was peculiarly their
King, and the King of all those other nations also. But now he has scattered
his Saints in and through all nations, ( Thou have redeemed us out of all
Nations, that is the language of the New Testament) he is therefore therein
called King of Saints: he carrying on the same design by those Saints, which
he did before, and is as able to make it good, he being no less King of
Nations still, or Lord Almighty, (as you have it in that forecited place.) And
he being thus peculiarly their King, his interest is to maintain, defend, and
take part with them against all those that do malign them, as he did the
nation of the Jews. It is his title, and his most royal title, and the
greatest title, that he is King of Saints; he prefers it to his title of
being King of Nations; that vanishes, and is not mentioned in comparison. This
therefore answerably must be his greatest interest, which of all other he now
pursues. And therefore if all those Nations in which his Saints are, do not
bow to it, and comply with it, he will show himself that he is King of Saints,
and of Nations also, by ruining of them. As the greatest interest of the Devils
Kingdom is to persecute those that keep the commandments of Jesus, so it is
the greatest interest of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ to preserve his Saints,
and to confound those that injure them, for he is the King of Saints. And
further, in the Old Testament, when this his Kingdom was farther off, and
longer to come, and yet you have seen how strongly he drove on this design
then; but in the New Testament he is ascended, and personally as Man invested
into it: We see Jesus crowned with glory and honor, (says the Apostle, Heb.
2. whose faith was as real in this as our sight can be) and he SITS there
EXPECTING, as thinking the time long, till alll his enemies are subdued, Heb.
10. 13. which the same Apostle elsewhere interprets, (and therein speaks home
to the point in hand) the putting down all rule and dominion that are opposite
to his Saints, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. verses compared. And accordingly in all those
Psalms, where ever his ascension and investiture into his Kingdom at Gods
right hand is prophesied of, there the ruin or conversion of Kings and
Kingdoms are also spoken and prophesied of. Read Psalm. 2. Psalm. 68. Psalm.
110. And let me add this to all, That as the shorter time Satan has, the more
is his rage; so the shorter time Christ has, and the nearer he is to the
possession of his Kingdom, the more is his zeal for his Saints, and
indignation against his enemies. His heart is set upon it, and the more eager
does his desire become every day to attain his long expected Kingdom, and to
throw donwe all that oppose it: and therefore it is that we see in this latter
age, he has made such changes in the world. We have seen him do that in a few
years, that he has not done in an hundred years before; for he being King of
Nations, and King of Saints, he pursues his interest; and being more near his
Kingdom, he takes it with violence. We are now within the whirle of it,
therefore his motions are rapt. Hence therefore all States and Kingdoms had
need now (of all times else) to be instructed; and accordingly comply with this
interest of Christ, it is more especially now then ever their greatest
interest. It is well for us, that Jesus Christ he is our King, who is the King
of Kings, and King of Saints: and withal that he is so near the enjoyment of
his Kingdom.

APPLICATION.
I Shall come now to a word of Application, Application.
which I shall dispatch exceeding briefly. In those fore-rehearsed instances I
have carried you over, and given you a prospect of all Kingdoms throughout the
story of the Bible, and at last I brought you, and set you down, and left you
in the times of these Ten Kingdoms of Europe, of which the holy Ghost has
prophesied, Revelat. 17. 14. These (says he) shall make war with the Lamb,
and the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of Hosts, and King of Kings,
and they that are with him, are called, and chosen, and faithful. And it is
certain, we are in the last times of these kingdoms, and we all here live in
one of them. But a word of Encouragement and Direction to those of this
kingdom.

You have heard in those words I last read, 1. Encouragement.
the greatest security that any kingdoms can have in these times: for first, in
the general, this Text holds forth plainly, that Jesus Christ by virtue of his
being King of Kings, and being King of Saints, (as you heard even now) he will
overcome, and subdue these kingdoms to himself, and yet (for our
encouragement) not so as to destroy them; why? Because these kingdoms, as such,
shall destroy the whore: and therefore shall not be overcome by way of
desolation, but by way of a more happy conquest of Reformation and Conversion:
Thus the Text seems clearly to speak; for the ten horns, (which are these ten
kingdoms) shall hate the whore, and make her desolate, and burn her with
fire, ver. 16. As I have therefore thought this Text to be a bar to the
projected Spanish Monarchy, over them, even then when it was in the greatest
height, and in most probability to have carried it; so the greatest security
for continuance and preservation of these Kingdoms, because they must remain
ten Kings, or supreme States and kingdoms, until the whore is burnt, for
they must destroy her. And first, for their number, Ten: it is true, they have
indeed been more, yet never fewer, since the breaking of the Roman Empire. And
when it is said ten KINGS, it is not necessarily to be understood there should
be so many Monarchs always, (in a strict sense as we use the phrase) for in
the language of this Book, Kings is put for Supreme States. Thus Rome is said
to have had seven Kings, and yet five of those Governments were not
Monarchical. These kingdoms may fall one upon another, there may be civil
broils, and divisions, and distractions, and thereby they may be sorely
punished as we have been, for dealing ill with the Saints. Likewise two may be
joined into one, and one may be broken into two, so they have varied in
several times and ages, yet still they have stood, and at the least the number
of Ten has been kept up: and though they have made war against the Lamb,
and have been punished for so doing, yet the Lamb shall overcome them another
way then by destroying them, even by winning ground upon them: so as where you
see Jesus Christ has took footing in any one of these kingdoms by such a way
of conquest, (as in ours he has done a second time for double security) stand
that Kingdom shall till you see Rome down.

Now the next thing I desire you to take notice of in the words, is the Reason
why that Christ will thus overcome them, and preserve them. FOR (says says
the holy Ghost) those that are with him, (namely, in these ten kingdoms, and
so members thereof) are called, and faithful, and chosen. Therefore it is that
the Lamb shall work these kingdoms about, and win ground upon them, and shall
cause them at length to hate the whore, and therefore they shall stand till the
whore be ruined, and how long after, he only knows that has set them up.

It has been one great outward evidence to my faith, of the truth of the New
Testament, that what was in this particular foretold in this Book so distinctly
should so come to pass as we see it has done. When John wrote this Prophecy,
there were none of all these kingdoms set up, the Empire was not broken. You
see the Empire has been broken into these kingdoms, and they have given their
power to the beast: and we know how rooted the power of the beast once was in
all these Kingdoms, so as, who could make war with the beast? yet we have
likewise seen the Lamb has overcome many of them, especially these Northern
Kingdoms, where he has set up his Temple. He has overcome them, and he wins
ground upon us every day, and works us up age after age to a farther
Reformation, to more light and holiness, and so he will do till he has
perfectly overcome every Popish principle out of them. We see all this done,
we see likewise all these Kingdoms stand, and not subdued to any one Civil
Monarchy over them all: We see Rome prophesied of in this Book Revel. 17. 18.
, yet standing and possessing some of these kingdoms. We see likewise
multitudes of faithful called and chosen, whom God has raised up in these
kingdoms to oppose the Whore. All these things we have seen fulfilled,
therefore I beleve this shall be fulfilled too, that these kingdoms shall still
continue, where God has faithful, called, and chosen, and that they shall be
the ruin of the whore in the end. Having seen and believed so far, we may very
well trust him for the rest. This for the general.

More particularly, to you of this Kingdom we live in: If you would yet know
and be confirmed in what is your greatest interest, this Text speaks more
punctually to the point, and it holds forth by way of Prophecy thus much to
you, that your interest lies (as you are one of these ten Kindomes) in what I
have hitherto told you, even in YOUR faithful, called, and chosen. And let me
speak this for your peculiar encouragement farther: That look as where God does
give a command with a reason, upon whom the reason falls most strongly, there
is the greatest obligation; so where God gives a promise, and gives it with a
reason, where most of the reason is found true, there certainly the promise
will take place most in the fulfilling of it. Now upon what has he put the
standing of these kingdoms, and their being thus overcome by the Lamb, and
that they shall hate the whore, so as to destroy her in the end? It lies you
see in this, that they that are with the Lamb, are faithful, called, and
chosen. He puts the very reason of it upon this, The Lamb shall overcome
them, FOR (says he) they that are with him, are called, and chosen, and
faithful. Now look upon this Isle in which we live, and it is the richest
Ship, that has the most of the precious jewels of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ in it, and the greatest treasure, of any kingdom in the world, I had
well-nigh said, as all the world besides. Now where there are most of called,
chosen, and faithful, certainly there (toward the time of Romes ruin) the
Promise will take the most effect. Here then lies your INTEREST. You have it
not only confirmed from the general truth of that great point I have all this
while been giving demonstrations of, but further you have it confirmed by a
more special charter of promise and prophecy (which you may well believe,
having seen so much of it fulfilled) granted forth to these kingdoms long
before their erection. And as for this Kingdom, give me leave upon this so
just and solemn an occasion, to take the boldness to utter this in the same
expression which now well-nigh twenty years ago I used in public, That if
we had stood at Gods elbow when he bounded out the Nations, and appointed the
times and seasons that men should live in, (as the Apostle speaks) we should
not have known (unless when Christ himself was alive, and the Apostles, in
those Primitive times, unless in Judea it self, where all the Apostles were
together) in what age, or in what place, in what nation or kingdom we would
have chosen to have lived in, in respect of the enjoyment of the Gospel, and
the communion of Saints, more then in this kingdom wherein we live. Other
Churches they have had the glory of Reformation, and have had the honor in the
first age of Reformation; but we though in that respect have been like to
bleare-ey'd Leah, yet have since been abundantly the more fruitful of Saints,
faithful, called, and chosen. This is therefore our great security, and it is
the more special interest of this Kingdom in which we live, the Magna Charta
of it.

And therefore that which I shall make further bold with your leave and
patience is but only this, 2. Direction.
to add a word of Exhortation and Direction to MAINTAIN THIS INTEREST, and to
preserve it. To this end, consider, it is not simply having Saints, and
multitudes of Saints, called, faithful, and chosen, but it is the using them
kindly, and dealing well with them, that is the interest of a Nation. Judea it
self had the best of Saints, it had Christ and his Apostles, and multitudes of
others also in that Country, (which were afterward dispersed into all Nations)
yet though they had these multitudes, because they dealt unkindly with them, it
was their ruin, and God provided a safety for those his Saints, by dispersing
them into all Nations, through their persecution of them.

That worthy Duke of Rohan, that writ that Book of the CIVIL INTEREST OF THE
STATES OF EUROPE, in his Preface to it, says, That according as the proper
INTEREST of each has been well or ill followed, it has caused the ruin of
some, the greatness of others. That which that worthy Duke thus speaks of
the Civil Interest, give me leave, from all the grounds forementioned, to
press upon you concerning that which is your greatest interest; an interest
most divine, most general, and fundamental. The Saints of England are the
Interest of England; look to, and keep to this your interest, namely, maintain
and preserve the Saints among you, and make provision for them, as you would
preserve the Kingdom. When afterward the same Author particularly comes to
speak of the proper interest of England, he has a saying, (and he seems to
speak it as if it had been an Aphroisme of the late Queens) that England is a
mighty Animal, which can never die except it kill it self. To follow his
Maxim in that also, we may apply it to this interest in hand. There is a
mighty body, and company of Saints in this Kingdom. Now if they could all be
united in one, and their divisions and animosities allayed, and all reconciled
and made one, I am confident we need not fear if all the Nations of the world
were gathered together round about us. But if ye bite and devour one another,
take heed ye be not consumed one of another. It is a State Maxim as well as a
Church rule, there is nothing else can destroy us.

If any man think I am a pleading for a liberty of all opinions, of what nature
and how gross soever, I humbly desire them to remember that I only plead for
Saints, and I answer plainly, The Saints they need it not. The Apostle tells us
that there are damnable heresies, so 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. and they will soon
unsaint men; there are errors that are capital, not holding the head, so Col.
2. Do but distinguish these from others, and let this be one foundation laid
for this union. And when I say Saints, I mean no one party of men: Do we not
know that the new creature is found in circumcision and in uncircumcision, and
as eminent in the one as in the other? and it were the highest sacrilege in
the world to ingrosse that title of Saints and the godly party to any one.
Characters of Saints I need not give you, it has been the main subject of the
preaching in this Kingdom for these forty years and upwards, to describe them
to you, and distinguish men from men.

As there are multitudes of faithful, called, and chosen ones in this
Kingdom, so you, Honorable and worthy Senators, are the called, and chosen,
out of all these, to this great work, and have obtained mercy from our God, to
be in a great measure faithful. Consider the trust God has committed to you.
You have the richest treasury that I know God has above ground elsewhere on
earth. THE SAINTS OF ENGLAND ARE THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND. Write this upon your
walls, to have it in your eye in all your consultations, never to swerve from
it for any other interest whatsoever.

And have respect to the Saints, and to the whole lump of them; if you will
maintain your interest whole and entire: have regard to the Saints SMALL and
GREAT. You shall often find that expression, as in Revel. 11. 18. When the
Kingdoms of the world became the Kingdoms of Christ, and Revel. 19. when the
whore is judged, ver. 2. it is said, that all the Saints SMALL and GREAT
rejoiced. ver. 5. 7. What vow does David make when he should obtain the
Kingdom? Psalm. 101 6.
Mine eyes shall be upon THE FAITHFUL OF THE LAND, that they may dwell with
me. Let yours be so.

You are the shields of the earth, under God, and for his Saints: as in Psalm.
47. The shield should defend the whole body, and all the parts and members of
it. You are covering Cherubims unto the Ark of God, (so the Prince of Tire is
called, Ezech. 28. 16.) stretch your wings from one end of the holy of holies
to the other, so as to cover all. You are the nails of the Temple, and for the
vessels thereof, as Eliakim, Isa. 22. 24. is called a nail, on which ALL the
vessels should be hung, and by whom alike supported, the vessels of SMALL
quantity, as well as great, from the vessels of cups even to all the vessels of
flagons, so the Prophet there speaks, comparing the people of God to the
vessels of the Sanctuary, and small weak Saints to the vessels of smaller
quantity, and the stronger to the greater: and Eliakim to a nail, and a like
support to all. Shebna his Predecessor had been an oppressor of the Saints,
and therefore God says of him, that he should be driven from his station, and
cut or sawn off from the wall, so as the wall should stand: and he would put
Eliakim in his room, and hang all the Saints upon him. You are Mordecai's, and
it is said of him in Hest. 10. 3. that He was accepted of the multitude of his
brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to ALL his seed.
You are likewise called Shepherds; now the Shepherds are to take care of all
the sheep. Oh see that all the sheep be folded, and have pastures to lie down
in: not only a staff and a rod, but folds and pastures for them: take care not
of the strong only, but of the sick and the diseased, so the expression is,
Ezekiel. 34. 21. those that are sick and diseased, that men did push with their
horns till they were scattered abroad, not only reduce them from their
scatterings in a dark and a cloudy day, as Ezekiel. 34. 13, 14. but feed them in
a good fold, and judge betwixt them, and those that would push them. You are
Fathers, and you should see provision made for all the children; and though
they through way wardnesse will not eat together, yet let them not starve.

And to conclude, let me use your own word to you, UNITE, or (if you will, the
Apostles) Reconcile all the Saints in this Kingdom together. Providence has
disposed it so, that they do and will differ in judgment. The Apostles, who
were Oracles infallible, could not in their times wholly prevent it. And
differing thus in judgment, they will hardly ever of themselves agree. But it
is your work, and will be your honor, to make them and to cause them so to
do, and to find out ways whereby this may be done, notwithstanding these
their differences. Thus Constantine dealt as a Reconciler amongst his Divines,
and he did it with success. It is of all works the happyest and most glorious,
Lege Eusebium in vita Constantini, lib. 3. c. 13. Ipse consilio interfuit,
reconciliavit eos qui dissidebant, and ad concordiam persuasit: Eos qui paulo
insolentiores and ferociores fuerunt, mitigavit; nec antea desi it, quam omnes
ad concordiam revecaverit, and tum hanc quasi SECUNDAM VICTORIAM nactu^, (...),
Festum Triumphale celebravit. Whitak. contr. 3. quaest. 4.
for it was Jesus Christ his eminent work. Ephesians. 2. 14. He is our PEACE, who
has made both one, and has broken down the partition wall between us, having
abolish in his flesh the enmity: and a greater enmity was betwixt Jews and
Gentiles, then among us. He did it by his blood; do you mingle his blood with
faith, and mingle therewith but the Rules given by the Apostles, by which they
effected this, as in Romans 14. when one believed that he might eat all things,
another that was weak durst not, but eat herbs, ver. 2. Let not him that
eats, says he in this case, despise him that eats not; and let not him
that eats not, judge him that eats. And ver. 14. Let us not judge one
another any more. Certainly this rule, with such others, reduced to practice,
as are found in their writings, would heal all. I shall not stand to dispute
that place now. I shall only upon occasion thereof, acquaint you with an
Observation, which to me was strange (having considered former proceedings)
when I first found it. In the late Book of Canons that were made just before
this Parliament, and stirs began, when the Bishops would have brought in bowing
toward the Communion Table, (the Altar, as it was called) after many specious
colors prefaced thereto, they close all with this, In the practice or omission
of this Rite, we desire that the RULE OF CHARITY prescribed by THE APOSTLE may
be observed, which is, That they which use this Rite, DESPISE NOT them who use
it not; and that they who use it not, CONDEMN NOT those that use it. Could
they not have said so sooner? The observing this very rule about those other
things urged by them, had ended all the quarrels, prevented all the oppressions
of tender consciences, that were during all their days; it had saved and
prevented the silencing of how many faithful Ministers by them! But God, (who
who before he punishes, usually takes evidence, or at least lays a ground of
their conviction whom he punishes) when he had once drawn this out from them,
(though they did it for an end to facilitate the introduction of that which was
a novelty) yet then ex ore tuo, out of their own mouths he condemns them,
and stays not a moment from the execution. But from that time and word uttered
by them and published to the world, began their ruin, it hastened, and hastened
instantly.

I am confident of it, that Christ that King of Saints that is in heaven, he
will not rest till such time as he has made us one, if not in judgment, yet
in fobearance; and that if we will not take warning, and will not agree it,
that either Antichrist, or Jesus Christ himself will come in upon us, and we
shall be made to do it one way or other.

But if this great design of reconciling all the Saints could be brought to a
full issue and perfection: and if this your Interest, ( a regard had to all the
Saints in this Kingdom, which to me upon all the grounds forementioned is the
greatest Interest of this Kingdom) be followed and maintained, I would not
fear, though (as the Prophet Zachary says of Jerusalem, Chap. 3. ver. 3.) all
the people of the earth were gathered together against us. We fear foreign
Forces; certainly let us keep to our own proper Interest, and then if all the
Nations of the world were gathered together against us, I believe they would
have the hardest pull of this Nation that ever was of any: THE LORD IS HERE,
(as the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 35. 10.) or (let me express it in those
similitudes Zachary there uses) if they should come, and think to devour us,
they will find this Kingdom to be a cup of poison to them, ver. 2. (so it is in
your margents, but we read it, a cup of trembling) which they must not only
vomit up again, but will be their death and destruction: they will find it to
be a burdensome stone, as ver. 3. which while they go about to overturne, or
stir, or meddle withal, it shall fall back upon them, and cut them to
pieces. I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people; all that
burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the
earth be gathered together against it. And you that are the GOVERNORS OF JUDAH,
(as at the 6. ver.) shall be as an harth of fire among the wood, and a torch of
fire in a sheafe; and all that oppose you and rise up against you shall be but
as so many strawes. Take a stack of straw, great for bulk and number, and lay
it upon a few coals of fire upon an hearth, and what will become of them all?
though they cover the fire a while, yet they will soon be consume I and burnt
up. Read the 6. ver. I will make (says God) THE GOVERNORS of Judah like a
harth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheafe, and they
shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left.

I shall only end with what is further spoken there of these Governors of
Judah in the 5. verse, (which is the sum of what I have said) THE GOVERNORS
OF Judah SHALL SAY IN THEIR HEARTS, (as comforting themselves thereby) The
inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my STRENGTH, in the Lord of Hosts THEIR GOD.
And so say you, the Saints of this our Jerusalem are our greatest INTEREST and
security through the Lord of Hosts, his being our God: And let this saying be
ever in your hearts, to encourage and to guide you.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii 25. Feb. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir Robert Harley and
Master Purefoy do from this House give Thanks to Master Thomas Goodwin for the
great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day at the entreaty of this
House at S. Margarets Westminster, (it being the day of Public Humiliation)
And to desire him to print his Sermon. And it is Ordered, that none shall print
his Sermon without license under his hand writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

I do appoint Robert Dawlman to print this Sermon.

Tho: Goodwin.

Die Mercurii, Febr. 25. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that S. Robert Harlow, and
Col. Purfrey do give thanks to M. Burgess, and M. Goodwin, for the great pains
they took in the Sermons they preached this day, at the entreaty of the House
of Commons, at S. Margarets Westminster (it being the day of public
Humiliation) and to desire them to print their Sermons. It is also ordered,
That none shall presume to print their Sermons without license under their
handwriting.

Hen. Else. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Thomas Underhill to print my Sermon, and no man else.

ANTHONY BURGESS.


