The GOSSIPS BRAULE, OR, The WOMEN wear the BREECHES.

A Mock COMEDY.

The Actors Names, Nick Pot, a Tapster. Jone Ruggles, a Dungel-raker. Doll
Crabb, a Fish-woman. Megg Lant-Ale, a Tub-woman. Bess Bung-hole, an Hostice,


WHO All to try the Mastery of their Tongues,
New wet their Whistles, Barley-Oyl their Lungs,
Then raised with Choler, Spleen and Gaul,
Their Tongues advance, and then begins the Braule.


LONDON, Jan. 30. 1654. Printed in the Year of Women's honesty, 1655.

The GOSSIPS BRAULE, OR, The WOMEN wear the BREECHES.
Enter Nick-pot, and his Guests Jone Ruggles, Doll Crab, and Megg Lant-Ale.
Nick-pot. WHat is it ye drink Ladies?

A merry Pott of Ale, or a quartern of the best in the House?


Jone Ruggles. Let us have both Nick;

I am so troubled with the Wind at my stomach,

That if it were not for the comfort of a little Sniffe,

I should be at Death's door,

B^ing us some Spannish Tobacco too Nick,

As I take it, it is a great expeller of Rheum.


Exit Nick Pot. Doll. I can take a Pipe too as well as another Woman;

Yet my Husband grumbles at me;

Grutches me a little Strong Water before I go to the gate in the morning for
my Ware,

But in faith, in faith, I Will meet with him for a base trick I Will warant him; the
more he grutches, the more I Will have it, if Gold or silver will buy't.


Enter Nick-Pot with Strong-Water, Ale and Tobacco. Nick. Here Is that will make
a Cat speak, a Coward valiant, a Cripple caper, a poor man a King, and wash
away all Diseases,


Megg. This is a Cup of as good Ale as ever was tip'd over a Tongue, I have
served six turns in a morning, and given my Customers as good cuntent as men
need to desire from a Woman.


Turns it off. Jone. Here Is to ye good Doll, remembering Ned, he is a kind ladd
I Will warrant him, and a good friend to a Woman.


Doll. You say right by my trot Neighbor Jone, he is as sweet a man as ever
lay by a woman's side, and one is as tender of a Mistrisses credit; Well, well,
were but my Husband such a man, I should love him too well? but to tell you
true, He is a very Boar to me, and lies in the bed by me like a logge rather
then a man, turns his breech, and surreverence farts like a Stone-horse: Come,
come, the World little knows what we poor Women endure.


She turns off her Cup. Megg. Nay neighbor, it is not your case alone; I have
one more like a Devil then a man, alas my head's but weak woman, cosidering
the kicks and blows I have had, that sometimes a double-Pott turns my Head: and
then, if but Will the Soldier leads me home; you know a Woman cannot be
backward in requiting a man's Courtesy, and send for a Cup at home; but if he
comes in before he be gone, oh it is death to him Woman! and though he will sit
you as dumb as an unbrib'd Lawyer, till he be gone, yet he is no sooner out of
doors, but he calls me at his pleasure, says I am the Soldiers Whore, the
Cobblers Whore, the Broom man's Whore, the Tinkers Whore, nay Nick the
Chimney-sweepers Whore, when (by this good drink Neighbor) I know no more
dishonesty by them then I do by my own Bawdy.

Cries. If ye talk of Husbands! come, come, I swallow twenty of these in a day.

She drinks off her Cup and sighs.
Jone. Well, I have a contented man to my husband, I may go when I will, and
come when I will, and bring home a hundred Friends one after another, he is
never the man that will say, Jugg, why do thou so? shall be so attentive I Will
warrant ye, to fetch beer, go of an arrant; nay rather then a friend should be
lated home, will lie out of his Bed for him; and he looses nothing by it at the
years end.


Doll. He Is a right Genteman borne I Will warrant him;

Well I had a Husband would do so,

Cries. But he was too good for this life.

Drinks.
Enter Tapster* sitts down, and his Wife comes in after him, and finds him
kissing Jone Tub-woman. Bess. Are ye got amongst your Whores ye Rogue? Ye
lick-spicket Rogue; it is something that makes ye so drowsy a Nights; I Will broach
your Noddle for ye, but I Will wake ye; Are ye so ramphant with a Pox t'yee?


Kicks him out. Doll. Do ye hear, Mistress Bung-breech,

Who do you call Whore, pray?


Bess. Not you goody draggle-tayl with the doggs-Skin muff at your breech.


Doll. We shall have ye at Bum-barrell again shortly in the Cellar with the
Brewers Clarke; crack me that nut, crack me that nut, good Mistress Nick-pot.


Bess. Out ye Bastard-bearing Whore; who lay inn in the Cage you Whore? who
lay inn in the Cage:


Doll. No marvel your VVhoreship should tell me of a Bastard in the Cage, when
you have lain in with no less then 3 in the same place your self; did not I
bring you clouts ye Whore, lend ye money to pay for the washing of your lowsy
Smock, and bring you a Posset with a pox to ye, and Bread for your Whores hide.


Bess. Bread for my Whores hide, you broad-fac'd Jade you; you have forgot
since you were knocked by two Roagues under Mount-Mill and after came home as
drunk as a Bitch; 'twas when ye fell down in the dirt, and said you had the
Falling Sickness with a pox to ye.


Doll. So, so, Mistress Nick and Froath, with the Hawks Nose, cut out of
Marlbrough Chalk, Is this the thanks I have for lending you money to redeem
your Husbands Cloak, when you had pawnd it to be drunk withal; is it; is it.


Bess. Yes, yes, Mistress Flownder-mouth, you shall have thanks with a Pox to
ye, ye old Lecherous Jade you; I was never down-diddl'd by a Barbers Boy, on a
Cobblers stall ye Whore, when his boy run his Aule in your buttocks, to teach
ye to pace ye Whore; Marry goyp, come up with a foul smell, can you trot or
gallop, Minion?


Doll. Go, go, to Tower Hill, and get your Gun scowr'd ye Jade; I never was the
Hang-mans. Whore yet, nor had the Brewer come home with me to tip my Gigg five
times in a day; I was never Flux'd in the Spittle yet of the P -- so I was not.


Doll. Marry foh, come up my durty Cousin; your Husband says you are a Jade; I
never tired going to Hackney for Turn-ups yet; mark ye that Puss.


Bess. Indeed Mistrs Tickle -- - T -- with the basket of Crabs in your breech;
go home and get your poor Husband a Mess of Porridge ye Jade, hie ye home, hie
ye home ye Jade, there is a Hogg in the Cubbord.


Bess. To Hy-bury-Barn, to Hybury Barn you drum-ars'd Jade, go to your Fiddler
there; come I could say something.


Doll. Say your heart out if you will, thou Whore, thy Neighbor knows what
thou art well enough; I faith Puttock, He blaze your coat i will warrant you.


Bess. Thou fetch a Warrant for me Piss-pot; do, do, I Would have thee begin once;
go Pawn thy Petticoate and wastecoat again to fee Lawyers, then come to me for
money to withdrawing thy Recognisiones, about your ugly tongue, and am I thus
rewarded. I faith Sponge, I Will handle ye for Buttock I warrant ye: you will lie in
again shortly, then pray Neighbor lend me a Kerchief for my head, lend me a
sheet, lend me a Candle, a little butter, etc. No, thou Ditch of damnation,
thou shall have a Rope and Butter, before thou shall borrow a Pin of me.


Doll. Bear witness Neighbor, she called me Witch; I Will scratch ye Alehouse
Polecatt --


Bess. Murder, Murder, Murder, fetch the Constable.


Enter Nick-Pot the Tapsier. Nick. Do ye knock here?


Bess. Out ye sneaking Rogue, will ye suffer me to be murdered amongst your
Whores? the best in the Parrish shall understand whether I must be murdered in
my own House or no? they shall Sirrah: they shall understand whether you be a
man fitting for a License, or to govern a House?


Exit Bess Bung-hole. Megg. Tapster, what have we to Pay? Sure the Deviill is
got into this Alehouse my Ears are dumb with the very Noise of your Tongues.


Nick-Pot. Here is three shillings Strong Water, two shillings in Ale, and
twelve Pence Tobacco, that is six shillings just; and ye are all welcome.


Doll. The Devil pay the shot, i will pay not: Penny: Shall we pay our Money to
be abused? No, I Will be righted I Will warrant you, if the best Law in England will
right me; Though the Rogue my Husband will not take my part, I shall find
friends that shall tickle ye for Law in faith.


Nick-pot. I Will have my Money before you go hence, else I Will make th Room too hot
for ye.


Jone. You shall be glad to look up, what shall honest Women be ravished in
their Reputations; No, no w^ stand upon our reputations, and our integrities,
and scorn to have our credits and good Names drownded in an Ale-tub, I Will make
you know Sirrah, that some of us that sit here have had Husbands that have born
all Offices in the Parrish from the Scabbender to the Headborrow; come
Neighbors, let us go, why do we spend our Tongues and Brains upon this
Nick-pot, this simple cuckoldly Tapster.


Nick-Pot, Give me my shot give me my Money, I Will not trust a penny; my Brewer
must be paid.


Jone. Paid you Tap-lash Rogue, you Lant-liquor Rogue come Neighbors we will
pay him, let us piss out his Eyes.

EPILOGVE.
Who from bad Women, thus as evil flies,
May loose a Reckoning, to preserve his eyes.
Exeunt omnes.
FINIS.

