THE PROGRESS OF Divine Providence, SET OVT IN A SERMON PREACHED In the Abbey
Church of Westminster before the house of PEERS, on the 24th of September,
1645. being the day of their Monthly FAST.

By William Gouge, one of the MEMBERS of the ASSEMBLY.

ECCLES. 7. 8. (...) Inest omni utenti ratione naturaliter appetere potiora.
Bem. de diligendo Deo. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Joshua Kirton next
Goldsmiths-hall in Foster-lane, MDCXLV.

Die Veneris 26. Sept. 1645.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That M. Doctor
Gouge, who preached on Wednesday last before the Lords of Parliament in the
Abbey Church, Westminster, it being the day of the public Fast, is hereby
thanked for his great pains he took in his said Sermon, and desired to print
and publish the same, which is to be done only by authority under his hand.

John Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum
.
I Appoint Joshua Kirton to print my Sermon, and none else.

William Gouge,

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE House of PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
AS in sundry other ages and places, so in this age and place wherein we now
live, has my Text been verified: and that within the compass of these last
five years; in every of which God has done better unto us then at our
beginnings: and we have great and just cause to hope that he will yet continue
to do better and better.

It was an especial evidence of Gods good providence, that the great Counsel of
England was called at that time, that it was called.

The State of Church and Commonwealth was so far out of order, and the
disorder in both so backed, as, without a Parliament, it would not, it could
not (in man's apprehensions) have been redressed.

The Reformation that was then intended by that Parliament, being by some
envious eyes espied, a dissolution thereof was procured.

But that, and other former dissolutions of Parliaments ( necessity forcing
another Parliament soon after to be called) occasioned an Act to prevent
inconveniences, which may happen by the untimely Adjourning, Proroguing, or
dissolving of this present Parliament.

What better thing ( rebus sic stantibus ut tunc and nunc) could have happened
to this State? The good consequencies, that have happened thereupon, are
evident demonstrations of Gods mind, still to do better and better for us.

It would exceed the proportion of a Dedicatory Epistle, to reckon up the
particular instances of the Divine Providence, increasing time after time for
the better unto us, and that by virtue of this present Parliament: they are so
clear and evident, as none, but such as take notice of nothing, can be ignorant
of them: and none, but envious and malignant spirits, can conceal or pervert
them.

When might the good Providence of God have been better discerned, in
protecting the persons, upholding the spirits, directing the counsels, and
prospering the endeavors of such as were assembled in a Parliament, then in
this? When might the like Providence of God have been better discerned in
stirring up men's minds, encouraging their spirits, enabling their bodies, and
preserving their persons for maintaining a cause, then in this cause that is
now maintained by the Parliament? Of them who with a single eye behold the
footsteps of the Lord in the Counsels of our Parliament, it may justly be said,
They have seen thy goings, O God, the goings of my God, Psalm. 68: 24.
my King.

Have not our Armies had success beyond expectation, even to admiration?

What a stop has been set to Superstition? How good a progress has been made
in Reformation? And may we not yet hope that God will do better unto us then
at our beginnings? Gods promise is the ground of hope: and my Text shows that
God has promised as much.

Go on, Right Honorable, and put forth your utmost endeavors, Cum aliqua
spes subest, vehementiores vires apparere assolent. Aug. de quant. animae. c.
22. Spes ad majora audenda sese erigit. Greg. M in Job 4 l. 5 c. 29.
for bringing on those better things that yet remain. Where their is Hope,
there endeavors use to be most earnest: For Hope stirs up men's spirits to
set upon great things.

Though the full accomplishment of the remaining better things should be
reserved to a future age, yet it becomes us, to be as earnest in prosecuting
them, according to the ability and opportunity that God does give us, as if we
our selves were sure, while we live, to have the fruition of them. Experience
shows that to be true, which of old was said of the provident husbandman,
that he planteth trees which may be useful in an other age. But I hope that
God will let you see and enjoy the fruit of your Counsels, and of our desires.
This shall be the continual prayer of

Your Honors humble Servant and Orator, William Gouge.

THE PROGRESS OF GODS Providence.
EZEKIEL. 36. 11. I will do better unto you then at your beginnings.
AMong other evidences of Gods special providence, Gods care in affording
instructors to his Church.
and care over his Church, this is an especial one, that he ever afforded unto
it sufficient means to instruct it in his will, and to direct it in the way to
happiness.

When, Sundry kinds of instructors. 1. God himself, Genesis 2. 9.
at the beginning he made man, he did not only write his law in his heart, but
also revealed means of standing in his happy estate, or falling from the same.
Instance the two Sacraments in Paradise, the tree of life, and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil.

When men increased into a Family, 2. Firstborn. Genesis 4. 7.
God ordained the firstborn, both to be a Governor, (...) 18. 19. 3 Priests
and Levites. Number. 3. 12.
and also an Instructour of the Family.

When the Church multiplied into a Nation, God set apart the twelfth part
thereof, namely one Tribe of twelve, to be ordinary Ministers therein. These he
distinguished into Priests and Levites.

When that Polity ended, 4. Pastors and Teachers. Ephesians 4. 11.
be ordained Pastors and Teachers to be ordinary Ministers in his Church, to
the end of the world.

Of old in extraordinary times, 5. Extraordinary Prophets.
and upon extraordinary occasions, God endued men with an extraordinary spirit,
who were styled Prophets; such an one was Ezekiel, to whom, I suppose, more
extrordinary visions and revelations were made known, then to any other.

He was raised up in most corrupt and said times, When and where Ezekiel
prophesied. Isa. 28. 23.
even when God was forced to do his work, his strange work, and to bring to
pass his act, his strange act.

He prophesied in Babylon, whither he was carried captive, when the Babylonians
first entered into Jerusalem, and took away many of the sacred and precious
vessels of the Temple; together with a great part of the treasures of that
house, and of the King and Princes, and carried them, together with Jehoiakim
the King, and many of the Princes, Priests and people into Babylon, There he
also continued after that the said Babylonians had again entered into the said
City, broke down the walls thereof, burnt the house of God, Jeremias and
Ezekiel immimente caprivitate vaticinium exercuerunts sed alter eorum in terra
Judah, alter in Babylonia. Hier Conm: in Jer. Prophet. ^1.
and all the houses in the City, and carried away the remainder of the vessels
of the said Temple, and of the treasures therein, together with Zedekiah
another King, and the remainder of Princes, Priests and people.

About the same time Jeremiah was raised up to bea Prophet among that remnant
of Judah, which was left in Judaea. They both prophesied the same things for
substance, though they were far distant in place, and so ratified each others
prophecies.

As other Prophets, With what kind of persons Prophets had to do.
so this our Prophet had to do with two sorts of people, impious and pious.
The impious were openly profane, and impenitently obstinate, or covertly
hypocritical and deceitful. The pious were righteous, upright and humble. In
which respect his prophecies were of a mixed kind. Different spirits of
Prophets.
In regard of the former sort, he had such a spirit as was given to Boanerges,
sons of thunder, to denounce Gods terrible judgments against them; Mark 3.
17.
in regard of the later, he had such a spirit as was given to Barnabas a son
of consolation, Act. 4. 36.
to pronounce sweet promises. Hereby the obstinate were the more terrified and
kept down; the humble and penitent were supported.

The spirit of consolation did sweetly breathe forth in this Chapter, out of
which I have taken my text. It is full of very comfortable promises.

In the beginning of it, The sum of the Chapter.
he points at the insultations of enemies against the Church of God in their
troubles: with which weak spirits use much to be perplexed. The Lord therefore
to keep their spirits from fainting, by this his Prophet makes known before
hand the good which he intended unto them. Many particular promises are set
down, both before and after my text; but the sum of them all is couched in
these words, I will dot better unto you then at your beginnings.

The Hebrew is so excellent in compounding words, as it compriseth the ten
words of my text in two, which are these (...) word for word, I will do good
above your beginnings.

The first word compriseth under it all the blessings which God intended for
his Church, not of Jews only, but of Gentiles also, and that from time to time;
even from their return out of captivity, till the coming of Christ; not in the
flesh only, but in glory also. The later word noting out a comparison between
times and times, has relation to all the former ages of the Church, even unto
those very times of their great troubles.

The main scope of all is, The scope of the text.
to set out

The Progress of Divine Providence.

This is done by five particulars.

1. The parts thereof.
The Author or fountain. He is not expressed in the text, but clearly
intimated: for the verb is of the first person: besides the copulative particle
[ and] does intend the same person that is mentioned before, thus, I will
multiply, I will settle, and will do; that is, and I will do. In the seventh
verse the person intended is plainly expressed to be the Lord God. And in the
next clause after my text, the Lord Jehovah is expressed. For where this word
LORD is set down in four Capital letters, it sets out Jehovah.

2. The Act whereby the foresaid providence is exercised, Do good. The word is
in the third active conjugation of the Hebrew tongue, called Hiphil, which
signifies an efficiency.

3. The increase of that providence, in this note of comparison (...) above, or
more then. Our English compriseth the act, and the increase thereof under this
word better: for better sets out more good, or greater good.

4. The parties to whom that good is intended, Unto you. I must confess that
the parties are not expressed in the Original, but yet implied under this
copulative particle [ And:] which shows that this promise is made to the same
parties to whom the former were made; and they are thus expressed, I will
multiply upon you, and I will settle you, so here, I will do better unto you.
Besides, the affix after the later word (...) your, shows what parties are
here intended. They are in one word styled Israel, under which is comprised the
Church of God.

5. The times, which are the later times; for this promise is made in
opposition to former times, expressed under this word beginnings.

These five points afford five useful instructions.

1. Observe. 1.
The Lord is the fountain of all good. I may well say all, for the indefinite
particle good, intends as much. Besides all the particular good things
promised, before and after my text, are applied to this Author the LORD. So
other good things also in other places. Pertinently to this purpose says an
Apostle, Jam. 1. 17.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of lights.

2. Observe. 2.
God causes his goodness to flow forth. He is, not only a full fountain,
Zech. 11. 1.
but an open and overflowing fountain. David speaking to the Lord of his
goodness, Psalm 119. 68.
thus says, Thou art good, and do good.

3. Observe. 3.
Gods goodness ever increases. It Is like the waters that came down from the
Lords Sanctuary, and increased from ankle-deep, to knee deep; from knee-deep,
to middle-deep; from middle-deep, to an impassible river. In this respect, this
word of comparison, better, uses to be added to the good things which God
provideth in later ages. I intend to exemplify this in sundry particulars
hereafter.

4. Observe. 4.
The Church is the proper object of Gods goodness. Israel, to whom this
promise was made, Mal. 1. 2, 3.
is put for the Church of God. This is further evidenced by that great
difference which is made between Jacob and Esau, thus expressed, I loved Jacob,
and I hated Esau. Romans 9. 13.
This the Apostle applies to Gods chosen children on the one side, and all the
other, on the otherside. Thus there is an especially put upon Gods mercy in
relation to the members of the Church; 1 Timothy 4.
for he is said to be the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe.

5. Observe. 5.
The best things are reserved for the last times. The beginnings here
mentioned, comprising all former ages and times, the great increase of
goodness here intended, must needs be referred to the later times. This, a
Prophet thus expresses, It shall come to pass in the last days, that the
mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains,
and shall be exalted above the hills, Isa. 2. 2.
etc.

Time will not suffer me distinctly and fully to handle all these points;
neither indeed is it needful; for the last compriseth all the other under it:
which will the better appear, if we do somewhat more largely express it, thus;
The Lord has provided his better things for the later times of his Church.
Here have we,

1. The Person that is the fountain of goodness expressed, the Lord.

2. The Act of goodness flowing from him, in this word, provided.

3. This comparison, better things, declares the Increase of his goodness.

4. The mention of his Church shows the proper Object, or parties to whom his
goodness is extended.

5. The times are here expressly set down, in these words, later times.

Thus, in handling this Doctrine, God has provided his better things for the
later times of his Church, all the former will be handled; and the proofs
alleged for this, will prove all the rest. My purpose therefore is to insist
upon the last Doctrine. You heard it before, hear it again, God has provided
his better things for the later times of his Church.

Well observe the particular good things, Particular things styled better.
which God has provided for the Christian Church, which is the Church of the
later times, and you shall find them styled, better.

The Testament given to the Christian Church is a better Testament. 1. Better
Testament. Heb. 7. 22. Heb. 9. 15.
It is made by the Son of God, Immanuel, God with us, and ratified by his
death, wherein an eternal inheritance is bequeathed unto us. Was there ever
such a testament before?

2. 2. Better Covenant. Heb. 8. 6.
The Covenant made between God and his Church in these later times, is a better
Covenant. Give me here leave, because mention is made both of a Testament and a
Covenant, to show you the difference between them.

1. Difference betwixt Covevenant and Testament. Heb. 9. 17.
A Covenant is an agreement between two: a Testament is the declaration of the
will of one.

2. The two between whom a Covenant passes must be both living: a Testament
receives force by the death of him that made it.

3. A Covenant is ratified by the mutual consent of both parties: a Testament,
by the will only of him that made it.

4. A Covenant uses to be made upon conditions on both parts: a Testament is
made upon the mere favor and grace of the testatour.

Now the Covenant made with Christians is better then the two former Covenant:
Two old Covenants.
both called old, because they are both in such respects nulled.

The first was a Covenant of works made with man in his entire estate: which by
his fall he made impossible for man to keep. Romans 8. 3.
But this Covenant gives ability to keep it with much alacrity.

2. There was a Covenant indeed of grace made with the Church before Christ
exhibited; but set out in such obscure promises and prophecies, and dark types
and shadows, as it was needful in time to be abolished: but the new Covenant
made with the Christian Church, is so clearly and plainly revealed, as it may
well in that respect also be called better.

3. The Promises now made, 3 Better promises. Heb. 8. 6.
are better Promises: most of the Promises before Christ exhibited were of
temporal good things: I will not deny, but that spiritual and celestial good
things were prefigured under them; but now spiritual and heavenly good things,
are more expressly, perspicuously and plentifully promised to the Church.

4. 4 Better hope. Heb. 7. 19.
The hope that now we have, is a better hope, Promises are the ground of hope.
The better the promises, the better must hope needs be: and that in those
respects wherein the Promises are better. Christians may more immediately,
directly and steadily, hope for all spiritual and heavenly blessings, then
they that lived before Christ could.

5. 4 Better sacrifice Heb. 9. 23.
The sacrifice that now we have, is better then the former sacrifices. He that
considers the difference between the bodies of unreasonable creatures, and
the body of Christ the Son of God, cannot but know, that there is an infinite
excellency in this sacrifice over and above those: If any thing under the
Gospel may justly be styled, better, then the like under the Law, surely this
sacrifice may most of all be styled better then those.

6. 6 Better blood. Heb. 12. 24.
The blood of Christ, in regard of the cry of it, is styled better. It is said
to speak better things then that of Abel: because Abels blood cried for
vengeance; Christ's, for pardon. Christ when he was upon the cross, where he
shed his blood, Luke 2 34.
thus cried, Father, forigive them. Yea further Christ's blood is better then
that blood which was shed on the Altars under the Law: Heb. 10. 4.
For it is not possible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins:
1 John 1 7.
but the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin.

7. All Gospel things better.
To insist upon no more particulars, the Apostle under this indefinite phrase
(...), some better thing, compriseth all those good things, which in comparison
of the Church of the Jews are bestowed on the Christian Church. Heb. 11. 40.
For thus he says, God has provided some better thing for us, that they
without us should not be made perfect.

In such a respect, Gospel-things new.
as Gospel-blessings are called better, they are also called new, as A new
Covenant, a new Testament, a new Jerusalem, a new Heaven and earth, a new
name, a new commandment, a new way, a new heart, a new spirit, and a new song.
These and other like things are called new, in opposition to old things, In
what respect new. Heb. 8. 13.
which decaid and vanished away: so as there was a necessity of new things to
succeed in their room. These new things shall never wax old: they are new, not
only in their beginning, but also in their perpetual continuance; They shall
ever be fresh and flourishing, Numb. 17. 8. etc. Heb. 9. 4.
like Aarons rod which budded, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds: and
so always continued, even as long as the Arc of the testimony, before which
it was set, remained. The new Covenant and the new Testament are the same,
which were before styled better, and in such like respects called new. Of them
therefore I shall need to say no more then what has been said. The rest that
follow are these.

1. 1. New Jerusalem. Rev. 3. 12. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
A new Jerusalem. The old Jerusalem was of senseles corruptible materials. The
new Jerusalem is of lively stones, a spiritual house: It is styled the City of
God, in regard of the excellency thereof, (for excellent things, in Canaans
language, are said to be things of God) 2. New Heavens and a new Earth. Isa.
65. 17.
and in regard of that care which God takes of it, and delight which he takes
to be in it. Non dixit alios caelos and alia^, terran videbi. mus, sed antiquos
in melius commutatos. Hier. Com. in Isa. 65.
The old Jerusalem was but a type and figure of this.

2. New Heavens, and a new Earth: Hereby is meant a new face of a Church, far
more glorious in the spirituality of it, then the former before Christ. The
phrase is hyperbolicall: it is used to set forth not only a renovation of the
Church, but such a renovation as should put the world as it were into a new
form and frame; insomuch as he that should attentively look upon it, might
say, Behold new Heavens and a new Earth. If it be objected, 2 Pet. 3. 13. How
we still look for new heavens and a new earth. Principium innovationis in
praesentiseculo* perfecta consummataque novitas nondum. Hier. Com. in Ephesians. l.
2.
that an Apostle, speaking of the times of the Gospel, says, We look for new
Heavens and a new Earth, and thereby intends the glory of the world to come. I
answer, that excellent matters are some times spoken of in their inchoation and
progress, and sometimes in their perfection and consummation: so as the new
Heavens and the new Earth, in their beginning and increase, may be under the
Gospel, and in their consummation and perfection, after the day of judgment.

3. 3 A new name. Isa. 62. 2. Joh. 1. 12. Act. 11. 26.
A new name. This Christ styles, his name, ( Rev. 3. 12.) This name is to be a
son of God: For as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the
sons of God. Of old, they were called children of Israel; now, Christians:
yea the Apostle gives the name Christ to the mystical body of Christ,
consisting of many Saints, (1 Cor. 12. 12.)

4. A new Commandment. 4. A new Commandment. Ioh. 13. 34.
Another kind of Commandment then that which was written in tables of stone.
For that exacted an impossibility, ( Romans 8. 3.) by reason of the weakness and
corruption of our flesh: But the New Commandment is written in the fleshly
tables of our heart, whereby ability is given unto us cherefully and acceptably
to perform the same.

5. A new way. 5 A new way. Heb. 10. 20.
This is also called a living way, which Christ by his flesh has consecrated
for us. For Christ himself, having with his own blood entered into the most
holy place, has thereby made full satisfaction for all our sins (which causes
the way to Heaven to be impassible,) and made the way easy for us to walk in.
Thus is he the way, the truth and the life: the only true way that leads us
unto life. Ioh. 14. 6.


6. 6. A new heart. Ezekiel. 36. 26.
A new heart. This is opposed to a man's natural heart, which is styled an
heart of stone, in that it is so obdurate, that it will sooner (like a stone)
be broken all to pieces, and utterly confounded with Gods judgments, then
yield to him and his word. This new heart, is not only freed from that
obstinacy, but also made flexible and pliable to the Word of God, and work of
his spirit, and thereupon called an heart of flesh. Ezekiel. 11. 15.


7. A new spirit. 7. A new spirit.
This also is opposed to a man's natural spirit, Act. 7. 51.
which in all things resists the good Spirit of God. Such a spirit the Jews
of old had, of whom Stephen, the first Martyr for Christ, thus speaks, Ye do
always resist the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. But this new
spirit readily and willingly yields to every good motion of the Spirit of God.

8. A new song. 8. A new song. Isa. 42. 10 Romans 10 18.
A song which shall sound forth, (as the Prophet expounds himself) Gods
praises from the end of the earth, by reason of the Gospel, whose sound, as the
sound of the heavens, has gone forth through all the earth: The sum and
substance of this new song was sung out by an heavenly quire at the birth of
Christ. Luke 2. 14.
It was this: Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will
toward men. All things new. Rev. 21. 5.


Finally, to insist on no more particulars, there is a promise made, of making
all things new. If any shall think that this is meant of the world to come:
let him consider how expressly the Apostle applies it to the time of the
Gospel; saying of that time, Behold, all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

Thus we see how this promise of Gods doing better for his Church in the later
times, is evidenced by sundry particulars, of better, and new things. Yet
further, as if ordinary words and usual comparisons were not sufficient to set
forth the great increase of Gods providence, Hyperboles do set out the
increase of Gods goodness.
the Prophets use very transcendent, and hyperbolicall expressions, to set it
out the more to the life, and that according to our capacity. To which purpose
this increase of Gods Providence is thus expressed: For brass I will bring
gold, Isa. 60. 17.
and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron:
Hereby he shows, that as wood is better then common stones, and iron better
then wood, and brass better then iron, and silver better then brass, and gold
better then silver, so much better, yea infinitely more, are the good things of
these later times, better then the good things of former times. Yet further is
this increase thus heightened, Luna fulgebit, ut sol, etc. non significat
interitum pristinorum, sed commutationem in mell us. Hier. Com. in Isa. ^ l. 18.
( Isa. 30. 26.) The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and
the light of the Sun shall be seven fold, as the light of seven days. Who
knows not how great a difference there is, between the two lights of the Moon
and the Sun? to make the light of the Moon as great as of the Sun, must needs
be a wonderful great increase. And because there can be no greater light then
the light of the Sun, he multiplieth that light to the number of perfection,
saying, The light of the Sun shall be seven fold, as the light of seven days.
And to show that no comparisons are sufficient to set out the increase of Gods
goodness to the full: it is further said, The Sun shall be no more thy light by
day, neither for brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee: But the Lord
shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory, Isa. 60. 19.

If we take a view of the increase of Gods good Providence, generation after
generation, even from the beginning of the world to the end thereof, it will
yet more clearly appear, that as Gods goodness has ever increased more and
more, so the greatest increase thereof has been in later times, and so the
better things reserved for us, and others who have lived therein.

For the clearer exemplification hereof, we will account the whole continuance
of the world, The continuance of this world divided into six days.
together with the world to come, as one great week: And distinguish the whole
course thereof, from the creation to the day of judgment, into six long days,
the seventh, being an eternal (...), a keeping a Sabbath, or rest after the
day of judgment.

The six forementioned days may thus be distinguished.

The first from Adam to Noah: 1.
Wherein, besides Gods goodness in creating the world, was manifested that great
evidence of mercy, in promising a Redeemer to free man from his miserable
bondage under Satan, whereinto he had implunged himself; the words of the
promise are these; Genesis 3. 15.
It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

By this relative particle It, the seed of the woman, the Lord Jesus Christ is
meant. The words being spoken to Satan under the serpent, by thy head, is meant
Satan, and all his power: by bruising, an utter subduing of the same. The next
words, Thou shall bruise his heel, set forth Satan's attempts against the
mystical body of Christ and his annoying of the same in many respects: But so
as the heel only the external condition of the foresaid body, not the head,
Genesis 6. 18. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Beza transsere. (...) correspondens exem lar. Vide
annotat ejus majores in hunc locum Suidas, ait (...), sumi prosimilitudine.
the soul of it, can be crushed. This was a very gracious promise, and a great
good.

The second day lasted from Noah to Abraham: wherein the Church had that
memorable type of Gods preserving it out of that common deluge which destroyed
the whole world besides. This type was the Arc. This the Apostle calls, in
relation to Baptism, a like figure. For it did lively set forth to the Church
such a preservation and deliverance from sin and destruction, as Baptism
does. In this respect a more express evidence of Gods goodness was given in
this day, then in the former.

The third day was from Abraham to David, 3.
wherein that precious and express promise of blessing all Nations in Abraham's
seed, was made: wherein also Israel was brought out of the Egyptian bondage, (a
type of the redemption of the Church from her spiritual bondage under sin and
Satan.) In this day the Tabernacle, with the many other types of Christ, his
offices and benefits to his Church were first ordained, and Israel settled in
the land of Canaan, a type of their heavenly rest. Thus did this third day
far exceed the former in glory.

The fourth was from David to the carrying of Israel into captivity. 4.
Herein a royal government was given to Gods people (a type of Christ's royal
Kingdom.) Herein most of the extraordinary Prophets (special types of Christ's
prophetical office) were raised up: and most clear prophecies made of the
better things to come in the Christian Church. Herein also Solomon's Temple was
built, and sundry new and more glorious types of Christ were made, then in the
Tabernacle. So much therefore as this Temple of Solomon excelled the Tabernacle
of Moses, and the Cherubins, Tables, Altars, Pillars, and all manner of sacred
instruments in the Temple, surpassed them that were in the Tabernacle: so much
more did Gods goodness in this day exceed the goodness of former days.

The fifth day was from Isreal's going into captivity to Christ's ascension into
Heaven. 5.
This day, for the greatest part thereof, was indeed a dismal day. Yet the
delivering of Israel out of the Babylonish captivity, was a more clear and
full type of our redemption by Christ, then any former deliverance: Ier. 16.
14, 15.
whereupon it is said, It shall no more be said, The Lord lives that brought
the children of Israel up out of the land of Egypt: but the Lord lives that
brought up the children of Israel from the lands of the North, and from all the
land whither he had driven them. The re-edifying of the Temple, was also a
principal type of Christ's resurrection: and of this Temple it is said, Hag. 2.
9.
The glory of this later house, shall be greater then of the former: so as
these added much to the glory of this day. But in that the Lord Christ was in
the evening of this day actually exhibited: and the things accomplished, which
were perfigured by the legal types, and foretold by the ancient Prophets, the
goodness of God manifested in this day, far exceeded that which was in
former days. In this respect it is said of John the Baptist, who saw and made
known that promised Messiah, and was the first that directly pointed him out,
Ioh. 1. 29, 36. Mat. 11. 11.
saying, Behold the Lamb of God: Of him it is said, among them that are borne
of women, there has not risen a greater. This was the surpassing glory of the
fifth day.

The sixth was from Christ's ascension into Heaven, 6.
to his second coming unto judgment. This is the day of the clear and full
revelation of all the glorious mysteries that were hidden from the beginning of
the world till then. This is the day wherein all the forementioned new things,
and better things were conferred upon the Christian Church. In this day, as
better things shall not be given, so better things cannot be expected while the
world lasts. Psalm. 118. 24.
This is the day whereof we may say, This is the day which the Lord has made:
we will rejoice and be glad in it.

Thus from this exemplification of the increase of Gods goodness in the
several ages of the world, we may well infer, that God has provided better
things for the later times.

Questionless, God thus orders his good providence upon just and weighty
reasons: Reasons of Gods increasing goodness.
and though his counsel be unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, in
regard of the full latitude of them, yet has he left some footsteps; wherein
and whereby we may observe some grounds of his wise proceedings therein. Among
others, I suppose, these may be some.

1. That the extent of his goodness may be more distinctly considered, 1
Extent of goodness better discerned.
more clearly discerned, and more transcendently admired. Gods governing of his
Church in the world by his providence, is ordered in such a manner, as his
prudence in creating the world was manifested.

In that first great work, Gods works better and better.
he still put off the better things to the later days. He could, if it had
pleased him, have created all the things that he did create, at once. Had he at
once said, Let there be light, firmament, waters, earth, all manner of trees,
and herbs bearing seed, Sun, Moon and Stars, fowls, fishes, beasts and man,
they had instantly been all; but voluntarily and purposely he took up six days
in creating them, and in each day made several and distinct creatures, but
ever the better, for the reason before specified. This will evidently appear by
an induction of particulars, which follow in order.

1. The light which he created in the first day, The first days work.
was indeed a glorious creature. But either it was the element of fire (for no
where else we read of creating fire) or else it was some other light, which was
of use but for three days: for in the fourth day those lights were made, which
have hitherto continued, and shall continue to the worlds end. So as either
this light was annihilated, when those were made, or else it was settled in the
body of the Sun.

2. In the second day the firmament or air was made, The second days work.
and called heaven: then also were the seas and earth made. If we mark the
Text, we shall find that the blessing of the second days work is not
expressed, Aben Ezra aliique referunt maria and terram ad e^undum diem, eo quod
post qua^ illa creata fuerunt dictum sit v. 10. Vidit Deus quod bonu^ esset.
till the seas and earth were made, Genes. 1. 10. These three, air, water,
earth, are the three elements, of which all bodies are compounded. These are
more excellent then the foresaid light, in regard of their continual use.

3. In the third day all the grass and herb yielding seed, and the tree
yielding fruit after his kind were made. These being vegitable creatures, The
third days work.
by reason of that life which is in them, excelled the former.

4. In the fourth day the host of heaven was made. The fourth days work.
This days work in the glory and immutability of it, and in the constant
perpetual motion, running most swiftly round about the world every day,
without wasting or weariness, excelled all that went before.

5. In the fifth day all the fowl of heaven, The fifth days work.
and fish in the sea were created. These having life and sense in them, and
voluntarily moving from place to place, surpassed the very host of heaven.

6. In the sixth day, The sixth days work.
besides other creatures living on the earth, Man was made: Man, in the image
of God. This was Gods masterpiece, and reserved unto the last working day. By
this distinct increase of Gods goodness, God comes the more to be admired, and
his wisdom, power and other excellencies the better discerned. The like course
therefore God took in his providence.

2. God provides better things for the later times, 2 Better things put off, to
make them more desired and esteemed. Mat. 13. 17.
to make those better things to be the more earnestly desired and longed for,
before they come: and to be the more highly prized, and the better esteemed,
after they are exhibited. It is said, That many Prophets and righteous men
desired to see and hear the things which were seen and heard in Christ's days,
which were the last days. It is also said, that the Prophets searched
diligently, what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them
did signify, 1 Peter 1. 11.
when it testified before hand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that
should follow. Certainly the putting off the great blessing of the exhibition
of Christ to the later times, made it to be the more desired, and the better
esteemed. When he was exhibited, the Angel that brought the first tidings
thereof, Luke 2. 10.
thus expresses it, Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall
be to all people. And the blessed Virgin, so soon as she conceived him in her
womb, thus breaks out, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has
rejoiced in God my Savior. Luke 2. 46, 47.
And good old Zachary, when the forerunner of Christ was born, thus in great
joy breaks out, Luke ^. 68.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. And another good old man, having
embraced Christ, when he was but a little infant, sweetly sings forth this
Swan-like song, Luke 2. 29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation. Their long expectation of Christ thus affected them, when at length
their longing was satisfied.

3. God put off his best things to the last times, 3 Best things put off to the
last days for Christ's honor
because in his unsearchable wisdom he ordained, that his Son should be sent
into the world in the later age thereof; that thereby he might be known to be
the best of Gods gifts, and to excel all other gifts, that were before
conferred upon the Church. Gal. 4. 4.
He is said to be sent forth when the fulness of time was come. The Church
had been as a breeding woman. Genesis 3. 25.
She began first to conceive, when God made the promise of the woman's seed. She
grew bigger and bigger through many other promises, prophecies, types and
figures, whereby her hope in the Messiah was nourished. At the fulness of
time she traveled, and brought forth this long expected man-child. The better
things, which were now brought to pass in this fulness of time, added much
to the honor of him that was then born: then was the fullness of Gods grace
and goodness manifested: so as this God thus ordered even for the honor of
his Son.

Hitherto of the Doctrinall part of my Text. Uses of Gods increasing goodness.
It is time to come to the Application thereof. The Uses of Gods providence in
reserving better things to the later times, are of manifold and singular Use.
For,

1. It affords a Demonstration of the detestablenesse of the Romish religion, 1
Popery makes the last days worst.
which has directly perverted the forementioned course of Gods providence to
his Church. For, where God provides better for the later times, they make these
later times to be far the worse. As they handle the matter, their Church
under the Gospel is many ways in a worse case then the state of the Church was
under the Law. Among many other instances I will note only four.

1. Their public reading of Gods Word, 1 An unknown tongue less understood
than types. Bellarm. de effect. Sacr. l. 2. c. 31.
administering the Sacraments, praying and performing other divine services in
an unknown tongue, make the mysteries of the Gospel less intelligible, more
obscure, and every way less edifying then all the rites, types and shadows
under the Law did. Rhem. Annot. on 1 Cor. 14.
Except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be
known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air, says the Apostle. And
again, If I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that
speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me.

2. Their unbloudy Sacrifice (as they style it) of a feigned transubstantiated
body, 2 Popish sacrifice worse then legal.
is far worse then if they had such Sacrifices of beasts and fowls, as were
under the Law. Those sacrifices, at that time, did set out the virtue of
Christ's death, and nourish their faith and hope in the benefits thereof.
Council. Trid. Decret 10. c. 2. Bellarm. de Miss. l. 1. c. 5. and 12. and l. 2.
c. 7.
But the foresaid Popish sacrifice would take away the virtue and efficacy of
Christ's sacrifice, if it could be taken away. For I demand, whether the
sacrifice that they pretend to offer up, be the very same, that Christ himself
offered upon the cross. If they say, the same, what need is there that it
should be offered up again? Heb. 7. 27. and 9. 26, 28 and 10. 10. Heb. 7. 11,
etc.
Was not Christ's once offering of it up sufficient? The Apostle does assuredly
intend as much by his frequent mention of this word once, which is exclusively
to be taken: once for all, and not to be reiterated. If it be another
sacrifice, then the sacrifice of Christ was not perfect. For hereby the Apostle
proves the Priesthood of the Law to be unperfect; because another was to
succeed in the room of it. Whereas some say, that their offering up of the body
of Christ, is but by way of application; that seems to contradict their own
position; for they teach that the forementioned transubstantiated body,
offered up by a Priest, is a true, real, propitiatory sacrifice for the quick
and dead. Besides, the end of Christ's intercession, and the virtue thereof is
made void by that which is avouched of the applicatory virtue of their
sacrifice. For the continual application of Christ's own sacrifice, is the end
of Christ's intercession. They think to evade all these absurdities by a
distinction betwixt a bloody and unbloody sacrifice, saying, that the sacrifice
which Christ himself offered up was a bloody sacrifice, but that which they
offer up, unbloody. To this distinction I answer.

1. It Is without any warrant or ground from Scripture.

2. It being applied, according to their position, to one and the same thing
(for they say that the body of Christ, which their Priest offers up, is the
very same that Christ offered upon the cross) it implies contradictory terms,
namely, that the same thing should be bloody and unbloody.

3. According to their own position, their sacrifice cannot be unbloody: for
they hold that the wine is transubstantiated into blood, as well as the bread
into a body, and both make one sacrifice. How can that be unbloody, which
consists of blood? Yea, of blood poured out, as their wine is into the chalice,
and out of the chalice into the Priests mouth. Heb. 9. 22.


4. If it be unbloody, 3 Popish penance more heavy then legal.
it has no virtue for the taking away of sin: For without shedding of blood is
no remission.

3. The third instance of their making the state of the Christian Church worse
then of the Jewish, Alij degentes in remotis and abditu locis singuli singulas
cellas veluti sepulchro, inhabitant, etc. Annonam totius bebdomadae Sabbato
accipiunt, ac omnimode humanae consolationis expertes, etc Alij antris,
speluncis, parietibus se includunt, etc. Sune etiam quisqualores solitudinum
requaru^t, bestiale feraru^ consortium non pertimescunt, etc. Otho. Frisingins.
l 1. cap. 35.
is their unwarrantable and inhumane penance (which often they enjoin to their
penitents, for satisfaction) and other barbarous courses, whereunto they
perswademen upon pretense of merit and perfection. They have in these cases
some whom they style Eremites, who live in remote places from all society, and
feed upon such fruit, roots, and other things that the earth brings forth,
lodging in Caves, Dens or Cellars, dug out of the ground. Others they call
Anchorites, who live enclosed betwixt walls, and on the Sabbath receive their
sustenance for the whole week. Others they either enjoy, or persuade to whip
their naked backs with scourges of cords, wyers, and sharp rundals, till the
blood run down, and skin and flesh be torn from their backs. Others must lie in
shirts of hair cloth. Others go bare foot and bare legged to such and such
shrines. Others undertake long pilgrimages to remote lands; nay, they stick not
to send a Queen to Tiburn upon penance. Did the Law ever impose such hard tasks
upon any that were under the pedagogy thereof? 4 Popish ceremonies more
burdensome then legal.


4. The last instance that I will give of putting an heavier yoke upon the
necks of Christians, then the Law did upon the Jews, Bellarm: de effect: Sacr:
c 31. Rhem. Annot: on Gal. 4. 1. 2, 3.
shall be the innumerable, unwarrantable, and intolerable rites, which on mere
humane inventions are obtruded upon their people. These must needs be heavier
burdens then the rites of the Law, in three respects especially.

1. In that they lie as dead things on men's shoulders, which make them the
heavier. The life of rites in Gods service, consists in divine institution,
and warrantable signification. But Popish rites are neither instituted of God,
nor have any warrantable signification, whereupon he that uses them may rest.
The rites of the Law had both their institution and signification from God.

2. There is no set stint of them. For man's inventions are endless. They have
no set and certain rule to be ordered and moderated by. But God set down a
distinct number of rites to the Jews, whereunto there was no need to add any
other.

3. When all is done that can be done about the foresaid Popish rites, they can
give no sound satisfaction to the conscience. If the doers thereof should plead
them before God, what other answer could they receive, but this, Who has
required this at your hand? Isa. 1. 12. Mat. 15. 9.
Or thus, In vain they worship me, etc.

Much more might be said in manifesting the wrong, which in this kind our
Adversaries do to the Christian Church, and in manifesting the blindness of
those, that suffer themselves to beled with such blind guides. Blessed be God
that has delivered us out of that worse then Egyptian darkness.

The progress of Gods providence unto the better, 2 To wish the Jewish
glorious times argues folly.
gives us information in their folly, who on too great admiration of those
external glorious types, which were under the Law, do wish the continuance of
them still: as such a Temple as Solomon built, such Cherubims, such Altars,
such Tables, such Candle-sticks, such Lavers, such Priestly vestments, and
other such vessels and instruments, as were precious in their matter, being of
pure and fine brass, silver, gold, fine linen, silk, skarlet, pearls,
precious stones, and very curious in their workmanship, and glorious to the
sight. Herein they manifest their folly, in that they do not understand nor
discern the excellency of those spiritual and celestial things which God
has now provided for his Church: whereof those external and earthly, though
seemingly glorious types, Genesis 3. 6.
were but shadows and figures; herein they show themselves like to our first
Parents, who were deceived with the fair show and pleasant taste of the
forbidden fruit.

Some, Jewish Christians.
whom we may well style Jewish Christians, so far manifest their folly in
this kind, as they do not only wish those former times, but also actually
conform themselves to that servile pedagogy. Acts 10. 15.
For what fish, fowl and beast were then forbidden, they still hold unlawful
to be eaten, though God has forbidden us to call that unclean which he has
cleansed, and reckons abstaining from meats, which God has created to be
received, among doctrines of devils. 1 Timothy: 4. 1, 3.
The last day also of the week they still keep for their Sabbath, though the
first day of the week, in memorial of Christ's resurrection, be expressly set
down in the new Testament, Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 1^
for Christians holy assembling together.

Too near to these do they come, Apish imitation of the Jews.
who though they do not tie themselves to the very same rites and ordinances,
whereto the Jews were bound, yet tread too near upon their heels, and too
apishly imitate them: and that in matters about divine Service: as in fair
embroidered Copes, and other Ministers-vestments; in high standing Altars; in
low cringings and bowings; in turning to the East, as they to the Temple, when
they pray; in variety of musical instruments and artificial anthems; in
multitude of holy days, with the like; whereof even this Church stood formerly
too guilty. These Jewish Christians do both justify the poor blind Jews, who
yet retain as many of the Mosaicall Ceremonies as they can (in that Christians
have a greater light, the light of the Gospel, to discover unto them the
abrogation of that Law, together with the reason thereof) and also do harden
their hearts, and make them bold in cleaving to their Law, when they see such
as profess themselves Christians, come so near there unto.

3. Gods increasing goodness may give some satisfaction to such as make
question of Church Governors, 3 It is worse to have no Church Governors, then
such as the Jews had.
proper and peculiar to the Church.

Of such I demand, whether it be a good, useful, and needful thing, for the
Church to have Governors of its own; and secondly, whether the Church of the
Jews had such Governors, or no. Surely, me thinks neither of these should be
denied. Have not families, schools of learning, Colleges, Universities,
Cities, Towns, all manner of Corporations, Companies and Societies, Governors
proper and peculiar to themselves: besides the public Magistrates, who are
also over them? Is it not by experience found, that such proper and peculiar
Governors are needful and useful, and so good in their several spears? And
shall the best Society on earth, the militant Church, be without
Ecclesiastical Governors, proper and peculiar to it? I suppose none will
deny, but that the Church of Israel had such Governors: instance their Priests
and Levites. In Iehoshaphats time there is an express distinction made betwixt
Ecclesiastical and Civil Governors under these two phrases, 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
matter of the Lord, and matters of the King. If Church Governors were an
evidence of Gods good Providence under the Law, surely his Providence in this
kind, would not be more scantie to the Church under the Gospel: for he has
promised to do better then at her beginnings. A change of Governors there may
be, and that for the better; but an utter abolishing of all Governors, proper
and peculiar to the Church, cannot be to the better. We expressly read that
God has set in his Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
among other good functions, Governments. If it be said, that under that word,
Governments, (...) both in sacred Scriptures and other authors signifies a
Governor. (...) (Mica 5. 2.) (...), Dominator, is style (...), Mat. 1. 6.
(...), is also opposed to (...), him that serves, Luke 22. 26 (...). Qui
imperat voluptatibus. Islo a (...). Plutaron. Difference betwixt Magistrates
and Church Governors.
civil Magistrates are understood: I answer, that first this phrase, God has
set in the Church, and then the other particulars, among which Governments are
reckoned, being all proper and peculiar to the Church, admit not such an
interpretation thereof. To them which ask where any mention is made of a
ruling Elder, I allege these words of an Apostle, (1 Timothy 5. 17.) The Elders
that rule well, etc. Apply them as you please, to Ministers or others: there
are ruling Elders. The word (...) twice used by an Apostle, ( Heb. 13. 7, 17.)
and translated by our last and best Translators of the Bible, them that have
rule, shows, that Ministers of the Gospel are Church Governors: for
Christians are required to obey them. And that Ministers are there meant, is
evident by these phrases, They have spoken unto you the word of God, and they
watch for your souls.

To show that this kind of Government does not entrench upon the authority of
the civil Magistrate, let the difference betwixt them be well observed, and
that in these three particulars.

1. Civil Magistrates command in their own name, or in the name of a
superior civil Magistrate, thus, I charge you in the name of the King. But
Church Governors, in the name of Christ.

2. Civil Magistrates require obedience to themselves, Church Governors, to
Christ.

3. Civil Magistrates press on their subjects their own Laws, as Statutes
and Ordinances made by themselves. Church Governors, the Ordinances of Christ.

4, The progress of Gods Providence to the better, 4. Aggravation of
Gospel-sins.
is a great aggravation of the ungracious and ungrateful disposition of many
people, if not of most, whom God has reserved to these later times. God has
graciously done better for them, and they deal worse with God. Such are,

1. They who remain blind and ignorant under the clear light of the Gospel.
Gospel-sins. 1. Ignorance.
A wonder it is, that there should be so little knowledge, where there is so
plentiful means of knowledge. Note an Apostles doom of such, If our Gospel be
hid, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
it is hid to them that are lost, whose eyes the God of the world has blinded.

2. They who are unstable, 2. Unsetlednes.
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, notwithstanding the evident
demonstration of the truth now made known unto us. The Apostle resembles them
to children, Ephesians 4. 14. Heb. 5. 12.
whereas for the time we ought to be as grown strong men.

3. Such as are ever weak in faith, 3. Doubtings. Jam. 5. 6, 7. Mat. 8. 36. --
14. 31.
full of doubts and fears. Often does Christ check his Disciples for this. Such
come far short in strength of faith, of those who lived before these better
times. Witness that catalogue of believers which the Apostle makes, Heb. 11.

4. Such as take advantage, 4. Abuse of Grace.
from the abundance of Gods mercy, to exceed in sin. In the Apostles time,
upon this gracious extent of grace to great sinners, Where sin abounded grace
did much more abound; some made this impious and unjust inference, let us
continue in sin, that grace may abound. These make sin the proper procuring
cause of Gods grace, Causa pro non causa.
which is every way free: only God takes occasion from the misery whereinto sin
implungeth man, to extend mercy unto him: and that abundance of sin may not
hinder the current of his grace, he causes it to abound. Objectum pro non
objecto.
Besides, they who infer the foresaid unjust consequence, apply that to sins
future, which is spoken of sins past; Subjecum pro nos subjecto.
and extend that to obstinate and impenitent sinners, which is intended to such
as groan under the burden of their sins.

5. Such as from the comfortable Doctrine of Election to life, 5 Perverting
Election.
infer that they shall assuredly be saved, though they live never so lewdly:
not considering that they who are ordained to the end, Ephesians. 1. 4.
are ordained to the means that bring to that end.

6. Such as from Gods wisdom in bringing good out of evil, 6 Doing evil on
pretense of good.
take occasion to do evil, upon this pretense, that good may come. The Apostle
most justly makes this inference upon theirs, Romans 3. 8.
whose damnation is just: implying thereby, that damnation is their due, and
that most justly.

7. Such as upon Gods pardoning a sinner, 7 Delay of repetnance.
whenever he repents, put off their repentance: not considering that men have
not power to repent when they will: so as such may never repent, and never be
pardoned.

8. Such as from that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, 8 Misapplying
liberty.
imagine that they are freed from all obedience to the moral Law: Gal. 3. 10.
-- 13. Romans 8. 1.
whereas that liberty is only from the rigor of the Law, which binds to a
perfect fullfilling thereof in every part, point and degree of it, and from the
curse thereof.

9. Such as deny the morality of the Christian Sabbath, 9 Profaning the
Sabbath.
and profane it with all manner of sports, because the ancient day is changed
by virtue of Christ's resurrection. All these and other like them turn the grace
of God into lasciviousness; Jude v. 4.
that is, into all kind of licentious living. An Apostle gives this verdict of
them, They were of old ordained to condemnation.

10. All that having escaped the pollutions of the world, 10 Apostacy. 2 Pet.
2. 20.
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are again
entangled therein, and overcome, and wilfully sin, after they have received
the knowledge of the truth. Heb. 10. 26.
In a word, all apostates from the true faith, deal most ungraciously and
ungratefully with God. I may well use Moses his exprobration against them,
Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? The forementioned
Gospel-sins, and others like unto them, do much grieve the good Spirit of God,
and they that commit them go far in treading under foot the Son of God, Heb.
10. 29.
and counting the blood of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified an
unholy thing. By the means of grace they are exalted unto heaven: Mat. 11. 21,
etc.
but by their abuse thereof they are brought down unto hell. So as the woe
denounced against those, among whom Christ much conversed, may be applied to
these. The inference which the Apostle makes upon Gospel-sinners, cannot but
terrify such as heed it, Heb. ^. 8, 29.
it is this, He that despised Moses Law died without mercy. Of how much sorer
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has treden under foot
the Son of God? etc.

But from these Uses of error and terror, I proceed to Uses of another kind.

5. 5. Gods reserving better things to later times makes us expect better in
bad.
Much consolation may be gathered by faithful ones, from the continual
increase of Gods providence, in such sad, doubtful, dangerous days, as these
our days are. For we may with confidence expect better things. The days
wherein the Prophet first uttered this prophecy were worse days then ours are;
and to comfort the faithful that then lived, and such others as should from
age to age live after them, he revealed this promise. There are more particular
promises concerning a future glory of the Christian Church, set down by the
Prophets in the old Testament, and by Christ and his Apostles in the new,
especially in the book of the Revelation, then we have either heard of, or seen
in our days to be accomplished. The glorious City described, Revel. 21. 10,
etc. is by many judicious Divines taken for a type of a spiritual, glorious
estate of the Church of Christ under the Gospel yet to come, and that before
his last coming to judgment. I pass by all conceits of our later Chiliasts
or Millenaries, (whom in English we may call Thousandaries) who imagine, that
Christ shall personally come down from heaven, in that nature in which after
his resurrection he ascended into heaven, and reign here a thousand years with
his Saints. The certainty of this I leave to be proved by them who are the
broachers thereof. But this is most certain, that there are yet better things
to come then have been since the first calling of the Gentiles. The Jews to be
recalled.
Among other better things to come, the recalling of the Jews is most clearly
and plentifully fore told by the Prophets. Many apply sundry prophecies that
tend that way, to the delivery of the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity; and
others, to the spiritual Israel, consisting of Gentiles. But assuredly such
prophecies as foretell the re-uniting of Judah and Ephraim together, have
especial reference to the foresaid recalling of the Jews: as that Parable,
whereof this our Prophet makes mention, about joining two sticks, on the one
whereof was written, Ezekiel. 37. 16, etc.
For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: and on the other,
For Joseph the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his
companions. That Parable the Prophet thus applies, I will make them one
Nation, and one King shall be King to them all, etc.

But if any shall question this and other prophecies of the ancient Prophets.
The Apostle Paul has so expressly foretold a recalling of the Jews, and
thereupon, a bringing in a fullness of the Gentiles, as no question can be made
thereof: and he does after such a manner express these, as apparently
declares a future glory of the Christian Church. Some particular expressions
of his in the 11. to the Romans, are these.

1. Verse. 11. Having propounded this Question concerning the Jews, Have they
stumbled, that they should fall? (namely, totally and finally, never to be
raised again.) He gives this answer, God forbid. Whereby he implies, that
assuredly they shall be raised again, that is, they shall be made a visible
Church of Christ, and submit themselves to his ordinances.

2. Verse. 12. This supposition, If the fall of them be riches of the world, and
the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles: how much more their
fulness? By their fulness, he means their bringing them in to the Church
of Christ, consisting of Gentiles, and thereby making that Church full, when
both Gentiles and Jews shall be joined together.

3. Verse. 15. This Question ( What shall the receiving of them be but life from
the dead?) does take it for grant, that they shall be received, and taken into
the Church of Christ; and that this restoration of theirs will be as a new
glorious resurrection.

4. Verse. 23. It is said, They also shall be graffed in; namely, into the body
of the Christian Church; and a proof thereof is taken from Gods omnipotency,
For God is able to graff them in again.

5. Verse. 24. This emphaticall Interrogation, How much more shall these, which
be the natural branches, he graffed into their own Olive Tree? does put it out
of all question, that the Jews shall again be brought to be of the true Church,
which is the Olive Tree here intended.

6. Verse. 25. This restrictive particle, In part (blindness in part is
happened unto Israel) does import, that they shall not be finally blinded, but
that at length they shall come to have their eyes so opened, as they shall know
and believe in Jesus Christ. This is further manifested by expressing the
period of this limitation, thus, Until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.

7. Verse 26. This general phrase; All Israel shall be saved, shows, that
there is a time to come, when not only two or three, or a few Jews here and
there thorowout the Christian Church (as have been in all ages thereof) but the
whole Nation shall be called.

8. Verse. 31. This phrase, Through your mercy they also may obtain mercy;
shows, that God purposely suffered them sometime to abide in unbelief, that
when they should be brought to believe, this grace and honor might appear to
arise from Gods mere mercy and free grace. The words following in the next
verse do show as much: They are these, For God has concluded them all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

Thus we see that there is a calling of the Jews to come, and that their
calling shall be as a resurrection from the dead, as an incision of many more
branches into a glorious tree, that it shall be an universal, conspicuous
calling of a whole Nation, wherein the freeness and largeness of Gods grace
and mercy shall be evidently manifested. At which time there shall be also such
a number of Gentiles brought in, as may well be called the fullness of the
Gentiles, verse. 25. This certainly shall be a most glorious condition of the
Christian Church, and this is yet to come: therefore God will yet do better
things for us. In expectation whereof we may comfort our selves, though for a
while thick clouds of troubles do overspread the face of the Church, and
somewhat eclipse the glorious brightness thereof.

Yea further, The better things given to Jews.
we may expect better things then yet we do enjoy, upon the forementioned
progress of Gods good providence, before that glorious calling of the Jews be
accomplished. For the Jews, after this promise made, before the first coming
of the Messiah, and calling of the Gentiles, had conferred upon them many
better things then before. They were brought out of Captivity to their own
Land. A second Temple was built. The Law was restored unto them by Ezra, and
many other blessings. So after Christ's first coming, the Gospel was preached
in many Nations, multitudes of Churches were erected and established, the
Gospel confirmed by many undaunted Martyrs. Yea, after much persecution, the
Church had great rest and liberty in Constantines, and other Christian
Emperors times. And though that rest and liberty were in time exceedingly
abused, by the ambition of Prelates, which at length brought it to the height
of Papacy, yet God by a Reformation in these later times, showed that he was
mindful of this his promise, and did better things for her then before.

This may further be exemplified by Gods doing better for us here in England
then at our beginnings. Better things to Christians.
For as the thick dark cloud of Antichristianisme overspread the sky of the
whole Christian Church for many years together, so did it clean keep away the
bright shining of the Gospel from England. But it pleased God almost three
hundred years ago, Light held forth by Wickliff.
in the reign of Edward the third, to raise up John Wickliff, a Professor at
Oxford, to hold out the light of the Gospel, so as many in those days were
much enlightened thereby.

Among other principles wherein he instructed the people, these were some.

1. The Eucharist, Wickliffs articles.
after consecration, is not the very body of Christ, but figuratively.

2. The Church of Rome is not the head of all Churches, more then any Church
is. Nor has Peter any more power given of Christ, then any other Apostle has.

3. The Pope of rome has no more in the keys of the Church, then any other
within the order of Priesthood.

4. The Gospel is a rule sufficient of it self to rule the life of every
Christian man here, without any other rule.

5. All other rules, under whose observances diverse religious persons be
governed, do add no more perfection to the Gospel, then does the white color
to the wall.

These and other like positions wrought so effectually upon the hearts of noble
and mean persons, as this may be accounted a good beginning, wherein many
rejoiced; but no public reformation was wrought thereupon.

About an hundred and fifty years after, the Lord did better then at that
beginning. Popes supremacy cast down.
For he stirred up both King and Parliament to go further in suppressing
Popery, and advancing the Gospel. Witness that Act of Parliament, in Henry the
eight his days, whereby the Popes usurped authority in England was taken away;
and liberty given to the King to reform abuses crept into the Church. The King,
by virtue thereof, sent out injunctions for removing images, reading the holy
Scriptures, and performing all divine Service in English: preaching Gods Word,
Catechizing children, and observing other duties of piety: so as the Gospel
began to shine forth somewhat brightly in England. Only it was much obscured by
an other Act of Parliament, even in that Kings time, which established
Transubstantiation, The scourge with six strings.
communion in one kind, private Masses, Auricular confession, Vows of
chastity and prohibiting Priests marriages.

3. About seven years after, that King being dead, and his Son, A better
Reformation.
King Edward the sixth, a child of nine years old, (yet another Josiah) set
on the throne, God did better for England then before. For the foresaid Act
(commonly called the scourge with six strings) was repealed: and a more through
reformation established. But even then, many of the peoples hearts so lingered
after Romish superstition, as the Israelites did after the high places, in the
reign of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. -- 20. 33.
Iehoshaphat and other good Kings: so as this goodly reformation continued but
six years; For God took away that good young King. Q. Many. The doctrine of
the Gospel restored to the purity thereof. Tihi, Regina, tu^sque populis, quod
haud scio, an cuiquam nostra tempestate regno per te datum est, pura videlicet
ac fincerae Evangelij. doctrinae integra professio. B^za in Epist. Ded. Reginae
Eliza.
After whose death a popish bloody Queen utterly defaced the foresaid
Reformation, and brought in that dark cloud of Popery, which overshadowed this
whole Land.

4. God being mindful of his goodness to his Church, within five years after
raised up blessed Queen Elizabeth, in whose reign that dark cloud of Popery
was more thoroughly dispelled then ever before: and Religion, in regard of the
truth and soundness of doctrine was restored to as full an integrity, as ever
it was in the Christian Church since the Apostles time. A grave, learned and
judicious outlandish Divine gives this testimony of Queen Elizabeth, that
under her that was granted to her Kingdom, which he knew not whether it were
given to any other Kingdom or no, namely, an entire profession of the pure and
sincere doctrine of the Gospel. More learned and stout Champions, were in her
reign raised up to maintain the same faith, then ever before in this Kingdom.

5. There is yet another reformation now begun in this Land, Ad quam si plenam
quosque ecclesiasticae disciplinae instaurationem adjunxeris, lane non video
quid a^p^us Anglia ipsa possita te flagi. tare. Ibi^.
which being added to the former, evidently demonstrates that God does intend
better things then at our beginnings. This is the Reformation of the Discipline
and Government of the Church: concerning which the foresaid judicious Divine
thus says, If to the profession of true Doctrine, a full reformation of
Ecclesiastical Discipline be also added, surely I see not what England can
more desire.

If any shall object, Rubs which hinder the Progres of Providence.
that in many respects the state of our Church has grown worse and worse. I
answer, that by reason of our sluggishnesse, want of zeal, and unworthy walking
of that light which. God graciously afforded, clouds of error and superstition
gathered together: as by the negligence and wickedness of the Israelites, the
Canaanites were not utterly destroyed, Joshua 23. 13.
but proved to be snares and traps unto them, and scourges in their sides, and
thorns in their eyes. Yet God did time after time remove those impediments,
and cause the light of his Gospel more and more brightly to shine forth.

Why then may not we yet look for better things then at the beginning of our
Reformation, and hope that as then the Doctrine of the Gospel was restored to
the purity of it: so the Government also of the Church be restored to its
purity. Comfort your selves in these sad times with this hope.

6. Gods reserving his better things to the later times, 6. Gods increasing
goodness, requires greater thankfulness.
ministers unto us, who have been reserved unto these later times, Mat. 11. 11.
much matter of gratulation. The least of us, which live in this Kingdom of
God (styled, for the celestial excellency thereof, the Kingdom of Heaven) The
least of us, I say, is greater then he of whom it is said, Among them that are
borne of women, there has not risen a greater. Had we lived in the ancient
former times, and believed the promises of things exhibited in these times, how
should we have enquired and searched after them? 1 Pet. 1. 10.
The Prophets so did. How should we have desired to see them? Many Prophets and
Kings so did. Luke 10. 24.
How should we have rejoiced to see this day? John 8 56.
Abraham so did. Now that we are reserved to live in this time, to hear, see
and enjoy these better things, should not our hearts be filled with praises,
and our mouths opened to utter the same? God has made an abundant recompense
unto us, who live in these later days, for putting off our time of living in
this world so long. It is to our unspeakable advantage and benefit; and shall
not God have the praise thereof? True believers now have greater cause then old
Zachary had to sing and say, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has
visited and redeemed his people. Luke 1. 68. (...) 2. 2^
Yea, then old Simeon had to say, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. These old men saw but the
Sunne-rising of the Gospel. We see it shining forth in the full brightness
thereof. Should not we then be thankful, even for the times wherein we live?

Well may I, 7 Worthy walking.
from the forementioned Doctrine, raise an Exhortation of worthy walking, that
is, of carrying our selves answerably to this good Providence of God, in
reserving us to the enjoying of better things. This worthy walking in general
is much pressed in Scripture, We charge you that you would walk worthy of God,
who has called you to his Kingdom and Glory. 1 These. 2. 12.
We cease not to desire that you might walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing. Col. 1. 10. Ephesians. 4. 1.
I beseech ye that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called.

This word (...), worthy, does not intend any merit, but a mere meetnesse; no
condignity, but a congruity and correspondency to that whereunto it is
referred. This is evident by that phrase which the Baptist uses, where he
exhorts to bring forth fruits worthy repentance, Mat. 3. 8.
which our last and best Translators thus turn, Fruits meet for repentance.
And in the margin thus, Fruits answerable to amendment of life. If in that
place (...), worthy, should be taken for any matter of desert, it might be thus
translated, Fruits which deserve repentance, that is, such as are to be
repented of. And what are those fruits, think ye? surely evil, Romans 6. 21.
such as those whereof the Apostle thus says, What fruit had you then of those
things, whereof you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death. A
catalogue of them is reckoned up, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. But the word (...), is
derived from (...), which signifies to poise: and the Metaphor is taken from
things equally poised: there being the like weight in each balance, they stand
even. Thus when man's inward disposition, and outward conversation is answerable
to Gods gracious dispensation, it is in Scripture dialect called a worthy
walking. Hereby therefore it i^ intended, that we who live in these later
times, and enjoy the better things which God has provided for his Church,
should more abound in knowledge, be more strengthened in faith, be more
established in hope, be more enlarged in our hearts with a zeal of Gods glory,
be more conformable in our lives to his holy will, be more charitable to such
as stand in need, be more diligent and faithful in employing and improving our
talent, more patient under crosses, more ready and forward to suffer for the
name of Christ, and to seal up our holy profession, even with our blood, if we
be called thereunto. It is not enough for us to be followers of them, who
through faith and patience inherit the promises; Heb. 6. 12.
but we must strive to outstrip them. As we have more means of grace, so we
must more abound in the measure of all Christian graces. The forementioned
worthy walking intends thus much.

But may some say, How Christians are to excel the ancient Jews.
Is this possible? Can the best of us now come near to Abraham, other
Patriarks and Prophets, in knowledge, faith, parience and other like graces?

I answer first, that indeed some had the Spirit in such an extraordinary
manner and measure bestowed on them, as they might excel such as live under
the Gospel. But the comparison is not so much betwixt person and person, as
betwixt body and body. So as the point intended is, that Gods people in these
times should excel his people in those times.

Again, though in some particular extraordinary gifts and revelations, some of
them excelled, yet in a full and distinct knowledge of all the mysteries of the
Gospel, and in other graces, we may and ought to excel them.

If you be persuaded to the foresaid worthy walking, How Christians walk worthy.
I will make bold to set before you a direction, whereby you may be much helped
thereunto.

In general it is this, that in every of the foresaid days of the great week
of the world, you observe the most eminent persons recorded in the sacred
Scripture, and the most excellent graces for which they are commended, and
thereby be stirred up to an holy emulation.

This that ye may the better do, I will endeavor to set before you (as the
Apostle does, Heb. 11.) some of the prime paterns, in every day.

1. In the first day note especially Abel, Genesis 4. 4, Heb. 11. 4. Genesis 4
26. Genesis 5. 24.
Enosh and Enoch. Abel so ordered his offering, as his person and offering was
accepted. His faith occasioned it. Enosh gathered assemblies together to
worship God, and frequented the same. Enoch in all that he did had his eye on
God, to approve himself unto God.

2. In the second day observe Noah, Genesis 6. 9, 11 Genesis ^. 23. Genesis 14,
18, 20
Japhet, Shem, Melchisedech. Noah shined as a bright light in a dark and wicked
world. Japhet with his brother Shem, covered his Fathers infirmity.
Melchisedech blessed God for Abrams victory, and encouraged his soldiers.

3. In the third day very many are set before us, Heb. 11. 13.
as the three great Patriarks: who all with much patience passed through many
trials, and long lived, and died in the faith of those Promises, which after
their days were to be accomplished. Joseph in an impious and idolatrous Land
kept his integrity. Genesis 42. 18 Namb. 14. 24. Joshua 24. 15. Judges. 2. 16,
etc.
Caleb was a man of an invincible spirit in Gods cause, Joshua also with his
household would serve the Lord, Ruth 3. 16.
though none else did it. How careful were the Judges to draw the people from
idolatry, and to keep them close to God? Ruth, after she had been instructed in
the true Religion, went from her own Country, with a poor Mother in Law, to
the true Church.

4. In the fourth day we have excellent paterns of singular Governors, as
David, Solomon, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah and others, who made it their
main end, and put forth their utmost power to advance Gods glory, settle and
restore true Religion and peace, and procure good to their people. In that day
also, there were multitudes of faithful Prophets, who held close to Gods Word,
and would not falsify it for fear or favor. Such were Elijah, Elisha,
Micaiah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, etc.

5. In the fifth day there were worthy restorers and reformers of Religion,
builders up of the house of God, and redressers of grievances in State, and
preservers of Gods people from pernicious plots of Adversaries. Such were
Zerobabel, Iehoshua, Ezra, Nehemiah, Mordecai, Esther, etc.

6. In the beginning of the sixth day, there were painful and faithful
preachers of the Gospel, zealous and pious professors of the true faith:
merciful and charitable brethren: constant and courageous Martyrs.

These being reserved to the beginning of the last day, wherein the better
things were exhibited, answerably carried themselves, and were in many respects
better then such as lived before them.

Should not we then who live in the later part of the last day (to which better
things are reserved then in the former part) endeavor to be better then all
the former? What a shame is it to us to be so ignorant, so superstitious, so
doubtful, so fearful, so cold and backward to good, so impatient, so
discontent, so worldly, so wicked, as many of us are? Mat. 12. 41, 42.
If the men of Nineveh, and Queen of the South shall rise up in judgment
against the Jews, who lived in Christ's time: much more shall such as lived
either in the beginning of this last day, or in other days before it, rise up
in judgment against us. I will conclude this point, and my Sermon too, Hab.
12. 1.
with that inference which an Apostle makes upon a like ground, in these words,
Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.

FINIS.

