SEASONABLE ADVICE,
Ordered to be Printed by the Lord Major of LONDON.
Invented by WILLIAM GOSLING, Engineer,
How many several ways, Houses, Towns, and Cities, have been set a-fire.
SOme has been burnt by bad Harths, Chimnies, Ovens, or by pans of fire set
upon boards: some by Clothes hanged against the fire: some by leaving great
fires in Chimnies, where the sparks or sickles breaking fell and fired the
boards, painted Clothes, Wainscots, Rushes, Matts, as houses were burnt in
Shoreditch: some by Powder, or shooting off Pieces: some by Tinder or Matches:
some by setting Candles under shelves: some by leaving Candles near their
beds: some by snuffes of Candles, Tobacco-snuffes, burnt papers, and some by
drunkards; as many houses were burnt in Southwarke: some by warming Beds: some
by looking under Beds with Candles: some by sleeping at work, leaving their
Candles by them, so many have been burnt of several Trades: some by setting
Candles near the thatch of houses: some by snuffes or sparks fallen upon
Gunpowder, or upon matts, rushes, chips, small-coale, and in chinkes; so
Wimbleton was burnt: some Towns were burnt by Maultkills: some by Candles in
Stables: or by foul Chimnies: some by Candles amongst hemp, flax, and
warehouses: some by Candles falling out of their Candlestickes: some by
sticking their Candles upon posts: some by Lincks knocked at shops, stalls,
sellers, windows, warehouses, doors, and dangerous places: some by carrying
fire from place to place, where the wind has blown it about the streets, as
it did burn St. Edmondsbury: some by warm Sea-coale sinders put in baskets,
or wooden things, as did burn London Bridge: And some have been burnt without
either fire, or Candle, as by wet hay, corn, straw, or by mills, wheels, or
such like: all which has been by carelessness. And some have been fired a
purpose by villainy or Treason.

Orders to be Observed that fire may not happen,
IS that every housekeeper, either himself, or one by his appointment that
should be last up, to see to the fire and Candle, and to shut the
Sellerwindowes, doors, casements, garret-windows, and to stop holes, and
sinkes, that fire may not come in by Treason, or otherwise: To prevent Treason
that may come by wilde-fire, is to stop the wilde-fire simples, where they are
sold: Seek to prevent fire at the beginning, and by the sight of smoke, to
look to it, for diverse fires have been so prevented: Some have been prevented
by smelling old wood, linen, or woollen burn: and some by hearing the
crackling of sticks, coals, or sparks of fire, have prevented mischief
thereby: if you will use Candle all night, let your Candlestick be a pot of
water brim full, and set it where it shall stand, and then light a Candle and
stick a great pin in the bottom of the Candle, and let it slowly into the
water, and it will burn all night without danger if the wood under the harth
of a Chimnie be a fire, then take heed you do not open it too suddenly, before
you cast water upon it, for the air getting in, the fire will burst forth,
therefore still throw water, and open it by degrees. And that the Bricklayers
should look better to the foundations of harths, and ovens, to prevent the
hurts of fire: if Chimnies be a-fire, either wet hay, or straw, or a wet
blanket, or a kettle of water hung over, or bay salt cast into the fire, or a
Piece shot up into the chimnie, will help it. And that the Watch might be from
daylight to daylight, at such a distance that they may see and hear from one
Watch to the other; that some might be upon Gates, Towers, or Churches, if need
be, to give notice to the Watch below, upon any occasion, to prevent both enemy
and fire.

Orders that if fire should happen, either by wilde-fire, or other ways, to
prevent the miseries thereof.
THen the Bells going backward, does give notice of fire: and that all Officers
and others, must keep the streets or lanes ends, that the rude people may be
kept from doing mischief, for sometimes they do more harm than the fire: and
suffer none but the workers to come near, and all the streets from the fire to
the water, may have double rows or ranks of men on each side the street, to
handy empty pales, potts, or buckets, to the water, and to return full to the
fire, by the other row or rank of people, on the same side the street: so as
the streets affords, you may have diverse ranks: and by this order, water may be
brought to quench it, or earth to choke it, and smoother it, with that speed
and plenty, as need requires.

All those of higher or level ground, should throw down water, to run to the
place where the fire is, and there to stop it: and others to sweep up the
waters of kennells toward the fire. If water-pipes run through the streets,
you may open it against the house that is a fire, and set another pipe in that
upright, and two or three foot lower then the height of the head of the same
water, set in some gutter, trough, or pipe unto the upright pipe, to convay the
water to the fire, for under the foresaid height, it will run it self from
high ponds, or from Sir Hugh Middletons water, or Conduit-heads, or from the
Water-houses, without any other help, into the fire, as you will have it: you
may keep great Scoopes or Squrts of wood in houses; or if you will, you may
have in the Parish a great Squrt on wheels, that may do very good service.

Where mild fire is, milk, urine, sand, earth, or dirt, will quench it: but
any thing else set a-fire by that, will be quenched as before: if there be many
houses standing together, and are endangered by a mighty fire, before it can
be quenched, or choked with earth, then you may pull down the next house
opposite to the wind, and then earth and rubbish being cast upon the fire, and
round about it, will choke the violence of the fire: besides the water you may
get to do the like. Also it is necessary that every Parish should have Hooks,
Ladders, Squrts, Buckets, and Scoopes in a readiness upon any occasion.

O the miseries of Cities, Towns, Villages, and particular houses, that have
been burnt, where some could not recover their losses in thirty years after,
and some never, which have been lamentable spectacles unto us, when many men,
women, and children, have been burnt in their houses; and multitudes of people
utterly undone, that saw all their wealth burned before their eyes. Besides,
many have been hurt, many killed, and many burned, that came but to help to
quench the fires. What lamentable cries, frightings, and amazements, there was
to all sorts of people, some sick, some in childbed, and some great with
child, to the terror of them all: and all was through the miseries of fire,
that came by carelessness and wilfulness.

Therefore let the very sight of fire and Candle, put us in mind to prevent
the like miseries that have come by fire, both in London, and the parts of
England: for great winds may rise suddenly, and enemies furies, may do
mischief. To master the Elements, is either to increase or decrease any of
them; for as air makes fire increase; so earth will choke it; and water will
quench it.

Preventions of fires, would save the often Collections of money in all
Churches in England; all which is for the profit and safety of the
Commonwealth. As good order, and care, prevents our fear of fire; so a good
life, prevents the ways to sin. And every one, mend one; then all will be
mended. The Lord commands us, to have care of our neighbors goods, Deuteronomy.
Chap. 22. For the love of our neighbor fulfilleth the Law, Romans Chap. 13.

Printed for H. B. At the Castle in Cornhill. 1643.


