A Postscript, or Appendix TO A TREATISE Lately published by Authority,
Entitled, HAGIO-MASTIX, OR, The Scourge of the Saints displaid in his colors
of Ignorance and Blood. Being an Explication of the third verse of the
thirteenth Chapter of the Prophecy of Zachary; [the tenor whereof is this:
And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophecy, then his father
and his mother that begat him, shall say unto him, Thou shall not live, for
thou speak lies in the Name of the Lord: and his Father and his mother that
begat him, shall thrust him through when he prophecieth.] According to the
analogy of the Sriptures, the scope and exigency of the context, and the sense
of the best Expositors upon the place. By John Goodwin a servant of God and
men, in the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Ioh. 7. 24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
judgment. Quidam Christianae ac fraternae charitatis obliti, in tantum
existimationem nostram quoquo modo student laedere, ut suam, se evertere
nocendi cupiditate, non videant. Aug. in Resp. ad Artic. Sibi false impositos.
Prophetae fuerunt viri eloquentes, crebroque sunt usi tropis in scribendo,
quibus multa obtexerunt. Aug. de Doctr. Christ. l. 4. c. 7. Mira profunditas
eloquiorum tuorum; quorum ecce ante nos superficies blandiens parvulis; sed
mira profunditas, Deus meus, mira profunditas. Horror est intendere in eam,
horror honoris, and tremor amoris. Aug. Confess. l. 12. c. 14. Quod est gladius
ad vaginam, granum ad aristam, anima ad corpus, hoc est sensus genuinus ad ipsa
verba Sacrae Scripturae. Corn. a Lapide. In Argumento super 12. Prophetas.
London, Printed for H: Overton, and are to be sold at his shop in Pope's Head
Ally.

A Preface to the Reader.
GOOD READER,
I Have almost daily occasion, as well to reverence, as remember, this gracious
dispensation of God (which elsewhere I have taken knowledge of in some of my
writings) that whereas his Saints and Servants commonly lie under the sorrow
and shame of many infirmities, and some unworthy doings, yet he so governs and
orders the ill will of their adversaries, that they seldom in their defamations
or hard speakings against them, hit upon these; but commonly lay the burden
upon the whole shoulder, where the Saints are strongest and best able to bear
it, charging them with such crimes and matters of disparagement, not only
whereof they are altogether innocent and free, but which are most contrary to
their choicest virtues, and to the tenor of such practices, which are their
chiefest honor and commendation. Joseph as great a pattern of chastity, as
Abraham was of faith, was yet defamed and accused, as an Adulterer, and a
violent attempter of the chastity of others. Genesis 39. 17.
Moses, who was meek above all the men on earth, Number. 12. 3.
was yet charged to take too much upon him, and to lift up himself, above the
congregation of the Lord. Number. 16. 3.
The Prophet Elijah, who was indeed the chariot and horsemen of Israel, 2 Kin.
2. 12.
i. a special means, and noble instrument of the safety of Israel, was
nevertheless arrested by Ahab, as he (that is, as the only man) that troubled
Israel. 1 Kin. 18. 17.
To pass by (for the present) many more instances of like consideration; the
Lord Christ himself was represented, and accused as an enemy unto Caesar, John
19. 12.
who yet was Caesar's best friend, being he, by whom Kings reign, and Princes
rule. Prove. 8. 15, 16.


For my self, I know my self to be compassed about with as many infirmities, as
the weakest of men, and my great unworthiness in many things is daily before
me; yet it has pleased my God, whom I serve in the Gospel of his dear Son,
still to hide my nakedness from mine enemies, though many in number, and
diligent inquirers after it; and so to dispose of their hatred and ill will
against me, that the fiery darts of their accusations have still hit where my
breast plate of righteousness is, and has been most firm, and of best proof.
It is too much for me to say of my self, nor will I say it; but it would be a
truth comely enough in the mouths of some others, to say, that I am, if not the
best yet none of the worst Friends, which the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures has amongst men; and that I have been as diligent, as faithful, as
laborious an Assertor thereof, as any of those, who think themselves more
worthy of the crown. All that I shall say of my self in this behalf, is, that
if I have done any service for the world, since my entrance into it, or if the
souls and consciences of men have any cause at all to bless me, it is, because
I have clothed them with strength and confidence of the royal parentage and
descent of the Scriptures, and subdued their fears and jealousies of any
subornation (in that kind) under their feet; or rather that I have attempted
with all my heart, and all my soul, to do them. Notwithstanding, with what
importune clamor, and virulency of spirit, I have been of late traduced, not
only to vulgar cognizance, but to Authority it self, as an enemy unto, and
opposer of the heavenly Original of the Scriptures, by some, who out of zeal
to God (for so they gloss the practice) neglect their own Trades and
Employments, to follow Satan's, in accusing the Brethren, Revel. 12. 10.
is so well known throughout the City, that any farther information from me,
would be an impertinency. But though Joseph was accused as an enemy to the
chastity of his mistress, yet the true reason and ground of his accusation (as
the Scripture informs us) was, not his enmity, but his faithfulness,
thereunto; in like manner, though the matter of my accusation from the mouths
of men, he opposition to the Scriptures; yet I make little question, but that
the real and true cause hereof, was not my opposing, but my avouching the
Scriptures, as the Oracles, or word of God, by a strong and pregnant eviction
from them of a notorious unworthiness in those practices and proceedings
against the Saints, wherein these men with their fellows, were, to the
reproach, not of Christian Religion only, but of humanity it self, engaged.
But all things (says the Apostle) that are [to be] reproved, are made manifest
by the light: for whatsoever does make manifest, is light. i. is by this act of
manifestation or discovery, clearly evinced to be light, Ephesians. 5. 13. And as
Joseph's Mistress accused him to his Lord, for an adulterous attempt upon her,
because he refused to be adulterous with her; so because I have constantly
refused to misfigure the face of the Scriptures, and destroy the character of
the Divine glory which is stamped upon them, by compelling them to serve in the
wars of High Presbytery, against both themselves, the Saints, and the Truth;
therefore have these men accused me before Authority, as if I had blasphemed
their honor, and contradicted that manifest and pregnant Relation, wherein
they stand unto God, as their Father. That herein I charge them not, but with
the royal assent of Truth, is evident from hence: There is scarce any Divine,
or Protestant Author, having a like occasion to speak of the same subject, but
have expressed themselves upon the point wherein I am made an offender, in
terms far more obnoxious to exception then mine, No translation is simply
authentical, or the undoubted word of God. In the undoubted word of God, there
can be no error. But in translations there may be, and are errors. The Bible
translated therefore is not the undoubted word of God, etc. Dr. Featly in his
Treatise, entitled, The Dippers dips, p. 1. 2. This Treatise was printed with
License, and since reprinted 5. or 6. times, long since the sitting of this
present Parliament; no man, that ever I have heard of, finding himself agrieved
in the least, at any of these expressions.
and yet my accusers are all thoughts made for them and as men in whose mouths
there are neither complaints, nor reproofs. Why? these Authors, either have
ordered the Scriptures and High Presbytery, and made them to agree; or else
they had no occasion to take notice of any disagreement between them. But
because I have so demonstratively proved that the Scriptures, and High
Presbytery, point, like East and West, one diametrally opposite to the other,
Ergo, therefore my saying, that it is no foundation of Christian Religion, to
believe that the English Scriptures are the word of God, is a denial of the
Divine Authority of the Scriptures simply, though another man's saying twice as
much, would have amounted to no such sum of indignation. But that I daily fight
with beasts at Ephesus, after the manner of men, what advantageth it me; if the
Scriptures be not the word of God? Or why have I bought so many Scripture
Truths at such great rates as I have done, as with the loss of Friends,
credit, esteem with men, estate, yea of all hope, that I say not possibility,
of bettering my portion and condition in the world, as low as it is, if I
believe them not to be the word of God? Why did I so lately suffer a
Sequestration from, or ejection out of my free hold, (the best means I had in
the world, for the support and livelihood of my self, wife, and seven children)
for none other cause, or crime that ever I could hear of, but for endeavoring
to go before others in an example of a real Reformation (.i. For my
conscientious and faithful observance of the solemn Covenant, after by
public Order and injunction from Authority, I had taken it) if I believe not
the Scriptures to be the word of God? Certainly if I did not really and
cordially believe them to be the word of God, I would believe them as
prudently, as many others do: I would so believe them, as not to be disturbed
by them, or any thing in them, in my worldly interests: I would so believe
them, as to keep fair quarter with soft raiment, great purses, full tables, and
benches of honor, notwithstanding: nor would I sacrifice the least degree of
my hope of rising in the world, upon the service of any thing whatsoever
contained in them. Nay, did I not verily believe them to be the word of God, I
would not for their sakes, nor for the vindication of any thing which they say,
expose my self, as now I do, to the clamorous, and stingling tongues of an ill
employed, and (I fear) a worse spirited generation of informers (God forgive
them, for I hope charitably, that they know not what they do) I would write no
books that should deserve burning by the common Hangman, Some of my accusers
made it their most affectionate request, that my late book might be burnt by
the common Hangman
but such only which should be welcome to, and judged worthy to be sold, at
the sign of the Bible it self. For I confess, that I am neither Stoic, nor
Cynick: I had rather abound, then be in want: I had rather have the good wills,
and the good words of my generation, then their bad; and that the greatness of
this world should rather smile, then frown, upon me. And for the acquirement
and enjoyment of my desires in all these I conceive I had as fair and large
opportunities, as others of my Brethren in the Ministry, and had a price in my
hand, as sufficient (I make no question) for the purchase, as many of those,
who have bought, possess, and enjoy: whose felicity or advancement by their
purchase, I (God is my witness) no ways emulate or envy. For I judge it (in
many cases) best for the peace, and accommodation of the world, that they should
enjoy the great things of the world, who least know how to want them, or what
to do without them. But that which mainly separated between me, and the
enjoyment of my desires in this kind, was nothing else, but my believing the
Scriptures to be the word of God: this principle within me, was (I confess)
too stiff and stately to bow down at the feet of worldly accomodations, and
these on the other hand thought themselves too good, to subject themselves
unto, or comport with that my principle: and since they thus mutually resented
the genius and temper one of another, they have been strangers, and kept at a
distance, and by this time scarce know, remember, or take much care one for the
other. It was a very irrational and incongruous imputation which some cast
upon Paul, that he should preach Circumcision, when as he suffered so deeply as
he did, for non-preaching, at least for non-practising of it. And I Brethren
(says he) if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? then
is the offense of the cross ceased. Gal. 5. 11.
And certainly, reasonable and considering men being Judges, my accusation of
denying the divine Authority of the Scriptures, is every whit as senseless and
importune, when as I suffer, and have suffered every ways, in my credit, name,
friends, estate, ease, yea, and expose my self daily to further sufferings,
only for believing, and acting this my belief of, their Authority. My belief
in this kind, has dealt as hardly by me, as the Lord did by Balaam (in Balaks
interpretation) I thought (says he, to him) to promote thee to great honor:
but so, the Lord has kept thee back from honor: Number. 24. 11.
But that belief I speak of, which has reigned in me, and over me, hitherto,
and has blessed me with such an abundance of peace and comfort, in sufferings
for it, will not (I hope) forsake her throne, till either she has overcome
mine enemies, and so delivered me from suffering further; or else changed the
contemptiblenesse of what I am yet capable to suffer further in, into that
spirit of glory, which rests on those that suffer for the Name of Christ. 1
Pet 4. 14.
For I am resolved (God assisting) not to be ashamed of any of Christ's words,
Mar. 8. 38.
nor to forbear, upon occasion, the freest utterance and asserting of them,
before what generation soever: and hope, that neither Name, nor Friends, nor
Estate, nor Liberty, nor life it self, which have not betrayed me hitherto,
will ever for the future prove any snare of death unto me, or hinder me from
finishing my course with joy. Act. 20. 24.
If I shall miscarry or fall, in any of my standings up for the Truth, the
inconvenience or loss, is already cast up by Luthers Arithmetique; Malo cum
Christo ruere, quam cum Caesare stare: I had rather fall with Christ, then
stand with Caesar: I have begun to build a tower, and trust I have wherewith to
finish it; I am engaged in a war against the world, and do not intend to send,
or supplicate for conditions of peace; nothing doubting, but that I have
sufficient strength (the strength of Heaven) to meet any adversary, that comes
against me, in the field. I make no question, but I shall persuade the
judgments of some, to accept of that Truth, whose cause I plead; but the
strength and glory of my comfort is, that of the Apostle: We are unto God a
sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish, 2 Cor.
2. 15. Ezekiel must prophecy, whether the people to whom he is sent will hear,
or whether they will forbear, that they might know, there has been a Prophet
amongst them, Ezekiel. 2. 5. Men are then prepared for destruction upon the best
terms for the glory of God therein, when his Truth has been effectually made
known unto them, they persisting in their former ways of disobedience unto it.
This is that, which the Scripture calls, Rebellion 1 Samuel 15. 23. and walking
stubbornly against God (as the former translation reads it) Lev. 26. 21. 23.
27. And in this respect, they who make known his Truth unto me, are a sweet
savor unto him, even in those who perish, through disobedience to it. As for
him, who (it seems) counts it an honor to be an Officer in blood unto Satan,
the Scourger of the Saints under the name of Fools A scurrilous Pamphlet lately
put forth, Tam fine re, quam fine nomine, called, Mo^o mastix.
(for so indeed they are called in the dialect of the world, the language which
this man speaks) the God of Recompenses Ier. 51. 56.
will provide a scourge for him, and that of Scorpions, in due time, (unless
by Repentance he becomes one of those Fools, whom now he scourges) and will
declare from Heaven, with an astonishing demonstration, who is the Fool, and
who is the wise man.

And Reader, were it not for fear of making my gates too big for my city, I
should here, in further vindication of my self against the pretended crime of
denying the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, have directed thee to such
passages in that discourse it self, which is constrained to bear the cross of
this forged cavillation, wherein I clearly acknowledge and assert the same: As
1. to page 29. Where I suppose the fouls of men, to have been ransomed by the
precious blood of Jesus Christ. So again to page 36. where I express my self
thus. And though for my self, I can, and do without scruple, subscribe to the
truth of this doctrine, yea and am ready, God assisting, to die for it; that
God is one in three persons, etc. Certainly he that asserts, or takes for
granted, that the souls of men were ransomed with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ; and again, that God is one in three persons, professing himself ready
to die in attestation hereof, asserts his belief of the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, with as much plainness and evidence, as is lightly possible for any
man in words to do. For who can really and cordially, and with a Faith
animating unto death, for the obsignation of their Truth, believe either of
these upon any lighter or looser foundation, then the Authority or word of God
himself? The latter place (I desire all the world to take knowledge of it)
which is the more pregnant of the two, wherein I profess my subscribing
without scruple, to this Doctrine, that God is one in three persons: and
further, that I am ready to die, in attestation of it, God assisting me; is in
the very next page unto, and but a very few lines before, that unChristianly,
yea, and sencelesly perverted, and mis-used passage, wherein my Informers would
fain persuade the world, that they see me under a denial of the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures, with my pen. Miserable mend who know not how to
refrain from making themselves more miserable, then they are, by making sin of
innocence in other men, and innocence of sin in themselves: Yea, the truth is,
that I am so far from denying the Divine Original or Authority of the
Scriptures in the said book, that Sect. 25. beginning at the foot of page 32. I
assert the same as demonstrable, by many grounds and Arguments otherwise;
whereas the Presbyterians (more generally, as there I show) hold and affirm it
undemonstrable upon such terms, by all arguments and reasons whatsoever,
excepting only the immediate illumination or revelation of the Spirit of God.
But I remember that he that glorified God more then all the world besides, was
notwithstanding again and again charged with blasphemy, Ioh. 10. 33. Mat. 9. 3.
Mat. 26. 65. etc.
and that by those, who thought they knew as well as all the world besides,
what blasphemy was, yea, and judged themselves as holy just, and zealous men,
as far from that great abomination of unrighteousness of condemning the
innocent, as were to be found among all the living; yea, this great, and
blessed factour for God, and his glory, and for the salvation of the world, was
at last notwithstanding all his faithfulness unto both worlds, sentenced even
by such men as I spoke of, worthy of death, as a blasphemer. Mat. 26. 65, 66.
Reader, I cannot but comfort my self with these words. The Lord give thee a
discerning spirit between things that differ, and keep thee from being either
ravished with the spirit, or rapt up into the third Heavens, of this present
world. Farewell.

From my Study in Colemanstreet, March 2. 1646. Thine, and all men's, in the
service of the Lord Jesus Christ: John Goodwin.

ZACH. 13. 3. And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophecy
then his Father and his mother, that begat him, shall say unto him, Thou shall
not live: for thou speak lies in the Name of the Lord: And his father, and
his mother that begat him, shall thrust him through when he prophecieth.
BEcause there are some amongst us, who look upon this passage of Scripture, as
undoubtedly comporting with such a practice, which (it seems) too much comports
with their desires, I mean, the inflicting of civil punishments by the
Magistrate, upon spiritual Delinquents (persons uttering, or teaching
erroneous doctrines in Religion) and having had no occasion ministered, to argue
this, as I had for several others, in my late Treatise, entitled,
Hagio-mastix, etc. I conceive it may be a good and acceptable service both unto
God and man, to make a district and narrow search into the mind of the one in
it, for the accommodation, and benefit of the other; partly in rectifying the
judgments and practice of some, partly in preserving others from undue
sufferings. We shall steer our inquiry by the compass, partly of the sense and
mind of the holy Ghost in other Scriptures; partly of the coherence and scope
of the context; partly, of the sense and import of the words themselves; partly
by the analogy of phrase or manner of expression found elsewhere in Scripture:
partly also of the apprehensions and judgments, of the best and soundest
Expositors we have had opportunity to see, and consult about the meaning of the
place. So then, that the Holy Ghost had no intent as all to countenance the
interposall of the civil Sword, for the suppression or punishment of error,
or Heresies under the Gospel (least of all, in these times, or, in the Churches
of the Gentiles) will clearly appear, if not divisim, yet conjunctim, by these
ensuing considerations.

1. It clearly appears from the two preceding verses (the first and second of
this chapter: and indeed from the whole, both precedent and subsequent
chapters) that what is spoken in this third verse, concerning the high
displeasure, which Fathers and mothers should conceive against their children,
when they should prophecy lies in the name of the Lord, respects only the
Nation, and Church of the Jews. Nor is there the least hint or intimation given
in the context, that any thing expressed in the said verse, relates unto the
Gentiles. For. i. (v. 1.) he mentions only the house of David, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem (1. the Jews, of what rank or condition soever, noble,
or ignoble) as those, for, or, unto whom, the fountain for sin, and for
uncleanness, there spoken of, was to be opened. Upon the same terms he
expresses himself in the Gospel, thus Mat. 15. 24. I am not sent, but unto the
lost sheep of the house of Israel: meaning, that he was not sent by his Father,
to minister in the days of his flesh, either by preaching the word of the
Kingdom, or confirming it mith miracles, but only unto the Jews: in which
respect the Apostle calls him a minister of the circumcision Rom ^5. 8.
meaning the Jews. Now as our Savior professing, that he was not sent, but to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel, speaks, only and determinately of the
Jews, not including the Gentiles in the expression; in like manner, when the
Holy Ghost speaking and prophesying of him, and of his sending into the world,
under the metaphor of a fountain to be opened to the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, etc. cannot reasonably be conceived, in such an
expression to mind the Gentiles, but the Jews only. Especially considering,
that this prophecy of the Messiah, and the blessing he should bring with him,
was not simply directed unto the Jews, and unto them only, by the gracious
appointment of God, but it was directed and sent unto them, being now in a
dejected and low condition, on purpose for their encouragement and erection, as
appears, Ezra 5. 1. and all Expositors agree. Now when God is well pleased with
the Jews, or intends their comfort or encouragement by a message from himself
by his Prophets, he is not wont to speak of the calling of the Gentiles, or of
making these equal, or superior, in holy privileges, unto them: but when he
puts this ingredient into any such addressement of himself unto them, it still
argues his displeasure and coffeehouse with them, according to what himself
expresses by the mouth of Moses (a little before his death) They have moved me
to jealousy, with that which is not God; they have provoked me to anger with
their vanities: and I will move them to jealousy with those, which are not a
people, I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation. Deuteronomy. 32. 21. See
also Mal. 1. ver. 10. compared with ver. 11. etc.


2. These expressions, I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land,
and again; also I will cause the Prophets, and the unclean spirit to pass out
of the land (ver. 2) clearly show, that the context speaks precisely and
circumscriptively of the Church and Nation of the Jews. It is a true and
frequent observation amongst Interpreters, that the word, land, indefinitely
put, in the Scriptures of the Old Testament, always in such constructions as
this (viz. where no particular country, or people besides, are treated of)
signifies, the land of Canaan, the inheritance of the Jews.

3. Some of our best and most Orthodox Expositors, understand, not only the
present context (I mean the passages near adjoining both before and behind, to
the Scripture in hand, and consequently, this Scripture it self) but the whole
chapter, yea, and the whole proceeding and subsequent chapters, with a peculiar
reference and limitation to the Jews: yea, and further limit and confine the
whole content of this chapter, to that tract or space of time, which began with
the restoration of this Church and State by the Macchabees after the
devastations, and prophanations of Antiochus, and ended with the siege and
destruction of the City and Temple it self of Jerusalem, which they conceive
(and that truly) to be predicted, and described in the following chapter, Summa
hujus capitis est brevis narratio tum praecipuorum Dei donerum, tum etiam
eventorum, quae in populo Judaico. i. Ecclesia Dei contingere debebant (ac
reipsa contigerunt) post instauratum a Maccabaeis populi and Ecclesiae statum,
usque ad extremam urbis Jerusalem obsidionem ac excidionem, quae cap. sequenti
continetur. Itaque ordinem temporis continet haec prophetia et apt superiori
capiti connectitur. Ceterum commemorat, duo quae dam summa Dei in Ecclesiam seu
Iudeos, futura beneficia, nimirum peccatorum expiandorum rationem et
expurgationem Idololatriae a sua Ecclesia and Templo Lambe^tus Danaeus, in Zac.
c. 13 v. 1. See also Hugo Grotius upon the place.
wherewith this prophecy ends. So that according to this calculation of the
passage in hand, there is nothing at all herein prophesied concerning the
Churches of the Gentiles, no nor concerning the Church or nation of the Jews
themselves, under the Gospel, at least after, or since the final destruction of
their city and temple when (according to the general and constant opinion both
of ancient and modern Divines) the Mosaicall polity and Occonomie of that
Church and State fully expired, and gave up the Ghost. Now the practice or
course here spoken of, (viz the appearance and standing up of Parents against
their children, and that unto death, in the case of false Prophecy in case it
be to be literally understood) being a branch of that polity, and enjoined,
Deuteronomy. 13. 5. 6. etc. (as all Expositors almost I can meet with upon the place
in hand, agree) it is a ground of much probability (at least) that this
Prophecy reaches not beyond the said term of the expiration of the Mosaicall
Law.

If it be objected and said; yea, but if this be foretold by God, in the nature
of a special benefit, or blessing, which the Church and nation of the Jews
should enjoy (as it seems here to be) viz. that the zeal of the Truth, and
purity of Religion should be so great and prevalent amongst them, that Parents
themselves should do justice, and that even unto death, upon their own
children, when they proved false Prophets, and teachers of lies; does it not
follow, that it will, and must needs be a proportionable benefit and blessing
to all other Churches and nations, when their respective Magistrates shall
proceed with the like zeal against the like Delinquents? To this I answer.

1. Be it granted, that not only Civil (Magistrates I mean) but even natural
Parents themselves lawfully may, yea, and of duty ought, in these times of the
Gospel, to proceed with the like zeal against the like Delinquents, yet will it
not follow, that they lawfully may, much less that of duty they ought, to
express or act their zeal after the same manner, or with the self same kind
of expression. It was lawful for the Apostles, to be as zealous against the
enemies of God and of Christ, as it was for Eliah; yet it was not as lawful
for them to express their zeal by calling for fire from heaven to consume
them, Luk 9. 54.
as it was for him. So it is not only as lawful, but necessary also by way of
duty, for the Ministers of the Gospel, to be as zealous for the glory of God,
and for the peace and safety of their people, as either Phineas, or the same
Eliah was: but it is not as lawful for them, either to thrust adulterers or
adulteresses through with spears or javelins, as Phineas did; nor to slay
Idolatrous Priests with their own hands, as did Eliah. In like manner, it may
be as lawful, yea, and a matter of duty lying as much upon Parents, whether
natural or civil, now, to proceed with the same measure and strength of zeal,
against their respective children, in cases of those sinful misdemeanors
specified in the Scripture in hand, as it was heretofore either for the one
kind of Parent or the other, amongst the Jews, to proceed against theirs; and
yet withal they may sin grievously, in case they shall utter their zeal in
such outward actings against them, as the other did. The reason of the
difference is, because God has now under the Gospel appointed other methods
and means for the vindication of his glory, and the peace of his people,
against the enemies of both, differing from those prescribed under the Law (as
has been argued, and proved in the preceding Treatise.) And as the Jews,
though (as the Apostle testifies of them) they had a zeal of God, [that is,
either for the glory of God, or for the obtaining of his favour] Romans 10. 2.
yet this zeal of theirs not being according to knowledge. 1. Not being
exercised or acted according to the will and mind of God revealed in the
Scriptures in that behalf, but according to their own erroneous sense and
misapprehensions herein, sinned greatly, even to the loss of the favor of God
for ever, in, and by such an execution, or acting of it: in like manner, men
may be very zealously affected, either to promote the glory of God, or to
procure his love and favor; and yet by seeking to effect either the one, or
the other, by means disallowed by God in the Scriptures, they may both highly
dishonor him on the one hand, and provoke his displeasure, instead of his
favor, on the other, And that temptations in this kind are very incident to
persons of zealous affections and desires for Gods glory, appears by the
character of those times, wherein, as our Savior informs his Disciples,
whosoever kills them, will think that he does God service. Job. 16. 2.
Whosoever kills them, will think, etc. This note of universality,
whosoever, imports, that there would not be only one, or two, or some less
considerable numbers of men, that would stumble at the stone here spoken of,
but that this would be a common or general practice, countenanced and allowed,
if not enacted, by the Authority of States and Kingdoms. The obnoxiousnesse of
zeal to the said temptation, might be further confirmed by that example of the
Jews, recorded, Act. 13. 15. who are there said to have stirred up the devout
and honorable women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution
against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts; as also by
the example of Paul himself, whilst yet he was Saul; who (as himself
confesses) was zealous toward God, and yet persecuted this way (the way of
Christ) unto the death, binding and delivering into prisons, both men and
women. Act. 22 3. 4.
yea, and verily thought that he did God service in so doing. Act. 26. 9.


But 2. Even those Expositors, who understand the expression of thrusting
through (in the Scripture in hand) not literally only, but even to the utmost
extent of the letter, viz. for an absolutely slaying by death, (though the
letter it self does not enforce this, as we shall show presently) yet do not
allow such proceedings as this in Parents against their children, upon every
false Doctrine or error taught, or published by them Non quod tamen omnis
falsa Doctrina, illiusque Doctor (...) sit puniendus, etc. Dan. in Zach. 13 3
nor do their hearts or learning here serve them to undertake the arbitration,
between the several kinds of false Doctrines and errors; so as to sanctify
such and such for the sword, and to show mercy unto others. And whosoever will
now undertake it, had need have a special Commission for it under the broad
Seal of Heaven, Therefore such Parents, who shall thrust their children through,
or slay (yea, or punish) them for any false Doctrine or error whatsoever, had
need have a better, I mean, a more particular and special warrant for their
practice, then this Scripture: So that,

3. If the said expression of thrusting through, be to be taken literally, viz.
either for slaying with death, or punishing otherwise (with any civil
punishment) the particular delinquency or offense, against which such a
proceeding is to take place, must be inquired after, and found out, only by
consultation had with the tenor of the Law, Deuteronomy. 13. 5, 6, etc. and Deuteronomy. 17.
2, 3. etc. unto which Scriptures, Expositors generally (as was formerly noted)
send their Readers for a right understanding of the passage in hand. Now the
false Prophet that was in these Scriptures sentenced by God unto death, was not
every Heretic, or erroneous person (especially as men now count Heresy and
error) but determinately, and only such a false Prophet, who endeavored to
persuade them to the worship of a false God, and that by pretending the
inspiration of some Deity, for the confirmation of such a doctrine; Hoc
intellige de Pseudopropheta, populum volente abducere ad cultura falsorum
Deorum: nam in tales quemvis Iudaeum Lex armabat. Deuteronomy. 13. 8. 9. quae lex
express addit, in tali crimine, nec filio parcendum. Hugo Grotius in Zach. 13.
3.
(as was sufficiently proved in the fore mentioned Treatise, Sect. 41.) So that
howsoever, by the joint consent of Interpreters upon the place in hand,
thrusting through (in the literal or proper import of the word, whether high,
or low,) was never allowable by God in the Old Testament (much less is it in
the new) for any other kind of false Prophesying or teaching, but that only
whose express bent and tendencie was, to draw off people from the worship and
service of the true God, and to allure them to the worship of some Idol, or
false God, yea, and this by asserting some special Revelation as of divine
Authority, and credit, to procure credit, and acceptance for such a doctrine.

4. Tarnovius a Protestant and learned expositor, observes, that the Original
word, (...), transfodit, seu transfixit, does not always signify such a
thrusting throw, which is unto death, but sometimes such a wounding, which
admits of a ready cure, as well as of a recovery: and cites, Jer. 37. 10. for
this signification: yea, and further affirms, that if men will needs understand
the expression of thrusting through (ver. 3.) literally and properly, they must
of necessity, considering and comparing herewith what follows in the sixth
verse, understand it, in such a sense. From whence also he infers, that the
punishment of thrusting through here spoken of, if taken properly, cannot be
meant of any punishment to be inflicted by the Civil Magistrate, but by the
natural Parents only, to whom we know, as he says) that God has given power
of correction, and that by stripes and scourgings, against their disobedient
children. Quid? quod nec (...) id est, transfodit, semper significat ita
transfixit, ut inde mortuus sit: siquidem express habetur apud Ieremiam cap.
37. 10. reliqui essent ex eis homines transfixi, quisque in tentorio suo
exurgerent, and comburerent civitatem hanc igne: quomodo etiam experientia
testatur multos confossos supervivere, etc. Et paulo post; verum si omnino
omnia proprie velis accipere etiam depsis Parentibus, in sua ipsorum persona,
correptiones, verbera, flagellationesque privatas in filiis immorigeris his
esse concessas novimus, Pro. 13. 24. Heb 12. 7, etc. Et si versum 6 cum hoc
volumus conferte, omnino cogimur hoc asserere, utrunque vocabulo configendi hic
denotari, viz. primum praeire aspera verba: quibus si nihil proficiant
parents, ventum iri ad verbera, aliaq media duriora etc Tarno^^us in Zach. 13.
3.
The tenor of this sixth verse, is this: And one ball say unto him, what are
these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was
wounded in the house of my friends. But,

5. The said Author delivers this ensuing Exposition as his sense upon the
place, viz. that Friends of nearest relation, even natural Parents themselves,
shall so far subject their most dear and tender affections, and engagements
otherwise, to their zeal for the truth and purity of Religion, that when any,
even of those that are nearest and dearest unto them, through the allurement of
that unclean spirit (spoken of v. 2.) shall prophecy, they shall [or will]
endeavor to take him off, and deter him from such a practice, by producing and
laying before him the sentence of death out of the Law of God. Exodus 20. 5. 7.
threatening him after this manner; if thou go on, thou shall not live [with
God] but shall be condemned (for the phrase, compare Ezekiel. 18. 24. Ezekiel. 33.
10. Ephesians. 4. 18. for the matter, Gal. 5. 20. 21. Philip. 3. 18, 19. 2 Timothy 2.
17. Tit. 3. 10, 11.) because thou have spoke falsehood in the name of the Lord.
With these, and other like words, sharp, and piercing, shall his Father and his
mother who begat him, as it were, pierce him through when he prophecieth. For
thus, threatening words, sore and weighty reproofs, and indeed all Doctrines,
are said to cleave in sunder the hearts of those that hear them, Act. 7. 54.
and again, to goad or prick them by piercing, Act. 2. 37. And the words of the
Lord, are said to be whet, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. and are compared to a two-edged sword,
Psalm. 149. 6, 7. Isa. 49. 2. Ephesians. 6. 17. Heb. 4. 12. Apoc. 1. 16. and 19. 15.
and again to goads or nails, Eccles. 12. 13. namely because they do (as it
were) strike or pierce a man through. To which purpose that of Solomon, Prove.
12. 18. may well be alleged. There is (says he) that speaks like the
piercings of a sword, etc. Where there is the same radix which is here in the
text, and the meaning is, that there are some, who with sharp and heartpiercing
words provoke those unto anger, to whom they speak; as again there are wise
men, who with soft words, pacific wrath, etc. Sic autem futurum est, ut quum
prophetaverit quispiam amplius ab illo spiritu impuritatis pellectus, dicaent
ei, qui sunt ipsi a natura conjunctissimi, parents scilicet, qui genuerunt
cum; non tantum pater ejus, sed and matter ejus, cujus tamen in natos solet esse
tenerrimus affectus, atque adeo studium natural ac (...) suas pietatis studio
subiicientes juxta Christi monitum, Mat. 10. 37. sententiam mortis ex lege Dei
proferant, atque illa ipsum deterreant, Exodus 20. 5. 7. sic comminantes, si ita
perrexeris, non es victurus tandem apud Deum, sed condemnaberis (confer Ezekiel
18. 24. and 33. 10. Ephesians. 4. 18. quod ad phrasin, quod ad rem, Gal. 5. 20, 21.
Phil. 3. 18, 19. 2 Timothy 2. 17. Titum 3. 10, 11.) quia falsitatem locutus es
nomine Iehovae, and his alilsque verbis durioribus velut transfigent eum pater
ejus and matter ejus, qui genuerint eum, dum ita prophetat ipse, quomodo verba
comminatoria aut graves reprehensiones aut doctrinae omnes dicuntur findere
corda auditorum, Act 7. 54. stimulare, ac pungendo penetrate, Act. 2 37. and
verba Iehovae acui Deuteronomy. 6. 7. unde and ipsa gladio ancipiti, Psalm. 149. 6. 7.
Isa 49. 2. Ephesians. 6. 17. Heb. 4. 12. Apoc. 1. 16. and 19. 15. aculeis denique and
clavis conferuntur, Eccles. 12. 13. quod nimirum hominem velut transfigant, in
quam sententiam huc merito adducimus illud Salomonis Prove. 12. 18. est qui
pronunciat similia transfossronibus gladii, at lingua sapientum medicinae. Ubi
eadem Radix quae hic extat, in textu, and notatur, esse, qui verbis asperis cor
ejus cui dicuntur, penetrantibus ad iram provocat, and esse sapientes, qui suis
verbis blandis iram sedent.


This is the best and fullest Exposition of the place, that I can any where
mere with amongst Interpreters; for the confirmation whereof, besides what the
Author himself abundantly cites case that comes to pass, which Christ here
commands us to take heed of, that is, the wheat is plucked up with the tares;
which is an horrible sin before God, and can never be excused. Here then
consider, how madly we have gone to work, who would needs compel unto the
Faith, Turks by war, Heretics by fire, Jews through fear of death and other
injuries, and pull up the tares by our own strength, as if we were a kind of
men by our selves, who had power over the hearts and spirits of men, and as if
it were in our hand to bring men unto righteousness and true godliness. We by
such a course, pull men quite away from the word, by slaying them, that it
cannot work any thing upon them: and so, as much as in us lies, we make our
selves guilty of a double death, of that of the body, which we destroy by a
death temporal; and of the soul, which we thrust down into Hell, so slaying it
eternally, and then we boast, as if we had performed some special service unto
God, and promise our selves a reward in Heaven for it. Well therefore may this
place thoroughly terrify those inquisitors after Heretics, and those
murderers, if they had not foreheads of iron, who make little or nothing of it
to put men to death, for every error so by them judged or esteemed, yea,
though they had Heretics indeed to deal with. But now, themselves being the
Heretics, they burn true Saints. What is this, but to pluck up the wheat,
whilst they pretend the pulling up of the tares, etc. Proximum, doce mur quo
modo habere nos debeamus erga illos haereticos ac falsos doctores: non
extinguer^e eos and excindere oportet: aperte enim hic Christus ait, sinite
crescere utraque. Solo Dei verbo contra cos agendum est Ita enim hac in
re^evenire solet, ut qui hodie errat, cras possit redire in viam. Quis novit
quando Dei verbum cor cujusquam attracturum sit? Si autem exuratur; vel alias
tollatur, impeditur, ne possit in viam reduci, verboque Dei subducitur, ut
perire cum necesse sit, qui alias potuisset errore liberari. Tum evenit quod
hic Christus vult caveri, nempe triticum simul cum zizaniis evellitur. id quod
horrendum peccatum est coram Deo, neque unquam poterit excusari. Hinc vero
vide, ut male sant hactenus fuerimus, qui Tureas bello, haereticos igni,
Judaeos necis metu and aliis injuriis voluimus ad fidem compellere, and zizania
nostris viribus evellere, ac si nos ij essemus, quibus potestas esset in corda
and spiritus, and in nostra manu ad justitiam and pietatem hominem revocare:
quod si unus Deus non faciat, manet perpetuo infectum. Nos isto pacto vero
homines potius a verbo avellimus, eos perimendo ne possit in eis aliquid
operari, and duplicis necis, quantum in nobis est, nos reos constituimus:
corporis, quod perdimus morte temporaria: and animae, quam in gehennam
detrudimus morte afficientes aeterna, pestea jactamus obsequium nos praest^^sse
Deo, ac peculiare nobis pollicemur hinc in coelo praemium. Iure igitur debebat
hic locus inquisitores haereticorum, and homicidas illos, qui ob errorem quem
libet, qui ipsis videtur, homines adeo facile mactant, si non esset illis frons
ferrea, etiam si quando vere haeteticos, in manibus haberent, plane
petterrefacete. Nunc autem exurunt veros sanctos, and sunt ipsi haereti i. Quod
quid aliud est, quam evellere triticum, and pre se far evulsionem zizaniorum.
Luther. Postill in Dominic quint. post Epiphan.


Long before Luther, Austin expounded the same Parable much after the same
manner, carrying the scope and importance of it to the very same point: which
exposition of Austin, Musculus in his Common Places (cap. de Haeresi) having at
large rehearsed, concludes thus: Haec Augustinus: quibus contra occisores
haereticorum parabolam zizaniorum convenientissime, meo judicio, exponit. i.
Thus Augustine, in which passage he expounds the parable of the Tares, and that
(in my judgment) most appositely and properly, against those that would have
Heretics put to death.

The same Luther, elsewhere writes, and argues thus. That Heretics should
be burnt is contrary to the will and mind of the Spirit of God.

This I prove, first, from the experience of the whole Church, which from her
first beginnings never burnt an Heretic nor ever will burn any: It would be a
strange thing, that in so many ages none should be burnt, if the Spirit of God
had declared himself for it. But [the Papists] will say: John Husse, and Jerome
of Prague were burnt at Constance. I answer, I speak of Heretics: as for John
Husse and the said Jerome, they were Orthodox men, they being Heretics,
Apostates, and Antichrists disciples, (as appears by what was formerly said)
who burnt them. In imitation of whose example, other murderers also in other
places, burnt and slew the Saints of Christ, amongst whom Jerome Savanorola,
with those that followed him, may be numbered.

Secondly, from the Scriptures, Isa. 2. They shall turn their swords into
Plough-shares, and their spears into pruning books. And cap. 11. They shall not
kill, nor hurt in all my holy mountain. And Christ committed no manner of arms
or weapons at all to his Apostles; nor did he enjoin any other punishment, then
that he, who should refuse to hear the Church, should be counted as an Heathen,
Matthew. 18. And the Apostle, Tit. 3. teaches to avoid a man that is an
Heretic, but does not command that he should be put to death, either by fire,
or sword. And to the Corinths he says: there must be Herefies, that those
which are approved may be made manifest. But what will your holiness, most holy
Lord, here say? Luke 9. when the Disciples would have brought down fire from
Heaven to destroy a city, Christ restrained them; saying, you know not of what
spirit ye are the children. The Son of man came not to destroy men's lives, but
to save them: This is that which I have said, and now say again, Christ himself
being my master [in it] that they, who persecute men with fire, are not
children of the good spirit. Of what spirit then? even of the evil spirit, who
was a murderer from the beginning.

Christ would not compel men by force or fire, to the faith. He gave the sword
of the spirit, that the children of his spirit should fight with that. But for
this sword of the spirit (the word of God) the Pope with his Popelings have
laid it up in bench-holes amongst worms and moths, and are become stout
hunters, and Nimrods in the earth, who do whatsoever they please, in the Name
of the old Caldean God, Ur, or Fire; that so Babylon the latter may in every
thing resemble Babylon the former: this Babylon burnt the forefathers of
Christ; the other, burns his children. The same God of them both, Ur, or Fire,
always burns and rages.

But even these men themselves in their most sacred Canons, prohibit arms
unto Clergy men; and would have the Church to pray effectually for the
preservation of the life of a Clergy man, when he is delivered to the secular
Judicatory. But by such discourse as this, they do but make a mock of the death
of innocent men. For in the mean time, the Pope, the Prince of the Clergy, with
all the Kings, make most bloody and cruel wars: yea, what havoc and
slaughters of men are there not made by his command? when does he not call in
to him the secular arm, so terrifying the world with both deaths? And yet the
prime Clergy man himself does not bear arms, whilst he prays devourly for
those that are to be slain, and is earnest, that they may be dispatched out of
hand, and that they be narrowly searched after, and found out in every corner
of the world. O Satan, Satan, Satan, woe unto thee with Pope and Papists, who so
impudently disport your selves with the most sad and serious affairs of the
Church, and slay the souls of men with their bodies. Haereticos comburi est
contra voluntatem spiritus. Primum ab experientia totius Ecclesiae probo, quae
ab initio sui usque huc nullum combussit haereticum, nec aliquando comburet.
^^itum autem esset, in tot seculis non esse aliquos combustos, si voluntas
spiritus hoc voluisset. At dicent; Constantiae Johannes Huss and Hieronymus de
Praga exusti sunt. Respondeo: Ego de haereticis loquor, Nam Iohannem Huss and
Hieronymum, viros catholicos combusserent haeretici ipsi and Apostatae, and
Antichristi Discipuli, ut ex superius dictis patet. Quorum exemplum and multi
alii homicidae imitati in diversis locis sanctos Christi exusserunt, and
occiderunt, inter quos Hieronymus Savanorola cum suis numerandus videtur.

Secundo, ex Scriptura Esa 2. Conflabunt gladios suos in vomeres, and lanceas
suas in falces. Ejusdem 11. Non occident, and non nocebunt in universo monte
sancto meo. Et Christus Apostolis nihil prorsus armorum commisit, nec aliam
poenam imposuit, quam ut haberetur pro ethnico, qui Ecclesiam non audiret,
Matthew. 18. Et Apostolis Tit. 3. Haereticum hominem vitari docet, non occidi
jussit armis vel igne. Et ad Cor. dicit: Oportet Haereses esse, ut qui probati
sunt, manifesti fiant. Sed quid hic dicet, Domine sanctissime. sanctitas
vestra? Luc 9. ubi Discipuli volebant ignem de coelo deducere, and civitatem
perdere, compescuit cos Christus, dicens: Nescitis cujus spiritus filii sitis?
Non venit Filius hominis animas perdere, sed saluare. Hoc est, quod and ego
dixi, and dico, Christo Magistro, cos qui igne persequntur homines, non esse
beni spiritus filios: Cuius tunc? mali spiritus, qui erat homicida ab initio.

Christus non voluit vi and igne cogere homines ad fidem Dedit ob id gladium
spiritus, ut in hoc pugnarent qui sui spiritus filii sunt. At gladium spiritus,
quod est verbum Dei, Dominus papa, cum suis Papastris, subter scamnum inter
blattas and tineas posuerunt, and rursum facti sunt robusti venatores, and
Nimrodi in terra, qui denuo in Deo Chaldaeorum, qui Ur seu ignis fuit, omnia
quae volunt, faciunt, ne quid Babylon nouissima discrepet a Babylone prisca:
illa exussit Patres Christi, ista exurit filios Christi, and utriusque idem
Deus, Ur semper urit and saevit.

Sed ipsi quoque in suis sacerrimis Canonibus prohibent Clericis arma, and
clericum fo^o seculari traditum volunt per Ecclesiam efficacibus precibus
redimi a morte. Verum his verbis ludunt in mortibus innocentum. Nam interim
^apa clericorum princeps, cum omnibus Regibus cruentissime belligeratur, Imo
quae strages non illius imperio fiunt? Quando non invocat brachium seculare,
and morte utraque terret mundum? Et tamen interim Clericus ipse primus non fert
arma, dum efficaciter orat pro occidendis, dum instat, ne mors eorum
differatur, ut in omni orbis angulo exquisitissime perquirantur. O Satan, o
Satan, o Satan, Vae tibi cum Papa and Papistis, qui tam impudenter in rebus tam
seriiis Ecclesiae luditis, and animae cum corporibus occiditis. Luther in
Assert. omnium Articulorum per bullam Leonis Decimi damnatorum. Artic 33.


This pleases no good man in the true Church, (says Augustine) that any man,
though an Heretic, should be put to death. Nullis tamen bonis in Catholica
hoc placet, si usque ad mortem in quemquam, licet haereticum, saeviatur. Aug.
contra Crescon. Gram. l. 3. c. 50.
And elsewhere: love the men, and slay the errors be confident of the truth,
without being cruel, Diligi te homines: interficite errores: fine superhia de
veritate praesumi^e, fine sae^itia pro veritate certate. Idem contra lit. Pe
til. l. 1. c. 29.
In another place, answering a certain epistle of an Heretic, he says thus:
Though the Lord by his servants is wont to overturn the kingdoms of error, yet
he commands the men themselves, in as much as they are men, should be rather
amended, then destroyed. And soon after: It was our part therefore to wish and
make choice of the better means, that so we might have an access and way to
your amendments; not by contention emulation, and persecutions; but by gentle
consolations, by loving exhortations, by soft and calm disputations; as it is
written, The servant of the Lord must not strive but be gentle unto all men,
apt to teach patient; In meekness instructing those that are contrary minded,
etc. And presently after: Let those deal cruelly with you, who know not with
what labor truth in found and with what difficulty errors are declined. Let
those be cruel toward you, who know not how rare and heroic a thing it is to
overcome carnal phantasmes or imaginations, with the serenity and clearness of
a pious mind. Let those handle you with cruelty, who know not how difficult it
is so to cure the eye of the inner man, that it may be able to behold the sun
that was made for it: not that Sun, which you worship in an heavenly body, which
glitters and shines in the fleshly eyes both of men and beasts: but the Sun, of
whom it is written by the Prophet; The Sun of righteousness, is risen upon me,
and of whom it is said in the Gospel: He was the true light, which lights
every man that comes into the world: Let those be cruel to you, who know not
with what, and how many sighings and groanings, even a little knowledge of God
is to be obtained. Lastly, let those be cruel to you, who themselves are
deceived with no such error, as they find you for the present deceived with.
Quanquam enim Dominus per servos suos regna subverat erroris, ipses tamen
homines, in quantum homines sunt, emendandos esse potius, quam perdendos jubet.
Et mo^ Nostrum enim fuit eligere et optare meliora, ut ad vestram correctionem
aditum haberemus: non in contentione, and aemulatione, and persecutionibus, sed
mansuere consolando, benevole hortando, leniter disputando: sicut: criptum est
Servum autem domini non oportet litigare, sed mitem esse adomnes, docibilem,
patientem, in modestia corripi entem diverso santientes. Et mox: Illi in vos
saeviant qui nesciunt cum quo labor verum inveniatin, et quam difficile
caveanter errores. Illi in vos saeviant, qui nosciunt quam tarum and orduum sit
(...) phantasmata piae mentis sere (...) superere. Illi in vos saeviant qui
nesciunt cum quanta difricultate sanctur oculus (...) hominis, ut possit
intueri solam suum non ist^^, quem vos col^^s coelesti corpore, ocalis carnels
and hominum, et pecorum, fulgentem atque radiantem: sed illum de quo Scriptum
est per Prophetam. ^rtus est mihi Iustitiae Sol; et de quo dictum est in
Evangel^^^: Erat lumen verum quod illuminat omnem hominem venientem in hunc
mundum. Uli in vos saeviant, qui nesciunt quibus suspiriis et gemitibus fiat,
ut ex quantulacunque part intelligi possit Deus. I ostremo illi in vos
saeviant, qui nullo tali errore decepti sunt, quali vos aeceptos vident. Idem
contra Epistolam Fundamenti, non long ab initio.


And whereas it is commonly said, that Austin afterward reversed his opinion
concerning the unlawfulness of proceeding against erroneous Persons by outward
violence (a fly which Mr. Edw. also catches at in his Antap. page 290. 291.)
it is true, he was somewhat over-perswaded by others (as himself confesses)
this way: but that which befalls many wise men frequently, and in many cases,
viz. to exchange, or make bargains to loss, might very possibly befall Austin
himself once. We know Tertullian, a man of as great learning, as Austin,
miscarried after the same manner, and that once and again, in points of great
moment. And though Austin retracted his former opinion (in part) yet he never
refuted, nor any man for him, nor is any man able to refute those grounds and
reasons, upon which his former opinion was built (as they were briefly touched
in the last recited testimony) in comparison of which (all reverence and terms
of honor reserved to so incomparable a man) those, upon which he changed his
opinion, in the judgment of any considering and dis-ingaged man, will be found
for weight and substance very inconsiderable.

Moreover (says Musculus) he that is a Christian, will attempt the correction
or amendment of an Heretic, with no other spirit, then the spirit of Christ,
which is a spirit of love, gentleness, humility, and beneficence. -- His heart
especially is to be moved and drawn; which is sooner, and to better purpose
done by services of love, and by a spirit of meekness, then by violence, or any
clamorous disputation. Deinde, correctionem Haeretici molitur Christianus,
nullo alio quam Christi spiritu, qui spiritus dilectionis est, mansuetudinis,
humilitatis, ac beneficentiae. -- Movendum cum primis illius cor est: id quod
benevolentiae officiis, ac spiritu mansuetudinis prius and utilius, quam
violentia vel verbosa disputatione perficitur. Musc Loc. Com. Cap. de Haeresi.
And elsewhere: I (says he) altogether, and without all dissembling confess my
self to be in the number of those, whom it much displeases, that whereas
errors should be slain, men are slain [in stead of them] Omnino citra
dissimulationem inter eos me esse fatetor, quibus admodum displicet, quod ubi
interficiendi sunt errores, interficiuntur homines Idem. ib.
The saying of Melancthon is sweet and pious. Whereas (says he) the Devil
being set on fire with the hatred of God, to put reproach and dishonor upon
him, has always, and still does move light wits, to spread and scatter false
opinions up and down, and it is much to be feared that in this utmost period of
the old age of the world, there will be greater confusions of opinions then
ever; we ought therefore to strive, or fight, both ways, viz. by prayer, and
doctrine. Cum autem Diabolus ardens odio Dei, vt cum contumelia afficiat,
semper impulerit, and impellat levia ingenia ad spargendas falsas opiniones,
and in hac ultima Senecta mundi majores confusiones opinionum fore metuendum
sit, utroque modo pugnandum est, videlicet precatione and doctrina. Pb.
Melancth. in Ena^. Symb. Niceni.
To conclude (for testimonies) Calvin himself, who seems by his practice, to
have sharpened first his own pen, and by both pen and practice to have
sharpened the pens of all those Protestant writers, who since his days have
handled the subject, we all this while speak of, more roughly: seems
notwithstanding, now and then, the truth rejoicing against his judgment, to
pull down, what elsewhere he builds up, in this kind, and to acknowledge a
non-necessity, of proceeding against Heretics or erroneous persons in a way
of outward violence or compulsion, if other means more proper for their
suppression, were effectually advanced. Therefore (says he) as by the rising
of the sun, the darkness is put to flight, and the true and distinct shape or
face of all things appears: So when God appears, or rises up in the world
by the Doctrine of his word, all the impostures whatsoever of Satan must of
necessity flee far away. Sicut ergo folis exortu fugantur tenebrae, and apparet
distincta rerum omnium facies: Sic etiam ubi Deus emergit per sui verbi
Doctrinam, necesse est procul faccessere omnes Satanae imposturas. calv. in
Zach. 13. 1.
If errors and Herefies, which are the first born of Satan's impostures, must of
necessity avaunt far away, when God arises in the world in the Doctrine of his
word; certainly if this word be but effectually preached, there will be no
necessity of driving them away by fire and sword: except we mean thus to pursue
them, after they are departed far away from us, as indeed the Papists many
times do; who use to destroy the lives of those, that recant and abjure their
errors, (as they call error) as well as theirs, who persist obstinate. So
that it is neither agreeable to the scope of the place, nor mind of the
Scripture elsewhere, nor to the sense of many Orthodox Interpreters upon the
place, nor to the judgment of the chief Modern Writers of the Protestant
party otherwise, to understand the phrase of thrusting through (in the
Scripture in hand) literally, or of thrusting through with sword, spear, or the
like, unto death; especially with relation to the Churches of the Gentiles
under the Gospel. And though some of our Protestant Expositors seem to carry it
in such a sense; yet the great cry of this interpretation, is heard out of the
midst of Rome; Jesuits and others, the children of that mother, thirsting after
the blood of the Saints, being with open mouth the great abettors and
proclaimers of it. But,

9. Whereas the Latin translation reads, transfigent eum, and our English,
they shall thrust him through, the Septuagint reads, (...) i. e. they shall
jointly tread upon him, or kick him with their feet; which imports only a
disgraceful, or disrespectfull carriage toward him. But,

10. (And lastly) If there be yet any place left for a further conjecture upon
a difficult and obscure place; (for peremptoriness and magistrality, become
difficulties no otherwise, then a full career the deepest ways:) it may I
conceive relate (in the direct, and full import of it) to those times of
refreshing, which shall come from the presence of the Lord, and of the
restitution of all things, viz. to the Jewish Church and Nation; whereof Peter
speaks and prophesies, Act. 3. 19. 21. and our Savior himself, Mat. 23. 39.
For I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye say, Blessed be he
that comes in the Name of the Lord: and the Apostle Paul, Romans 11. 26. And so
all Israel shall be saved: and the Prophet Jeremy (before them all) But this
shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: After those
days (says the Lord) I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And they
shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying,
Know the Lord: for they shall all know me from the least of them, unto the
greatest of them, says the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will
remember their sin no more, Ier. 31. 33, 34. These, with many more passages of
like tendencie and import in the Scriptures, plainly show, that God has yet
amongst the sealed treasures of his counsels and decrees, precious thoughts
toward his ancient people, the nation of the Jews; purposing in his time to
build them up again into a Church of far more Inward grace and holiness; into a
nation, of far more outward beauty, strength, and glory, then ever was their
portion since they first became a Church or nation, unto this day, either in
the one kind, or in the other. Now then I conceive, that the intent and scope,
of the Prophet Zachary, in the first part of his 13. Chapter, to the end of
ver. 6. was to encourage and raise the faint spirits of that small remnant of
his nation to whom he was sent by God with the message of this prophecy, by
representing unto them, how glorious a Church and nation God intended to make
of them and their posterity in time; and what a spirit, and rich anointing of
zeal and holiness, and knowledge and purity of Religion, should be found upon
them in that day; insomuch that no touch or tincture of Idolatry, no mixture
of error or false doctrine, should deface their beauty, or stain the
brightness of their glory: yea, and that their zeal toward God, his Law and
truth should be so exceeding fervent and strong, that it shall command and
subdue under it, all carnal, yea or natural affections, dispositions, and
desires, all other ends, purposes and intentions whatsoever.

By the way this interpretation does neither suppose or imply either that there
will be any son, or child, that shall then prophecy lies amongst them; or that
parents whether Fathers or mothers, should or would slay them, or thrust them
through, in case they did; but such expressions as these are figurative (as we
lately heard from Mr. Deodate, and our English Annotations upon the Bible)
taken from what was commanded against false Prophets, Deuteronomy. 13. that is, they
only note or express, such a degree, measure, or intensness of zeal to the
truth and purity of Religion, which God in his Law commanded to be expressed
by natural parents, against their children, and by others against persons in
nearest and dearest relation to them, in the case of seducement to Idolatry.
Now as the same degree, either of love, or hatred, does not necessarily import
a specificall indentitie or sameness of expression, but a generical only, viz.
by way of equipollencie, or equivalencie, yea and this only, when there is
occasion or opportunity: in like manner it is no ways necessary, that they who
are as zealous for the truth and Law of God, as those Parents were, who in
vindication thereof did lay violent hands upon their own natural children,
should act or express this their zeal, with the self same kind of expression
(I mean, should slay their children also) there being several other ways and
kinds of expression, by which the greatest zeal for the Truth and purity of
Religion whereof the nature of man is capable, may be proportionably declared
and expressed, upon occasion.

But for the interpretation of the place in hand, last mentioned and explained,
there are these reasons, abundantly sufficient (as I conceive) to carry it.

First, there is scarce any figure, or propriety of speech more frequent in the
Scripture, then to express a proper and particular sense by words importing
another sense equivalent to it. Thus God promises victories, and deliverances
to his people, by saying, (Psalm. 68. 22.) I will bring again from Bashan; I
will bring my people again from the depths of the Sea; meaning, that, as he had
delivered their fore fathers from Og, king of Bashan, and given them victory in
battle against him; and had brought them out of the Red sea, so delivering
them from Pharaoh, who pursued them; so he would for the future deliver them
from other their enemies, and give them victory and success against them.
Sensus est: sicut majores vestros liberavi ab Ogo, cisque victorian contra
illum dedi: item sicut eos eduxi, e mari rubro, eosque liberavi a persequente
Pharaone, eisque victoriam contra illum dedi: ita etiam in posterum vos
liberabo ab inimicis vestris, victoriamq: vobis contra illos dabo. Piscator in
Psalm. 68. 23.
Thus he threateneth them with bondage and captivity, by telling them, that
they shall return to Egypt (Hos. 8. 13.) Now will he remember their iniquity
(says the Prophet) and visit their sins: they shall return to Egypt. In this
figure, or phrase of speech (to forbear further instances) the Apostle Paul
affirms, that, if any provide not for his own, especially for those of his
own house, he has denied the faith: 1 Timothy 5. 8.
his meaning is not, that by such a neglective and ungracious course, he does
properly, or formally deny, or disclaim Christian Religion; but, that he does
that, which is tantamont, or equivalent to such a denial, in respect of the
prejudice which is thereby like to accrue unto Religion.

Secondly, it is a common observation among Writers, that the holy Ghost takes
a delight to make the New Testament and the Old, as it were inter-commoners in
language, and phrase of speech; i. to express matters proper to the one, by
words and phrases, which in propriety and strictness of sense, signify things
appropriate to the other. Quibus si quis explicationis uberioris gratia, id
quoque velit subjicere, quod Propheta de tempore Novi Testamenti loquens ad
populum sub veteri, accommodet se ad eorum captum loquendi formulis, et tum
notis utens quidem, sed long aliter intelligens, respiciat ad legem
Ceremonialem, quae extat, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. non improbabiliter hoc fieri posse
colligimus. (...) in Zach. 13. 3.
Thus Malachi, prophesying of the worship of God under the New Testament,
expresses it thus: My name shall be great among the Gentiles, and incense
shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering, Mal. 1. 11. And after, cap.
3. 3. he prophecieth of the ministers of the Gospel, under the names of, the
sons of Levi: And cap. 4. 5. of John Baptist under the Name of Elijah the
Prophet. But as none of these expressions, are in their literal, proper and
Grammatical significations appliable to the times of the New Testament; no
neither is it necessary, no nor so much as probable in the least degree, that
the Old Testament, or Lawphrase of Parents thrusting thorough their children
for prophesying lies, wherein our prophet expresses and foresheweth the great
zeal for Truth and purity of Religion which should be found in men, under the
Gospel, should be understood in the letter, or in the formal sense or
signification of the words.

Thirdly, the context it self, and the series thereof, plainly show, that the
passage and prophecy in hand particularly relates to these times specified,
viz. wherein the receiving again of the Jewish Nation by God, shall be as life
from the dead, Romans 11. 15.
unto the world, and their Church and State restored to seven times more then
their ancient beauty and glory. For ver. 10. 11. and 12. of the preceding
Chapter, the Prophet clearly describes that great and general conversion of
this people unto to God, partly by the causes or means of it, partly by the
consequents or effects of it. And I will pour upon the house of David, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications, and they
shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one
mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is
in bitterness for his firstborn. In that day there shall be a great mourning
in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. And the
land shall mourn, every family apart, the family of the house of David apart,
and their wives apart: the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives
apart: the family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart: the family
of Shimei apart, and their wives apart. And all the families that remain, (viz.
all besides these) every family apart, and their wives apart. First, evident it
is, that the tenor of the things here spoken, carries the scope and intent of
the passage directly upon the nation and people of the Jews, and does not
suffer it to be understood of any other. This needs no other proof; except
(happily) a second and more serious perusal of the words. Secondly, as evident
it is, that it relates, not to a remnant, or lesser part, but to the
generality, or body of this Nation. And the land shall mourn (says the
Prophet) every family apart, etc. (And again: And all the families that remain,
etc. Thirdly, and lastly, the expression, and they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, plainly implies, that this Nation shall see and behold Christ,
viz. when upon their Repentance (implied, by the spirit of grace, and
supplications poured out upon them) he shall appear or come unto them, to raise
up the tabernacle of David, which had been a long time fallen, and to build
them up, both Church and State, in excellency of beauty, strength and glory;
according to the express tenor of that grand motive, by which Peter inviteth
them to Repentance, Act. 3. 19, 20. 21. Repent ye therefore, and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out [(...)]. i. not, when, as our Translation
has it) but, that, or to the intent that, times of refreshing may come (not,
shall come, as our English Translation again mis-readeth it) from the [face,
or] presence of the Lord. And that he may [not, and he shall, as our English
yet again mis-translateth, (...)] send Jesus Christ, which before was preached
unto you, whom the heavens must receive, until the times of restitution of all
things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the
world began. So that the Repentance and conversion of this people unto God,
when, or how soon soever it shall take place, shall be immediately, or soon
after, rewarded by him, with the sending of his Son Jesus Christ, their long
expected Messiah unto them, It is the opinion of some of the Rabbis, that
their Messiah was indeed born (according to the Scriptures) before the
destruction of the second Temple: and withal, that for their sins, he hides
himself for a time in the Sea, and other desert places, until they be worthy
of his coming Rab. ^osue. Ben. Levi. in Taim. Tract. Sanedr cap. Helec. And the
Jews have a proverbiall saying amongst them: that the days of Hezebias have
swallowed up the days of the Messiah.
(...), i. (as the word properly imports) to restore, or, re-constitute all
things, [viz. in their Church and State] as they were before, yet not formally,
but eminently, and with abundance of superadded glory. Upon this sight, or
beholding of him (viz, as coming or come unto them with this abundance of
grace, and love, and mercy, who had for so many ages together so injuriously
and despitefully entreated him) shall ensue and follow, that most solemn,
affectionate and unparalled mourning, viz for their strange, inveterate, and
long continued unkindness, and hatred toward him, which our Prophet describes,
in the latter end of the transcribed passage (which also is elsewhere
foreshewed in Scripture upon the same occasion) Revel. 1. 7. Mat. 24 30.
Now having thus foretold the general conversion of this Nation unto God,
toward the end of cap. 12. he goes on in the beginning of this chapter, and
declares, how happy, holy, and glorious the State and condition of this Church
shall be, upon, and after this their conversion; and amongst other spiritual
privileges, wherewith it should be invested, enriched, and adorned (mentioned,
ver. 1. and 2.) he shows that the zeal of this Church, and people, for the
truth and purity of Religion, shall be signal, eminent, so as to reign over
all inferior ends, counsels, inclinations, and desires in men; yea over all,
even the nearest and dearest natural relations themselves, which are the
hardest to be commanded, or brought into subjection.

Fourthly, It no where appears, either by the Scriptures, or by any History
of credit, nor is it in it self a thing any ways probable, or worthy belief,
that ever the nation of the Jews (I mean, the main body, or generality of them)
were ever so zealously affected to the truth and purity of Religion, since the
time when this Prophecy was uttered, as the tenor and import hereof seems to
bear and require. Nay, since the promulgation of the Gospel in the world (which
is the time contested for by many, as wherein the said Prophecy, was to take
place and be fulfilled) the generality of this Nation has been so far from any
zeal for the Truth, that they have been as violent and desperate opposers of
it, as any other Nation, or generation of men in the world. Therefore
(doubtless) the days appointed for the accomplishment of the Prophecy in hand,
are not yet come.

Fifthly, Several other of the Prophets of God are wont in their writings, upon
the like occasion, viz. for the encouragement of the Church and People of God
in their days being under any affliction or discouragement, yea, and otherwise,
to re-minde them of the said Jubilean times, which God has in store amongst
his treasures, for them and their posterities, and will bring forth and give
into their bosoms in his appointed season. See Esa. 11. and 35. Chapters
throughout. And again, Isa. 65. 17, 18. and to the end. And yet again, Isa. 66.
20. to the end. See also Jer. 31. 31, 32. and to the end of the Chapter. Other
places of like import, as very obvious, and frequent both in these and other
Prophets: Yea, I conceive, that there is scarce any one of all the Prophets,
(if any) but in some place or other, casts an eye (at least) upon those times
and days we speak of, though in some of them it be hard to discern where. The
ground of my conception in this, is, that of Peter formerly touched, where
speaking of the times of a Restitution of all things [to the Jewish nation, as
was said] he adds which God has spoken of by the mouth of all his Prophets,
since the world began.

Sixthly and lastly, it seems by a brief touch which I find in Grotius
Commentaries upon the Scripture in debate, that the Exposition last propounded
and hitherto argued for, was indeed the sense of the ancient Rabbis, and Jews
themselves, how weak and inconsiderable soever it seems unto this Author: For
having delivered his own sense upon the words, as was formerly represented, he
closes thus, Haec et alia quaedam stulte Rabbini referunt ad tempus post
Resurrectionem. 1. These and some other things the Rabbis fondly refer and
apply to the time after the Resurrection. What they may further mean by the
Resurrection, I am not able to say: but doubtless they include herein, or
presuppose that happy and blessed estate of their nation, which Peter calls (as
we have heard) (...), the restitution of all things, and which has been their
earnest and constant expectation for many generations, and is not let fall by
them to this day.

By that which has been taken into consideration in this discourse, to
discover the mind of God in the Scripture first proposed, it fully appears,
that there is but a very slender appearance in it of any ground, (if any at
all) whereon to build the lawfulness of any compulsory proceedings by way of
civil penalty, whether death, or other, against Persons deemed erroneous, in
these times of the Gospel. This trumpet gives no distinct sound at all to
prepare any man to that battle. But when men delight in war, the whistling of
the wind will serve for a signal, It is the observation of an English Divine,
that the Papists, where ever they meet with the word, fire, in the Scriptures,
they find a proof for purgatory, A deceived heart (says the Prophet Esaias,
concerning the Idolater) has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his
soul: Isa. 44. 20.
When men please themselves, and gratify their affections with the belief of
any conclusion, before they have seriously and impartially debated the truth of
it: the shadows of the mountains will seem men unto them, for the guard and
support of it: and on the contrary, the strongest men will seem but as the
shadows of mountains unto them, for the eviction and dethroning of it.

FINIS.

