AN ALARM To all Priests, Judges, Magistrates, Soldiers, and all People;
Inviting Them to Repentance and Amendment of Life: For the great Day of the
LORD is near at Hand

Blow ye the Trumpet in Sion, and sound an Alarm in my holy Mountain: let all
the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord comes: for it is
nigh at hand.

Lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show Judah her transgressions, and
Israel her sins.

The substance of most of this Discourse was by several Revelations from the
Spirit of the Lord, given unto the Author to be proclaimed: who is known unto
many, by the Name of Daniel Gotherson.

Wherein Tho. Danson, a Priest in Sandwich, is proved a Deceiver of SOULS.

LONDON: Printed by James Cottrel, dwelling on Addle-hill.

To the honest-hearted understanding READER, who reads without Prejudice.
READER,
LEt thy Heart be fixed upon the Lord, and the Arm of his almighty strength, in
the supporting thee, and teaching thee: for it is Christ that opens the
Understanding to understand the Scriptures; and the great Mystery of Salvation
lies treasured up in Christ. And if thou without prejudice, in the cool of the
day, do search and commune with thy own Heart, and be still, thou may find
the true Bread that came down from Heaven, that whosoever eats thereof, shall
never dye: and thou shall plainly see all Deceivers unmasked, and their Deceit
plainly and nakedly laid open, with all Antichristian Practices used to this
day; and their Mystery of Iniquity unfolded unto all those that are not
wilfully blind, and desire to stupifie their senses.

But if thou will search in thy heart, in meekness, for the Light Christ, thou
shall find Eyesalve, the Balm of Gilead, the Blood of Christ that will cleanse
thee from all sin: for it will, by thy Obedience, bring thee to Mount Sion, the
City of the living God, the Mount that cannot be touched: for it is a spiritual
Life that must be witnessed: And Christ plainly shows, that the Father
seeks such to worship him, as worship him in the Spirit and in Truth.

And therefore lend thy Heart, nay, give it up into God, that thou, in thy own
Vessel, may have the Bread of Life: for it must be the Oil in a Man's own
Lamp, that must convey him into the Bridegrooms Chamber, to receive that
Blessing: Come you blessed of my Father, says Christ, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you* Enter, thou good Servant, into the joy of thy Lord: He is
that great Prophet that Moses spoke of, that whosoever would not hear, should
be cut off from amongst the people; who is JESUS, that saves his people from
their sins: Whose great day of power has appeared unto many, and is appearing
unto all, and does pull down their pride: for, The loftiness of men must be
brought low, and their haughtiness must be humbled: for Christ teaches all His
to be meek and lowly, that they may find Rest unto their Souls: for, Blessed
are the meek; they shall inherit the earth: And by hiding the Word Christ in
thy heart, thou shall be kept, as David was, from sinning against God: for
those that hear the Voice of Christ, and desire to be taught by Him, as the
truth is in Jesus, they shall be guided by him to do the will of God in every
thing, and be led by the Spirit of God, to do as they would be done unto; and
to walk in all things as Christ has walked: for they shall be filled with the
Spirit of Righteousness, that fills all in all: and they shall not need that
any man shall teach them, but as the Anointing which dwells in them, teaches
them all things: for they shall know their true Teacher. Know you not that
Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates? And so being taught by Christ, they
shall taste of his fullness, and the Arm of his strength they shall all witness;
that will make them walk from strength to strength, and Grace shall make them
see God in Sion: for Holiness becomes the House of the Lord for ever: And by
leading holy Lives, they find their works to be wrought in God, and themselves
Branches springing from that Vine Christ; and they come in by that true Door,
and they follow Christ's Voice: for he is their Shepherd, and he leads them
into pleasant Pastures, where their Souls are refreshed with that which is
sweeter then the Honey, and the Honeycomb, and is better then thousands of
Gold and Silver: for it is the enjoyment of the Lord, which is better then Life.

And therefore as thou tenderest thy salvation, be like the wise man that
foresaw the evil, and made his hiding place in his God: for assure your selves,
High and Low, Rich and Poor, Learned and Unlearned, Priests and People, the
great day of the Lords Wrath is near at Hand, wherein the stout Ones of the
earth shall tremble: for all their words and works must come to judgment; and
none but those that have truth in the inward parts, shall stand before him: it
is the unspotted Life, the undefiled in their way, the pure in heart, will see
him with comfort: the clean heart is a fit Temple for the holy Ghost to dwell
in: and those that have part in the first Resurrection, from the Death of Sin
to the Life of Grace; over such the second Death has no power.

This Treatise is for your instruction, to bring you to a sight of all that is
past, and present, and to come. And therefore seriously read without prejudice:
For it is the Advice of Him that thirsts after the salvation of all men, that
they may come to the knowledge of the Truth, that they may be saved: For every
one that shall find a Benefit by Christ, are such as have part in Him; such as
are baptized into Him; and such are baptized into His Death; and they are new
creatures, and old things are passed away; all things are become new: For in
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision; but a
new Creature: And where the new Creature is, there is the Unity of the Spirit
witnessed to be kept in the Bond of Peace.

The 22 of the 10. Month, commonly called by the heathens, December, 1659. I am
a true Lover of all whose Desires are after the living GOD, who am called
Daniel Gotherson.

A PREPARATIVE To the Ensuing Epistles.
1.
DEspise not Prophecy: 1 Th 5
Try all things; firmly hold
That that is sound and pure:
The rest thou may be bold,
As vanity and lewd
Illusion for to hate.
But if thou judge too soon,
Thou will repent too late.
Be well assured it is good,
Before thou do approve;
Be well assured it is naught,
Before thou dare reprove.
Mean while I wish thee do
As Abrams servant did;
As Paul in Macedon,
To preach when Christ him bid.
As the Beraeans, whose
Nobility is praised
By Gods own holy pen:
These men their courage raised,
And utmost industry,
To find the certainty,
When doubtful novelty
They heard or did epsy.
2.
BEfore or rash receive,
Or rash reject they durst;
First if his Doctrine swerve,
Detest him as accursed. Deuteronomy. 13.

But if of heresy
Thou can not him detect,
Stay till thou see the truth Chap. 18.

Made plain by the effect.
It is a wickedness
To which men are not slow,
In rage to cast away 2 Pet. 2.

That which they do not know.
so Joseph's brethren did
His Dreams as Dreams deride;
But them their reverend King,
Up in his bosom laid.
And though he thought them strange,
Durst not yet vilipend;
But humbly did observe,
Until he saw the end.
So Moses brethren durst
His zealous loving fact,
Reprove as deed accursed,
And as Usurpers act.
3.
THough Moses knew that God
Had sent him to that end;
And hoped his brethren would
This secret understand.
Eldad and Medad, when
In The Camp they prophecy,
Even Joshua is rash
To blame them foolishly.
But Moses tells him plain,
Not zeal does him inflame,
But envy and disdain;
And would God would his name
Not in these two alone
In this sort glorify;
But in all Jacobs seed.
When Gideon did destroy,
In his heroic rage,
The Altar which the Jews
To Baal had set up;
Oh how this people spews
Dire wrath, and fell despite!
But Joash bold replies,
Will ye for Idols fight?
That dares this morning dies.
4.
WHen Saul from that he was,
Was suddenly transum'd,
And with the Prophets did
As now he was indu'd:
Some spoke of this amiss,
But some were better skilled,
And said, they cannot choose,
Which with God's Spirit are filled.
VVilt thou the winds forbid
To blow where they are sent?
Shall sacred Prophesies
In Schools or Cells be pent?
When David offered
His service to his King,
What a loud peal did then
His eldest brother ring?
As if God might not send,
When, whom he thinks best,
And as to him seems good,
To relieve a State distressed.
As if God might not set
On Shepherds head the Crown,
When they themselves forget,
That must be tumbled down.
5.
BUt let Eliab storm,
Let Saul himself run mad,
Let him and all his crew
Conspire against the Lad:
Prince Jonathan is wise,
And for his brother glad;
And for his thankless King;
Religiously is sad.
Michal shall be his friend,
And so shall all the best;
And above all his choice,
What cares he for the rest?
What weighs he Nabals scorn?
The Ziphims treachery?
Abner his skill in war?
Dog Doegs villainies?
When Jeroboams King
A Prophet reprehended:
His Majesty incensed
Bid him be apprehended.
For this his hand he lost,
Until he su'd for grace.
Kings, 'twill be to your cost,
If Prophets you disgrace.
6.
DId not King Ahab so,
And with him that abused
His Prince with tales, and false,
Micaiah just accused?
The Bethelites profane,
That taught (as we to swear)
Their Boys and Gyrls to mock
Him that had power to tear,
And with a word destroy
Their lives, did in one day
Four hundred children loose,
Naaman went away
From Elisha his gate,
With scorn and rage fulfilled,
Because (so wise men are,
Learned and deeply skilled
In their own judgments blind,)
The word which him was sent
Did not his prouder thoughts
And high conceits content,
But though his footing slid,
His servants were more wise;
And boldly faithful did
Their foolish Lord advise.
7.
IF Lords or Kings misdeem
You that on them attend,
Be not base flattering Parasites,
But your best counsels lend.
Do not your selves and them,
Fond Parasites, for fear,
Fearless down headlong cast
In Pits of deeper care:
Yet, if you be but stout,
To speak as you believe,
You may your froward Lord
His leprosy relieve.
Or if he needs must wend
After his own advise,
You have done nobly yet,
And as became the wise.
When Elisha again
In a sad time of want,
Did promise by next day
Bread should be nothing scant;
This cannot be, quoth he,
That thought God could not do
That which he could not see
Was possible. And so,
8.
IF men these Prophecies
Judge as to sense they seem,
How can they feasibly
Such uncouth wonders deem?
But learn of that proud lord
Your judgments to submit:
For God is wise, and strong
To do all he thinks fit.
If in his name then hear
You shall things difficult,
Do not with flesh and blood
Too suddenly consult.
You may as did this Prince,
His life who therefore lost,
False sentence over-soon
Pronounce unto your cost.
Do not with Jehu's friends,
If in your sight appear
(As will) a Prophet, ask,
What makes this madman here?
Alas! can you straight know
What God in heaven has meant?
Can you sans trial know
Who is not surely sent?
9.
LEt us this Jeremie
How to supplant devise,
(Said the rash Jews) for sure
All that he tells are lies:
Is no man wise but he?
Is all the learning his?
Are there no Prophets more?
Do all else go amiss?
Poor men! thus they must do,
That must themseves destroy.
Sad Jeremiah they will force
Against their pride to pray:
I would their good, my God,
But they reward me ill:
Let famine and the sword
Them and their Infants kill.
As much did Pashur gain,
The chief of Clergymen,
A sect which always has
Before all other been
In mischievous designs,
And spightful machinations:
Be wise therefore you droans,
And shun these consultations.
10.
IF your Arch-Priests will needs
Like Antichrists resist,
Bid them alone for you
Malicious blind persist.
He that these Priests huge fame,
And their foul friends found out,
Has ever been the same,
And will still (do not doubt.)
They shall be terrified,
That terrible now seem:
Magor-Missabib is
This bul-beggers new names.
Poor wretches, I do not
Your pride at all envy!
I do not, but lament
And moan your misery;
And of these surly sect
Which with Hilchias child,
At hand I do foresee,
Repentance be your shield.
When Jeremie again,
By dreaful comminations,
His people would restrain
With hideous exclamations,
11.
(THe Priests they being chief)
Against him they conspire:
Treason must be his crime,
Destruction must be his hire.
For if you mark it well,
Priests they this use have got,
Reprove the state of sin,
And death must be thy lot,
If these blood-thirsty hounds
Be suffered to prevail:
But Magistrates are wise,
Though cater-caps can rail,
And carry after them
Sometimes with glosing lies;
(As they Jehoiakim)
The King (God opened his eyes)
Yet you that fear the Lord,
And in his Son believe;
Do not too soon consent,
But boldly wise relieve:
And namely Shaphans child,
Such is thy prudence rare;
So art thou just and mild,
And for our weal take care.
12.
ALthough Jehoiakim
Would not with reverence hear
The Book of Jeremie,
But scornfully did it tear,
And in the fire consume
Unto his greater hurt,
And of his royal race;
Yet some men had the heart,
Which next him were the first,
And sat in highest place,
The Prophet and his words
To heed, and to embrace.
They tremble as they hear,
And amongst themselves confer,
What course is best to take
These judgments to aufer.
In Zedechiah's days,
Again this holy wight,
For telling them the truth,
Of treason he is indight.
But though his own are blind,
A Pagan does believe:
Moors more then Jews are kind,
(Oh shame!) and dare relieve,
13.
WHom they dare persecute,
And do the King exhort
He credit not too soon
Malicious fond report.
When Amos in the court
Gods judgments did denounce;
The Prince of Prelates then
Him traitor does pronounce;
And the fond King incense:
But what was his reward?
Priests, you the story read,
And awfully regard:
Thy wife, said Amos then,
Proud Priest, shall play the whore;
Thy Sons and Daughters all
The sword shall soon devour:
Thy place thy eyes shall see
Thy enemies possess;
And in a foreign land
Thy self die in distress.
Frown, mow, grin, grind thy teeth,
Swell, break, for all thy mood,
The word I speak is truth,
And cannot be withstood.
14.
OUr Lord himself his own
Would not receive nor love,
Chiefly the chief amongst you
His words and works reprove.
Because the ways of God
They measure by their wits,
They Are scandalized and fall,
And still lies in the Pit.
Oh learn by their extremes
And lasting miseries,
What it is for to refuse
The profer'd verities.
What it is rashly to judge,
Resist, and presecute
Things that distaste, before
Thou know how to confute.
As after his ascent,
When he his promise paid,
Many both mocked, and railed,
And of the Apostles said,
For they did prophecy,
And with new tongues could
They babbled idly,
Because their brains were weak. speak,
15.
BUt wise Gamaliel,
When others burst for spite,
And plotted to destroy
Gods Prophets if they might,
Sage counsel freely gave:
Princes, beseech you hear;
Be well advised, take heed,
Too sudden wrath forbear.
As Theudas lying knave,
Judas the counterfeit,
Although a while they seemed
Great credit for to get,
Yet quickly came to naught:
So if these men you see,
Not true Apostles, but
Impostors crafty be;
Believe it, they will soon
Such as they are appear:
But if they be of God,
God will his servants clear;
And we that dare resist
Not men but Heavens King,
Shall wish that we had wist,
And late repent this thing.
16.
IF therefore thou be'st wise,
Reader, thy spirit suspect,
When thou perceiv'st it tempt
Thee rashly to reject
That which thou now have read,
Or shall within a while:
Do not with high conceit
Thy weaker wits beguile.
Though Doctors dote as yet,
And this false doctrine teach,
That Prophets now no more.
Of future things shall preach,
Nor miracles be seen;
Do not their dreams receive.
Blind guides, their silly selves
And others they deceive.
And if thou say as they,
Then hear this prophecy;
Thy eye before thou die,
Shall give thy tongue the lie.
Who shall the Jews convert?
Who shall restore our peace?
Who shall the Pope subvert?
And Mahomet make cease?
16.
DId not Elias need
When 'twixt Jehove and Baal

The doubtful Jews did half?
Did not Elias call
Men from their crooked ways,
And for the Lord prepare;
Before himself appeared
His Gospel to declare?
And do thou hope that now,
These schisms at all shall cease;
And the round world with light,
As the full Moon increase,
Without Elias aid?
Or art thou so purblind,
As nor in Malachie,
Nor in Esaias to find,
That as the Baptist did
Walk in Elias might;
When this Messiah came
A miserable wight:
So much more now before
We see his glorious day,
His usher shall prepare
Before his face the way?
18.
NOr do thou curious scan
From whence he does appear,
Nor what his person is:
For then I can but fear,
Thou some offense wilt take,
As men were wont of old,
When in Gods secrets they
To pry were over-bold.
God does send whom he list;
The reason none can tell,
But only God himself.
For this you must all know,
Christ's merits are the thing
Which all must fly unto
Even for salvation.
God did appoint him for
Salvation unto all
That in the light believe.
Which light is Christ alone,
Who has enlightened every one,
Which in the world has been,
Or shall be to the end.
The Lord he did also
David and Solomon call,
And his Apostles twelve,
His Prophets every one.
No man deserves this place,
No man is competent,
Let God do what he will,
Let this thy mind content.
19.
PRaise God that he has found
One whom employ he will,
More for thy good then goods,
To save thy soul from ill,
Danger, fear, care, and grief;
All for thy comfort, and
Thy heavy hearts relief.
Who if thou knew the soul
Of those whom God has called,
As Israel in Egypt,
I know thou art much appalled:
Do mourn, complain and cry,
That God as he of old,
Will now again provide
The sorrows that unfold
Thee, and his woeful spouse.
How quickly to relieve,
The means then glad embrace!
The choice thee let not grieve;
Thy wisdom in this case,
Is thankful modesty;
Say unto God thy grace
Without an envious eye.
20.
THe poor, the mean, the rude,
The vile God often does call;
And place in highest room,
That he the Lord of all,
Of all may be confessed,
His counsels be adored,
Rather then vainly scanned,
His name with hymns decor'd;
And all flesh put to shame.
David and Saul were poor;
Moses a man unfit,
Amos a country-boor,
The chief of Prophets all,
And of all Kings the head,
A Carpenters Son some so called:
The Apostles carn'd their bread:
The most were idiots called:
Paul was a wicked man:
Matthew himself records
A hated Publican.
Even Nathaniel said,
From Nazareth to hope
For good, I am afraid:
Yet Christ from thence did come,
Which brings salvation.
21.
THe word he brings, the works
That he shall do, respect:
All proud, and wicked ways
Far from thy thoughts reject.
Do thou believe?
Then lend thy helping hand:
Dare thou deny?
I dare thee then withstand.
Or art thou in doubt?
Then pray that thou may see:
Study within,
And then confer with me.
Egerton, Anno 1660. D. Gotherson.

FINIS.
The first Epistle:
To all people whose souls pants after God, as the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks.

ANd now also is the ax laid to the root of the tree: therefore every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. I is to
the circumcised in heart, that comes or springs from all the twelve Tribes,
that Jesus Christ is lovely, the choicest of ten thousand; for whom they part
with all, to purchase that pearl that is of so great worth, that the heart
cannot conceive, nor the tongue express, nor the eye see that is mortal; being
that Stone with the new name written in it, that no man knows but he that
has it; and is not discernable with any but they that are born again, that can
witness they are become little children, for only to such belongs the
kingdom, and to none other. Now the soul being of so great worth, that Christ
said, What will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to loose his soul?
or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? by which it appears, that
there is none but Christ the promised seed can redeem man from death, nor offer
unto God a ransom for him: and as the tree falls, so it lies, and there is
no repentance in the grave whither thou go: and every word and work must be
brought to judgment, with every secret thing; and God is no respecter of
persons, for he cannot behold transgression in Jacob, nor sin in Israel; and if
David a man after his own heart sins, he must go with broken bones to his
grave for it: and seeing all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God,
it is the one thing necessary for every man and woman seriously to consider,
and wait in seeking the Lord, that he may be manifested unto every ones
particular: and this is to be sought for, to know him that takes away sin,
even the sins of the world: for as in Adam all died, so in Christ shall all be
made alive: and Christ has lightened every man that comes into the world: and
Christ the hope of glory is in every one; and know ye not that Christ is in
you, unless you be reprobates? now the man Christ Jesus, the great Prophet,
declared in general terms what should be in latter times, leaving it to every
son and daughter to declare their particular experiences when the Spirit does
rise up in them, and manisest himself unto them: for they that believe (says
he) out of their bellies shall flow rivers (or plentiful discoveries) of the
water of life. Therefore as Moses gave way to Christ; for when Christ appeared
in flesh, Moses Administration began to be silent, and drew back, and set Jesus
Christ in the Chair, to be the great Prophet that should be the Teacher in
Types after him; and the Ministration of these discoveries were to reign in the
world their appointed times: Even so the Lamb Christ Jesus, or that single
body, gives way to the Holy Ghost, or spreading Spirit, Joh. 16. 7. Joh. 17.
21. If I go not away, the Comforter cannot come to you: for he that dwells
bodily in me, is to spread himself in you; that as the Father in me, and I in
him, are one; even so I in you and you in me, may become one with the Father.
And the Testimony of the Apostles declares as much, 2 Cor. 5. 16. Col. 1. 27.

Though we have know Christ after the flesh, (in one single body) yet now
henceforth know we him no more so, but we look after that mystery which has
been kept secret from ages and generations past, which is Christ in you the
hope of glory: and therefore I must tell you that yet live in dipping in water,
and observation of Gospel Ordinances as ye call them, forms and types, you live
yet under the ministration of Jesus Christ after the flesh, declaring the Lamb
Christ to remain as yet in one single person: but know you, that as the
ministration of Moses gave way to this; so this ministration is to give way to
the inward teachings of Christ, and the spreading of the Spirit in sons and
daughters, which will more excellently declare the glory of the mystery. The
man Christ Jesus told the woman of Samaria, Woman, the time is coming and now
is, that neither in Jerusalem nor in this mountain shall men worship the
Father; but they that worship him, shall worship him in spirit and in truth,
for the Father seeks such to worship him: by these words as also, Luke 17. 21.
Joh. 4. 45. the son of man declares that both outward forms, customs, and types
of Moses worship under that ministration at Jerusalem, likewise all forms, and
customs, and types of this ministration of himself, as the Lamb held forth at a
distance to be our Mediator, should all cease, and give way to the spiritual
worship of the Father in the latter days, or to the spreading of the Divine
power in men; the one Law of righteousness being the Teacher of all: so that
upon the rising up of Christ in sons and daughters, which is his second coming,
the ministration of Christ in one single person is to be silent and draw back,
and set the spreading power of righteousness and wisdom in the chair, of whose
kingdom there shall be no end: so as all things were gone out from the Spirit,
and were gone astray, and corrupted: the Spirit in this great mystery of truth
being manifested in the flesh, burns up that dross out of the Creation, and
draws in all things again back into himself, and declares himself to be the
alone wisdom and power of righteousness, that rules, dwells, that governs and
preserves both in and over the whole Creation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 1 Cor. 5. 24. and
now the Son delivers up the Kingdom to God the Father; and he that is the
spreading power, not one single person, become all in all in every person, that
is the one King of righteousness in every one.

Here is plainly seen what the dividing of time is, which is the last period in
which the Beast is to reign: for now every ministration pleads his privilege
till the Law of righteousness drown up all in himself. Moses yet pleads
privilege in the practice of the Jews after the flesh: the Son of man, Christ
in one single person, pleads a privilege; and not only the true ministration
of the Son of man according to the Apostles declaration, but likewise many
false forms, customs and observations of worshipping are raised up through a
wrong understanding of those Scriptures; all pleads their privilege: and
lastly, the ministration of the Spirit, forsaking all forms and types,
worshipping the Father in the substance of truth, this now pleads his
privilege as his due right by course. So that you see here is the dividing of
time. But this last ministration is the sufferer for the present, as being
denied his right by the former, that ought to give way: and as the worshippers
in Moses ministration envied and killed those as worshipped the Son of man, the
Lamb and his worshippers; so now those that worship Christ at a distance, in
their several Congregations and Forms, and are most zealous therein, are in
these days the most bitterest enemies to the ministration of Christ in the
spirit and in truth. But when this ministration of the Spirit spreads himself,
he will make the greatest separation that ever was: for though Isreal's
separation out of Egypt amazed the World, and the separation of gathered
Congregations out of Parish Churches (so called) did trouble the earth, though
it is no more but going out of one form into another, and none into the unity
of the one Spirit: yet this ministration of the Spirit now rising up by right
of inheritance, will take peace from the World much more; for he has begun,
and he will go on to gather the scattered of Israel together out of all
Egyptian bondages and self-seeking oppressing Governments, and out of all forms
and customs of the Beast, to worship the Father in spirit in and truth, being
made to be all of one heart and one mind: and this shall more and more appear,
as the day approaches, which has already dawned.

Therefore let me tell you, that all your enmity will not uphold your forms;
your imprisoning, and reviling, and making Laws to suppress such as are
contrary to you, will never work your will, but pull miseries and shame upon
your selves, as the zealous Scribes and Pharisees did, in killing the just one
Christ the Son of man. Therefore be patient, look up to him for teaching, from
whom every good and perfect gift comes down, even the Father of lights, in
whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning, who stands at the door and
knocks; and if any man will open, he will come in and sup with him; and the
high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, delights to dwell in the
contrite ones, that he may give life unto them: for when the Law of
righteousness arises up, and makes himself more manifest, he will reconcile
all, and make every one to be of one heart and of one mind; and no other power
must be the restorer, but this King of righteousness and peace: for this is he
that makes men do as they would be done unto, and then envy and bitterness
dies: see Act. 4. 32. Isa. 60. 16. Now when this King, Jesus, Emanuel God with
us, arises up in sons and daughters, whereby the Scriptures are proved true
Prophesies, Promises, Visions, and Revelations; the Teachers of this World deny
the Testimony, crying out, Visions and revelations are ceased, because they
would have the people ever learning of them, and giving their money to them for
that which is not bread, and profits not: for they can teach no further then
they have learned; and they have learned no further then the declaration, which
the Scripture it self says is but a dead Letter: it is a mystery, and Christ
reveals it by his Spirit; and it is the Spirit that makes known the deep and
hidden things of God. Now when any receives power from on high, by believing
in him, and he makes such to eat the good of the Land, and they are forced to
bear their Testimony to witness unto others, as David did; he had not hid his
goodness within his breast, but showed even in the great Congregation what the
Lord had done for his soul: I say, When any thus moved speaks to the Priests
of our days, although Scripture warrants speaking one by one, as it is made
manifest to them by the Spirit, and the first is to hold his peace; yet they
presently cry out, A disturbance in their Steeple-house, and hale them to
prisons, where many times the just ones of the Lord Jehovah die in the outward
man by their hardships, as in Colchester Gaol, and other places in the Nation,
by the Priests means, who possess the people with conceits, and make them
believe their lies, that these people are self-conceited, and it is Error and
Blasphemy they hold: even just like those that when the Holy Ghost had filled
the Apostles and all those that were with them, they cried out and mocked,
saying, These men are filled with new wine; because they knew not the voice of
the Spirit: for the natural man knows not the things of God; they are
spiritually discerned.

Well, he is at hand, and is a working; for he that keeps Israel neither
slumbereth nor sleeps; and he will discover your shame, and make your
nakedness appear unto all men: for wickedness shall slay the wicked, though no
man's hands be upon him. The tender Lambs of Christ by the Wolves in sheeps
clothing are destroyed; but yet let the wolves know for their eternal woes,
that the Lambs are the blessed of the most high: for the King of righteousness
is in them, for they are the field wherein the treasure has lain hid all the
dark and cloudy days of the Beasts Reign, which is now almost expired: they are
Zion whom no man regards, out of whom Salvation comes: for Jacob is in them,
who has been long a servant to Esau, and now is set free, and he will glorify
himself both in them and for them, to the shame of all wolfish Esaus that are
of a destroying nature: and the whole earth shall be filled by these with the
knowledge of the Lord, of whose Dominion and Power there shall be no end: for
the consolation of Israel does draw near to be made manifest to every ones
particular; therefore let all wait with patience for it, on him that is
almighty, able to save: for Jesus is able to save to the utmost all those that
come unto God by him; and for ever blessed are such, for the Lord is their
portion: for it is the Law and power of righteousness which made Abraham
forsake his Isaac, his dearest Relations according to the flesh, rather then to
refuse the way of his God; and by this he found peace: so that this King of
righteousness, and Prince of peace, that governed Abraham, and is called
blessed, the blessing of all Nations, for this shall save his people from their
sins: for he shall remove from the Curse, and restore his from the bondage they
groan under; for Abraham sprang from him, as a tree grows from a seed that
gave the tree its being: the Law of righteousness and peace ruling and dwelling
in any one, is the seed of Abraham; and the several branches of men and women
in whom that power rests, are children, and of the family of Abraham: for it
was not the man of the flesh that was called Abraham, but the Law of
righteousness, and truth, and peace, that did rule and govern in that body, he
was the Abraham: for it is clear, that before this righteous power was manifest
in it, it was Abram, as you may read Genesis 17. 1. And when Abram was ninety
years old and nine, the Lord appeared unto Abram, and said unto him, I am the
Almighty God: walk before me and be thou perfect, and I will make my Covenant
between thee and me: verse. 5. Neither shall thy name be called any more Abram,
but thy name shall be called Abraham: for a father of many Nations have I made
thee; And in Mat. 3. the Pharisees and Sadduces come to John's Baptism, as you
may see ver. 7. And he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who has warned
you to flee from the wrath to come? bring forth fruits meet for repentance: and
think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham for our father; for God is
able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. So it is plain, that
Jew or Gentile in whom the power of righteousness breaks forth and rules,
are the children of Abraham, Act. 10. 34. Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons; but in every nation he that fears him and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. For as the visible body of Christ was not
the anointing, but the Spirit in that body was the Christ, the spreading power
of righteousness, which was to fill the earth with himself; and his body but a
house or Temple for the present work, to redeem the lost man according to the
promise, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, as also to throw
down Moses Law; and became the substance of his Lambs, and Types, and
Sacrifice; for that body was the Lamb that did fulfill the righteous will, by
his voluntary and free will offering up of himself: therefore Christ is called
the spreading power, because he fills all with himself; and because this power
did appear first to Abraham as we read of, therefore is he called The father of
the faithful: for it was an everlasting Covenant that God made with him;
therefore every one that follows after him, and treads in his steps, being
willing and obedient, they shall eat the good of the land, and they shall be
called children of that seed of Abraham, which seed is the blessing of all
Nations, and is the restorer of all his from bondage: and although his just
ones many times lie under oppression and hardship by the seed of the flesh, and
they are despised ones by them; yet now the day is at hand, that their glory
shall arise: and the reason is, for the Almighty God is in them of a truth, and
he will lead their captivity captive, and set them down in peace: for they are
the City of the Lord, new Jerusalem, the place of his rest, which shall be the
praise of the whole earth: for the Almighty King of righteousness is their
Savior, and there is no other name under heaven whereby men can be saved, but
the name of Jesus; and verily I bear my Testimony from him, that he will be
exalted in this the great day of his power, for the Lord is a bringing mighty
things to pass in this the day of his appearance, and the hearts of his shall
fear: for, to him (says the Lord) will I look, that trembles at my word; and
therefore let all his redeemed ones wait patiently for the consolation of
Israel; for their King is coming, and he will fill the earth with his glory,
and turn ungodliness from Jacob: then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be
glad.

For without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest
in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory. And that his might
not be deceived, he says, In the latter times seducing spirits shall come, and
so cunningly carry themselves, that if possible the very elect should be
deceived: and Paul 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. shows some of the principles of
their deceit: and thus he says: Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to the seducing
spirits and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
consciences seared with a hot-iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of
them which believe and know the truth: for every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving; for it is
sanctified by the Word of God and prayer. And this Paul exhorts those that will
manifest themselves good Ministers of Jesus Christ, such who are nourished up
in the words of Faith and good Doctrine, that they should put the brethren in
mind of these things, and exercise themselves in godliness: by which it
appears, that Paul reckons such as are before spoken of, amongst Hymeneus and
Philetus, who concerning the truth have erred, saying, The Resurrection is past
already, and overthrow the faith of some; nevertheless, the Foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them that are His: and let
every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. So that it is
plain, that every act of evil is a fruit of old Adam, the flesh, which has
nothing but envy, lust, pride, drunkenness, malice, and all uncharitableness,
which the King of Righteousness, Christ Jesus, redeemeth his from, and also
makes his righteous, godly, full of faith, love, patience, meekness, being
without spot, unrebukable: for they are born again, not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and abides for ever;
which word is Christ in them the hope of glory: For Moses truly said unto the
Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren,
like unto me; Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.
So that it is plain, that the Lamb Christ Jesus, was the substance of Moses;
and where the substance is, shadows and Types does cease: and this method of
divine Discovery does finish the Mystery; for the Lord does take up all into
Himself, for he is in all, and acts through all; and all that power of
Righteousness that appears in any, is still but that power of the Lord which
he has promised to pour forth in the last days, as you may see in the second
of the Acts, verse. 17, 18. And it shall come to pass in the last days, says
God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and daughters
shall prophecy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream Dreams; and on my servants, and on my handmaids, will I pour out of my
Spirit in those days, and they shall prophecy. So that every Branch shall be
a Joint or Member of the Mystical Body, or several spreadings forth of the
Vine, being filled with that one Spirit, Christ the anointing, who fills all
with himself, and so becomes the alone King of Righteousness, that rules and
governes all his ransomed ones, Joh. 17. 23. I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one, that the world may know that thou have sent
me, and have loved them as thou have loved me: For I am the Lord, and beside me
there is no Savior. He is in every one of his little ones that are born again;
and how, is declared, Joh. 14. v. 15, 16, 17, 18. If you love me, keep my
commandments: and I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth, whom
the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: but ye
know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you: I will not leave you
comfortless; I will come to you. Yet a little while, and the world sees me no
more, but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also. At that day ye shall
know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. He that has my
commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me,
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto
him: if a man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him; and
we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. And Romans 8. 9. Now if any
man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; for as many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are Sons of God, verse. 14. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23. Paul speaking to them concerning their faith in the Lord Jesus, as
he had heard, and their love unto all Saints; he ceased not to give thanks for
them, making mention of them in his prayers; that the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto them the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him; the eyes of their understandings being
enlightened, that they may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding
greatness of his power, to usward, who believe, according to the working of his
mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and
set him at his own right hand, in the heavenly places, far above all
principalities, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come; and has put
all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church, which is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. Which
Mystery was made known to Paul by Revelation; and he expressly says, That this
Mystery in Christ was not made known unto the sons of men in other ages, as it
is now revealed unto his Apostles and Prophets, which is made known by the
Spirit; and that is, that the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same
Body, and partakers of his promise in Christ: and to this end, he prays for
them, that they may be strengthened in the inner man, by the riches of his
glory, with might, by his Spirit; that Christ may dwell in their hearts by
Faith, that they may be filled with all the fullness of God, and may grow up
into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ Jesus in them the hope
of glory, which cleanses all his from all filthiness, that they may perfect
holiness in his fear: for they that have learned Christ, and been taught by
him, as the Truth is in Jesus, they put off all uncleanness and lasciviousness,
they put off the old man, with his deeds, which is, lying, deceit, lust, evil
speaking; they must not be angry, neither give place to the devil, nor his
Temptations; against which they must keep a continual watch, that they may not
fall; they must let no rotten nor corrupt communication proceed out of their
mouths, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister
grace to the hearers; and all bitterness, wrath, anger, and evil speaking, and
clamor, must be put away, with all malice, drunkenness and fornication,
filthiness and foolish jesting. And that which makes manifest sin, is the
light in every one; for all things are reproved and made manifest by the light;
for whatsoever does make manifest, is light: and therefore awake thou that
sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light; and
wait on the Lord, to be filled with his Spirit; for we are members of his Body,
of his flesh, and of his bones; that you may be strong in the Lord, and the
power of his might, that putting on the whole Armor of God, they may be able to
stand against the wises of Satan; for they are not only to wrestle against
flesh and blood, but against principalities, and powers, against the Rulers of
the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses in high places; and
therefore they must have their loins girt about with truth, and having on the
breast plate of Righteousness, the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of
God, that enlightneth every one that comes into the world, Christ in you the
hope of glory: for they that are Christ's, crucify the flesh, with the
affections, and lusts: and he makes his walk as he has walked, to be holy as
he is holy, and pure as he is pure; to count all things but loss and dung, that
they may win Christ, for whom they suffer the loss of all things, that they may
know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable to his death, that they may attain unto the
Resurrection of the dead; forgetting those things that are behind, and
reaching after those things that are before, that they may attain unto
perfection; having their conversations in heaven, from whence they look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change their vile bodies, that they
may be fashioned according to his glorious body, according to that working
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself; and therefore they are
careful for nothing, but in every thing, by prayer, and thanksgiving, and
supplication, their Requests are made known unto God; and those things that are
true, just, pure, and of good report, peaceable, and lovely, bowels of
compassion, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, charity,
that whatsoever they do, in word or deed, they may and ought to do all in the
name of Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God the Father by him: and this is the
fruits the Saints are clothed with, which does demonstrate their new birth,
which gift is from above, from the Father of spirits, from whom they receive
power to become the sons of God, by believing in his Name. Behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch; and a
King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the
earth: In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and
this is his Name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS: For he
is that mighty King that shall be established upon the holy Hill of Sion; that
is, he shall be the only King, unto whom every man and woman must be subject;
for He shall Reign for ever and ever.

But here may an Objection arise: We see the power of darkness reigns in most
men and women, and they are guided by the god of this world, who rules in the
hearts of the children of disobedience; for the Mystery of Iniquity does work
in them, with all deceivableness in unrighteousness, in them that perish, to
whom the Lord sends strong delusions, that they should believe lies, that
they all might be damned, that would not receive the truth in the love of it,
but took pleasure (mark this) in unrighteousness; so it is sin is the cause of
all misery.

I answer, That all men by nature are children of wrath; but God, who is rich
in mercy, gives unto all a tender of grace, for he stands at the door, and
knocks; if any man open, he will come in, and sup with him. Now there is a
measure of the light of Christ in every one, which is given to profit withal:
and when he comes, he destroys sin, or takes away sin, for he came to
destroy the works of the devil; and he will consume and destroy all sin, by the
brightness of his power, for he is stronger then the strong man, that divides
the spoils, and takes from him whatsoever he trusts in. So that whatsoever
estate a son or daughter is in, it is still but Christ combating with his
Enemies, in that estate, drawing all into himself, and destroying all opposing
powers, that himself may remain to be the one alone Almighty power, spread
forth every where; and so doing the will of the Father, bruising the serpents
head in them that believe, that he alone who is the Divine, may grow up,
flourish and remain, and bring forth abundance of fruit in them, when their
created flesh is purged from bondage, and made subject unto him in all things;
for they that are in Christ, ought so to walk as Christ has walked, who did no
evil, neither was there guile found in his mouth; so that every one speaking
the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is their head,
even Christ, who is their Anointed; and he shall subdue all their enemies under
their feet, Psalm. 100. 1. and his people shall be willing in the day of his
power. And the new heaven and the new earth, mentioned Rev. 5. 13. wherein he
who is King of Righteousness does dwell and rule, and they that are his
redeemed ones, shall see him in all his creatures, and they shall all rejoice
in each other, and all their joy in him shall be full. This great Mystery,
Christ, is begun to appear, and Christ is arising, and drawing all his into
himself: and he that has part in the first Resurrection, over him the second
death shall have no power. For there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked;
there is no peace so long as deceit lodges in the heart: If I regard iniquity
in my heart, God will not hear me; there can be no quiet nor true peace in man,
till the Kingdom of Darkness be conquered, and the serpent be cast out, and all
his works; and then such a heart is made a fit Temple for the holy Ghost, to
dwell bodily in: for all Christ's enemies must to the fire, and when they are
burnt up, then he reigns in the soul; for unto us a Child is born, and unto us
a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name
shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of his Government and Peace, there
shall be no end: and those that wait or stay themselves on the Lord, he keeps
such in perfect Peace. For it is Righteousness that delivers from Death, even
death eternal; and therefore it concerns every man and woman to wait, that he
may feel that power of righteousness, the Lord subduing every lust in them,
bringing all into subjection that is contrary to him, that Christ alone may
Rule. Open the gates, and stand open ye everlasting doors, that the King of
glory may enter in, which is Jesus, who will cast out all sin, that he may
present his without spot unto the Father: for the Lord hates every hypocrite,
Isa. 9. 17. and Christ says, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites:
for wickedness burns as a fire, and through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is
the Land darkened, and the people shall be as fuel of the fire; no man shall
spare his brother, and all because of sin. And Tophet is prepared of old, even
for the king it is prepared; and the breath of the Lord, as a river of
brimstone, kindles it.

And therefore all you stout-hearted Magistrates that oppress and destroy his
holy ones in this the day of the Lords power, fear and tremble, for he is
coming to punish the stout heart of the King, and all that do wickedly under
him: and he pronounces woe unto all them that make or decree unrighteous
decrees, and that write grievousness, and subscribe it, to turn aside the needy
from judgment, and take away the right from the poor, that widows may be their
prey, and that they may rob the fatherless: What will you do in this the day of
the Lords visitation, which will bring desolation upon all oppressors? for
they shall be trodden down as dirt in the streets, Isa. 10. 6. And all those
that kill the Prophets, and stone the just ones that are sent unto them, to
turn them from the evil of their doings: Let them fear and tremble before him,
for fear he require at the hands of them the blood of all the Prophets slain
from the foundation of the World: for the wicked shall be turned into hell, and
all people that forget God: for the Lord is known by the judgments which he
executes, in snaring the wicked in the works of his own hands: for the Lord
will break in pieces all unjust oppressing Magistrates like a Potters vessel.

Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth; serve the
Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling; kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye
perish in the way; when his wrath shall suddenly burn, then blessed are all
they that trust in him. For nothing but truth in the inward parts can stand
before him, and therefore every one wait till this King Jesus, who is the Word,
and was in the beginning; and all things were made by him, and without him was
not any thing made that was made: for in him is life, and the life is the light
of men, which is the true light that lightneth every man that comes into the
world: and to all those that do receive this light, in the love of it, to them
he gives power to ^ecome the sons of God, even to such as believe on his Name,
which are born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, but of the will of
God. For it is plain, the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, Joh. 1.
14. the same was in the beginning with God, of whose fullness we have
received grace for grace.

Now say the people of this World, who lie in wickedness (for the whole
World lies in wickedness) this Light will delude you, it will deceive you.

Thou vain man, what can deceive Antichrist? what can deceive a Drunkard, a
Whoremonger, an unclean Swearer, Liar, Covetous man, who is an Idolater? are
not these led by the Prince of Darkness, that rules in the hearts of the
children of disobedience? Cannot all men see that they are in darkness? and can
the light of the World, Christ Jesus, can he delude them? these are plainly
lulled asleep by Satan in a carnal security, and cry peace, peace, until sudden
destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they
shall not escape it. Therefore let me advise such to wait and repent, if
possible, that this the sin of the thoughts of their hearts may be forgiven
them: for they are in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity. For I
bear my testimony from the everlasting Spirit of the Lord Jesus, that this
which has been declared, is the truth of God, and will become his power unto
Salvation unto every one that can lay hold upon him: for they shall put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness,
whose conversation is in heaven, from whence they look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change their vile bodies, that they may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the vvorking whereby he is
able to subdue all things unto himself: for Christ by his appearance with the
Spirit of his mouth, will burn up all the cursed seed of bondage, under which
his redeemed ones groan; and when that which is the Serpents seed is cast
forth, then the heart is a fit Temple for the Father himself to dwell in, a
garden wherein he will take delight: for the Lord will be alone exalted in
this the great day of his power, wherein Judah shall be saved, and Israel
shall dvvell safely: and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord
our Righteousness.

Now the Priests of this Generation delude the People, just like those spoken
of, Jer. 23. 14. I have seen in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing,
they commit adultery, and walk in lies; they strengthen the hands of evil
doers, that none does return out of his wickedness: for the Lord feeds them
with Wormwood, and gives them Gall to drink; for the Lord expressly says, They
shall not profit his people; for they speak a Divination of their own heart,
and not out of the mouth of the Lord; and they tell the people, if they walk
after the imaginations of their own hearts, no evil shall come upon them: I
have not sent these Prophets (says the Lord) yet they run; I have not spoken
to them, yet they prophesied: but if they had stood in my counsel, and had
caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their
evil way, and from the evil of their doings. Am I a God at hand, says the
Lord, and not a God afar off? can any hide himself in secret places, that I
shall not see him, says the Lord? do not I fill heaven and earth, says the
Lord? how long shall this be in the hearts of the Prophets that prophecy lies?
yea, they are Prophets of the deceit of their own hearts, which think to cause
my people to forget my Name, by the dreams which they tell every man to his
Neighbor, as their fathers have forgotten my Name for Baal. Therefore am I
against the Prophets, says the Lord, that steal my word every one from his
Neighbor, therefore they shall not profit this people at all, says the Lord.

Now let the Priests be tried, do they know the voice of the Lord? do they not
deny, and say, Revelation is ceased, and teach men cannot be freed from sin
while they live, and teach people to die in their sin? and what will become of
them then? for as the Tree falls, so it lies; and there is no repentance in
the grave. Well, look to it, woes will be your portion, Jer. 23. 40. The Lord
will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall
not be forgotten. And therefore let me seriously desire every one to wait
patiently upon the Lord, and to turn in to the light of their minds, that
checketh for sin and evil: for this is the true Teacher: for that which gives
power over one sin, will give power over all sin, if the watch be carefully
kept; and strength from on high will be manifested to give power against all
sin, if the mind be turned to the Lord, who will seek that which was lost, and
bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken,
and they shall be safe: And thus shall they know that I the Lord their God am
with them, and that they are my people, says the Lord God: for they know the
Word of the Lord for ever settled in heaven, and they make my Law their
delight, and will never forget my Precepts, but will meditate on my Law day and
night: for Christ saves his from their sins. He it is that comes out of Sion,
to turn ungodliness from Jacob: and the time shall come, that the Kingdoms of
this world shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord Christ, and he will lead the
captivity captive, and let the Prisoners of hope go free; now they that hunger
and thirst after Righteousness, shall be filled; and the poor receive the
Gospel daily: Christ is drawing all men after him; he is calling in the Isles
and Nations of the world, to come to this great Battle: and blessed for ever
are all those that fights under him, and are his soldiers. I give thee
thanks, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hidden these
things from the wise and learned, and have revealed them unto Babes; for such
have the anointing from the Anointed, as you may see in 1 John 2. 27. But that
anointing which you received of him, dwells in you; and you need not that any
man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things; and it is
true, and is not lying, and as it taught you, ye shall abide in him: and now
little children abide in him, if ye know that he is righteous, know ye that he
that does righteousness is born of him: For he that finds rest and peace in
this precious wisdom and power of the Spirit, finds it not by looking upon it
at a distance, but by seeing and feeling that power, ruling in the Body of his
flesh; for that which makes true love flow forth to every creature, is Christ
in you the hope of glory, who indeed is the Blessing of all nations, and the
Joy of the whole earth; Therefore fear not, O Servant Jacob, neither be
afraid, O Israel: for I will save thee, and thou shall dwell safely; and shall
not follow me in Types and Figures, in a formal customary way of worship, which
is zeal without knowledge; for he that has the anointing within, sees the
Father in every thing.

Now he that speaks from imagination or tradition, and not from experience of
what he sees, cannot tell another of his evil, but such a one is a false
Prophet, and runs before he is sent, put forward by some secret lust; and he
never can bring to that which procures peace, for he knows it not; because
that which a man seeks for, whereby he might have peace, is within the heart,
not without: The Word of life, Christ, the restoring Spirit, is to be found
within you, even in-your mouths, and in your hearts; the Kingdom of heaven is
within you. And therefore I must tell you the Priests of this generation, Read
all the Books in your Universities, that tells you what has been formerly; and
though by your natural parts, with the help of such Studies, you can make
speeches of a day long, yet you have no peace, but your hearts still are as a
barren wilderness, and increase in sorrow, till your eyes return into your
selves, and the Spirit come from on high to make you read in your own Book,
your heart, wherein you shall find the Mystery of Iniquity, the Man of Sin
seated, which is the fruits of the first Adam: and till the Mystery of
Godliness, the second Adam, Christ Jesus, be revealed in you, to destroy the
works of the devil, and make you righteous, and restore you to life, there is
not neither can there be peace: for there is no peace to the wicked, says my
God: and, if I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear me: and, he that
lives in sin, the wrath of God abides upon him.

So it is clear, that the single-hearted ones, who see the Mystery of
Righteousness, and are acquainted every one according to his measure, with that
Spirit of truth that is to be the Blessing of the whole earth, and that
enlightens all that come into the world, although they are slightly regarded,
and trodden under foot of men of the world, whom God fills with his hid
treasure, that have every worldly thing their hearts can wish for, that their
eyes many times are ready to start out for fatness: yet let them know for their
sorrow and woe, that out of this Sion, which no man regards, shall the Deliverer
come: for the light and life of Christ within the heart, discovers all
Darkness, and delivers Mankind from Bondage; and beside him there is no
Savior: and what will become of those that are found fighters against God?
for they that persecute them, persecute me, says Christ. And therefore fear
and tremble, whoever rhou art, for the wrath of the Lord smoaketh against
thee, and his jealousy burns like fire: if thou art found in a persecuting
nature, thy sin will bring destruction upon thee, and there shall be no remedy.
Although judgment is not executed speedily against evil doers, which causes
their hearts to be set in them to do evil, yet the Lord will punish the hairy
scalp of them that go on in their wickedness; and when their sins are fully
ripe, then judgment shall come upon them to the utmost, and there shall be no
Remedy: and therefore, O Man, who ever thou art, great or small, that fights
or striveth against his little ones, fear and tremble, and cease from sinning
any longer in that nature, for fear the Lord may be a heaping up thy
iniquities, that he may bring wrath upon thee to the utmost, and then there
shall be no remedy; for he repayeth them that hate him to their face, to
destroy them, he will not be slack. Deuteronomy. 7. 10, 21. For the Lord thy God is
amongst you; a mighty God, and terrible; who is now rising in his might and
power, to destroy the man of sin, and is rising like a mighty man, refreshed
after Wine, and the seed of wickedness shall be destroyed by the brightness and
glory of his coming: for he alone that is the King of Righteousness will be
exalted amongst you. And therefore let all flesh stand still, waiting in
silence before him, that they may see the Salvation of GOD.

The second Epistle:
To all people whose souls pants after God, as the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks.

NOW to him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the salvation of
God. Hearken to the Word of the Lord, and your souls shall live: mind what
power rules in you, whether it be a particular, confining, selfish power, which
is of the devil, or whether it be an universal, spreading power, that does
delight in the liberty of the Son: for if the Son shall make you free, then are
you free indeed. The selfish power when it is crossed or shamed, it grows
distempered, bitter spirited, sometimes endeavoring to kill that body it
dwells in, and sometime some other that angers it: but the power of Christ, who
is the giver forth of the Law of Righteousness, ruling within, is not moved to
anger: charity, true love, thinks not evil, but hops, and endures all
things, being meek and patient, loving and acting righteously, both to his own
Body, and to others, though they be his Enemies, following the Rule of Jesus
Christ their King, Do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despightfully use you, that you may be children of your Father which is in
heaven.

Let every man and woman know, that there is but two Spirits, a good and a bad;
there is but two ways, the straight and the narrow, that leads to life
eternal, and few find it; and the broad way, that leads to destruction, and
many there be that go in that way: there is but God and the devil, Heaven and
hell; the way to happiness, and the way to misery; the way to life, and the way
to death, even death eternal. And the way to life, is believing in the light
that does enlighten every man that comes into the world.

And verily it does concern every man to know in what state he is, whether the
spirit or the flesh bears sway: for the two powers before spoken of, are the
two Adams in mankind; they are Jacob and Esau, son of the free-vvoman, or son
of bondage: the first kills and crucifieth the Son of God; but the second, the
Lord from heaven, he makes alive: for Christ the Spirit of Truth, does arise
above the power of evil; and he takes the body, and rules in it: Isa. 65. 17.
he makes it a new heaven and a new earth, where in dwells righteousness. Now
that which seeks after the enjoyment of Creatures, to have peace in them, does
but seek the living among the dead: for all sin makes but one perfect body of
the power of darkness, the devil, which does reign in every man, till the man
of righteousness, Christ, the stronger then he, who is the Anointing, comes
and throws down his strong holds, and divides the spoil: and when Christ this
Word of life has the possession, that soul has true peace in the salvation
that comes out of Sion: for peace is not to be found in any other: for he is
the Prince of peace, and the Captain of our salvation, who has perfected for
ever all those that are sanctified by him; and he ever lives to make
intercession for them: for by his obedience many are made righteous. Every one
shall be called by my name: for I created him for my glory, formed him and made
him. I will bring forth the blind people, and they shall have eyes; and the
deaf, and they shall have ears. I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is
no Savior. Isai. 43. 7, 8, 11. Because thou wast precious in my sight, and I
loved thee, therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy sake. This
people have I formed for my self; they shall show forth my praise. And all the
seed of the Serpent shall be destroyed; and the power of darkness is that
cursed ground that is for burning, which the Lord of life and glory will
trample upon; for he came into the world to destroy the works of the devil; and
all things shall be subdued by his power, and he will put all things under his
feet: and then when all things are brought under by this Prince of peace, then
the soul sits down in peace in him who is the King of righteousness, who will
make all that living earth subject to himself, and fill all with holy
breathings. Glorious things are spoken of him; for he is the City of God: and
this holy breathing is the kingdom of heaven within you, when he rules within
you; and the kingdom of heaven without you likewise, when you see the same
glory rule in others, in which you rejoice. For in the day of Christ's power,
he will subdue all his enemies under his feet, and deliver up the kingdom to
his Father.

Therefore let not any one marvel to see the people turning from one way of
Worship to another: for the Father is driving his people through all the Ways,
and Forms, and Customs, and Reformations, and Governments of the Beast, to
weary them out in all, that so they may not find rest for the soles of their
feet, in any outward form of Worship, nor in any thing until they come to lie
down in him, forsaking all Forms to worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth;
that is, to walk uprightly, being holy in all manner of Conversation; for it is
written, Be ye holy, as I am holy; and pass the time of your sojourning here in
his fear, knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver
and gold, from your vain conversations in time past, but with the precious
blood of Christ Jesus, as a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. And
until Christ reigns as Lord and King, the soul is restless, running from post
to pillar, as I may so call it, from one Worship and Form to another, meeting
nothing but confusion and the curse in every thing he does; so poor creatures
are in bondage within, for they know not what to do; the way to Sion is not yet
clear, and they are filled with sighings and secret mournings, to see
themselves in confusion and loss, to stick in the mire, but cannot get out:
this is inward slavery which they groan under, being under the hand of the
Tyrant flesh that rules the Kingdom, and devises the several fleshly Forms and
Ways of Government, to which, if any refuse to conform, then he thinks fit to
punish them with imprisonment or shameful reproach, any way he can invent; so
that many weak spirits are brought under, and are in awe, either by fear or
shame; and thus Jacoh has been kept very low, but he must arise. To see the
Divine Power in Creature-Objects is sweet, but to see him ruling in the heart,
is sweeter: for the Spouse had seen Christ, or else she could never have called
him her Beloved, and mourned in his absence. Now all things, yea all things,
must be but loss, dung, and Dogs meat, that we may be found in him, having the
Law of Righteousness and Peace ruling and dwelling in our hearts, being
refreshed with those sweet smelling Spices, the discovery of the Fathers Love
within, which is the Word of God. This is sweeter then the Honey and the
Honeycomb; for this is to see him near at hand, even within the heart, ruling
and resting there: This is the Kingdom of Heaven within you; this the City of
Refuge that will not fail a man; this is the Rock of Defense and Offense: this
is the Power that makes a man as bold as a Lion, that in the greatest streights
finds peace and rest: like Paul, can sing at midnight, although in chains
under the hardship of persecution by Tyrants, for he felt peace, and was at
rest; yea, such peace as the world knows not of: let come what will come, this
man knows it is the will of his Father it shall be so, and he feels a quiet
peace compass his heart, so that he sees and feels peace within, and
rejoices in the excellency of it; he sees love and patience within, and
rejoices in that sweet Ointment that does cast a delightful savor all his
soul over. Now if this man should be forsaken of all his outward Friends,
imprisoned, banished, all men deny to deal with him, because they count him a
man of strange Opinions, and Blasphemies, calling him all reproachful names; as
they shall say all manner of evil falsely against the newborn Babes, and they
shall kill them, and think they do God good service in it: Yet the Saints are
in God, he lives in them and they in him; and he will have his holy Ones, whom
he draws up to worship himself in spirit and in truth, to be silent, slow to
speech, for a season; yet quick-sighted, Eagle eyed; though they be silent,
they are not sottish, as the world judges, and falsely surmiseth of them; but
they shall all see and behold with the single eye, and judge others
righteously, and they shall not be judged of any man. And let the ignorant
Professors of the world be ashamed, for condemnation will fall upon them, and
fear shall surprise the hypocrites: for the righteous actings and patient
silence of those that are drawn up to wait on the Lord, shall be the great
shame and confusion of face upon them; the wise flesh, that would be an Angel
of light, is full of words, but dead to the Law of Righteousness: the Saints
must dye to waste words, but be made alive to righteousness, walking uprightly
to all things, in all well-pleasing, in the sight of God their heavenly Father:
for the man of the flesh is altogether for preaching, praying, as he calls it,
observations of Forms and Customs, and knows not how to worship, if these be
taken away; he has no peace if this be gone. But the man that is in his
natural condition, that is not born again, this man's prayer shall turn into
sin, and all that ever he does is an Abomination in the sight of God, and he
that has his eyes in his head, as Solomon says the wiseman has, he beholds
all these his performances to be out of the life and power of Christ, and death
is in all that ever he does: let his specious fair pretenses be what they will,
if the inward Power be wanting, no Sacrifice can be accepted: therefore the
clean heart God accepts; therefore the just man is continually meditating,
the Law of his God is in his heart, therefore his footsteps shall not slide.
The godly man turns his eye inward to see the Law of Righteousness guiding and
ruling his body; and this is the excellent sight, to see the Divine Power in
ones self, ruling, dwelling and living within; which if it does, that Body
wherein it dwells, shall be wholly subject in all its actions to the Law of
Righteousness. They that know what the power of Love, and the Law of
Righteousness is, they know the truth of what is here verified: they that live
in the light, they see the Lord abroad and at home; they see him in other
creatures, and they see him in themselves; patiently submitting to his will in
all things, that it may be done on earth, as it is in heaven; so that there is
a sweet composed agreement between the disposing hand of God without, and his
power within. He that thus sees the Lord the Ancient of days, the one
Almighty power, does mightily honor him, when nothing can be done abroad,
either in adversity or in prosperity, but the divine power that rules in the
heart, consents, rejoices, and does not grudge: And now the Lord is one, and
his Name one, and his power one, every where.

The sight of the King of Glory within, lies not in the strength of Memory,
calling to mind what a man has read and heard, being able by a humane
capacity to join things together into a method, and through the power of free
utterance, to hold it forth to others, as the fashion of Students in their
Sermon-work is, which a plough-man that never was bred in the Universities, may
do as much; nay, they do more, in some kind, as experience teaches. But the
sight of the King of glory within, lies in the beholding of light arising up
from an inward power of feeling experience, filling the soul with the glory of
the Law of Righteousness, which does not vanish like the taking in of words and
comfort from the mouth of a hear-say-Priest, who does speak by the strength of
his memory; but it does continue like the Sun in the Firmament, shining forth
from that established power of the Divine within; and the inlivened heart shall
sooner be separated from glorying in the Law of Righteousness that dwells in
him, then the light and heat of the Sun, can be separated from the Sun: and
truly, let me tell you, that as a man finds abundance of sweet peace in his
heart, when he is made to live in the Kingdom of Heaven; so the words that this
man speaks from this power within, are very profitable to others, and is good
seed, wheresoever it is sown, that will spring up, and bring forth fruit: for
words spoken from the light of experience, have a twofold operation upon the
hearts of the hearers: for first, if I lie under straits and bondage in my
spirit, by reason of some inward and outward troubles, by reason of the
enthraldom to my own lusts, that overpowers me, so that I cannot do what I
would; then the words of experience from another mouth that has been in the
same condition, and is passed through it, sounds liberty and life to my weary
soul: I speak what I have felt in this particular.

Secondly, If I delight in any way of the flesh, as to seek peace in Creatures
abroad without me, or to seek satisfaction to my self-vvill and lust, in the
midst of this, I do (occasionally) hear the words of experience from others,
declaring such actions and motions to be the powers of the flesh and devil, and
not of the spirit of Righteousness; presently these words take peace from the
earth, that is, from proud flesh, and fills the whole soul with anger,
distemper, gradging and torment: and this is another operation that pure
Language produces, which is, a launcing of the dead flesh, that the disease
may be cured; for this wounding is not to the ruin of the creature, but it is
a Medicine sent from the Lord to heal him, to take away the evil peace from the
flesh, that so the created part may lie down in rest, and be at peace in Christ
which cannot be moved: for every comfort that is of the flesh, shall be shaken
and removed; but Christ the one power of Righteousness and Peace, shall not be
shaken nor moved, but stand firm for ever.

Now by this may you see the Kingdom of the flesh and devil, which must be
shaken to pieces, and fall, and the Kingdom of Heaven, or of God, that endures
for ever, and is that Rock that cannot be removed.

For every one that has lain under the bondage of selfish power, and is
delivered, he can from that experience, declare what the power of darkness is,
in whole mankind.

Now some may say, What is it for a man to live in the Kingdom of Hell, Devil,
or Darkness?

I answer: When a man takes delight in nothing but satisfying of the lusts of
his own heart; when the way of the flesh is pleasing, and the way of the
spirit of Righteousness is a burden to him; when he glories in himself, and
feeds with delight upon his Covetousness, Pride, Envy, Lust, Self-vvill, and
in all other Evil, that does satisfy his devilish appetite; and if he can but
overcome that power that checketh his will, or crosses his carnal delights,
then this man is in his Kingdom, he rejoices, and is well pleased. But yet
know, thou vain Man, that this is yet but the Kingdom of the flesh, that must
be shaken, and this earth must be removed; for this is glorying in a man's shame.

What is the Kingdom of Heaven, or of Christ?

The Law of Righteousness and Peace, ruling and dwelling in mankind, is the
Kingdom of Heaven; for this is the universal power bearing rule, and therefore
treads the selfish power under his feet; for all his delight is in the Law of
the Lord, and in that Law he does exercise himself both day and night. Now
where the heart is thus established with grace, there is perfect peace; and
that which is perfect peace, is the Kingdom of Heaven within you: yea, it is
the White stone, with the new name written in it, that none know it but them
that have it.

What is it for a man to live in the Kingdom of Heaven within you?

When a man is come to that condition by believing in the light, that he is
brought over the works of darkness, and is made subject in every thing to the
King of Righteousness, Jesus Christ, and all his delight is to walk according
to his Law in every thing, his Crown and Glory being in that Law of
Righteousness which he finds seated in his heart, and finds content no where
else; and when the Spirit is honored, this man is in his Kingdom, he has
what he would have: for when a man is made to see and know the Law of Love
and Righteousness within him, and delights to act from that power of life and
liberty which he sees and feels seated in him; now this man is carried on
with much joy and sweet calmness, meekness and moderation, and is full of
glory: this is the excellency of the work of Christ, not only to make flesh
subject to Righteousness, but to know himself made subject, and to rejoice in
the sweet enjoyment of that Prince of peace: to make a man rejoice, and to know
the ground of it, that his joy is unmovable.

What do you mean by Divine Power?

The Divine is the spreading power of righteousness, which is Christ that
fills all in all with himself, and he is called a Tree, or a Vine, because he
does not lie in any single person, but spreads himself in all mankind; and
every single body in whom he breathes, is but a bough or bud of the Vine: so
that look upon all together in whom Christ is spread, and they make up but one
Vine, knit together by that one Spirit into one Body, whether they be poor or
rich, learned or unlearned; therefore those rich men that despise the poor, and
those learned that despise the unlearned, as your University men and Priests of
the Nation does, for there is some Priests now in the Nation, that were not
bred in the University: but know all of you that are despisers of them that are
good, and have them in contempt for their poverty, and because they are
unlearned in your Logic and Tongues, as men are; why I must tell you, you are
all but pricks of the Thorn-bush, not Branches of the Vine, and you are the
curse that is now very near unto burning.

And every single one alone in whom Christ breaths, is but a parcel of the
Vine in whom the Divine Power dwells and rests, even as every Branch of an
Appletree is filled with the sap, which is the life of the whole Tree.
Christ is the Divine, because he grovvs and flourishes in the time of light; he
is the Son himself, he is a Vine or Tree that grows by day in the heat of
light, and so brings forth abundance of fruit to the glory of the Father. Trees
that grow in the heat of the Sun, they bring forth pleasant fruit: so those
that are Branches of this Vine, that grows in the heat and life of the one
Spirit, the King of Righteousness, they bring forth abundance of the fruits of
Righteousness, according to the nature of the Vine they grow from: therefore
the Saints are called, Children of the day, not of the night; for they speak
what they know experimentally, and what they have received feelingly from the
Lord: As we have tasted, as we have felt, as we have handled, so we deliver
unto you: and their actions and words are not spent at random; for they act
righteously in the creation, among all they have to do vvithal, and they do it
from the Law of Reason and Righteousness which they feel seated within them.

For every one that does speak or act from the light or power of the Divine
within himself, can give an account of his Words and Actions; but this is the
glorying that the fleshly part hides himself from: for the Law of
Righteousness, fleshly Israel, could not behold the new Covenant, which the men
of the long Robe, the Clergymen, so called, are unacquainted with.

For opposite to this Divine Christ, there is a night-Vine, which is the power
of selfishness, which is a fruit of the bottomless pit; and it is spread abroad
in mankind, and every man and woman that is guided by this selfish power of
darkness, are but Branches of the night-Vine; and this night-Vine which is
fleshly man, has from the beginning of Adams fall, filled the whole earth
with darkness, under pretense of Learning, and fleshly Forms of Government,
and so is become a spread Tree: but he is called by the Spirit of
Righteousness, the Thorn; the Fruit he brings forth, is sower and bitter, and
good for nothing but the dunghill; for Trees that grow always in the shade or
place of darkness, where the light and heat of the Sun does not cooperate,
brings forth unpleasant fruit. Now this night-Vine, or rather Thorn-bush, is
the branchings forth of the wisdom and power of selfish flesh; every bud from
it, is a sharp prickle: Treacherous and covetous Judas was one Branch from that
Root, and he has risen sin up to a mighty great Tree: for every treacherous
and covetous heart is but the buddings forth of Judas: so the envious Scribes
and Pharisees are other Branches from the same Root, and these have risen up
into mighty spreading Trees; for every one that is zealous without knowledge,
making a profession of the spirit of Righteousness, and yet grudging and hating
the way of the spirit, are but the buddings forth of the Scribes and Pharisees
that killed the just One, the Lord of life and glory, and wrote Hebrew, Greek
and Latin over his head, to blind the world, that their learning taught them to
do that act of murder: and although they have now killed Christ after the
flesh, and by that have spread in every Land and Family, to hinder Christ from
rising, or else to suppress and kill him again after he is risen, if they
could, in Sons and Daughters, whom he has, by the manifestation of his light,
made himself known unto them.

So covetous Demas, proud Simon Magus, froward and churlish Nabal, unrighteous
Elymas, and such like, are all the budoings forth of the Thorn-bush, and have
covered the earth with their Branches, to keep it in darkness, and to hide the
Son of Righteousness from it; and all these are centred in the Clergy of this
nation, or the Priests, which is most suitable to their taking of Tithes, which
is the great sin of Oppression that many people for conscience sake, and
nothing else, are undone in their outward Estates; and some through hard
imprisonment, have lost their bodily lives: and this great and sad grievance is
upheld by these men's pride, covetousness, idleness, bitterness of spirit,
despising and treading all under foot in whom the spirit of the Lamb appears;
which all those that are born again do see and know this to be true, and that
these are the standing Enemies against Christ; their Churches, as they call
them, are the Successors of the Jews Synagogues, and are houses of bon-dage.
And though they have prevailed with the Magistrates for their Tithes, to settle
them, yet they shall find the last end of them will be sad; for they are but
hearsay Preachers of the Gospel, they cannot say any thing from any Testimony
of light they have within themselves, but from the Writings they have from the
Apostles, which they profess great love to, and keep charily for their Tithes
sake: and by the one, they deceive the people of their Souls, for they preach
the letter for the spirit; and by the other, they pick their Purses.

And this is very manifest by their carriage: for though those Writings which
they live by, were not Writings that proceeded from any Scholars according unto
humane Art, but from Fishermen, Shepherds, Husbandmen, who spoke and writ as
the Spirit gave them utterance, from an inward Testimony of life; Yet now these
learned Scholars, having got the Writings of these inferior men of the world,
so called by some, they now slight, and despise, and trample under their feet,
men guided by the Spirit of the Lord, pressing upon the powers of the earth, to
make Laws to hold them under bondage, and that Lay People, Tradesmen, and such
as are not bred in Schools, may have no liberty to speak or write of the
Spirit. And why so? Because out of these despised ones of the world, does the
Spirit rise up more and more to clearer light, making them to speak from
experience, and every fresh discovery of the Father shines more glorious then
the old, till at last the creature is made to see the Father face to face in
his own light.

But now the Scholars that come to speak from the strength of what they have
stole from others, being not filled with the Holy Ghost, which makes
Ministers, they have no inward Testimony of their own to uphold their Trade,
but by a customary practice, they uphold their Trade thus, by holding fast the
old letter, getting their livings by telling the people the meanings of those
Tradesmens Words and Writings. But alas! they mightily deceive them, and
corrupt their Meanings, by their multitudes of false Expositions and
Interpretations: for no man knows the meaning of the Spirit of GOD, but he that
has the Spirit: and if the Father sends forth any of these Tradesmen to
declare their Testimony which is in them, as in these days he sends forth
many, and these true laborers shall increase, maugre the Malice of Men and
Devils, and all those false aspersions cast upon them, calling them new Lights,
Factious, erroneous Blasphemers, and the like, shall not hurt them: for it is
but that the Scriptures may be fulfilled; they shall say or speak all manner of
evil, falsely, against them for my sake; and they that kill them shall think
they do God good service in it, even as those that killed the Just One, crying,
Crucify him, crucify Him: but all will be to no purpose, for the work is of
the Lord, and it shall stand: The counsels of the Lord takes place in every
age, and his word is stablished in Heaven; and when all things else shall come
to nothing, then not one jot or tittle of this shall fail. Wicked men and
Deceivers had best give over, for it is hard for them to kick against the
pricks, or strive against the stream: For the Lord Jehovah, at whose voice the
mountains quake, the hills tremble; that tells all the Stars, and calls
them all by their names; and says to the proud waves of the Seas, Thus far
shall ye go, and no farther; that keeps the devils in chains, against that
great and terrible day, when all men shall be judged for the things done in
their flesh; that divided the seas for his children to pass over, and drowned
his enemies in the same waters; I say, this God is too great for Man to contest
with.

But what is the reason that the Preachers of this world, so called by many,
are so bitter against truth in the inward parts? in words they speak much for
it.

Because the light of truth that springs up out of this earth, which the
Scholars tread under feet, will shine so clear, as it will put out the candle
of these wicked learned Deceivers. Now the people are not to look for any
teaching, but from the great Prophet Jesus Christ, and are not to acknowledge
any other Ruler, but such as are guided by him, this King of peace, who plants
the Law of Righteousness in the hearts. The hearsay Teachers would have the
people look up to them for teaching: and verily I must bear my Testimony, that
the more I looked upon any man for teaching, the more I was wrapped into bondage
and confusion; and therefore all the upshot and end of the Priests is only to
hinder Christ from rising, and to keep Jacob under, that he may be a servant
unto the man of flesh.

So it is plain, that all that is done in the world about hearsay Priests, and
their settled Forms of Worship, is no other but the spreadings forth of the
Thorn-bush, the fleshly man, to hinder the worship of the Father in spirit and
in truth; and all these strict and zealous Preachers, so called, and Professors
of other men's Words and writings, and Upholders of Forms and Customs, are no
other but the Scribes, Pharisees, and Judas, that still pursues Christ in
enmity. And this is the reason why many are so ignorant and cold spirited in
the acknowledgement of the Father, because the night-Vine or Branches of the
Thorn-bush are so mighty great and thick, that they hide the light and heat of
the Sun of Righteousness from it; this is the man of sin, the Mystery of
Iniquity, that lets, and must let, till he be taken out of the Way. Indeed,
this Thorn-bush does so prick, that none dare meddle with it, but those that
are well clothed with Christ, such as have put on the whole Armor of God. This
Thorn-bush or night-Vine, grows in the cold time of the night, while the Sun of
Righteousness is under the clouds; and the fruit it brings forth is unpleasant,
as pride, covetousness, envy, self-love, hypocrisy, confusion, bondage, and
all misery, under the power of darkness: and all that oppress the holy just
Ones, they act from this night-Vine, and are children of the night and of
darkness.

Now from hence it does appear what proud men the Clergy are, that call
themselves Divines, when their light is but a candle, stolen from the Apostles
and Prophets writings; it is not their own Light, it is but hearsay in them,
who cannot in their own particulars witness the things they do declare or hold
forth unto others; and therefore their pride, and covetousness, does plainly
declare them to be false Christ's, and false Prophets, and that they are but
Branches of the Thorn-bush that are full of sharp pricks, in regard they
endeavor to uphold a forced maintenance from the people, whether they will or
no, and force the people to be silent, to hear them preach hearsay, what
Austin, Gregory, and the Fathers have said; and none must gainsay what they
affirm, although never so false, upon pain of 5 l. or lie in the common Goal,
and be bound to their good Behavior; and are like to be crushed in their
Estates, by the power of many wicked Magistrates, if they oppose these hearsay
Priests that say and unsay; for they know not what they say, but say to darken
peoples knowledge more and more! O sad Antichristian Laws, against the plain
Scripture, which allows prophesying, or speaking one by one, as the Spirit
gives or makes manifest, and the first shall hold his peace: does not the
shame of those Laws and their Makers almost appear unto all men? If it do not,
it will do very suddenly: assure your selves, you Priests, you must fall and be
turned out, as Judas, Simon Magus, and the Scribes and Pharisees, that are the
greatest Enemies to Christ, the spreading power of Righteousness: for the Lord
does not send hearsay men to be laborers in his Vineyard, but such as he
first fills with his Divine power, and then sends them to work in his Vineyard:
so that still it is but Christ in them, that is the One, that is sent of the
Father: for the Father sends none but his only beloved Son in whom he is well
pleased, who is the Law of Righteousness and Peace, the spreading power that
fills all in all. And you shall find, you Priests that are so puffed up, and
filled with pride, and are clothed with covetousness, that ere it be long
these poor despised ones of the world that have this Law written in their
hearts, are the true Laborers that are sent forth into the Vineyard; and you
that call your selves Divines, and Laborers, you are but Traitors to Christ,
and Enemies to his Spirit: you have had warnings from time to time; Many
Prophets has the Lord sent unto you, and righteous men; but you have stopped
your ears, and hardened your hearts at the voice of the Charmer, charm he never
so wisely: but the greater will be your woes and sorrow; for you are left
without excuse; you are the men that must have your mouths stopped, not by a
humane tyrannical hand of power, as you have stopped the mouths of Gods holy
and just Ones, for that they abhor; for the Lord himself, whom you dishonor by
your hypocrisy, will stop your mouths with shame and sorrow, when he makes you
to see your selves in the state of Devils, Deceivers, Scribes and Pharisees,
Simon Magus, Demas and Judas, that are Traitors to the spirit and power of
Righteousness which is in the Saints. But if you say you do not assume the
names of Divines as you write your selves, under which description you are as
bad as Diviners, Sorcerers or Deceivers, as Balaam was, and as the maid that
got her Master gain by Divination, in Act. 16. 16. you hold forth letter for
spirit, make people believe your words of hearsay, that it is the Testimony
and experience of the spirit within you; and you pick their Purses extremely by
this Sorcery and Divination.

So it appears plain that the word you call Divinity, darkens knowledge: you
talk much of the Body of Divinity, and of Anatomizing Divinity: O fine
Language! but when it comes to trial, it is but a husk: All is not Gold that
glisters; there is no Kernel; the words ye say are without life; the spirit
that gave forth the Scripture, ye are strangers unto: the natural man
understands not the things of God; they are spiritually discerned: the Spirit
has filled the hearts of those you despise. You go on, selling words for money
to the blind people, whom you have deceived; and the Spirit is not at all in
your service, and your service stinks before the Lord: your preachings,
prayings, and all your Will-worships, with all the people joining with you, is
but an abomination in the sight of the Lord; for you are the people that draw
nigh to God with your lips, but your hearts are far from him; and are removed
afar off Love; Justice, righteous actings, doing injury to no man, is not to be
found among you, neither clean hands and a pure heart: for the alone peace of
the heart lies in seeing and feeling Christ the Divine power to rise up and
rule within; and every soul is in confusion, bon-dage and sorrrow, until he
have true light and feeling thereof in himself, as I have showed and found by
experience. And surely this may command all mouths to be silent, that speak
from hearsay, and yet says, Thus says the Lord: he lies, and he dishonors
the Lord, whoever he is, that speaks before the Lord has revealed himself in
him, and spoke to him, and put words into his mouth; and he does exceedingly
wrong the souls of his hearers, by deceiving them; and so their lives, their
whole actions, and their conversations are unprofitable to all men, because
they make them believe a Divination are Words of Knowledge spoke from a pure
Testimony.

Surely if the Lord had not become the Teacher of his despised Ones, they had
been overspread with Egyptian bon-dage and darkness, as the Priests are, by
whom the earth is corrupted, and over spread with thick darkness: Well, you
have Prophecies and Promises in the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, wait
upon the Lord till you see the fulfilling of them within your selves: and leave
off your much talk about words and syllables; for by this multitude of waste
discourse people are blinded, that they neither mind the Ptophecies of
Scriptures, nor wait for the fulfilling of them in themselves: for whatsoever
is written, is written for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world
shall fall.

And verily, I can truly say; That so long as I was a blind Professor, a
strict goer to Church, as they call it, and a hearer of Sermons, and never
questioned what the Priest said, but believed as the learned Clergy, the
Church, so called, believed; and still forgot all I heard: though I must say,
The words they said were like a pleasant song in my ears, whilst I heard them.
And this I know is the best condition of all your zealous Professors, this is
all they can get from you; for you are in bondage and confusion; and Ignorance
is the Mother of your Devotion: for your lives are in the flesh, you do not
savor the things that are of the Spirit, and so you are not of God. Whilst I
was such a Professor, I was counted by some Priests and others, a good
Christian, and a godly Man, though all that was in me, was but zealous
Ignorance, and led me on in the height of the deceitful Nature. But since it
has pleased the Father to reveal his Son in me, and has caused me to speak
what I know from an inward principle of light and power of life within; Now the
same Priests, and Professors whom they have deceived, my former Acquaintance,
begin to be afraid of me, and call me an erroneous Man, a dangerous man; and
look upon me as upon a man of another world; and in that, they are not
mistaken: for our Conversation is in heaven; and our delight on earth is in the
Saints, and in those excellent Ones, that excels in virtue. For my part, I can
truly say, from the goodness of the Lord, who is worthy of everlasting praises,
to be acknowledged from me, that am as a brand snatched out of the fire, and
kept from burning, by the goodness and loving kindness of the Lord, That my
portion is fallen to me in a goodly heritage; the Lord is my portion; I have
the Lord, I have enough. I look upon them with the eye of pity and love, seeing
them as yet to live under the spirit of Delusion, and power of Darkness; the
god of this world having blinded their eyes, that they cannot see the way to
the Kingdom: and therefore I think it my Duty to wait upon the great Restorer
of all things, until he manifest or raise in them the manifestation of the
measure of that light that he has placed in their souls, and given them to
profit withal, and then that ruling in them, will makes us become one again,
and then we shall not be divided any more. O dear Friends! despise not this
Word, wait on the Lord for teachings; you neither will nor can have rest in
your souls, until he speak in you peace: For those that stay themselves on him,
are kept in perfect peace, And follow your Forms as much and as fast as you
can, in the strictest way you can possible, and it will not bring you peace;
nay, it will bring you to a loss, and you shall be more and more wrapped into
Confusion and sorrow of Heart: I speak what I have found, and therefore let not
any deceive themselves. But when once the heart is made subject to Christ, the
Law of Righteousness, looking up to him for instruction, waiting with a meek
and quiet spirit till he appear in you, then you shall have peace, then you
shall know the truth; and those that are made free by the Son, they are free
indeed: For they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; for the Lamb
which is in the midst of the Throne shall govern them, and shall lead them to
the lively Fountain of water: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

The third Epistle:
To all Those that teach for Hire, and divine for Money, that they may lay
their Hands on their Hearts, and consider the evil of their doings, and cease
to do Evil, and learn to do well: For the terrible Day of the Lord is at hand;
And who can dwell in everlasting Burnings?

VErily I must bear my Testimony from the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, which is
everlasting, That you the Priests of England are all blind Guides, and have
your right eyes put out: and I shall prove you Deceivers of the people, and
woes everlasting will be your portions, if you proceed; and therefore in tender
love to your souls, I send this unto you, without consulting with flesh and
blood.

Consider this, you that are wandering Stars, That when Christ appeared in
flesh, Moses Administration began to be silent, and drew back, and set Jesus
Christ in the chair, to be the great Prophet that should be the Teacher in
Types after him, and the Ministration of these Discoveries were to reign in the
world their appointed time: Even so the Lamb, Christ Jesus, or that single
Body, gives way to the Holy Ghost, which is the spreading Spirit, Joh. 16. 7.
Joh. 17. 21. If I go not away (says Christ) the Comforter cannot come to you:
for he that dwells bodily in me, is to spread himself in you; that as the
Father in me, and I in him are one, even so I in you, and you in me, may become
one with the Father: And the Testimony of the Apostles declare as much, 2 Cor.
5. 16. Col. 1. 27. Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth know we him no more: but we look after the Mystery which has been
kept secret from Ages and Generations past, which is, Christ in you, the hope
of Glory. And therefore all your merchandising in Gospel Forms, as you call
them, and Types, declare you the Priests of England, to be yet under the
Ministration of Christ after the flesh, declaring the Lamb Jesus to remain yet
in one single person. But know you, That as the Ministration of Moses gave way
to this, so this Ministration is to give way to the inward teachings of Christ,
and the spreading of the Spirit in sons and daughters, which does more
excellently declare the glory of the Mystery; and this you call, A Dumb Idol:
for all those that patiently wait in silence upon the Lord, do wait for the
manifestation of the measure of the Spirit of God, to be poured down upon them,
to make them profit withal; for they that are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the Sons of God. The Man Christ Jesus told the Woman of Samaria, Woman, the
time is coming, and now is, that neither in Jerusalem, nor in this Mountain
shall men worship the Father; but they that worship him, shall worship him in
spirit and in truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him.

Now you show your Ignorance of Scriptures, and that you have not the Key of
David, that opens and no man shuts; and shuts, and no man opens; but
like those that made silver Shrines for Diana, cried her up for a great
goddess, because their Living was got by it; but their deceit was plainly seen
to all, whose eyes were opened. Now you deny the Teacher within, that shall not
be moved into a corner: For the word is nigh thee, even in thy heart, and in
thy mouth; and you need not tell the people, Lo, here is Christ, or Lo, he is
there: for there is in every one a measure of the light of Christ, which is
given them to profit withal; and if they follow that light, it will bring them
out of every evil way: for it is that pure thing in man, that never did consent
to sin, nor never will, but does check and reprove for evil thoughts, and vain
lusts and desires, which this light judges down; for Christ has thus
enlightened every man that comes into the world: now till the measure of this
light is manifested in you, so as totally to destroy the works of the Devil,
for to that end Christ came, even to destroy sin; I bear my Testimony from the
Lords Spirit, You are strangers from the Covenant of Grace, and Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and are without God in the world: and how are you fit
to teach another, that know not your own Guide, that is, the Lord from heaven?
for know you not that the Kingdom of heaven is within you? you Disciples, you
little Ones, that are born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, the word that abides for ever, Christ in you, the hope of
glory: for know you not that Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? so your
deceit is to drive a Trade in the world, to deceive souls, to keep people from
knowing the true Teacher: for if they should once know one within them, to lead
them whither they in their corrrupt wills would not go, and should give way to
obey that holy Voice, for it is the Voice of Christ, then they would not give
their money for that which profits not, and that which is not bread; for
Christ says, He that eats the bread that I shall give him, shall live for
ever: for my flesh is meat indeed: and, he that believes in me, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water: Now you do esteem men contrary minded,
as Heretics; the Just One, Christ, was accused for a perverter of the people,
by the Jews, Luke 23. 14. Stephen was stoned for blasphemy, Act. 7, 59. Herod
killed James the brother of John, with the sword, imprisoned Peter, Act. 12. 2,
4. Paul stoned till they supposed he was dead, Act. 14. 19. they had trials,
Heb. 11. 36. by mockings, by bands and imprisonments, by cruel scourgings, they
were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were slain with the sword; and all
for faith, for bearing Testimony for that which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world: for Paul said, That when Christ had revealed himself in
him, then he spoke the word with boldness, and went about turning people from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might
receive remission of sins, which teaches to follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

Now the light makes manifest the Mystery of Babylon the great, the Mother of
Harlots, and abominations of the earth, who has made her self drunk with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and Saints of the most High: those that have the
mark in their foreheads, in which you are yet, even in Babel, in confusion: and
therefore fear and tremble before the Lord, for who is able to dwell in
everlasting burnings? For the devil that deceived them, shall be cast into the
lake of fire: mark that, that deceived them: nothing makes a man more like unto
the devil, the Prince of darkness, then to be a deceiver of the Brethren, and
they shall all to perdition, Rev. 17. 8. for they do mock now with the Lamb
Jesus, and they offend his little Ones. O! it were better that a Millstone were
hanged about their necks, and they thrown into the sea, then to offend one of
those little Ones that put their trust in me. But know this, the Lamb shall
overcome you, for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings, and they that are
with him are called, and chosen, and faithful, and therefore rejoice over her,
ye holy Ones, for God has avenged you on her, and will avenge: for true and
righteous are his Judgments; for he has judged the great whore, which did
corrupt the earth with her fornication; and has and will avenge the blood of
his servants at her hand: for the dreadful and terrible day of the Lord is at
hand, in which no iniquity or deceit can stand: there is nothing but the pure,
holy and undefiled shall be able to enter: for no unclean thing can enter the
Kingdom of Heaven; and it must be the oil in a man's own vessel, whereby the
true light is maintained, by which alone the Bridgegroom can be followed in to
the marriage-chamber, who is the true Vine; and they that abide in him, and he
in them, they bring forth much fruit; and he is the Way that whosoever walks
in, shall come to the Father: he is that Rock that whosoever builds his house
on it, shall stand, and no persecution, storm or tempest, shall shake: although
the mountains move into the midst of the sea, my heart (says David) shall not
be troubled: Why? Because it stands fixed, fixed in the Lord: the Lord
keeps such in perfect peace, whose minds are stayed in him: there is nothing
can disturb the peace of them whose minds are turned in to the light Christ,
and hearken to his voice; For my sheep (says Christ) follow me, they know my
voice; I am the true shepherd, and they will not follow a stranger: now you are
come in not by Christ the Door, but by the inventions and wills of wicked men,
like your selves, who are out of the life and power of God, and so cannot make
Ministers: for the carnal man knows not the things of God, they are
spiritually discerned: read Act. 13, 2. it is the holy Ghost that sends
Ministers, they must be anointed by the holy Child Jesus, the Anointing, before
they can go teach; and this you may see Mar. 16. 15. after the Resurrection, Go
ye eleven disciples into all the world, and preach ye the Gospel to every
creature: he does not say to the Scribes and Pharisees, and High Priests, Go
ye; nay, they put him to death, crucified him, as you the Priests do now, even
murder the Just One, in your own particulars, and in every other that you can,
to whom Christ pronounced this woe: Woe unto you, Lawyers, for you will not go to
heaven your selves, and those that would, ye hinder. O dumb Dogs,
Idol-shepherds, that cry, The Lord, when the Lord never put into their mouths:
but they prepare war against the Just; when he cannot put into their mouths,
then they prepare war. Take heed, leave off seducing, for everlasting woes will
be your portion: and this take notice, that from the Lord you are warned to
repent, and turn in to the light in your consciences, that checketh you for sin
and evil, for that is your true Teacher, Emmanuel, God with us; and to this I
bear my Testimony, That it is true, and they that believe in the light Christ
Jesus, in you that believe the hope of glory, they shall find him raising them
from the death of sin to the life of grace, and have part in the first
Resurrection, and over such the second death shall have no power; for he is
Jesus, that redeemeth his from all iniquity, who is the light of the world, and
the life of men, the living Way, the Resurrection and the Life, the faithful
and true Witness, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End, who was
dead, and is alive for evermore.

Now this Mystery is made known unto the Saints, Col. 1. 27. even the mystery
hid from ages and generations, and is now unto his chosen ones made manifest;
which is, Christ in them the hope of glory, ver. 28. Whom we preach, warning
every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus, whereunto I labor, striving according to his working
which works in me mightly: as ye have therefore received Christ Jesus, the
Lord, so walk you in him, rooted and built up in him: for in him dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily; and ye are complete in him, for you are
risen with him, through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him
from the dead; therefore their bodies are of Christ, and therefore they are not
to be deceived by voluntary worships, and beggarly rudiments; which indeed have
a show of wisdom, but it is to the man that is blind: and, if the blind lead
the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch.

Now is the day of the Lords mighty power appearing, and his people need not go
to the Priests for help, Jer. 31. 34. After those days, says the Lord God, I
will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will
be their God, and they shall be my people; and they shall teach no more every
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they
shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them; for I will
forgive their iniquities says the Lord, and remember their sins no more. Thus
says the Lord which gives the Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of
the Moon and Stars for a light by night, which divides the sea, when the waves
thereof roar, the Lord of Hosts is his name. Now is it fit to hearken to your
preaching, as you call it, by Arguments and expositions, putting a meaning upon
other men's words, as you Priests do, telling stories by hearsay of what you
have read out of the works of those, it is like, as much out of the power and
life of God as your selves? whereas none of you know by experience: for if you
did, you durst not sue for treble damages, but with Zacheus make restitution to
those ye have robbed: it is plain you are merchandizers of the Scriptures, and
drive a Trade with your Traditions, and imaginations of your own brains; and
woes will be your portion, if you proceed: for you plainly preach to others, to
get a living by it, and this makes you all children of the curse: for it is
plainly seen, that Money, covetousness is your God.

Well, you must all be slighted; your preaching stinks before the Father, and
he will draw his people out of your confusion, and leave you naked and bare,
and your shame shall be made manifest to all men. For indeed, I bear my
Testimony from the Lord, That you are a most wicked Generation of men: for you
are teaching people, busying their heads what has been done in the time of
Moses, and the Prophets and Apostles times, and in the Son of Man's time in the
flesh, Jesus, the Anointed; but you do not, nor cannot teach them, because you
are strangers to it, to wait upon the Lord, to find light from the spirit of
Righteousness, which is to arise from the measure of the light of Christ in
every one, and his power in and upon the heart. Now all the Learning and Arts
in the world, is but to speak methodically of what has been, what is, and
conjecture what shall be: all which is uncertain. Now he that speaks within, as
we have felt, as we have tasted, as we have handled, so we deliver unto you; I
say, these must know what they say, and know who they worship: and whereas some
of you call silent meetings a dumb Idol, when the people of the Lord are
waiting on him, for the fulfilling of those Prophecies promised unto them; You
show your blindness: for it is and shall be the portion of the sons and
daughters of the Lord to wait in silence with their eyes looking upwards,
waiting to be taught only by Christ, the great Prophet, before whom all flesh
shall be made silent.

And therefore cease your teachings, and your prayers, as you call them: for
they are an abomination to the Lord, until you find this true Teacher Christ
in you, opening your hearts to hear his voice: for whoever does speak, and not
declare the Lord in a pure Language, that is, from himself, shall bear his
shame, whoever he be.

For the time is come that none shall need anything to teach him the way to
Sion, but an humble quiet heart, to wait on the Lord, till he manifest himself
unto them: for the Lord is a great King, and worthy to be waited upon; and his
Testimony within, fills the soul with joy and singing; such joy as the world
knows not of, and such joy as men and devils cannot take from them, by which
his holy Ones have experience of his goodness, that he is the Rose of Sharon,
the choicest among the sons, altogether lovely; whose love is better then wine,
his fruits are sweet unto the taste; whose voice is sweet, and his countenance
altogether comely; and the souls of his beloved ones delights in him: and by
this experience of him, he gives power unto them to speak forth those
experiences unto others, and then they speak to the rejoicing of one another,
and to the praise of Him that declares Himself in them.

And therefore thou, whoever thou art, that speak thy imaginations, studies
of thy own brain, thoughts, and makes thy self a Teacher of others, and the
voice of the Lord has not appeared to thee, and the anointing from the holy
Spirit has not come down upon thee, thou shall be judged for thy
unrighteousness, because thou seek to honor flesh, for thou do not honor
the Lord: for the anointing that comes to teach all things, creates new
heaven, and new earth, wherein dwells Righteousness; for they shall be filled
with the fullness of Christ, who is the spreading power that fills all in all;
every Member of his Body, being a star shining forth of him; or rather, a body
in and out of whom he shines; for he is the power that fills all, Romans 8. 23.
We that have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we, groan within our selves,
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our bodies; and the Spirit
it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered: and
he that searches the heart, knows what the mind of the Spirit is; because
he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God: For he
makes all new by himself and for himself; and this is called the holy
breathing, which Christ said the Comforter shall come, who shall abide with you
for ever. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you? 1 Cor. 3. 16. Now the fleshly part, first Adam, seeks peace,
life and glory to himself, from creatures, and things that are without him; as
first, he seeks content and peace from wife, children, friends, riches, places
of dominion over others; but that peace that is built upon such hay or stubble,
shall come to nothing, and the Foundations shall fall, 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13.
Secondly, the fleshly first Adam that is from the earth earthly, seeks content
and peace from sermons, prayers, studies, books, Church Fellowship, and from
outward forms and customs in their forms of worship; but that peace that is
built upon this foundation, will fall and come to nothing likewise; Romans 9. 31.
But Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to
the Law of Righteousness; for they sought it not by faith, but as it were by
the works of the Law; the reason they stumbled at that stumbling Stone which
the Builders refused, but now is become the Cornerstone, the Rock of Ages: as
it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and a Rock of offense,
and whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed: The Word is nigh thee,
even in thy heart and in thy mouth, that is, the word of faith which we preach,
Romans 10. 8. Isa. 28. 9. those that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the
breast, he teaches knowledge, and makes to understand doctrine. Now woe unto
those that have made lies their refuge, and under falsehood have hid themselves,
every one wondering after the Beast, and worshipping the golden Image, the
inventions of their own hands, who are deceived by her Witchcrafts, her Gog and
Magog, who are in number like the sand of the sea: But what will be their end?
they must be destroyed by fire: and therefore follow not a multitude to do
evil. And the devil that deceived them shall be cast into the lake of fire,
where the Beast and false Prophets are, who shall be tormented day and night,
for ever and ever.

O stand amazed all Deceivers of his people: for the time will come that he
will require the blood of his people at your hands; and what will become of
you, when the dreadful and terrible GOD appears in Judgment? you will then
desire the hills to fall upon you, to hide you from his presence; then those
that have Christ in them, who has filled them with everlasting rest and glory,
shall lift up their heads, for their Redemption draws near; and he that shall
be your Judge, is become their Savior: for the Father judges no man, but has
committed all Judgment unto the Son: And they that live in the Son, have the
Light of Life abiding in them. And so in him they walk from strength to
strength, until they appear before GOD in Sion.

The fourth Epistle:
To all the Hypocrites in Sion, desiring them that they would return, that the
Lord may heal their Backslidings: For the Wrath of the living God is revealed
from heaven against all Unrighteousness; And Woes will be upon them, even Woes
eternal, that take upon them the Profession of Religion in any Form, to be a
Cloak to their Sin and Unrighteousness.

THere is no man (says Christ) that puts his hand to the Plough, and
looks back, that is apt for the kingdom of God. Now does not most Professors
look back? do they do the works God, or are they not doing the works of the
devil? is not wrath, anger, backbiting, whispering, deceiving, overreaching in
their bargains, killing, is not these fruits to be found amongst all
Professors? and therefore it is high time for them to repent, that they may do
their first works: for the time once was, that they had Zeal, and Love, and
Gentleness and Temperance, and were in the Moderation a little kept: but now
they are come into the persecuting nature, into the destroying nature, the
devouring nature, the dogs nature; and are out of the Lambs nature: for the
fruits of Faith, are Love, Goodness, Gentleness, Meekness, Temperance,
Brotherly kindness, Charity, Bowels of compassion, Holiness and Righteousness;
Against such (says Paul) there is no Law: For they that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.

And now amongst those tender Lambs of Christ, those Babes that are born again,
those Plants of the Lords right Hand, Trees of his own planting that are full
of sap, the Cedars of Lebanon; I mean those that are by the wicked of the
earth, the men of this world, in scorn called Quakers, amongst these is crept
in wicked Deceivers, ungodly men, and ungodly Women, even as Judas crept in
amongst the Apostles, such who think that gain is godliness, such who follow
Christ for the Loaves, such as think they can serve two Masters, God and
Mammon, Christ and Riches, Christ and Lusts, Christ and the World, Christ and
Antichrist; such who teach that Doctrine of Devils, that Paul speaks of,
denying to marry, and to abstain from meats, such who turn the Grace of God in
them into wantonness, Truce breakers, Breakers of Covenants, pretending they
were married in their carnal estate; and they were never moved of the Lord, and
therefore they may leave their husbands, and leave their wives; and that spirit
these are guided by, is of Satan, and so will lead them to take others, as
their blind Ignis fatuus leads them: for by nothing but Imagination, Lust and
Fancy, are such led. And such leads away silly women, that are captivated by
Satan, laden with diverse lusts and pleasures, that are always learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Others are led to neglect
their Families and Relations, to neglect their Children; contrary to that
Doctrine of Paul, that says, A man is worse then an Infidel that does not
provide for his Family, meaning his outward Family: For, let every man wait on
his calling; and God has appointed that the creation shall be managed, that
man may be Lord of all the creatures: and Christ says, It is a more happier
thing to give then to receive: and the Apostle commands to lay up, that there
may be a distribution amongst the Saints: and how can he lay up that is idle,
and runs to and fro, wasting his time in idleness, and consuming his precious
time, whilst his wife and children wants at home? and so this spirit rents and
tears the affections of men from their wives, and women from their husbands,
and children from their parents; and this that brings into a dis-uniting, is
not the Spirit of the Lord: for the Spirit of the Lord brings into Union: for
it shall convince the whole world at last, that they shall be all of one heart,
and of one spirit; and the one alone spirit of Righteousness shall fill all in
all: And this cannot be that spirit that rents and makes divisions; but this
spirit of Righteousness teaches the man to know his own wife, and love her, as
Christ did the Church; and it teaches the woman to know and love her own
husband; and the man and woman so taught, live like Turtle Doves. And so the
unbelieving woman comes to be sanctified by the believing man; and the
unbelieving man by the believing woman; and here the good virtuous Wife comes
to be found, that Solomon speaks of, whose price is above pearls, and she
does him good and not evil all his days: and is not as the wicked woman, that
is termed by him, a whorish woman, that is rottenness to her husbands bones.
And Others there are, that are very loose in their carriage, and deny the
Resurrection of the Body, contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostle, saying, The
Resurrection is past already, and such was in his time, that had overthrown the
faith of some: now these people are in distraction, and the Spirit of the Lord
leads into Unity, Love, and Peace, and out of all disturbance; and the Lord is
the portion of his people for ever, and they that stay themselves upon God, are
kept in perfect peace: and the Spirit of God is infallible: they that are
guided by that, cannot err; and these do err, not knowing the Scriptures, and
so are led into the distraction which causes disturbance; and this is, by the
cunningness of Satan, who lies in wait to deceive, and this simple people are
led captive by him, to do his will at his pleasure.

And therefore dear Friends, take heed how you hear, and whom you hear; and be
not blinded by those that lie cunningly in wait, to deceive you: for all that
is to be known of God, is made manifest in man: and this is all the Lord thy
God requires of thee, To do justly, love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God: for Holiness becomes the House of the Lord for ever. And Christ says, He
that has my commandments and keeps them, dwells in me, and I in him. And
therefore do not think the Name or the Profession of a thing will serve the
turn; it is coming into the Life and Power of the thing that is expected from
the Lord: they that cry in that day, We have eat and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets; all that will not do: Depart from me, says
Christ: the reason why, is showed by him, because they were Workers of
iniquity. So there is no privilege for a people, be they never so high in Gods
favor, yet if they sin against him, they must know, the wrath of God is
against them: for if a righteous man turn from his righteousness, and do that
which is evil, he shall die for the evil, and I will remember his righteousness
(says the Lord) no more. The people of Israel were a peculiar people, the Lord
had manifested his love in abundance to them, he fed them with Angels food, and
led them in the Wilderness, that their clothes waxed not old; and he made the
rock gush out waters, and gave them Quails, the lusts of their own hearts. But
they died in judgment; whilst the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God
came down upon them, and Gods Soul came to be angry with them, even so much
that the Lord said, My soul shall be avenged on this Generation. David, a man
after Gods own heart, yet for sinning, was forced to go with broken bones, and
his Ioines were filled with a sore Disease, and he went groaning all the day
long. Moses for striking the Rock twice, did not enter the Land of Canaan. And
therefore do not thou think, whoever thou art, and let thy profession be what
it will: for if thou sinnest against God, thou must be punished by him. And
know this, That the end of all teaching, and speaking, and writing, is to be
brought to doing. The end of all, says Solomon, is to fear God, and keep his
Commandments: This is the whole Duty of Man.

And therefore be as thou seem to be, or seem to be as thou art: For it is
only the pure in heart shall see God; and the meek shall inherit the earth,
and dwell therein for ever.

The fifth Epistle:
To Roger Crabb, and Francis Jennings, John Porter, Elizabeth Porter, Stephen
Powel, Sarah Aldridge, Anne Bunion: To all those that are in the deceit with
him, who style themselves the Servants of the Lord only; with Judeth Edds, and
some few Others, whose Names I cannot find: that they may see their durty
Dregs, and repent of their Abominations: For the Wrath of God is revealed
against all Deceit, and all Deceivers.

LAmentations, Mourning and Woe is pronounced against all evil; and he that
sows, or she that sows Dissension amongst Brethren, is such a one as the
Soul of the Lord abhors.

Now let not their looks dismay thee, thou tenderhearted child or children of
the most High: for the Duty of Obedience which the Lord thy God requires of
thee, is not in any other thing but in being obedient to the Commands of God,
as sin is made known unto thee, by the light of the everlasting Spirit of
Righteousness which is in thee, and there is placed, to make known sin and evil
unto thee, and is there placed in thy heart, to raise thy immortal soul, by the
immortal seed of the word, which is, Christ in thee, that thou may live unto
him that has called thee out of Darkness into his marvelous light, that we
might not henceforth live unto our selves, but unto him; and therefore living
unto him, is to be holy as he was holy, and pure as he was pure: and so the
Life of the Saints is to be a Life of purity, and it is the pure in heart that
see him; and so it is not as Roger Crabb surmiseth, and William Smith, and John
Dunck, and others, in wearing hair or not hair: for if they will believe the
History of Josephus, they may find that Christ wore his Hair very long, waving
about his Shoulders; and the Scriptures of Truth makes mention, that he wore
it according to the manner of the Nazarites, who had no Razor come upon their
heads: neither is it in dirty hands and faces, as they fondly do surmise; but
it lies in the hidden man of the heart, in a meek and quiet spirit, which is a
thing of God, much set by: neither is it in straw Hats, or such fond conceits;
for they cannot be made without hands, no more then woollen ones. But the
Reader may take notice, that this people being departed from the living
presence of the Lord God, where Life, and Peace, and Rest is to be dwelt in;
they wander up and down, seeking Rest, and find none: for the Peace is not in
eating or drinking, but in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. It
is not then in denying the lawful use of the creatures: for the Apostle says,
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, making no scruple for
conscience sake. So then it is clear, that men may lawfully eat all creatures,
as well as herbs, or what grows naturally: And every creature of God is good
(says Paul) and nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with praise and
thanks giving: and, it is not that (says Christ) that goes into the man, that
does defile the man; but that which comes out: For out of the heart (says
Christ) proceeds adultery, fornication, murder, and the like: So it is the
evil heart being corrupted, that is the cause of the man being defiled, and it
is not the denying of meats wherein Religion stands: for they may see that
Christ fed five thousand men with five Loaves and two Fishes, and commanded the
Fragments to be taken up, that nothing might be left; and he turned water into
wine: if he had not allowed the use of it, he would not have made it; but it
was to be drunk. And Christ says, If any of you have a son shall ask bread,
will he give him a stone? or if he shall ask a fish, will he give him a
serpent? so he clearly owneth the eating of those creatures. And if they, or
any led by their fond deceitful spirit, that deny the Resurrection of the Body
of Christ out of the grave, let them read Luke 26. verse. 37. and so forward:
But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a
spirit: and he said unto them, Why are you troubled, and why do thoughts arise
in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self; handle me,
and see: for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have. And when he
had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet. And while they yet
believed not, for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat?
and they gave him a piece of broyled fish, and a honeycomb; and he took it,
and did eat before them: and he said unto them, These are the words which I
spoke unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled
which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the
Psalms, concerning me. Then opened he their understandings, that they might
understand the Scriptures. Act. 1. verse. 9. and so forward: And when he had
spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received
him out of their sight; and while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he
went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel, which said, Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as you have seen him go into
heaven.

And these peoples Teacher, Roger Crabb, most blasphemously speaks of a place
where no Righteousness shall enter in, without distinction; and so he puts
no difference between the precious and the vile; and so most wickedly and
perversely takes upon him to speak of things he knows not: for Christ the
Righteousness of God, who is righteous as God is righteous, does enter, and
sits on the Throne with clean Hands; and his righteous Seed, in all his true
Babes and little Ones, is raised, that they feel his living presence in them,
constraining them to love; and they feel his Arm of strength carrying them, and
guiding them in all their Ways; and they feel that Rock of Ages, bruising the
Head of the Serpent, who is too powerful in Roger Crabb, and his Followers, and
leads them captive to do his will: For of whomsoever a man is overcome, his
servant he is, of whom he is overcome; whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto Righteousness.

And so dear friends, I desire you to repent, and turn, and put away the evil
of your doings. Cease to do evil: learn to do well: hide the word of the Lord
in your hearts, that you may not sin against God: and be content with this
knowledge of the Lord, to know what he requires of thee, and to do it; and that
is this, What does the Lord thy God require of thee, O man, but, To do justly,
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy GOD?

The sixth Epistle:
To all Magistrates, Judges, Lawyers, Commanders, Soldiers and Priests: that
they may plainly see by the Scriptures of Truth, what the Lord God requires at
their hands; and they may see here, as in a Glass, how short they come of what
is required of them, and repent, and turn from their wicked and abominable
Ways, that the Lord may have mercy upon them: for this they may assure
themselves, The fierce and terrible day of the Lord is near at hand, and none
but the pure in heart shall be able to stand before him: for nothing can dwell
in his presence but purity: for without Holiness, none shall see him with
Comfort.

I Shall direct the Reader to some Texts of Scripture, that sets forth what
Gifts a true Teacher ought to be qualified with. See Genesis 17. 1. And when
Abraham was ninety and nine years old, the Lord appeared unto him, and said,
Abraham, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect. Genesis 18.
19. For I know him, that he will command his children, and his household after
him; and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. Heb.
11. 24. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son
of Pharaohs daughter: choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Verse. 26. Esteeming the
reproach of Christ, greater riches then the treasures in Egypt: for he had
respect to the recompense of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing
the wrath of the king: for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. Genesis 5.
22. And Enoch walked with God, after he begat Methusala, three hundred years.
And verse. 24. And Enoch walked with God; and he was not: for God took him.
Exodus 4. 14. And the Lord said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy Brother? I know
that he can speak well: and he comes forth to meet thee; and when he sees
thee, he will be glad in his heart. Verse. 15. And thou shall speak unto him,
and put words in his mouth; and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth,
and will teach you what you shall do. Verse. 16. And he shall be thy spokes-man
unto the people; and he shall be, even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth,
and thou shall be to him instead of God. Josh. 1. 1. And the Lord spoke to
Joshua, verse ^. There shall not a man be able to stand before thee all the
days of thy life: as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee: I will not fail
thee, nor forsake thee. Verse. 6. Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this
people shall thou divide for an inheritance, the land which I swear unto their
Fathers to give them: only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou
may observe to do according to all the Law that Moses my servant has
commanded thee: turn not from it, to the right hand, nor to the left; that thou
may prosper whithersoever thou go. Verse. 8. This Book of the Law shall
not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night. 1 Samuel 2. 10. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces: out of
heaven shall he thunder upon them: the Lord shall judge the ends of the earth,
and he shall give strength unto his King, and exalt the horns of his anointed.
Concerning David, Psalm. 18. 20, 21, 22, 23. The Lord rewarded me according to
the cleanness of my hands, according to my righteousness has he recompensed
me: for I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from
my God: for all his judgments were before me, and I did not put away his
statutes from me: I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from my own
iniquity: Mark that, from my own iniquity; his delightful sin: And verse. 32. of
the same Psalm, It is God that girdeth me with strength, and makes my ways
perfect. Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the
end of that man is peace. Psalm. 119. 101. I have refrained my feet from every
evil way. Verse. 113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love. Verse. 128. I
hate every false way. 1 King. 3. 14. And if thou will walk in my ways, to keep
my statutes and my commandments, as thy Father David did walk, then will I
lengthen thy days. And Pro. 23. 26. My son, give me thy heart, and let thy
eyes observe my ways. 2 Chronicles. 34. And Josiah did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord, and walked in all the ways of David his father, and
declined neither to the right hand, nor to the left. Ezra 7. 10. For Ezra had
prepared his heart to seek the Law of the Lord, and to do it. Verse. 25, 26. And
thou Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God that is in thy hand, set Magistrates and
Judges, which may judge all the people; all such as know the Laws of thy God,
beyond the river: and teach ye them that know them not: and whosoever will not
do the Law of thy God, and the law of the king, let judgment be executed
speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. Neh. 1. 5. O Lord God of heaven, the
great and terrible God, that keeps covenant and mercy for them that love him,
and keep his commandments. Neh. 10. 29, They came to their Brethren, their
Nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in Gods Law, which
was given by Moses the servant of the Lord; and to observe and do all the
commandments of the Lord our God, and his judgments, and his statutes. Job 1.
1. There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job, and that man was
perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil. Isa. 2. 3. Let
us go up to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways,
and we will walk in his paths: for out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let
him be your fear, and your dread. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose
mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. Trust ye in the Lord for
ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. The ways of the just is
uprightness. Thou most Upright do weigh the paths of the just; yea, in the
ways of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee: the desire of our soul
is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee. Thus says the Lord of hosts,
the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings: Trust not in lying words,
saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord:
for if you thoroughly amend your ways and your doings; if you thoroughly execute
judgment between a man and his neighbor; if ye oppress not the stranger, the
fatherless and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither
walk after other gods to your hurt: then will I cause you to dwell in this
place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and for ever. Behold,
ye trust in lying words that cannot profit: will ye steal, murder, and commit
adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal, and walk after other
gods, whom ye know not, and come and stand before me in this house, which is
called by my Name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations? But
this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and
you shall be my people: and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you,
that it may be well unto you. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I
will raise unto David a righteous Branch; and a king shall reign and prosper,
and shall execute judgment and justice on the earth: in his days Judah shall
be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his Name whereby he shall
be called, The Lord our Righteousness. Nevertheless, if thou warn the righteous
man, that the righteous sin not, and he does not sin, he shall surely live: the
soul that sins shall die: but if a man be just, and do that which is lawful
and right, and has not eaten upon the mountains, neither has lift up his eyes
to the idols of the house of Israel, neither has defiled his neighbors wife,
neither has come near to menstruous women, and has not oppressed any, but
has restored to the debtor his pledge; has spoiled none by violence, has
given his bread to the hungry, and has covered the naked with a garment; he
that has not given forth upon usury, neither has taken any increase, that
has withdrawn his hand from iniquity, has executed true judgment between
man and man; has walked in my statutes, and kept my judgments, to deal truly;
he is just, he shall surely live, says the Lord God. And they that be wise
shall shine as the stars in the firmament, for ever and ever: and they that
turn many to righteousness, as the brightness of the firmament. And in that day
will I make a Covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the
fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground; and I will break
the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the earth, and will make them
dwell safely; and I will betroth thee unto my self in righteousness for ever;
yea, I will betroth thee unto my self in righteousness, and in judgment, and
in loving kindness, and in mercy: I will betroth thee unto my self in
faithfulness; and thou shall know the Lord. The Lord also shall roar out of
Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem: and the heavens and the earth shall
shake: but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the
children of Israel. Then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no stranger
pass through her any more: For thus says the Lord unto the house of Israel,
Seek ye me, and ye shall live. But upon mount Sion shall be deliverance, and
there shall be holiness; and the house of Jacob shall possess their
possessions. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. But I
will sacrifice to thee with the voice of thanksgiving; I will pay that that I
have vowed: salvation is of the Lord. Thus says the Lord, concerning the
prophets that make my people err, that bite with their teeth, and cry peace;
and he that puts not into their mouths, they ever prepare war against him.
But truly, I am full of power, by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and
of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgressions, and to Israel his sin. Hear
this, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that
abhor all judgment, and pervert all equity; they build up Sion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity; the heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests
thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet will
they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? no evil can come
upon us. Therefore shall Zion for your sakes be plowed as a Field, and
Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the Mountains of the house as the high places
of the Forests. The Lord is of purer eyes then to behold evil, and cannot
behold iniquity.

When the Lords appearance comes upon the soul, then he cuts away all Idols,
and they shall be no more remembered: the appearance of the Lord gives sight to
the blind: Christ Jesus enlightneth every man that comes into the world; and
that is Christ the Son of the most High, that checketh for evil in every one,
and that is the true Teacher. Follow that: it will bring thee out of all evil;
for it leads unto perfect peace. Ye shall not say, Lo here is Christ, or lo
he is there: but the Word is nigh thee, even in thy heart, and in thy mouth:
and this true Teacher, will keep thee from the very appearance of evil. The
Lord Jesus promised the Comforter should come after his departure; and Peter
received it: for he being full of the Holy Ghost, there was three thousand
added by his Ministry at once: and the Apostles, when-they had prayed, the
place was shaken where they were assembled together, and they were all filled
with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke the Word of God with boldness. Now Christ
is the Bread of Life: And he that eats the bread that I shall give him,
(says Christ) shall never hunger: and he that believes in me, (says Christ)
has everlasting life: and he that eats the bread that I shall give him,
shall live for ever. And those that are risen with Christ, set their affections
on the things above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God; and they do
not mind earthly things: for as they have born the Image of the earthly Adam,
which is sin unto death; so they must bear the Image of the heavenly, which is
obedience unto righteousness: the end whereof, through his mercy that enableth
them to bear it, is everlasting life and salvation: and, he that is born of
God, sins not, because he is born of God; neither can he sin, because he is
born of God: for he that commits sin, is of the devil.

Now consider these sayings, and ponder them in your minds; for where the Lord
comes, his presence is very dreadful and terrible; and he destroys all
Graven Images, and grindeth them to dust; he makes that heart deny himself,
and take up his Cross daily, and follow him. When a stronger then the strong
man armed comes, he destroys his strong holds, and divides the spoils, and
makes the heart clean: A new heart, says the Lord, will I give thee, and a
new spirit will I put into thee, and I will lead thee, and be thy everlasting
reward and strength to support thee: for I dwell in the humble, and delight to
give life to my contrite ones: for with the holy, will thou be holy; and with
the contrite and pure, will I be pure, says the Lord. Now by thy words, thou
shall be justified; and by thy words condemned.

Now this is from the true Lover of all your souls, the seed of God in you,
that groaneth after the deliverance of it, may come forth from the state of
bondage, and corruption, and thraldom, where it is kept, that it may come to
the glorious liberty of the Sons of God Almighty, the most high, who with
continual praises with one heart, and in oneness of spirit sing continual
Praises and Hallelujahs to Him that lives for ever and ever, who alone is
worthy of all everlasting praises from his own, henceforth and for ever.

Now I shall show the signs, marks and characters of good Magistrates, as the
Lord gives of them, as I find in Scripture: and by the manifestation of his
Spirit within me, I know it is the Lords desire, that Judges and all
Magistrates should be such as fears the Lord and hates covetousness, and
works Righteousness, that judgment and justice may run down like a mighty
stream, and Rivers of waters.

Moses was a good Magistrate: he executed the Law with Justice upon all,
without respect of persons, or gifts, or rewards, according to the command of
the Lord, who was the Lawgiver: For the Law came by Moses, but Grace by Jesus
Christ.

Deborah was a good Magistrate, and the children of Israel came up to her for
judgment; and she judged Israel at that time, and the Lord was with her, and
made her lead away the Captives, and lead them into Captivity that oppressed
his people: for she was just before him; and the Stars from Heaven fought in
their courses for her, against the enemies of truth, and the river Kishon swept
them away: and the Land had rest forty years: and the Lord caused the Mighty
and the Nobles to be in subjection unto her, and the Lord went before her, and
the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds dropped water.

Gideon was a good Magistrate, and the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and
said, The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valor; go in this thy might,
and thou shall save Israel. And the Lord said unto him, I will be with thee.
And the Lord said unto him, Peace be unto thee; thou shall not dye: and the
Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon; and Gideon did as the Lord had commanded
him. And Gideon said, That neither I nor my Son shall rule over you. And the
Land had rest forty years in the days of Gideon

Solomon was a good Magistrate, and God said unto him, Because thou askedst
this thing, and have not asked the life of thy enemies, nor long life for thy
self, neither riches for thy self, but have asked for thy self understanding to
discern Judgment; behold, I have done according to thy words: lo, I have given
thee a wise and an understanding heart, so that there was none like thee before
thee, neither after thee shall arise any like unto thee; and I have given thee
that which thou have not asked, both riches and honor; so that there shall not
be any like unto thee, amongst the kings all thy days. And Solomon said, His
meditation was stayed on the Lord all the day long, and his meditation was of
his goodness, kept in the Lords fear: And Solomonraigned over all Israel forty
years.

Asa was a good Magistrate: he was perfect before the Lord, although the high
places were not taken away in his time: he reigned one and forty years, and the
people had much comfort by him, and made sore lamentation for his death: for
they, by his appointment, entered into a solemn League and Covenant, That
whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death,
whether small or great, whether man or woman: and all Judah rejoiced at the
oath: for they had sworn with all their hearts, and sought him with their whole
desires, and he was found of them; and the Lord gave them rest round about: And
Asa reigned in peace seven and thirty years.

Hezekiah was a good Magistrate; and he did that which was right in the sight
of the Lord, according to all that David his father had done, and wrought that
which was right and truth in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David
his father had done; and wrought that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
and he did it with all his heart, in seeking the Commandments of his God, and
prospered in the work.

Josiah was a good Magistrate; and he did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord, and walked in the ways of David his father, and did not decline from
the right hand, nor the left: and the people sorely lamented his death: for all
Judah mourned for him, and Jerusalem, and Jeremiah lamented his death: and he
reigned one and thirty years.

And Paul says of a good Bishop, that he must be no striker, blameless, the
steward of the Lord, not soon angry, not given to filthy lucre, nor wine, but a
lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate,
holding fast the faithful word: and he shows the reason, That he may be able
by sound doctrine to convince gainsayers: he exhorts that prayers and
supplications may be made for kings, and all in authority; to what end, he
shows; to this end, That we may live peaceable lives in all godliness and
honesty: for this is good and acceptable in God our Savior: and he says, The
Magistrate bears not the sword sor naught; It is for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

Now that Magistrate whose heart is not touched with the true fear of the Lord,
and that seed of true faith that is as small as a grain of mustard seed, has
got the pre-eminence, and is chief in his soul, and Christ Jesus is set up in
his soul, in him on the throne, that he has the whole heart, and the whole man
is in his dominion, that can truly say, by bearing Testimony to the witness of
God in him, That to him to live is Christ, and to die is gain; unless the
Magistrate be such, he is not Christ's Magistrate: for those that are Christ's,
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts; and no drunkard,
whoremaster, swearer, proud, ambitious, self-seeker, lover of pleasures more
then lover of God, having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof,
no such can be said to be of God, and so are not to have that double honor
which is due to Magistrates that do truly rule in his fear. And this discovers
plainly how short those Judges and Justices come of being godly Magistrates,
that suffer and consent to the imprisoning of just and righteous ones, whom the
Lord esteems as the Apple of his eye; and those that touch them to their
hurt, will one day find it, that the Lord esteems them as his Jewels: and yet
how is the Goals filled with them through the Nation? and some have perished to
death, because they cannot consent, for conscience sake, to pay Tithes, seeing
them to be a great and abominable Oppression.

I could wish that Judges and all Magistrates would regard their Oaths, to do
equal Administration of Justice to every man alike, to have no man's Cause in
respect of person, but rightly to judge for the Poor as well as the Rich, and
let the merits of the Cause carry it; minding the words of Jehosaphat: for he
said to the Judges, Take heed what you do: for ye judge not for man, but for
the Lord: wherefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you: for there is no
iniquity with the Lord our God, nor taking of Gifts.

And let them that are contrary minded, remember the ends of Empson and Dudly,
and mind the proceedings of Henry the Third, in the five and thirtieth year of
his reign, against Henry de Bath, one of the Judges then. And the sixteenth
year of Edward the First, there being a great complaint of the ill
Administration of Justice by the Judges; whereupon the then Parliament, upon
due examination, and proofs of their Bribery and Extortion, together with their
injustice done to the people, were fined to pay to the King, as follows:
Ralph Hengham, chief Justice of the Upper Bench, 7000 Marks; John Lineton,
chief Justice of the Lower Bench, 3000 Marks; William Brompton Justice, 6000
Marks; Solomon Rochester, 4000 Marks; Thomas Lodington, 2000 Marks; Walter
Hopton, 2000 Marks; Richard Boyland, 4000 Marks; William Sham, 3000 Marks;
Robert Litbury, Master of the Rolls, 1000 Marks; Roger Liester, 1000 Marks;
Henry Bray, Escheter, and Judge for the Jews, 1000 Marks; Adam Streton, chief
Baron of the Exchequer, was fined 34000 Marks; and Thomas Wayland, being found
the greatest Delinquent, for Bribery and Extortion, and being of the greatest
substance had all his Estate, real and personal, taken from him to the Kings
use: and this great Act of Justice was highly pleasing to the people, and
brough^ much honor to the King, as well as Treasure into his Coffers: And one
Bellknap and Trisillian, being both chief Justices, were executed for
injustice. In the year forty one, Articles were exhibited against John Bramston
chief Justice, Robert Barkly, Francis Crawly, Humphry Davenport, Richard
Weston, Thomas Trevor, being Justices of both the Benches, and Barons of the
Exchequer; and as I take it, they were degraded for injustice done the people.
It is said of that great Tyrant Nero, That he could not endure an unjust Judge:
for one being convicted before him for injustice, he caused him to be flayed
alive, and his skin to be nailed to the Judgment Seat, that whoever came on
that Seat, might have that act of Justice fresh in his memory.

Thou art inexcusable, O man, whoever thou art, that judge another: for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, if thou do the same
things: and think thou to escape the judgment of Cod?

Now it were a good thing for the people of England, that the chief Magistrates
with their Council, would erect a Court of Justice, where every man, by their
Proclamation, might once every quarter of a year, appeal to the said Court, for
relief against any injury done them by Judges, Justices, or any Officers of the
Commonwealth in private or in public, done to their detriment. This would be a
high Act of Justice from the Counselors, Magistrates or Rulers, who should
preserve Justice in the Land: and it would be very satisfactory to all the
people; and this would make men follow the Command of Christ in time, To do
unto all men, as they would have all men do unto them.

By all these Texts of Scripture before-rehearsed, it is plainly showed by the
holy Ghost, the marks of true Teachers and false; the marks of hireling
shepherds, and such as fleece the Flock; and such as are of Christ, and are
truly Ministers of Christ, and have the Spirit of Christ, God having revealed
himself in them, they do minister food in due season; and they do feed the
Flock of Christ, over which the holy Ghost has made them Overseers; and they
do turn people unto God, unto the light that is single, that knows the deep
and hidden things of God: for the Father that dwells in them, shows them
all things; and they have the first Fruits of the Spirit, and God is in them of
a truth, and they and the Father are one; and they do abide in the Vine, and in
him they bring forth much Fruit, to the glory of God the Father: and these
Fruits of the holy Ghost are to be found dwelling in them, as Love, Joy,
Meekness, Patience, Temperance, Brotherly Kindness, Bowels of Mercy, Humbleness
of Mind, Holiness and Righteousness.

And the false Teachers appear plainly by their Fruits, to be the Priests that
do receive Tithes: for they seek gain from their Quarters; they fleece the
Flock, and do not feed them; they speak a Divination of their own brain; they
are in the number of those that steal the word from their neighbor, and cry,
The Lord says, when the Lord never spoke unto them: they do not at all profit
the people: for they that were unclean, are unclean; they that were filthy, are
filthy still; and Drunkards are Drunkards still: they are not sent of God; for
if they were, they would have turned people from the evil of their doings, and
they should have learned to do well. By their fruits (Christ says) they shall
be known: for men do not gather figs of thorns, nor grapes of thistles: but
every good tree brings forth good fruit: and by their covetous filthy lives
they destroy the hearty professions of their hearers, who are much led by
example and practice of their Teachers; and herein they are partakers of other
men's sins, and so must partake with them of their plagues; and the blind does
lead the blind, and they must fall into the ditch: for they that cannot witness
in their own particulars, that the Spirit of the Lord in them, is raised, and
has the whole seat of the soul in his dominion and power, and the seed of God
is raised in him, and there is a continual watch kept to destroy sin in its
first motion, and so it is not yielded to, but is laid all upon the Tempter:
unless a man be brought to this, he is not a fit person to teach others: for
Christ commands his Disciples to be perfect, as their Father which is in
heaven is perfect; and to be holy, in all manner of conversation: for without
holiness no man shall see the Lord: and, he that is in Christ, ought so to walk
as Christ has walked, who did no sin, neither was there guile found in him.

I am sure the Priests dare not say they are in Christ, or that he has
revealed himself in them, or that the holy Ghost is come down upon them: if
these effects were wrought in them they durst not sue the just and righteous
for treble Damages, and make such spoil and havoc of their Estates, as they
do, throughout the Nation; taking from some eight times as much as is the Due,
according to their own Demands. O sad Generation of men! that dare say the
Lords Prayer, as they say, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us; and yet it is like, the next day sueth for treble Damage
for a pretended Trespass, done before he says the Petition. Do they think the
Lord God, who has an all-seeing eye, does not know their hypocrisy, and will
repay their deceit upon their own heads? yea, be assured all of you, he will.
Do you follow the Rule that Christ commands, To do unto all men, as you would
that all men should do unto you? Do you expect a day wherein God shall judge
the secrets of all men, by Jesus Christ, and when every man shall give an
account for the things done in his body? And do ye think that these actions
before-rehearsed, will stand and bear weight in that day? O fear and tremble:
for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he assuredly reap; he that sows to
his flesh, shall of that, reap corruption; but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of that, reap life everlasting: for they that are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the sons of God; and they that are led by their wills and lusts,
whose servants are they? the Apostle tells you, That of whomsoever a man is
overcome, his servant he is; whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience
unto righteousness. And therefore awake thou that sleep, and stand up from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee light: and be not drunk with wine wherein
is excess; but be ye filled with the Spirit: and look to see that Scripture
fulfilled in you, that ye are covetors of spiritual things, and all other
Scriptures also: for they are written for our Instruction, upon whom the ends
of the world shall fall; and leave off the woolvish nature, the dogs nature,
the lions nature, and the destroying nature; and put on the Lambs nature, be
tender hearted one to another; and if any man have a quarrel against another,
forgive it, even as God for Christ's sake, forgiveth thee: if thou unfainedly
repent, and turn from the evil of thy doings, then the Lord will blot out all
thy transgressions, and he will remember thy sins no more. O turn ye, turn ye:
for why will ye die, ye house of Israel?

And therefore let all now take up the sore lamentation, and teturn unto him,
that they may be saved: for Jesus is able to save to the utmost all those that
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them: and
they that do forsake lying vanities, and cleave unto him, blessed, yea, for
ever blessed are they; for they that have part in this first Resurrection, from
the death of sin unto the life of Grace, over such the second death shall have
no power; but they shall reign as Lords and kings, for ever and ever; and the
high praises of God shall be found in their mouths, and they shall be all
clothed with white, the white Robes of his Righteousness; and follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes; and he will lead them unto the lively Fountains, and
wipe away all tears from their eyes; and they shall sing praises and
hallelujahs unto him, for ever and ever: for he has found them worthy, and
has given them to be with his Father, that they may behold his glory, and see
him as he is: for none of Christ's prayers shall fail: He says, Father, I will
that those whom thou have given me may be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory; that as thou, O Father, art in me, and I in thee; so that they
may be made one in Us, Joh. 17. 23, 24. And they have all this benefit here,
that if they abide in Christ, and his Word abide in them, let them ask what
they will, and it shall be done unto them. And herein is my Father glorified
(says Christ) that you bear much fruit, Joh. 15. 7, 8. These things have I
spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be
full, says Christ.

Now as for all others, let them be in what form of Worship soever, if they be
out of the Life and Power of Christ, as is before showed, who are in the life,
which are only such that have the seed of God raised in their own particulars,
and always obey it in the power thereof; such are not under the power of the
Law, but under Grace: and the Spirit of the Lord Jesus which dwells in them,
has made them free from the Law of sin and of death; and they, and they only
are Christ's, because they are led by the Spirit of Christ: and all others, let
their forms be Episcopal, Presbytery, Independents, Anabaptists, or whatever;
all their Worship is but Will Worship; and their eatings and drinkings, and
washings, and preachings, and singings, and hearings, are all but the Sacrifice
of Fools, being all will Worship, the inventions of men's hands, out of the life
and power of the truth, as it is in Jesus; and therefore is before the Lord,
but as the cutting off a dogs neck, being a blind zeal without knowledge: for I
know upon what ground they all stand, having run through all these Forms, and
could never find rest for the sole of my feet, in them; neither can any find
true peace, until they come to lie down in the Father, worshipping him in
Spirit and in Truth, being holy in all manner of conversation: for unto such it
is become natural to do the will of their Father on Earth, as it is done in
Heaven.

And therefore I do dearly exhort you all, men and women, to whom this shall
come, to keep close to the pure seed of God in you: for that is your true
Teacher; and follow it, and it will show you the Father and the Son: and if you
obey this Doctrine, you shall know that it is of God: and lend not your ears at
any time or place unto the Tempter, but crush the Serpent in the first motions
of sin; and then they turn upon his own account, and not upon thine: for it is
no sin to be tempted, but the sin is to yield: for when lust has conceived, it
brings forth sin and sin when it is finished, brings forth death. Therefore
break the Cockatrice Egg, before it be hatched, that it may never come to be a
Serpent: and resist the devil, and he will flee from you; and turn in the mind
to the pure light, and wait in it, that preserved you may all be out of that
sin and evil that would defile you: for this pure Principle of God in you, will
not consent at any time to sin, but will check and reprove for it; and if its
motions be obeyed, it will keep you all single and unspotted of the world; and
so you shall be found worthy to follow the Lamb in this the day of his power,
wherein he is risen to make War with the Beast and false Prophet. And therefore
it does concern every one continually to watch, and to have their loins girt
about with the preparation of the Gospel of Truth, that is, with Jesus, the
Word, by whom all things were made, who is in all his Babes and Children that
are born again; and those that have his commandments and keeps them, dwells
in him, and he in them: and this Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
world, shall have the Victory: and blessed and thrice happy are all they that
can come to witness, sensibly, in their own particular, him rising in them,
that are truly fighting under his Bann^ against sin, the world, and the devil;
and feel a daily conquering of sin; that die daily (as Paul says) unto sin,
that they may be made alive unto God; and (as David says) that hates the very
appearance of evil.

And the only way to this, is to keep low in ones self, and to wait in the
cool of the day, turning in to the light, and in it wait; and put on the whole
Armor of God, that you may be preserved at all times out of the snares of
Satan: for this will let you see sensibly, the Tree that brings forth corrupt
fruit to be cut down in you, and a new plant raised, which will bring forth its
fruit in due season, to the glory of the Lord, who alone is worthy of all glory
and honor, and everlasting praises, for ever and for ever.

And therefore all Friends, keep in the pure fear and wisdom of the Lord, that
at all times you may be ordered by it, to do all things to his glory, at all
times, and in all places; that you may be a good savor unto all men you have
to do withal; and let your souls truly pant and thirst after the living God, as
the heart pants after the waterbrooks: for your Redeemer is near you, if you
refuse him not: the Word is nigh thee, even in thy heart and in thy mouth: and,
the kingdom of heaven is within you, as is plainly showed in this Treatise: and
if Satan be in his first motions resisted, you shall plainly see him pass away,
as the shadows pass away, and the dew, when the Sun arises.

And therefore keep in the pure fear and wisdom of God, that with it you may be
ordered and guided in all things, to do them to his glory; and so you shall
sensibly witness the seed of God in you all to reign, that will trample Satan
under feet: and then shall the saints rejoice, and they shall witness pure and
holy rejoycings, with songs of Triumph and Praises, with Glory, Glory, Glory,
and everlasting Praises to their Father, which is in heaven, who is worthy.

We have had great stirs in the Nation, of late years, by Soldiers, and great
Words, and good Language have they spoken, that they would do much for Christ,
and the settling of his Kingdom, which they do not know; and the protecting of
his people, whose Life is in it, being in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the
holy Ghost; which is a hard thing for a Soldier that kills men for money,
houses, lands and goods, ever to witness, until with Zacheus, he restore to him
that he has robbed by forged cavilation, and to the debtor his pledge. But the
whole Nation is sensible, if they be not wilfully blind, of the backsliding and
Apostatizing of the Army, and how in all changes they have sought themselves,
and not the things of God: it is like they have forgot that Text, Joh. 18. 16.
My kingdom (says Christ) is not of this world: and Paul says, Romans 14. 17.
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, nor yet Arms and Armies, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, which Soldiers and Armies
usually destroy and confound: and therefore Christ's Soldiers must have only
the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, which leads them into all
the truth and peace, and condemns the very practices of this Army, that has
so often changed and sworn, and engaged, with hands lifted up to heaven, and
yet broke all as fast as made them, to the sadding of the hearts of all their
faithful friends, to the strengthening of the hands of their enemies; and if
they do not speedily repent, they must expect that the great God will pay their
hypocrisy and deceitful dealings, with indignation and wrath upon the heads of
every one of them that does, or has done evil: and when the measure of their
iniquities are full, they must expect wrath from heaven to be poured down upon
them, and there shall be no Remedy: For they may read that David, although a
man after Gods own heart, yet because his hands were dipped in blood, the Lord
would not let him build an house unto his Name. Zach. 4. 6. Not by power, but
by my Spirit, says the Lord of hosts, is this work to be done.

We read that Soldiers have been great enemies to Christ and his Kingdom, Joh.
19. 23, 24, 32, 34. the Soldiers armed with swords, staves, and spears, were
employed to take Christ, and apprehend him, to bring him to Pilate; they
stripped him of his Garments and Robes, and crowned him with Thorns; they spit
in his Face, they buffeted him, they gave him vinegar to drink, they crucified
him, and cast lots for his garments; they thrust a spear through his side, they
watched the Sepulcher, for fear he should be taken away; and after he was
risen, the chief Priests gave large money to the Soldiers to broach their
lies, that his Disciples came by night, and stole him away while they slept:
The Soldiers stretched forth their hands to vex certain of the Church; they
killed James the Apostle with the sword; they apprehended Peter, and put him in
prison, where he was guarded day and night with four Quaternions of Soldiers,
to prevent an escape.

The Lord has resolved that men of blood, as is before showed, shall not build
his house: Christ is the King and Prince of Peace, and his Subjects are the
Subjects of Peace; Christ's Gospel is the Gospel of Peace, his Apostles and
Ministers the Ambassadors of Peace, and his Kingdom consists in Righteousness
and Peace. Now nothing is more directly opposite, inconsistent and destructive
to this Peace, to the King, Prince, Gospel, Ambassadors, and Kingdom of Peace,
then Armies, Wars, Soldiers and Arms are: and therefore you may read, that
when Christ sent forth his Disciples to preach his Gospel, and set up his
Kingdom, he did not choose Captains of thousands and hundreds, nor yet Soldiers
and armed men, but Fishermen and others, altogether averse from war; and
commanded them in express terms, not to take gold, silver, nor brass in their
purses, nor scrip, nor two coats, nor yet staves; much less Pistols, Muskets,
Pikes, Carbines, Swords: for Christ expressly means that his Ministers must be
no fighters, no strikers, strivers, much less professed Warriers; and their
weapons must be the Spirit, and their mouth, the Word of God; and they must
fight only against men's lusts and sins, not against their persons.

It is prophesied by the holy men of old, That men shall learn war no more, but
his people shall break their spears into pruning books, and their swords into
plough-shares: for Nation shall not rise against Nation, nor lift up the sword
any more; neither shall they learn war any more, but live in peace. And these
things shall be fulfilled, when Christ's Kingdom comes to be set up; and they
shall keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

And therefore let me admonish you all, to leave off your dissembling, and tell
people in plain terms, you fight to get great Estates, and kill men for money:
and sad and miserable will be the end of you, unless you repent, and perform
all those Engagements, Vows and Promises made at Triplo-Heath, New Market, and
other places; where, by your large Declarations, Remonstrances, professed by
you, that you aimed at nothing but the public good, you caused many honest
hearts to join with you, to the shedding of Blood. And therefore speedily
repent, and turn to the Lord, with fasting, weeping and mourning, and set your
selves to do Justice in the earth, for fear it speedily open her mouth, and
swallow you up, as it did Corah, Dathan and Abiram: for assure your selves, the
Lord is coming against you in Judgment, and he will be avenged on every one of
you, great and small.

And therefore, if you expect to reign with Christ, I say unto you once more,
Speedily repent, and put away the evil of your doings, and go way, and sin no
more, by your deceitful wicked practices, lest a worse thing come unto you.

And consider how often you have declared to put your helping hand and utmost
endeavors to regulate the Laws, that are so exceeding chargeable and
burdensome to the people of this Nation, that I have heard it credibly
reported, That according to calculation, cast up by good Arithmeticians, that
say, There is near seven millions of money spent yearly, by the people of the
Nation, in Law and Equity; and above one hundred thousand a year, it cannot be
less, amongst Sergeants, Bailiffs, and such kind of needless Officers, besides
many persons murdered every year, in and about Arrests, and escaping from
Sergeants, that no Nation but England can parallel the like practices: which is
a shame to all that profess the knowledge of the Lord, and makes the very Turks
say in their common speech, as I have been credibly informed, when any does
them some great injury, I think you will use me like a Christian: O abominable
shame! that Turks must rise in Judgment, and condemn the great Talkers of
Religion in England: and this heightens the spirits of Judges, and makes them
proud, and not like their Predecessors, that rode to Westminster upon Asses to
show their humility, from Sergeants Inn, and back again to Westminster, and
did not vaunt and lord it over the people as some have done of late years, and
gained great riches for themselves and their Favorites and Creatures; it is to
be feared not justly, but evilly: just like the Papist Priests in former times,
when most of those Laws now in being were made, who gained in their times most
part of the great situations, and best Lands in this Nation, by Combination,
Craft and Subtilty; by lulling the people asleep in ignorance and blindness, in
their vain superstition, pronouncing hell and damnation, with bell, book and
candle, to all that did not observe the same; and thereby brought the people
into a fond belief of them: for since that fall, those, that is to say, the
Judges and their favorites, have far outrun those Priests, in gaining riches
in an excessive manner, by griping very many men.

And it is to be observed, that many of them have come of poor and indigent
Parentage, yet have they climed up, and leaped into most of the Lordly Titles
and gainful places and Offices in the Nation, and therein and thereby have
domineered and tyrannized over, and oppressed the honest people, and gained the
favor of fawning, flattering, and lascivious Courtiers, by Rewards which they
have usually given at their entrance, which they have made up again out of
others, to their sorrows; contrary to the practice of the Judges in old time,
in this Nation; and the Lawyers formerly were mild to their Clyents, and
honest, (as I must confess, some I have had trial of, has been to me, as
Sergeant Twisden, William Wild, Shelton, and a few others) and used them very
kindly, and had great care of their business; seldom any Lawyer taking above
one Fee in one Cause in a Term; and they did not let their Clyents standCap in
hand, and make them scrape legs, and beseech them to take their money, and take
large excessive Fees, as some will, and have done, and pretend they are afraid
one of another: as Sergeant Conyers took a Fee of me to move in Chancery, and
kept it four several days; and Sergeant Maynard, and Chal. Chute was fee'd to
defend the motion; and that Cause was in an Order positive, That unless cause
was showed that day, I was in a manner undone, in a business of almost all my
Estate: and by the Rules of the Court, I was to stand committed, if I spoke up
my self; and I could get no other, the time being so short; yet this Sergeant,
just as he came to the Bar, gave me my Fee, and run into the Court, and told me
the Atturney-General was against me, and he durst not nor would not meddle in
the Case: So I was forced to move the Commissioners my self, and run the hazard
of committing to the Fleet, or else I had been ruined. Now let all men judge,
if such Lawyers ought not to be punished: for by Law they ought to be for ever
put by pleading in that Court, or any other, and suffer imprisonment, during
the pleasure of the King or chief Magistrate, as you may read by the Statute of
3 Edw. 1. chap. 29. The Life of the Law is execution of it. And some, nay, too
many, have taken large Fees to speak in Causes, to my knowledge, and have never
come to the Bar at all; and the Party has gone and demanded his money again of
them, and they have denied to give it again; and told their Clyents it was
enough for them that they were not against them. Is not this a grand Impudence?
and does not this cry for Vengeance against such a Generation as this is, that
the Poor, the Fatherless, the Widow, has little or no right done him? for if a
poor man have never so much right to an Estate, he cannot get it but by suing
under forma pauperis; and if he be cast, as many, nay most times he is, let his
Cause be never so good or just, by the reason of a corrupt Judge, and the
weight of his Adversaries Purse, which makes most Causes, according to the late
practices and proceedings, then the poor man must be whipped at the Carts Tail,
says our Laws: and if any man lends the poor man money to sue for his Estate,
then it is Champerty and Maintenance, says the Laws of England, and Barratry:
and the man that does it, must be fined all his Estate, and be punished with
imprisonment, and pilloried, or what punishment a corrupt Judge pleases to put
upon him. And now, Soldiers, will you tell us you have regulated our Laws? I
say unto you, Up and be doing, and act like men of courage, and do some great
things for us, according to all your Oaths, Declarations, Remonstrances and
Engagements; or assure your selves, the proudest of you shall be dashed and
broken to pieces, like a Potters Vessel, and none shall be able to deliver you:
for the Lord is risen, and will stand by his redeemed ones, whom you are now
helping to eat up, as men eat bread, and stand them in no stead at all: and
your gilded Promises and specious pretenses will not hold out without doing; it
is he that does good, and he that keeps promise, shall come into the holy
Hill; they that break it shall be sure to be cast forth for ever: your Form of
Godliness, without the Power, is known, and is discerned by all men, who have
their eyes in their heads.

Now having done with the Deceit of these men, at present, I must speak a few
words, in the vindication of a Party, who has some calumnies cast upon her, by
the scandalous Pen of a lying Priest, one Tho. Danson at Sandwich in Kent; it
is on the behalf of one he calls Mrs. Dorothy Gudderson, in his Book called
The Quakers folly opened, by him, as he alleges, upon his Dispute at
Sandwich, with three Quakers, on the 12, 13, 14. days of the month he calls
April, in the year 1659. wherein he styles himself, Fellow of Magdalen College
in Oxon: where he might, if he had made good use of his time, have learned more
manners then to traduce a person so much above him by Birth and Parentage, as
she is; which thing he highly esteems and prizeth, although she denies it;
having so learned Christ, as to count all things but dross and dung, that she
may be found in him, not having her own Righteousness, which is by the Law, but
having the Righteousness which is by Christ, through faith in his blood, and so
expecting Justification by the Righteousness of Jesus Christ within her. And
this I know is her whole desire, panting and breathing after holiness; as the
heart pants after the waterbrooks, so longs or breaths her soul after the
living God.

And thus Tho. Danson begins his Discourse of her: I will tell thee a true
story, which may perhaps move thy laughter. Just like a Jester in a Play, more
like then a staid Fellow of a College; wherein he condemns her for denying
to kiss a Gentleman, and is ashamed to tell it was himself: for I being present
the same time, perceived by his countenance, as far as one may judge or
discover by outward appearance of another, that he was much disturbed that she
refused him to salute her: and the passage was thus: He coming to salute her,
she put forth her hand to him, and said, That so far as God had made manifest
to her any sin, or vain custom of the world, she should and had denied her
self in it: and that she did believe to be one. And verily he might have been
so far judicious, after so many high complements used to her, and his wife
inviting her to his house, as to have forborne the putting her in print, just in
the end of his Book, as much as in him lay, to make her ridiculous to her
Friends, Kindred and Acquaintance; when she said she believed it, and he may
know, that what is not of faith, is sin.

But all men may see what spirit he is guided by, even a lying spirit. He may
be ashamed of what he held forth at the Meeting, at Sandwich; as also his
traducing of Samuel Fisher, charging him with many lies, to my knowledge, in
his Book, I being present at the Meeting, and also knowing Samuel Fisher very
well, being confident he is a precious child of the living God, one that is
born again, and is a Babe in Christ, and his whole desire is to do the will
of his Father, which his soul continually breathes after, which is, the
living God that made heaven and earth; and it is his meat and drink to do his
will on earth; and I am sure this is the desire of his soul: and that he is a
true Minister of Jesus Christ, I do bear Testimony unto it, the witness of God
in me being raised by his Ministry: and for those false aspersions cast upon
him, of his receiving a Pension from the Pope, I know his soul abhors any
such thing; and that he is as great a hater of the Pope, and his vvayes, as any
man in England is; and I know he has no such need, nor ever will have: For
they that seek the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, all other
things shall he administered unto them: and I do verily think, that there is not
a man in England more able to confute Error and Heresy, then Samuel Fisher is.

And verily, Tho. Danson did exceedingly wrest the Scriptures, giving his dark
and blind meanings of them, at that Meeting in Sandwich: for he said, We were
not justified by that Christ that was in us; he said, No, no, twice to it: for
he owned two Christ's, one without the Saints, and another within them. But
this he became ashamed of, and disowned in the Meeting: and then he owned but
one Christ in the Saints and in Heaven, as there is but one God; though he be
in heaven, yet is he with him that is poor, and of a contrite heart, and
trembles at his word. Yet still he could not clear himself from his former
assertion, in his denying Justification by the Righteousness of Christ within:
for he might as well have said, That Christ and his Righteousness was divided;
inasmuch as he owned Christ in the Saints, but not his Righteousness, which
justified: and all his Discourse and Drift was, to have men justified in their
sins, and to be sinners all their lives, as one that justifies the wicked,
Prove. 7. 15. Isa. 26. 12. God has wrought all our works in us, says the
Prophet: Romans 4. 5, 9. says the Apostle, Abraham's faith was counted to him for
Righteousness: and this Priest is a bolsterer of men up in their sins, and sows
pillows under their arms, as I may so say, in comparison: for he calls them
worthy that are his hearers, that loves flattering and fained Titles, and the
fawnings of men, which is deceit; when none ought to have the Title of Worthy,
but those that truly set their faces toward Sion, and seek it with their whole
hearts, and desire to have the King of Righteousness and Prince of Peace, to
guide them and rule them in all their actions and works, that they may witness
them to be all wrought in GOD.

Now this person, Tho. Danson, all his teachings tends to a Justification of
Christ without us, and not to a Justification wrought by Christ within us; and
so his hearers can never attain to that perfect peace that the Scripture speaks
of, which is thus written, That he that stays himself upon the Lord, he
keeps such in perfect peace; and there is no peace to be found out of a man:
the peace is within the Heart; the Gospel, Christ Jesus, the enlivening Word is
within the soul; and he is the pure Word, Power and Wisdom of the Father, who
is the only Reconciler unto God, who is made manifest for the same purpose, to
break down the partition-vvall which separates the soul from God, and to bring
the soul into its proper place and center, into Unity and Fellowship withGod,
who is Light, in whom there is no Darkness; and so by abiding in this living
Word Christ, and he abiding in you, the creatures are brought to serve the ever
living God in newness of life, and in the Spirit; and so Christ will and does
work their work in them and for them, to their everlasting salvation: and so
the first fruits of the Spirit, makes them alive unto God; and according to
Christ's words, He that believes in him has everlasting life, and he shall
never come into condemnation, but shall pass from death unto life: for Christ
alone is the only Savior; and there is no name under heaven given unto men,
whereby they can be saved, but by the Name of Jesus. And this Gospel Christ, is
a free gift of God: it is not to be bought for money, as Tho. Danson falsely
surmiseth: for he must know, that there is a necessity laid upon those that are
the true Teachers of the Gospel, and woes is to be upon them, if they do not
teach freely, and be instant in season and out of season: for Christ says to
them, As ye have freely received, so freely give: and so having received from
the Lord that which they do deliver unto the Saints, they speak from a pure
Principle of Life and Power, that reaches the witness of God in their Hearers,
and they live themselves in the Life and Power of what they speak, and so by
their good examples are a good savor unto all men that they have to do withal;
and so they bring people into the pure and perfect image of Christ, and the
unity of Faith, which brings them to the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure and the stature and the fullness of Christ; and
they say, We that are dead unto sin, how can we live any longer therein? and
such are in the number of such as the Apostle said, We preach wisdom amongst
those that be perfect; not the wisdom of the world, but the wisdom and power of
God, which is pure and peaceable.

Therefore it is good and righteous to let the people know the false Teachers,
and those that call themselves Ministers of Christ, and are not, but are of the
Synagogues of Satan. And the true Prophets of the Lord, always did stir the
peoples memory up with these Deceivers: Isaiah cried against such Hirelings as
seeked gain from their Quarters, Isa. 56. Jeremiah cried against such as taught
for hire, and divined for money, Jer. 5. Christ himself cried against such as
were called of men, Master, stood praying in the Synagogues, and had the
chiefest places in the Assemblies, Mat. 23. the Apostle Jude declared against
such as went in the way of Cain, in envy; and such as went after the ways of
Balaam, for gifts and rewards, Jud. 11. Peter declared against such as through
fained words and covetousness made Merchandise of the people, 2 Pet. 1. 5.
these and suchlike practices manifests the false Teachers: for they that have
not the Spirit of the Lord Jesus dwelling bodily in them, leading them into all
the fruits of Holiness and Righteousness, making them perfect in Christ; unless
they be such, they are no Ministers of Christ, let their pretenses be what they
will: For they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections
and lusts thereof; and, they that live in the Spirit, shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh; and they that are risen with Christ, seek the things that
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of the Throne of God, and
they do not mind earthly things.

And therefore all dear Friends, mind the pure love of the eternal God, the
loving Father unto you all, to manifest his living pure way of Truth, Life and
Salvation unto you, which is treasured up in Christ, who is in you that
believe, the hope of glory: and therefore lay hold upon him, and highly prize
this the day of your visitation, which the Father has given you all in tender
love to your souls, which the Lord desires the salvation of: for the Lord
says, As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but that
he may turn from his wickedness, and live: and, God would have none to perish,
but that all might come to the knowledge of the truth, that they might be
saved. And what is the Reason when men have the measure of the manifestation of
the true light of Christ in them, which is given them to profit withal, that
they are not saved? The Reason is, Because they will not part with their Lusts,
their darling sins: for they love Darkness more then Light, because their Deeds
are evil; and they will not come unto the light, that they may have their deeds
made manifest: and, Thy condemnation is of thy self, O Israel: and Christ
says, I stand at the door and knock: if any man will open, I will come in, and
sup with him, and he with me. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the
Prophets, and stonest those that are sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered thee together as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings! and ye
would not. So thy rebellious sinful nature leads thee to thy everlasting
destruction, because thou take pleasure in unrighteousness and sin, and thou
slightest the pure ways of the living God, and countest the blood of the
Covenant an unholy thing, and thou do despite unto the Spirit of Grace.

And therefore now search and try your ways, and turn to the Lord, and put
away the evil of your doings, and learn to do well; and the Lord will heal all
your backslidings, and will love you freely, and remember your sins past no
more, if you from this day go away and sin no more. But if you go on in sin,
know, That although judgment is not speedily executed against evil doers, yet
the Lord will punish assuredly the hairy scalp of him that goes on in his sins
and wickednesses; and when the measure of thy iniquities are fully ripe, then
Judgment shall come upon thee to the utmost, and there shall be no Remedy, and
none shall be able to deliver thee, in the day of the Lords wrath. And
therefore stand in aw, and sin not, lest a worse thing come upon thee, then yet
has done. And therefore confess thy sins unto the Lord, and he is faithful and
just to forgive thee thy sins. But woe be unto him that covers his sin, and
hides his Transgressions: for he shall not prosper.

Therefore high and low, rich and poor, learned and unlearned, turn unto the
Lord, and harden not your hearts: and let the great ones know, That the
Almighty God is coming against them, and he will plead with them, by fire and
by the sword; and the ungodly shall be as chaff before the wind, as stubble
before the fire: for the day of the Lord shall burn as an Oven, and the day
shall burn up all that do wickedly: for the Lord God will not be mocked, but he
will be avenged on his enemies; and all the unbelieving and unrighteous
generation of men, both Priests and People, shall feel the stroke of his
almighty Arm of Power, if they do not speedily repent, and turn unto him, and
leave off their wicked deceitful ways, and their doings that are not good: for
they are wallowing in their own ways, and their hearts are running a whoring
after their own inventions. And therefore return unto the Lord, and learn
Righteousness now at the last, before you die: for as the Tree falls, so it
lies, and there is no Repentance in the grave whither thou go; and as death
leaves, Judgment finds: for this I say as Paul does, That according to the
way that most men call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers; believing
all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets, and that there shall
be a resurrection both of the just, and the unjust, a resurrection of the dead:
and herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offense,
toward God and toward man. Act. 1. 10, 11. And while they looked steadfastly
toward heaven, as he went up; behold, two men stood by them in white apparel,
which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this
same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner, as ye have seen him go into heaven. Act. 2. 20. The Sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of
the Lord come, 1 These. 4. 15, 16, 17. For this we say unto you by the word of
the Lord, That we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord,
shall not prevent them that are asleep: for the Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of
God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and
remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord
in the air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord. 1 These. 5. But ye, brethren,
are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief, 2 These. 7,
8. And to you which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorified
in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe. As Paul reasoned
with Felix, (Act. 24. 25.) of Judgment, Felix trembled, and said, Go thy way,
I will call for thee, when I have a convenient season. 1 Cor. 15. If after the
manner of men (says Paul) I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what
advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? 1 Cor. 15. 43. It is raised in power,
by the mighty power of him that is Almighty, that said, Let there be light, and
it was so; and laid the Foundations of the earth, by the word of his power, and
can destroy it in the very twinkling of an eye, by the word of his power, 1
Cor. 15. 52. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for
the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we
shall be changed. 2 Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appear before the Judgementseat
of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. 2 Pet. 3. 7. But the heavens and
the earth which are now, by the same word, are kept in store, reserved unto
fire, against the day of Judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. Verse. 10. But
the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat; and the earth, with the works that therein are, shall be burnt
up. Ver. 12. Looking for, and hasting to the coming of the day of God, wherein
the heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat. Mal. 4. 1. For behold, the day comes, that shall burn as an
Oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble; and
the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, and shall
leave them neither root nor branch.

I could instance many more places to clear it, and to show the Lords purpose
in it, to make his mighty power to appear, and to show to all that ever was,
his Justice in fulfilling his promise to his redeemed Ones, and to lay all
their sins upon the Prince of Darkness, the Devil, for tempting the newborn
Babes of Christ; and he not prevailing over them, because greater is he that is
in them, then he that is in the world; and sin must not go unpunished:
therefore Satan tempting, and they not yiedling, it is all treasured upon his
account, against that terrible day: and if it were not for that day, he should
still remain, and be a Deceiver of the Brethren, and still range up and down
the earth, and do wickedness. But his day of wrath is approaching, and that day
is it, as you may see plainly, in that Epistle of Jude, verse. 6. And the
Angels, which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he
has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day.

When this day is, none knows but the Father, who keeps it to himself: but
thy particular, and the men of this Generations day of Judgment is at hand;
and therefore it is good to live in judgment at all times: for blessed is the
man that fears always. And verily it is a blessed state for a man to wait on
the Lord at all times: for blessed is he that waits on him: and, salvation is
of the Lord, and his blessing is upon his people. And when the mind is stayed
upon God, then the heart judges down sin in the first rise of it, and so it is
blasted and laid upon the devils account, that is the Tempter: and the mind
that is always staid upon the Lord, waiting upon that pure seed of God in him,
judges down sin at all times, and sin has no entrance in that heart, but it
is, by the power of Christ in him, kept pure, and clean, and incorrupt, and
holy as God is holy, in all manner of conversation; as it is written, Be ye
holy, as I am holy; and be ye perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect. Now all those that allow themselves in any sin or lust of the flesh,
they cannot be of God, neither can any sacrifice that man or woman does, be
accepted. If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayer: and,
the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination in the sight of the Lord God:
and, the prayers of the wicked shall turn into sin.

And therefore cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, ye
double-minded; that when that day comes, you may be found in the number of
those that shall have the Sun of Righteousness arise upon them, with healing
under his wings; and they shall grow up as fat Calves: for their Redemption
draws near. And as for the wicked, woe to them, it shall go ill with them: for
the wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all people that forget God: For the
Lord is known by the Judgments which he executes, when he snareth the wicked
in the works of his own hands.

The seventh Epistle:
To all Magistrates, and Persons in Power, to consider what they do, when they
oppress the tender Lambs of Christ's Fold: For the great Day of the Lord is at
hand, and He will bring every word and work unto Judgment.

GOD said to Pharaoh by Moses, Let my people go, that they may serve me; and if
thou will not let them go, I will show my power and wonders upon thee; I will
pour out my plagues upon thee and thy people. The Lord is coming to punish the
stout-hearted Magistrates that oppress his babes and children: and it is not he
that cries, Lord, Lord, that will be able to stand before him: for he is coming
with fire, like a Refiners fire, to purge the Dross from the good Metal; and it
is only he that does the will of his Father which is in heaven, that shall be
able to lift up his head in that day: for the Lord will be avenged of all his
Enemies, be they never so lofty; for they are all alike to him: God is no
Respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him: and the Lord is a bringing forth his
People with joy, and his chosen Ones with gladness: for he is become their Sun
and Shield, their Righteousness and Strength, and their exceeding great Reward:
for his delight is in the upright on the earth, and such he does make to excel
in Virtue: and the Lord will overturn all false deceitful Powers, that are not
of his planting, and he will root them up, and leave them neither Root nor
Branch, and they shall feel the stroke of his Almighty Arm, in this the day of
his fierce wrath: for it is coming upon the Hypocrites in Sion; for the
Marriage of the Lamb is come: now is he coming in power and great glory, and
none but the pure in heart shall see him; and they shall behold him as he is:
for the Lord is the God of Truth, and an everlasting King: at his anger the
earth shall tremble, and the nations cannot abide his wrath: for he has made
the earth by his power, and established the world by his wisdom, and has
stretched out the heavens by his discretion; he causes the clouds to ascend
unto the ends from the earth.

And therefore every one, come to know this great GOD, that you may in him lie
down in peace, and find rest unto your souls; and know this, That there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit: for condemnation has passed over them already; they are
complete in Christ, and renewed into his image; they are in Covenant with him;
they are his Children; they are born of him: and he that is born of him sins
not, neither can he sin; because he is born of God. The Reason, because he is
born of him, that is, the pure seed of God in him, being always obeyed and
waited in, the watch being continually kept, by this he overcomes the world;
and this is our victory, even our Faith, that has given us victory over the
world; and this Faith stands in Christ, who removes those Mountains of Sin
and Uncleanness, that has possessed them in the time of their ignorance, even
like so many Devils: for every sin is a Devil, as you may read, that Mary
Magdalen had seven Devils cast out of her, that is, seven reigning unclean
spirits, being devils: and the devils besought Christ, when they saw they must
go forth of the man possessed, that they might enter into the herd of Swine: So
by this Faith in Christ, the corrupt fruitless tree that cumbreth the ground,
is removed, and a Plant of Righteousness, of the Lords own planting, is placed
in the room of it, that is planted by the Rivers of waters, that flourishes,
and brings Fruit in season, and whatsoever it does, does prosper, and his
leaf shall never wither, but it shall bring forth his Fruit in due season, to
the glory of the Father; and so by abiding in Christ the Vine, the creature
does bring forth much Fruit to the glory of the Father; and the pure is known
from that which is impure, and the holy from that which is unholy and that of
God from that which is not of God: for that which is holy, is to abide in the
house of God, who dwells not in unclean Temples made with hands; but his
Temples are his Saints, and their Bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost, and
this is the living sacrifice that God accepts: for it is the living that
praise the Lord, the dead cannot: they that are dead in trespasses and sins,
they praise not God, their sacrifice is as the cutting off a dogs neck: it is
the redeemed of the Lord that sings the songs of Sion, the songs of Holiness:
they are they that follow the Lamb in the Regeneration, and they are
regenerated; and these follow the Lamb Jesus, through great Tribulations, and
they have washed their garments in his blood, and they shall sit on his right
hand for evermore: for he has found them worthy: for he has redeemed them
from all iniquity, that they may serve him in Righteousness and true Holiness,
all the days of their lives; and so they are come to the perfect liberty of
the sons of God; they are led by his Spirit, which leads them into all truth,
out of all sin, and all unrighteousness; and so they are kept without spot or
wrinkle, in the midst of a perverse and crooked Generation; and the Comforter,
which is the Spirit of Truth, leads them into all Truth, and sets up true
Judgment, and Justice, and Equity, that that rules the whole man, and governs
the souls of his, that all unjust Rulers and Governors, that has had
possession formerly, is destroyed, and the LORD GOD alone does reign in this
the day of his power, and he alone does plead the cause of his redeemed Ones,
by that of his pure Self, which he has placed in every one of them, and has
made it to get the victory.

And therefore woe, woe unto them that lay heavy burdens upon his despised Ones:
for a Day of terrible Wrath and Vengeance is coming upon you all, and the sword
of the Lord is drawn, and will be avenged on all his Enemies, in this the great
day of his terrible; appearance; and the Enemies of his power shall know, that
he alone will reign and be exalted, in this great day of his appearance: for
the Lord alone will reign, and be King over all the Kingdoms of the world; and
all the Kingdoms of the world shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ, and unto him shall all bend and bow, and all the powers of the earth be
made subject: for he is the Light, and in him is the Light of the world; and he
is the beloved of God. Therefore every one lend their ear unto him, and hear
him: for in him is to be found the white stone, with the new name written in
it, that no man knows, but he that has it: for all that are led by the
Spirit of God, are led into Holiness: for Holiness becomes the House of God
for ever: it is none but the pure in heart shall see God: for God is
Righteousness, and he leads his people into righteousness: they that are led
by his Grace, are led out of Ungodliness, and out of the paths of the wicked:
for the wicked walk in darkness, they stumble at noonday: the fool says in
his heart, There is no God; and his actions plainly declare it: for he lives
as though there were no God to punish him, nor Devil to torment him, nor
Hellfire to burn him, which is the portion of the wicked; storm and tempest,
fire and brimstone is their portion for ever, from the presence of the Lord,
Rev. 19. 3. And her smoke rose up for evermore.

And therefore you stout-hearted of the world, that bend your brows against the
Just, fear and tremble: for the righteous God is coming in Judgment to avenge
the blood of his servants at your hands; and which of you will be able to dwell
in everlasting burnings? for Judgment is already begun at the house of God:
And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the sinner and the ungodly
appear? And therefore repent, repent, go away, and sin no more, before
repentance be hid from your eyes, and you be cut off from the Land of the
Living, and meet the Lord speedily in the ways of his Judgments: O it is good
to live in judgment at all times, that is, to judge sin down in the first
motion, as has been already shown.

And therefore all you that would be counted Christians, and be Coheirs with
Christ Jesus the Son of the living God, who is the only Savior of Mankind,
depart from iniquity, sin, and all ungodliness, and return to him who is come
to judge all flesh, raising up his true and faithful VVitness in all
Concernments, which shows to all men upon the face of the earth, what sin,
iniquity, and all ungodliness is, to the end they may unto their Father, return
and repent of their former evil ways, that their sins may be taken away, and
their iniquities may be blotted out, and his perfect life brought forth, which
does his will on earth as it is in heaven: and such who do obey this holy Voice
of Christ in them, do witness his Kingdom come in great power and glory, which
is not of this world: therefore the world knovveth it not: for they will not
come unto Christ, that they may have life; and therefore they cannot taste of
the Tree of Life, and eat and live for ever, John 6. 50. This is the bread
(says Christ) that comes down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and
not dye. I am (says Christ) the living bread which came down from heaven: if
any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread that I will
give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. And this is he
that gives power to understand the Scriptures, that are dark to the
understanding, until he that gave them forth, open their understandings: as you
may see in Luke 24. 45. Then opened he their understandings, that they might
understand the Scriptures: the only way to obtain this favor from the Lord,
is to love the pure seed of God, in the which is Gods vvitness in thy
Conscience, and is his written Word in thy heart, which was that Word to
David, that he had such a love unto, that by loving of it, God made him vviser
then his Teachers, and it was sweeter then the honey and the honey comb, and
it was better then thousands of Gold and Silver: and Solomon says of this
vvisdome, The merchandise is better then the merchandise of silver, and the
gain thereof is better then gold: And this is the Pearl of great price, that
the man sold all to buy it: therefore my desire, nay, the desires of my soul,
thirsts after the Salvation of all men. And therefore, dear Friends and
People, all be kept lovv in the fear of God at all times, and learn of Christ
to be meek and lowly, that you may find rest unto your souls; and consider,
that the only thing is to fear God, and keep his Commandments; for they that
has the Commandments, and keeps them, dwells in Christ, and Christ in
them: and much reading is a vveariness to the flesh: here the end of all is, To
fear God, and keep his Commandments; this is the whole duty of man: for he
that manifests his faith by being obedient, he shall live for ever: for the
Kingdom of God consists not in words, but in life and power, which is
righteousness; and that procures true peace, such peace as men and Devils can
never take from you: and so vvalking in this peace, the God of love and peace
will be with you to the end. Now unto God our Father, be glory, and
everlasting praises ascribed, both now and for ever, and for ever.

Amen.
The eighth Epistle:
To Richard Allen, a Priest in the Parish of Crundal in Kent, and also to be
communicated to the rest of his Brethren the Priests, to show them the
unlawfulness and wicked Practice of receiving of Tithes, contrary to the
Practice of Christ and his Apostles; and yet call themselves, A
Gospel Ministry: But they must know, The terrible day of the Lords Wrath is at
hand, and this their Act of Oppression must come to Judgment.

WHat have thou to do to take the Name of the Lord in thy mouth, seeing thou
hate to be reformed? for, Let him that calls on the Name of the Lord,
depart from iniquity: and, He that says he is in Christ, ought so to walk as
Christ has walked: and, He that has Faith, it purifieth the heart, and he
purifieth himself as Christ is pure. Now he that lives in any known sin, is a
transgressor of the Law: and, He that keeps the whole Law, and yet offends
in one point, is guilty of all: and, He that breaks one of these least
Commandments, and teaches men so, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Now I do charge thee with the desiring of thy Neighbors Goods, which thou
have no just right to, neither by the Law of God, nor just Law of Man: but the
Reason is, there is Laws in being for thy wicked lust, because all things are
out of Gods order: for our Judges are not as they were at first, nor our
Counselors as at the beginning; if they were, they might tell the people of
the Law, what it is: for the power of the Nation of England has had their Laws
invested and enacted by Parliaments, and they chosen by the people. Now it was
never conceived that a people should be so void of reason, as to give a company
of persons a power to destroy their Birthright, the property of their Estates:
for they are called to provide for the safety and weal of a people, not for
their hurt or damage: and all Laws are grounded upon Reason, or ought to be;
and where Reason cease, there the Law cease.

Now thou art so ingenuous to confess that Tithes came first into England by
the appointment and command of the Pope, and Popish Laws: and is it reasonable
that those Laws should bind us, that were first made by them; when we are
so distinct from them, that we now, in our times, have had Laws made amongst
us, for the selling and sequestring of their Estates, quatenus as Papists? and
that an Act of Parliament made against common Right, as Tithes is, common
Equity and common Reason, is therefore null and void in it self in Law, and
ought not to be executed, as appears by these following Laws: See the first
part of Doctor Bonham's Case, fol. 118. and the eighth of Edward the Third,
fol. 3, 30, 33. E. Cassanet, 32. and the 27 H. Annuity 41. and the 1 of Eliz.
Dyer 113. and first part of Cook's Institutes, Lib. 2. Chap. 11. Sect. 209.
fol. 140. and the fourth of Edward the fourth, 12. 12. Edward the Fourth, 18. 1
Henry the Seventh, 12, 13. Plowd. Com. fol. 369. Yea, (says that Learned
Oracle of the Law of England, Edward Cook, in the fourth part of his
Institutes, fol. 330.) where Reason cease, there the Law cease: for seeing
Reason is the very Life and Spirit of the Law it self, the Law is not to be
esteemed to respect that which has no Reason, although the generality of the
words at the first Institution, or after the Letter, seem otherwise. And (says
the Learned Author, in his first part of Institutes, fol. 140.) all Customs and
Prescriptions, Acts of Parliament, Laws and Judgments that be against Reason,
are void and null in themselves.

And says the Armies Atturny John Cook, in the late Kings Case stated, page
the 23. That by the Law of England, any Act or Agreement against the Laws of
God and Nature, as I shall prove Tithes are against both, is a mere nullity,
says he: for as a man has no hand in making the Laws of God and Nature, no
more has he power to mar or alter them: and he cites the Earl of Leicesters
adjudged Case for a proof: and all the Judges in England cannot make one Case
to be Law, that is not Reason, no more then they can make one Hair white that
is naturally black: for Law must be Reason adjudged; and every Law of man must
be consonant to the Law of God, otherwise they are not Righteous nor Obligatory.

Now what reason is there that a poor man taking a Frame at a rack rent, and
peradventure hiring money at use, and spending all his time and pains for a
whole year to maintain his charge, which is his duty, being up early, and down
late, eating the bread of sorrow, plowing and sowing, and buying seed himself,
running the hazard of the loss of all his Cattle; and for want of a good
season, peradventure may hardly have the seed he cast into the ground; and
after he has reaped it at his own charge, then for a lazy Priest, a
Non-Resident, a Drunkard, a Whoremaster, a covetous Person, ambitious,
arrogant, proud, vain, lascivious, swaggering, swearing, fighting, lying,
unconfcionable, antichristian, ungodly Priest, as many are such; and some are
filled with all Unrighteousness, being Enemies to Christ, and his chosen Ones,
persecuting the righteous Seed; for such a one to come and take the Tenth of
the poor man's Corn: let any man judge whether this be reason; when the poor man
neither imploies him, nor dare not hear him; for fear, if he should come to
hear his Will-vvorship in his Idol-Temple, he may justly fall into the
condemnation of the Devil.

Thou say, That Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedec.

I answer: That was before the Levitical Priesthood: and Christ Jesus is made a
Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedec; which was thus: Melchisedec
met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, who brought him Bread
and Wine; and Abraham gave him the Tenth of the spoil: what was this to the
paying of Tithes yearly out of his own Estate? Can thou prove that Abraham
did pay Tithes out of that?

And now the Levitical Priesthood is changed by Christ Jesus, and therefore
there is a change of the Law: and now the Priesthood is not committed to the
natural Offspring of Levi, or any other Tribe, but to Christ Jesus, the
unchangable Priesthood, whose Kingdom stands not in Figures and carnal
Ordinances, but in the substance: For the time is come, (says Christ) that ye
shall not worship the Father at Jerusalem, nor in this mountain; but the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for he seeks
such to worship him. Now since the destruction of the Temple at Jerusalem, thou
can not read that ever God commanded another house to be built.

Thou say that Christ Jesus said, Ye tithe Mint and Cummin; these things ye
ought not to leave undone.

Christ Jesus spoke then to the Jews, in the time when the Levitical Priesthood
was not ended, who were bound by the Law. But when Christ was offered up, he
said, It is finished.

Now do thou remember, that he that adds or diminishes from the words of the
Prophecies of this book, his name shall be blotted out of the Book of Life: and
peruse thy Letter, and see if thou have not added.

Thou have those Texts quoted, No man muzleth the mouth of the Ox, that
treads out the corn: and, No man goes a warfare at his own charge: and, He
that plants a Vineyard eats the fruit thereof: And herein it is agreed, that
the Ministers of Christ Jesus, who are effectually called to his service, and
labor in the Word and Doctrine, ought to be comfortably provided for, that
they go not a warfare at their own charge: but this does not require the world,
which lies waste as a wilderness, and is not of the Vineyard, should
contribute: for Christ says, Father, I pray not for the world, but for those
that thou have given me out of the world, that they may be one, as thou, O
Father, art in me, and I in thee, so that they may be made one in us: therefore
no reason that they that are of the world should be compelled to give of the
substance of their labors to Christ's Ministers: for every man is sole owner of
his own; and he that violently or fraudulently dispossesseth him of any, is a
Thief and a Robber in the sight of God and good Men: God abhors the
sacrifice of the wicked, and has no need of his substance: for the earth is
the Lords, and the fullness thereof; and he will never forsake those that put
their trust in him: and, The just man shall live by his own faith: and, If any
man withdraw himself, says the Lord, my soul shall have no pleasure in him:
and such as Christ sent forth, he always took care that they never wanted, but
they were always kept without being chargeable to any, and they eat the fruits
of their own Vineyards which they had planted, not which other men had planted:
and by the Churches who were gathered out of the world, were they maintained,
to preach the Gospel to the world, who lay in wickedness, unto whom they would
not make the Gospel chargeable or burdensome; which was their glory, and their
crown: and this Example of the Apostles, leaves every one free to give him that
teaches, not binding any to the maintenance of those that have less need then
the Giver.

And this discovers the hireling shepherds, that teach for filthy lucre, that
fleece the Flock, and not feed them; that have a form of Godliness, but deny
the power thereof; from such there is an express command to turn away, who make
merchandise of the Scriptures: for the Lord says, They shall not profit my
people: for they are ever learning, and never able to bring to the knowledge of
the truth: for he that knowetn not the life of Faith, to witness it in his own
particular, how can he teach another?

Thou say, That Peter converted three thousand souls at one Sermon, and
thereby it did appear he was a Minister of Christ, the Lord effectually working
with his Ministry, upon the hearts of his hearers.

Now thou have been a Teacher to the People of Crundal many years, and name me
but one man or woman that has been converted by thy Ministry; and if they can
demonstrate unto me the work of Regeneration, wrought upon them by thy
Teaching, then I will pay thee thy Demands. And how can thou plead thy self a
Minister of the Gospel, and sue for treble Damages? for learned Judge Roll
said in Court, That Tithes were not due and payable by the Law of the Land: in
a Case of Tithes, on the Bench, when he was chief Justice: and when they were
paid in the old Law, the Levites, the Fatherless, the Widows, the Strangers,
were all to be provided for out of them; and the Priests of England has no
such custom, but consume them on their pride and lusts, and wicked
covetousness: and the Disciples of Christ were commanded to go into all the
world, to preach the Gospel to every creature; they were not to stay in a
place: and the signs that followed them that believed in their Doctrine, in
his Name they should cast out devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they
shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

Thou say, That Believers sold their possessions, and laid them down at the
Apostles feet.

But they did distribute them as every man had need, they did not purchase
Lands, and let the money to Usury and Extortion, as the Priests of this
Generation do.

Thou say that Paul informs of the qualities of a good Bishop, to be a man
blameless, not given to filthy lucre: and Christ says, Go not to Law with any
man.

Now learn thou these Lessons, and follow Righteousness, Faith, Love, Peace,
with them that call on the Lord, out of a pure heart.

Thou directest me to that Text, in Heb. 7. 8. And here men that die receive
Tithes: read the 11 verse of that Chapter: If therefore perfection were by the
Levitical Priesthood, for under it the people received the Law, what further
need was there that another Priest should arise after the Order of Melchisedec?
for Christ came of another Tribe: he sprang out of Judah, who was not made
after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endlesslife:
and verse. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save to the utmost them that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. And it
shall come to passin the last days, says God, I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all flesh, and your sons and daughters shall prophecy; and your young men
shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams; and on my servants, and
on my handmaids I will pour out of my Spirit in those days, and they shall
prophecy.

And verily, I do bear my Testimony, that I do witness such a people now upon
the earth, whom the Lord has revealed his secrets unto, and does powerfully
work upon the hearts of thousands, to the turning them from darkness unto
light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they do receive remission of
sins: and this I do witness in my own particular, in great measure; blessed,
yea, for ever blessed be his holy and dreadful Name: for he alone is worthy of
everlasting Praises from his Own, both now, henceforth, and for ever. And woes,
everlasting woes will be the portion of all those that oppress his righteous
Ones.

Now I find that all men that will attain unto salvation, must hear the Son of
GOD: for, A Prophet (says Moses) will the Lord your God raise up unto you, in
all things like unto me, and him shall you hear: and it shall come to pass,
that whosoever shall not hear him, shall be cut off from amongst the people.
Now neither the Son of God, nor none of his Disciples nor Apostles did ever
take Tithes, or ever command the paying of them: and they were not persons
ordained by the will of man, but were anointed with the holy anointing, and
were, by that Spirit that did anoint them, commanded to feed the Flock of
Christ, over which the holy Ghost had made them Overseers. And Christ himself
says, That unless a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. And this new Birth is a Death unto all sin, and a Life unto all
Righteousness: and this every man must feel, That it is as natural for him to
serve the Law of God, as it was formerly to serve the Law of sin. And he is the
true Teacher that is able by his own Experience to tell another how he has
passed from Death to Life: for no unclean thing can enter the Kingdom: for
without are Covetous, Liars, Adulterers, Drunkards, Extortioners, and all evil
Doers.

Now a true Teacher must hate the very appearance of evil; he must hate vain
thoughts, and every false way. We shall find in Scripture, that all the
Teachers of Righteousness were such as were filled with the Spirit of the Lord,
and did not preach for filthy lucre or gain, but of a ready mind, and were not
as the Priests of these times are, that lie as Thieves and Robbers, to murder
in the way, and sue for treble Damages, and persecute the Son of God in all
those that desire to live godly in him: which they will feel one day, that
those that persecute them, they persecute him: and it were better that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he thrown into the sea, then that he
should offend one of those little Ones that put their trust in me, says Christ.

Now I find that in the year 600. or soon after, Gregory the First, then Pope
of Rome, sent over Augustine the Monk into England; by whom Ethelbert King of
Kent was converted: This Augustine was a C^n Regular; and after he had
obtained his own Design, he then preached up Tithes in England, by the Popes
appointment; and at the same time, taught the people that the pardon of sin
might be merited by good Works.

In the year 786. two Legates were sent over from Pope Hadrian the First, to
Offa King of Mercland, Alwolf King of Northumberland, who made a Decree, That
the people of those two Kingdoms should pay Tithes: King Athelstone about the
year 930. King Edmond about the year 940. King Edgar about the year 970. King
Etheldred 1010. King Knute about the year 1020. Edward the Confessor, and
others of the Saxon Kings, by Order from the Pope, made Laws for Tithes. The
Normans afterward entering this Kingdom, William the Conqueror, Henry the
First, Henry the Second, King Stephen, and other Kings, by the like Order from
the Pope, confirmed the said Laws for Tithes: and yet notvvithstanding all
these Laws, yet was it left to the Owner to confer it where he pleased;
which was the cause of making so many rich Abbeys and Monasteries in England:
and until the year 1200. or thereabouts, every one gave their Tithes as they
pleased; which made Pope Innocent the Third, send his Decretal Epistle the
Bishop of Canterbury, commanding him to enjoin every man to pay his Tithes to
those that ministered spiritual things to them; which was enforced by Sentence
of the Ecclesiastical Courts. And this was the first beginning of Parochial
Tithes in England: and this after, by the Parliament was thought reasonable,
and then established by a Law, the King and People being all Papists.

Now all this will I prove: and let any man, that has any fear of the Lord,
judge whether that the Rules and Practice of those Back-sliders, who were in
the dark night of Apostasy, be fit to guide us, who have again received the
pure light, as the Apostles of our Lord and Savior, and have received the Lord
Jesus Christ, and know how to walk in him: for know ye not that Christ is in
you, unless you be reprobates? and, put you on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make
no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts ^eof.

The ninth Epistle:
To all Priests that teach for Hire, and divine for Money; that call themselves
Ministers of Christ, and are not, but are of the Synagogue of Satan; that they
may repent: For the day of the Lord is at hand.

THe Arm and strength of the Lord God is found and felt in the hearts of all
his chosen ones; and they feel themselves branches springing forth of the Tree
of Life: and in him (that is, in Christ) by abiding in him, and his living Word
abiding in them, they bring forth much fruit, and they walk from strength to
strength, and from faith to faith, until they appear before God in Sion: and
they do turn people from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they do receive remission of sins, and an inheritance amongst those
that are sanctified: and as they have felt, and handled, and tasted of the good
Word of Eternal Life; so they do deliver it unto others: freely they have
received, and freely do they give, according to the command of Christ their
Lawgiver; and they have received the Unction, the anointing, from the Holy
One, which does abide in them, and teaches them all things; and they have the
first fruits of the Spirit, which does make them alive unto God. And they do go
into the dark corners of the world, as they are moved by the Holy Ghost, to
preach freely the everlasting Gospel of Salvation, glad tidings to all people,
whose feet are beautiful: and they do it upon this account, that a necessity
does lie upon them, and woes will be upon them if they do it not, if they do
the work of the Lord negligently: and they are ready to sacrifice their lives,
and to seal the truth of their Ministry with their blood, that they may finish
their work with Joy and inward Consolation, which is full of power and great
glory; and their Conversations are without Covetousness, they seek not their
own, but the things of Jesus, the salvation of all men, that they may live the
life of holiness; as they have been servants unto sin, so, that they may now
come to be made free from sin, and have their lives in holiness and
righteousness, the end whereof, is everlasting life: for the gift of grace is
free; and so many as receive him, to them he gives power to become the Sons of
God, even to all those that do believe in his name: and their conversations are
in heaven; and they do not mind earthly things; and they do the works of the
Spirit, which does make them alive unto God: for as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God; and they are as Lights in the midst of
a perverse and crooked Generation: and they are holy, harmless, without spot
and blemish, waiting with Oil in their own Lamps, for the coming of the Lord,
that they may enter into his Joy, and receive the end of their faith, which is,
the salvation of their souls.

The true Ministers of Christ, they were filled with the Holy Ghost, before
they went forth; as Paul says, when Christ had revealed himself in him, then
he spoke the word with boldness: and many of the Priests say, That Judas had a
Commission, as well as the rest of the Apostles, because Christ sent them
forth, and said, As you go, preach; and say, The Kingdom of God is at hand;
which Kingdom was the pouring down of the Spirit of Righteousness, which he
promised that the holy Ghost should come down, and abide with them for ever,
and lead them into all truth. But there is not one Text that ever I could find,
that they did go forth until the lot fell upon Matthias in the room of Judas,
and he was numbered amongst the twelve. It is said, That the seventy returned,
and said, Behold, Lord, the devils are subject unto us. So at the best, those
Priests that pleads for Judas, does but derive their Office from him: for he
was a Deceiver at the best: and so are all they that have not received the holy
Ghost: for the Apostles were to feed the Flock of Christ, over which the holy
Ghost has made them Overseers, and the Priests of this Generation, are they
not proud, covetous, arrogant, ambitious, self-lovers, lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God, having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof?

Where is the man or the woman that has been at any time snatched out of the
paws of Satan, and out of the snares of hell, by their Ministry, as it is
called? Where is the fruits of the holy Ghost to be found amongst their
hearers, which is, Love, Joy, Meekness, Temperance, Brothetly kindeness, Bowels
of Compassion, enduring all things, Temperance, Righteousness, and holy in all
manner of conversation? Is not the fruits of their hearers clean contrary? are
they not wrath, anger, malice, murder, robbery, plunder, a neater word for
Thieves, Swearing, Adultery, Fornication, and all uncharitableness, scoffing,
despising those that are good, heady, high-minded, disobedient to parents,
unnatural, truce breakers, Covenant-breakers?

And by this it appears, that they neither have the call of Christ's Ministers:
for if the Lord had sent them, they should have turned people from the evil of
their doings, and they should have learned to do well: neither have they the
maintenance of Christ's Ministers, nor the fruits of Christ's Ministers: for
Christ's Ministers, they were commanded to take nothing with them, neither
money, nor staff, nor scrip; and they were to enquire who was worthy, and there
enter, and there eat such things as was set before them, and that was their
maintenance: not to force people, and take away their Goods, three times as
much as was or could be demanded. And the fruits of Christ's Ministers: Peter
converted three thousand at once; and many thousands now, blessed be the holy
Name of the ever-living GOD, are escaped out of the snare of the hunter, by the
sounding forth of the everlasting Gospel of salvation from his true Ministers,
who are despised, and scornfully called, by the seed of evil doers, Quakers:
whose Doctrine is, To turn people to the light within them, which does bring
them out of Rebellion, and the disobedient nature, which the light does reprove
and condemn; and they that do draw from the teachings of Christ within, such
the Light Christ does show to be seducers, 1 John 2. 26, 27. and this light
does bring into the holy life, and into the pure worship of God in the Spirit.

And therefore I do dearly exhort you from the Lord, to come out of all your
false Churches, your false ways, and from your proud deceitful Priests; and
come to Christ the true Pastor and Bishop of your souls; and so you shall come
to the Church that is in God, 1 These. 1. 1. Heb. 12. 22, 23. whose Overseers
are made by the holy Ghost.

And so dear Friends I do dearly exhort you to take heed to that which is pure
of God in your consciences, and obey it, and make that your Teacher: for that
calls for a pure conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. and let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works: and so you shall all come
to be baptized into Christ, and so put him on, by one Spirit, and come to be
buried with him in the true Baptism, Romans 6. 1, 2. and so a fellowship into the
new life comes to be witnessed, where there is one Faith, one Lord, and one
Baptism; and so one God and Father of them all: and so they are kept in that
Church which is the pillar and ground of Truth, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Timothy 2.
19. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Mat. 11. 28. Christ calls all that are weary and heavy
laden, to come unto him, and he will give: them rest.

And therefore obey the light, and come out from your sins, take up the cross,
and deny your wills, and forsake your iniquities, and touch not the unclean
thing, and he will receive you; and take heed you do not reject the counsel of
the Lord God, who desires to bring you to salvation: for, the vision is but for
an appointed time: and, the Lords Spirit shall not always strive with man.

The tenth Epistle:
To all Drunkards, Swearers, Usurers, Extortioners, Adulterers, and all unclean
Persons, showing the heavy Wrath of the living God burns like fire against
such evil Persons, and the terrible day of Vengeance is at hand: And these are
to warn them, that they speedily repent, before their hearts come to be ripped
up, and laid naked before the mighty and terrible GOD, who does regard no man's
Person in Judgment, but every one shall receive according to the things done
in his Body, whether they be good or evil.

THe Light that discovers sin, is Christ; and when any evil is committed, Gods
witness in the conscience is disturbed, the just seed lies oppressed, and then
the soul lies under the wrath of God: and who can dwell in his Displeasure?

And the many sad Judgments that have befallen persons in that condition of
drunkenness, I think, should deter persons from that accursed beastly sin,
which makes men, that they are like unto the swine, as you may see in 2 Samuel
13. 28. Now had Absalom commanded his servants, saying, Mark now when Amnons
heart is merry with wine: and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon; kill him, fear
not.

Another president you may see in 1 King. 16. 8, 9, 10. In the six and
twentieth year of Asa king of Judah, began Elah the son of Baasha to reign over
Israel in Tirzah, and reigned two years. And his servant Zimri (captain of half
his chariots) conspired against him as he was in Tirzah, drinking till he was
drunk in the house of Arza, steward of his house in Tirzah. And Zimri came and
smote him, and killed him in the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah,
and reigned in his stead.

Holofernes, being drunk, was slain by Judith.

Noah being drunk, his sons mocked him: he became a scorn to his Children.

Lot being drunk, committed incest with his two Daughters.

Benhadad being drunk, you may see what a sad loss he came to, and how he was
discomfited, 1 King. 20. 16, 20, 34.

David made Vriah drunk, and then sent Letters to Joab to have him set in the
front of the Battle, that he might be slain.

We ought not to keep company with Drunkards, Prove. 23. 20, 21. The woe of the
Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, is pronounced against Drunkards, Isa. 5. 11.
VVo unto them that rise up early, to follow Drunkenness, and to them that
continue until night, till the wine does inflame them: for they regard not the
work of the Lord, neither consider the works of his hands.

Many more Texts of Scripture might be quoted, and many Examples of Gods
Judgments against such sinners to my own knowledge: as, some that have fallen
into wells, and been drowned; some into the Thames; some have broke their Necks
off their horses; some their Legs, their Arms; sides wasting their precious
time, that God has put into their hands to get wisdom, and also ruining their
wives and children in wasting and consuming their Estates: for a Drunken man is
fit to do any wickedness, and to act any ungodliness: and this sad sin is many
times committed by peoples drinking of Healths: the Devil steals upon them,
and if he can get them to drink Healths, he has them safe enough: for of
whomsoever a man is overcome, his servant he is, to whom he is overcome;
whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto Righteousness: so he that
is overcome by sin, is the devils slave.

And verily, my soul does mourn in secret, and my heart does bleed within me,
and sorrow does over-whelm me, for some of my dearly beloved Friends, that are
overtaken by Satan's snares in this way of sinning: and therefore my desire is
to them from the Lord, that they would mind the light of Christ in their
Consciences, which is, Gods witness for himself; and it will either excuse or
accuse, acquit or condemn: and this being silently and patiently waited in,
will teach the denying the drinking of healths; and will be a means to keep out
of this beastly sin, that makes persons like Beasts, and defaces the Image of
God, and defiles his Temple; and such, if they do not speedily repent, the Lord
will destroy them: for he that defiles the Temple of God, him will God destroy.
And your Bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost.

And next to this is Swearers: for because of Oaths the Land mourns: and, The
curse shall enter into the house of the Swearer, and consume it, even with the
beams and timber thereof. And what a company of sad creatures there is, that
will swear any thing for advantage, in buying and selling in their ordinary
course of trading in the world, between man and man! how for six pence, many
times, they will sell their Faith! O let such fear, and tremble, and repent:
for without heavenly Jerusalem are all swearers, drunkards, and all Liars, who
have their portion in the lake that burns with fire and Brimstone.

And the sin of accustoming a man's self to swearing, is reproved, Eccles. 23.
9. to 24. and 17. 14. and Christ Jesus gave this command to all that then were
and should be, Swear not at all, says Christ: and all Controversies may be
ended without swearing, if the Magistrates would come to the line of true
judgment, and be guided by the witness of God in them.

And therefore dear Friends, leave off this wicked custom of vain swearing:
for it neither profits the speaker nor hearer; but serves the Devil, and
brings everlasting destruction to the soul.

And there is a great and most abominable sin committed in and by many, that
they eat up Gods people like bread, they devour them by Extortion and Usury:
but such must not come to the holy Hill of Sion. VVo to them that get fields
and houses by violence and oppression, and devour the Fatherless and the
widow: They are far from the commands of Christ, which says, Lend, looking
for nothing again: it is a sin forbidden amongst the Jews, Exodus 20. 17. and
22. 25. Lev. 25. 35, 36, 37. Deuteronomy. 5. 21. Neh. 5. 1. to 14. Psalm. 15. 1, 5.
Prove. 22. 7, 16, 22, 52. and the 22. 8. Jer. 15. 10. Ezekiel. 18. 13. and 22. 12.
Mat. 5. 42. and 7. 12. Luke 6. 30, 34, 35. and this lay upon me to acquaint all
people with from the Lord, that they do injury to no man, for gain to
themselves; but every one do as they would be done unto, as they would that men
should do unto them: for the great day of the Lords wrath is at hand, and all
shall be judged according to the things done in their Bodies, whether they be
good or evil: and all evil doers, sin lies at their doors, and the flaming
sword of the Lord of hosts does hang over their heads.

And therefore my desire, yea, my souls desire unto all is, That they would
keep their minds out of fading, visible, perishing things: for none but such
have their hearts upon the invisible God, who is a Spirit; and none but
spiritual worshippers do serve him, or honor him; even such the Father seeks
to worship him, that worship him in the Spirit and in Truth; and such feel
their lives to be in God, and they live by Faith, which Faith is the Faith of
Gods Elect: for they that so come to live, daily do they feel the flowings in
of comfort, from the wellspring of Life; and they grow like Trees that are
planted by the Rivers of Waters, that do bring forth Fruit in due season,
whose Leaf shall not fade, and whatsoever they do, it shall prosper; and the
Lord refreshes their souls with fatness, and gives them the bread of life,
that they eat, and live for ever; and they drink of that water, that they never
thirst: and they taste of that heavenly Rock, which is Christ: and they are the
tender Lambs of Christ: and the Lord God does esteem of them as his Jewels; and
they that touch them, touch the Apple of Gods Eye: For they are they that do
overcome the world, and they shall be clothed in white, and they shall follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goes, and sing songs of Triumph; Glory, Glory,
everlasting Glory and Hallelujahs be given to him that is Lord of lords, and
King of kings, that is the God that gives his people light, and in his light
they see the everlasting Light, which makes them live for evermore in his
presence, where there is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are
pleasures for evermore.

The eleventh Epistle:
To all Those whose souls pants after the living God, as the Heart pants
after the Waterbrooks.

DEar Hearts, my dearly beloved in the light and love of God, for whom my soul
travelleth in birth, that I might see Christ formed in you, that you might walk
worthy of the Lord, unto all well-pleasing; being fruitful in every good work,
and increasing in the knowledge of God, strengthened with all might, according
to his glorious power, unto all patience, and long-suffering, with joyfulness;
giving thanks to the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light; who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son; in whom we
have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins: who is the
image of the invisible God, the first born of every creature: for it pleased
the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell.

And so dear Hearts, as you wait in him out of all visible things, wherein your
life has formerly been nourished and upheld, you shall (by Christ) witness a
new birth, and a new nature; and the life of God will be felt and witnessed,
which does redeem the soul out of sin, and of inquity, and does reach the seed
of God, which is pure, and of his fullness, of whom we receive grace for grace:
and so the pure innocent seed of the Lord springs up in you, that you become
fruitful Branches, and bring forth much fruit unto the Lord; and so every one
in their several measure, answer the Lords expectation: who is this day seeking
for fruits amongst his people: and all dead fruitless Trees must have the Ax
laid to the root of them, that they may be hewed down, and cast into the fire:
for the Lord has chosen forth of the world, unto himself, a people to wait in
his counsel and light, that they may serve him in Righteousness, and obey him
in Truth.

And therefore, dear Hearts, be diligent and watchful, that in the strength of
God, you may be continually armed against the old devouring Enemy, Satan; who
goes about like a roaring Lion: and all his War is against the tender Lambs of
Christ's fold; that he may make Rents and Divisions amongst them: but you are
commanded to resist him, being steadfast in the Faith, and always to let your
works and labor to abound in the Lord, for as much as you know your labor is
not in vain in the Lord: and this know, that Satan will do what he may or
possibly can against you: he had sought to winnow Peter as Wheat was winnowed
in a sieve: he tempted Christ, but there was no ground for him to enter in him.
And those that are renewed in the spirit of their minds in Christ, they pluck
up and plow up the fallow ground of their hearts, they pluck up sin by the
roots; they remove the ground, that there is no room to receive the devils
temptations, although he strives to the utmost of his power to keep the seed of
God in bondage; which seed is Gods Elect and Precious, and he will redeem it
out of captivity and thraldom: for it is the Resurrection, and the holy Birth,
the Beloved, the incorruptible, that destroys Satan's kingdom: and therefore
love it, and nourish it, and cherish it, and let it have the whole dominion in
you, and it will totally put out Satan, and you shall tread him under your
feet: for where the seed of God does reign, there Satan is subjected: and so in
the light of God you will find strength, and power, and dominion over the
Enemy, and over all his sleights and deceits.

As you stand in the light, which is the power of God, the Enemy will find no
place to enter, and his strength will be abated and decreased, and then you
will, by degrees, find your bodies fit Temples for the holy Ghost to dwell in,
and the strength of the Lord God of Life and Glory will daily be renewed unto
you; and in his strength you shall walk, until you appear before him in Sion:
and you shall obtain victory over the Enemy of your souls, and know the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and so come to have a portion and an
inheritance with the Babes of Christ, even an everlasting inheritance reserved
in heaven for you, in that Kingdom which has no end; and even such glory as no
eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor tongue is able to express, which God
has laid up for them that love him: What has not eye seen? what has not ear
heard? and the heart is able to conceive more then all, yea, it is able to
conceive and entertain into the imagination any thing; yet all this is nothing
to those everlasting joys, and comforts, and consolations, which the Saints
shall enjoy in the presence of the Lord for evermore. And therefore faint not
at your fiery trials, which comes, or is admitted, or suffered in the Wisdom
that is Infinite, to try you, as if some strange thing were come unto you, as
you may see in 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13. But rejoice, in as much as you are partakers
of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, you may be glad
also, with exceeding joy: if you be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy
are you: for the Spirit of God and of glory rests upon you: on their parts he
is evil spoken of, but on your parts he is glorified: for the time is come,
that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us,
what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? and if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?
Wherefore (says the same Apostle) let them that suffer according to the will
of God, commit the keeping of their souls, to him, in well-doing, as unto a
faithful Creator.

And so dear hearts, look not out at things past, present, or to come, or at
others, but stand in the light, and in the counsel of the Lord, and freely give
up to his will, as Job did: Although he kill me, (says he) yet will I trust in
him. And in the Lords due time, there shall be deliverance out of all troubles,
and he will work your peace, even peace that men and devils shall not take from
you: for he that keeps Israel, neither slumbereth nor sleeps: and although
many are the troubles of the Righteous, yet the Lord will deliver them out of
them all. And therefore cast your whole care upon the Lord, and trust in him,
and he shall bring it to pass: he shall bring forth your Righteousness as clear
as the light, and your just dealing as the noon day: and so the power of the
Lord will compass you about, and his Angels shall have charge concerning you,
to keep you in all his ways: for they that stay themselves upon the arm of the
Lord, have perfect peace; and their strength shall be renewed day by day in
him, who is made perfect, and is become the Author of eternal salvation to all
them that obey him; which is Jesus, that saves to the utmost all that come to
God by him: for he ever lives to make intercession for them. And so believe in
him, and you shall be saved: For Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness, to every one that believes: For Moses describes the
righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does them, shall live by
them: but the righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise, Say not in
thy heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? that is, to bring Christ down from
above; or who shall ascend into the deep? that is, to bring Christ back again
from the dead. But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and
in thy heart; that is, the Word of Faith which we preach; which teaches to
deny all ungodliness, and worldly lust, and to live godly, soberly, and
righteously in this present evil world; and to do injury to no man, but to do
unto all men, as you would have all men do unto you: even this the Lord thy God
does require of thee, O man, To do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God. And this walking with God, is that way that Enoch vvalked in, and
all the holy men of God that brought their souls to the true center of Rest,
even Rest everlasting, where there is the innumerable company of Angels, and
the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven, in the book of Life. And so
dear hearts, endure, as Moses did, all things patiently, as seeing him that is
invisible: for the patient abiding of the Meek shall not be forgotten: and the
Lord bottles up all the tears of his redeemed ones: and so every one come with
patience to do the will of God, that when you have done it, you may receive the
Reward: and so every one come to feel Christ Jesus, in you that believe, the
hope of glory; and feed upon the living Gospel, which is the bread of life,
that whosoever eats, hungreth no more: for every one must come to possess
Christ in their own hearts: for it is the Oil in a man's own Lamp, that must
convey him into the Bridegrooms Chamber, where the fullness of life and joy is
to be found, possessed, and enjoyed: for unto such, who orders their
conversations aright, will Christ say at last, Come you blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world: for
those that be guided by Christ, are such as hear his voice, and do desire to be
taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus; and they shall be guided by him to do
the will of God in every thing, and so they shall come to be filled with his
Righteousness, and so his Righteousness fills them with everlasting glory:
and the pure broken heart that is contrite, the Lord does accept.

And so let all Rulers and Magistrates cease the naming of God, until they part
from evil: and let them cease their meddling with settling the things of Gods
Kingdom; for I have seen they have all been broken to pieces as soon as they go
about that work: for the Lord will do his work himself: by his Spirit and by
his power it shall be accomplished; and it shall not be in the power of man to
hinder: but he will break the great Potsherds of the earth to pieces, if they
meddle with those things that concern the settling of his Kingdom. And therefore
in render love to their souls, I dearly exhort them to settle their own
Governments, and their own Kingdoms, which are of this world; and let Christ
alone with the settling of his Kingdom, which is not of this world: for a Spirit
of Righteousness shall rule and reign in the earth, as the spirit of wickedness
has done: and although the devil does roar, yet the time is at hamd when this
shall be: and it shall not be in the power of man to hinder it.

And therefore give over striving against the stream, you mighty Potentates of
the world: for it is hard for you to kick against the pricks: For the great day
of the Lord is at hand, and all men's works shall be tried with fire: and in
that day, the great and mighty men shall cry to the mountains and the hills, to
fall upon them, and hide them from his presence.

And therefore all lend their ear to this call to Repentance, while the day of
their salvation lasts; and whilst the Lord stands at the door of your
hearts, knocking, let him in: remember what Christ said to Jerusalem:
Jerusalem, O Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee! how often would I have gathered you as a hen gathers her
chickens under her wings! and ye would not. But her calamity came of a sudden:
and so let her be an Example for you, speedily to repent, and put away the evil
of your doings: cease to do evil, and learn to do well; for fear the wrath of
the Lord destroy you: for the time was, when all the Kings of the earth would
not have believed that the Adversary should have entered the gates of
Jerusalem; and all the inhabitants of the world would not have believed that
the Enemy should have entered the gates of Jerusalem, for the sins of her
Prophets and of her Priests; which were full of iniquity, as the Priests of
England are, who have shed the blood of the Just in the midst of her. And
therefore woe, woe to thee, O England, if thou do not speedily repent, and put
away the evil of thy doings: for the Lord desires not the death of a sinner,
but that he may live. Therefore turn ye, turn ye: for why will you die, O house
of Israel? And come to be within the promise of the Elect of God: for the Lord
loves his saints, and he preserves the faithful, and mercy shall embrace them
on every side: For he is nigh to them that are of a broken heart, and he saves
them that are of a contrite spirit: therefore blessed are the people whose God
is the Lord, the people who he has chosen for his own inheritance: for the eye
of the Lord is over them, to preserve them, and to keep them in all their
ways, and to preserve them in famine; and thousands shall fall before them,
and the plague shall not come near them: for the destroying Angels shall pass
over their heads.

Therefore all dear hearts fear the living GOD, who is a God of power, and he
is dreadful to all the workers of iniquity; but a God of love, and joy, and
consolation to all those that fear him, and that delight in his Commandments,
to do them. Therefore fear the living God, and wait upon him, that you may
find pure wisdom flow in upon you, from on high: For every good and perfect
gift comes down from above, from the Father of lights, who does powerfully
manifest himself unto his Babes and Children, and does flow from heaven with
fresh discoveries of his love unto his belved Ones, that they can say
feelingly, Their beloved is their and they are his: and he draws them by the
cords of everlasting love, that they are refreshed at the wellspring of life.

And therefore return, return: forsake your idol-shepherds, and embrace Christ,
which is the Light: for he is the true Shepherd and Bishop of your souls, in
whom the sure mercies of David are enjoyed, and the glory of Israel is
witnessed; even the free Covenant of light, in which the true Prophets did
stand, who is the Rock of Ages, and is the Light of the World, and is perfect
Righteousness; and they that are in him, are right us by his Righteousness:
for he has for ever perfected all those that are sanctified: and he commands
his to be holy as he is holy, and pure as he is pure: and, Be ye perfect (says
Christ) as your Father which is in heaven is perfect: and the Cross of Christ
is the mighty power of God unto salvation, unto every one that believes: And
by this (says Christ) shall you appear to be my Disciples, by taking up the
cross daily, and following me: and Gods witness in every man will show him the
Cross of Christ, what it is: for that will show all those that are faithful to
it, what is the will of God in every thing: for it is that pure Thing of God in
man, that never did consent to sin, nor never will, but shows man all that ever
he did: and so we may say, with the woman, Come, see a man that has told me
all that ever I have done: Is not this the Christ? said she.

And so, dear Hearts, this is your true Teacher, Emmanuel, God with us: and the
Lord is a strong Towet, the Righteous fly unto it, and are safe: and they are
hid in that invisible life which is in God: and they know the life of God: and
they walk in his daily presence, and the arm of his strength is revealed daily
unto them, which brings salvation.

And therefore come off from all your Idol shepherds, and from all your false
Forms of worship unto the Lord, who is bringing his people off from the barren
Mountains, where they have fed upon husks and chaff: and he is become their
^cher himself, and he will feed them with the finest of the Wheat, and they
shall drink of the wellspring of Life, and never thirst again: and they shall
find, that one day in his Courts, is better then a thousand elsewhere.

Now the Priests must know, That an old Mass-house is not the Courts of God:
for the Church of Christ is the Pillar and Ground of Truth: and as many as were
baptized, were baptized into Christ: and, They that are in Christ, are new
creatures: old things are passed away; all things are become new: and, Your
Bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost: and him that defiles the Temple of
God, him will God destroy.

And so dear Friends, and Brethren, and Sisters, and Fathers, and all You that
do fear the Lord, Take heed how you hear, and take heed whom you hear: for I do
see dangerous seducers and deceivers abroad in the world, besides the Priests;
even such as the Apostle Peter speaks of, that even would beguile the saints
out of their simplicity, if they could, even as the serpent beguiled Eve; such
as have eyes full of adultery, beguiling unstable souls, hearts exercised with
covetous practices; having forsaken the right way, and gone astray, following
the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, which loved the wages of unrighteousness:
these are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest; to whom
the mist of darkness is reserved for ever: For when they speak great swelling
words, in the Name of the Lord, they allure through the lusts of the flesh,
through much wantonness, those who were clean escaped from them who live in
Error: while they promise them Liberty, (...) themselves are the servants of
corruption: for of whom (...) overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage:
for (...) they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through (...)
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are (...) entangled
therein, and overcome, the latter end is (...) with them, then the beginning:
For it had been better (...) yhem not to have known the way of righteousness,
then after (...) have know it, to turn from the holy commandment deli(...)ed
unto them, but it is happened unto them according to (...) true Proverb, (...)
dog is turned to his own vomit against (...) sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the mire.

And amongst the (...) other, so called, that says he was born in Holland; ^t
he is the dangerousest person that ever I read of, or heard of, next unto that
grand Apostate, Spira: and I fear he had more Brethren: I shall do my endeavor
to find them out and then publish them to the world, that all men may take
notice of them. And my Advice now unto you from the Lo^ is, That you all, dear
Hearts, wait low in the counsel of the LORD GOD: and when you have got into the
simplicity of Christ, stay in it, and abide in it, and wait in the power and
strength of GOD, that you may be kept out of the wiles and suggestions of the
roaring Enemy, who stirs up Enemies without, and Enemies within, and all to
keep your Crown from you.

Put on therefore, dearly beloved in the Lord, the whole armor of God, that
you may be more then Conquerours, through Christ that loves you, even as Paul
was: and learn the wisdom which is from above, which is pure, peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits: be humble, meek,
lowly, be broken-hearred, be contrite-spirited: let patience possess your
souls: For ye were as sheep going astray, but ye are now returned to the
Savior and Bishop of your souls, Christ Jesus. Unto his keeping I commit you:
To whom be given everlasting Praises, Honor, and all holy Hallelujahs to Him
that lives for ever, and for evermore world without end.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all Those that set Their Faces
toward Sion, and seek it with their So^ sire: To which my Soul says,

AMEN.
FINIS.

