Innocence and Truth Triumphing together; OR, The latter part of an ANSWER to
the back-part of a DISCOURSE, lately published By William Prynne Esquire,
called, A FULL REPLY, etc. Beginning at the foot of p. 17. of the said
Discourse, with this title or superscription, Certain brief Animadversions on
Mr. JOHN GOODWINS Theomachia. Wherein the Argumentative part of the said
Animadversions is examined; Together with some few Animadversions upon some
former Passages in the said REPLY.

Qui innocentiae debitum servat, poenitentiae non solvit usuram,

Chrysostom. Nolo mihi imperet ille vel ille, qui me opprimere potest, docere non
potest,

Hieronymus. Non est delicata in Deum, and secura confessio: qui in me credit,
debet sanguinem suum sundere

ibidem. Ignosci potuit simpliciter errantibus: post inspirationem vero and
revelationem factam, sine ignorantiae venia peccatur,

Cypr. Ep. Pios hoc nomen and titulum in mundo oportet gerere, quod seditiosi
ac schismatici, ac infinitorum malorum authors sunt,

Lutherus Gal. c. 5. Not that we have dominion over your faith: but are
helpers of your joy, 2 Cor. 1. 24. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be
thus minded: and if any of ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the
same unto you,

Phil. 3. 15. Licensed and Printed according to Order.

LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons, for Henry Overton, at his Shop in
Popes-head-Alley, 1645.

To the unpartiall and unprejudiced READER.
AM I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth 1 Cor. 15. 10.
, (says the firstborn 1 Cor. 15. 8.
, and yet the last born also Gal. 14. 16.
, of the Apostles to his Galathians;) The interrogation is a constructive
assertion of two things. First, that to speak the truth in some cases, is very
opportune to sinister interpretation, and apt to represent the speaker as a man
of no benevolous or friendly comportance with those, to whom he so speaks.
The reason whereof seems to be this: Errors and misprisions are many times very
indulgent and bountiful to the flesh; and he that incounters men under such
enjoyments, with the truth, seems to them rather to strike at these enjoyments,
then at the error or opinion, by whose consent they have first taken, and still
keep possession of them. Themselves esteeming the opinion of small value (as
well it deserves) save only in reference to those carnal gratifications; are
very apt to conceive that neither do others so much mind that, or take
offense at that, as at those privileges or accommodations which they enjoy by
it: and this they judge to be a strain of an hostile inclination.

Secondly, The prementioned Interrogation supposes, that no manifestation or
speaking of what truth soever unto men, simply as such, is any argument at all
of want of affection, and that in the highest, unto them. The reason is,
because there is no Truth, which being embraced, and honored with suitable
practice, but will give far better wages and consideration to her servants in
due time, then any error whatsoever. Yea, the truth is, that the greater
breach, or spoil, a Truth makes in any man's worldly possessions or enjoyments,
it is of so much the richer and the more advantageous concernment unto him, and
will honor him the more abundantly. It is the manner and guise of divine
truth, to pull down houses built with firres and brick, and to build them up
again with cedars and hewne stones.

He that deals much either in the discovery, (or recovery rather) or
inforcement of such truths, which are opposed in the world, not only by errors
and contrary misprisons, but by secular accommodations also, as of honor,
power, riches, pleasures, or the like, takes a very direct course to make
himself conformable to the image of his Savior, who being so great a
Benefactor to the world, was yet numbered amongst Transgressors. To attempt the
casting down of such imagination, which do not only exalt themselves in the
minds of men, but contribute also to the exaltation of men themselves in the
world, be they never so extravagant or eccentricall to the truth, is an
undertaking of almost as doubtful a presage, as they that speak Proverbs are
wont to represent by the taking a Lion by the beard, or an Elephant by the
tooth. And did not the God of Truth umpire (and that with an high hand) amongst
the thoughts and counsels of the sons of men, and put many a by ingredient
into his providence of sovereign relief to those, whose hearts are set, and
hands lift up to magnify such Truths, which being advanced are like to do
justice in the world, and to reduce all usurpations and unrighteous detainments
amongst men, Amos 7. 10.
the Earth would not be able to bear the words of such men; and the world
soon become too hot a climate for Truths of such a complexion.

It is a matter of somewhat a sad contemplation, (and yet in part, delightful
also, viz. as those Oracles of Heaven, the Scriptures, are mightily asserted
and vindicated like themselves thereby) to see, what commotions, tumults, and
combustions are presently raised in the minds and spirits of men upon the birth
(or resurrection rather) of any Truth into the world, concerning which there is
the least jealousy, that in case it should reign, it would rack them from off
the lees of their old customs, or compel them to a restitution of what they
have unjustly taken, and peaceably enjoyed for a long time, or any ways expose
them to any outward sufferings, or disaccommodations in the world; to see, what
hurryings up and down, what engaging of parties, what inquiring after parts
and abilities, what rembling over Authors old and new, what incensing of
Authority, what streynings of wits and consciences, what slighting of solid
arguments, what evading substantial and clear interpretations of Scripture,
what magnifying of those that are streined and far fetched in their stead,
what casting abroad of calumnies and reproaches, what incrustations, and
misrepresentations of opinions, sayings, practices, actions, what shiftings,
what blendings, what colorings, what pretendings, what disgracings, yea, what
conventings, what persecutions, what evil intreatings of men, what appealings
to fire, sword, prisons, banishment, confiscations, and all to turn a beam of
light and glory, into darkness and shame, to keep a newborn Truth from ruling
over them. As soon as Herod the King heard that Christ was borne, and that
wise men were come from the East to worship him, inquiring after him, as a
King; the Text says, Mat. 2. 1, 2, 3.
that he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him: and how unnatural and
bloody a design was there presently put in execution, to prevent the reigning
of him that was but now borne into the world? That one, who yet was their
lawful King, might not reign over them, many poor infants (innocents
altogether in this) were not suffered to live amongst them. This Scene also was
acted in Germany, when God first made Luther as life from the dead Romans 11. 25.
unto the Doctrine of free justification and remission of sins; a Doctrine not
so much opposed by the Popish Tenet concerning the virtue and validity of
Papal Indulgences, as by the Auri sacra fames.
sacred thirst of that gold and silver which the trade of such merchandise
formerly driven by the Grand Seignior of Rome and his Factors throughout the
Christian world, brought into their coffers in that bewitching and transporting
abundance.

Reader, 2 Cor. 12. 5.
of any wrong done to my self, I will not complain: but I know a man, who has
been forsaken of his friends, found those of his own house to be his enemies,
who has been reviled, traduced, reproached, waylaid, by tongues, by pens, by
practices, reported to have lost his wits, abilities, parts, suffered loss of
his due and necessary subsistence, wrongfully detained from him, and for which
he has labored faithfully, brought before Rulers and Magistrates, represented
to Sovereign Authority, as a wilful and presumptuous underminer of their
undoubted privileges, and that diametrally contrary to his Vow and Covenant;
besides twenty more hard sayings and practices of men against him; and all this
for no other cause, upon none other ground or exception, but only because he
holds forth such a Truth (as in all his heart and all his soul he is verily
persuaded) which, if entertained, is like to bless the world, though it be as
by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 15.
I mean by casting down the present thoughts, and crossing the present
desires and designs of many in it: Of the injuries and indignities offered to
such a man, I have cause (with many others) to complain; but for any
sufferings or evil entreaties of mine own from men, I count it beneath my
engagements to him, who strengthens me to do and to suffer all things (...).
Phil. 4. 13.
, to stoop to take up any lamentation or complaint.

In these leaves following, I make payment of a debt unto thee, contracted by a
promise and engagement made in my late brief defense, which I styled,
Innocencies Triumph; with some small additionall consideration, for thy present
forbearance. For in the former sections till about page 54. I animadvert upon
some select passages in the former part and body of that piece, in whose tail
lies the sting of my accusation; the pulling out whereof, is my task from the
third section unto the end. In the carriage of the discourse, I projected these
four; Brevitie, persecuitie, moderation, satisfaction. How I have performed or
prospered in my design, is a case now presented unto the Great Judicatorie of
the world to judge and determine. I shall not court thy favor or approbation:
if thou will deal hardly either with the Truth or her Friends, at thine own
peril be it: Injure what thou can, we shall be repaired; yea, and have all
our forbearance and delay, in full consideration and recompense. Yet a very
little while, and he that does come, will come, and will not tarry Heb. 10. 37
: and behold, his reward is with him Rev. 22. 12
. In the day of whose coming, however thou shall deal with me in the interim,
I cordially wish thee peace, and that lifting up of the head, after which it
shall never hang down more.

From my Study in Coleman-street, Jan. 8. 1644. Thine, all that thy soul
desires, in the love of the truth, J. G.

Errata.
Page 3. line 36. dele, only, and close the parenthesis at the word, government.

P. 8. l. 26. dele,).

P. 17. l. 5. for vere, r. vero.

P. 13. l. 7. for apparent, r. apparan.

P. 39. l. 3. for distances, r. disturbances; ibid. l. 36. for disturbances, r.
disturbance.

P. 47. l. 33. for, engagements, r. inducements.

P. 49. l. 14. for, leave, r. give.

P. 51. l. 31. for, in ordinary, r. in an ordinary.

P. 53. l. 1. for, faith, r. truth.

P. 56. l. 34. for. praise, r. honor.

P. 59. l. 11. for, still, r. till.

P. 61. l. 35. for, is more, r. is of more.

P. 62. l. 15. in the margent, for ipsa, r. ipsam.

P. 65. l. 4. for, precedent, r. president. ibid. l. 12. for guilty, r. guilt.

P. 68. l. 9. those words, and lastly, to be closed in a parenthesis.

P. 70. l. 18. for, together by, r. together for by.

P. 80. l. 10. for, the, r. that.

P. 87. l. 25. for, exemptively, r. executively.

Some other lesser mistakes, as in points, parentheses, or the like, the Reader
is desired to pardon, and amend.

Innocence and Truth Triumphing together: OR, The latter Part of an ANSWER to
the back-part of a Discourse, lately published by WILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire,
called, A FULL REPLY, etc.
THe Gentleman who has vouchsafed me the honor of so noble an Antagonist,
Sect. 1.
as himself, p. 8. of his Full Reply, has this ingenuous saying: I presume my
friends are so ingenuous, as not to be offended with me for reproving only
their errors with ingenuous freedom, in which I manifest my self their
greatest friend, because I neither spare nor flatter them in their mistakes. I
cannot doubt, but that he will put the same interpretation upon the ingenuous
freedom of his friend in the same kind, which he presumes his friends will
put upon his; and will make no other construction of my not-sparing or
flattering him in his mistakes, then as a manifestation of my self to be his
greatest friend. The truth is, that if he shall put any other construction upon
them, but this, it is a sign that he understands not the dialect or language
of mine intentions.

Upon the stock of so fair and rich an encouragement, Sect. 2.
as this, I conceive it very proper for me to graffe (at least) the
presentation of some errors and mistakes (more then so called) to Master
Prynnes view, which himself had first scatteringly, presented to the view of
the world, in his late piece, called, A full Reply, etc. and will (I trust)
assist my Pen with his in the censure and condemnation of them; I make no
question, but that he will acknowledge it an error and mistake in any man, to
confute concealed errors and mistakes with those that are open and professed.
He makes a sad complaint (in the very beginning of his work) that his
condition still has been to have his best actions and public services (he
means performed by his Pen) misconstrued and traduced; and yet a few lines
after, he affirms that his twelve Questions touching Church Government, gave
ample satisfaction to many truly Religious, of all ranks and qualities, who
returned him special thanks. He that can give men, yea, the best of men, men
truly Religious, yea, not a few of these men neither, but many, and that of all
ranks and qualities satisfaction, yea, ample satisfaction (and receive thanks
accordingly) only by asking Questions, seems to write with Fortunatus his Pen;
and may well bear the burden of much misprision from other men, out of the
strength of the joy of this rare success. Ordinarily, men of greatest worth
and learning, have much ado to give satisfaction, by the most elaborate and
exact resolutions; which is another manner of service to the world, then asking
Questions is: A weak man may ask more Questions in an hour, then seven wise men
can answer in seven years. And when he says, that our Savior both
instructed and refuted his opposites and auditors, by demanding Questions only,
I conceive it is a mistake: As for those Scriptures which he cites to prove
this, some of them being more then half Chapters, most of them very large
portions of Chapters; he that shall please to peruse them, shall find more in
them, then demanding Questions only. No question demanded by our Savior was
further instructive, then as it gave occasion to an answer. It is the marrow of
the answer, not the bone of the Question that nourishes with instruction; And
Luke 2. 47. (the first Scripture alleged by him in this Cause) it is said,
That all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and ANSWERS, not
at his Questions. Notwithstanding, we acknowledge Aristotle's (...) to be very
useful and serviceable for the advancement of knowledge; only herein we must
crave pardon, if we judge it no sign of any depth or thoroughness in an
Argument or Subject, to be imperious and sore in asking Questions about it, and
but weak and superficial in giving Answers.

Again, Sect. 3.
whereas he supposes, p. 4. that Independent Ministers and Congregations lay
claim to a sovereign Temporal all Jurisdiction, for the prescribing and
setting up of a Church Government; certainly it is a mistake, (whatsoever it is
more) they claim to Jurisdiction at all, much less any temporal Jurisdiction,
least of all any sovereign Jurisdiction, to prescribe unto any (much less, to
command or enjoin under penalties, which is proper to sovereign Temporal
Jurisdiction) any Church Government whatsoever: they only submit to that good
and holy and perfect Will of God, for the regulation of themselves, in point of
order amongst themselves, as far as he has pleased to inlighten them with the
knowledge thereof; without taking any offense at others, for being
contrary-minded to them, and without the least semblance or show of claiming
any Authoritative or Temporal power to impose or force what they practice
themselves upon others.

Again, whereas because some of the Independents (as he charge them, p. 5.
whether truly or no, I can neither affirm, nor deny) refuse to hear the
Scriptures read in our Churches, he thinks to evict this practice of theirs,
by proving (and that by no less then thirteen Texts of Scripture) that
public reading of them is an ordinance of God; I conceive it is a defect or
mistake in point of proof. Because, if such refusal be made by any, it is not
made either upon denying or questioning, whether public reading of the
Scriptures, be an Ordinance of God; but either upon questioning, whether the
bare reading of them in public, without giving the sense of them, or framing
some exhortation upon them, or the like, be an Ordinance of God (which some of
the Scriptures cited by himself, particularly, Neh. 8. 8. make very
questionable) or else upon this reason and ground of conscience, that a man may
very safely refuse an inferior accommodation for his soul, when he has a
lawful opportunity to enjoy a superior.

Again, Sect. 4.
whereas he affirms, p. 5. the only point in question (I presume he means about
Church Government only to be, whether the Independent model alone be that
exact, unalterable form of Church Government, which Christ has punctually and
particularly set down for all Christian nations, Churches to follow; and yet
both in the same page afterward, and in several passages besides in this
Discourse, denies that there is any such form of Government, so punctually and
particuarly set down by Christ, doubtless it cannot but be a mistake, if it
amounts not to an error: for they that hold the Independent model (as he
calls it) to be the only form of Church Government, which Christ has so
punctually and particularly set down, must needs hold withal, that Christ has
set down a form of Church Government upon such terms, I mean, which is, and
must be, unalterable. Now Mr. Prynne, (with many others of his judgment, in
this controversy) denying this latter opinion, as well as the former, evident
it is, that the former cannot be the only point in question. But the truth is,
that besides both the one point and the other, there are many others in
question, though possibly not of that difficulty or importance: yea, himself in
the following page, propounds another question, differing from this, to which
notwithstanding he appropriates the same honor, and affirms it to be the sole
Question too.

Again, Sect. 5.
p. 6. whereas he determines, moderated or regulated Episcopacy, to be the same
with Presbytery; I conceive this determination will hardly be voted orthodox
in the Assembly it self, nor in the general Assembly of the Church of
Scotland. For my part, though I cannot approve of it as matter of truth, yet
for matter of inconvenience otherwise, I have nothing to charge it with.

Again, whereas (in the same page) in case the Parliament by the Synods advice,
should unanimously establish a moderated Episcopacy, as most consonant to the
Scriptures, he professes for himself, that he shall readily submit unto it;
and withal demands of the Anti-Querist, Why not he, and all others? as if
either the consonancy of a practice to the Scriptures, or the example of one
man submitting unto it as consonant thereunto, were a sufficient ground for all
men whatsoever to submit likewise unto it, without any more ado; this savours
strongly of that error, which comports so well with the practice of some, viz.
that if men in Authority shall conclude and enjoin any thing, as consonant to
the Word of God, all men are bound readily to submit unto it, without asking
any Question for conscience sake; yea, or whether they see either consonancy or
dissonancy in it thereunto.

Again, Sect. 6.
whereas he owns this saying, p. 6. as the natural issue lawfully begotten of
the body or soul (the one) of his own position, that Politicians and Statesman
are fit to be consulted with to suit a Church Government best to the Civil
State; certainly it is no assertion to be rejoiced in. For as the Apostles made
their enemies themselves judges in this point between them, Whether it was meet
to obey God, or them: So shall I willingly abide the arbitration of any of all
those that make but the least conscience of fearing God and his King (Christ,)
whether the government of Christ's Church and Kingdom should condescend, and be
compelled by Politicians and Statesmen to do obeisance to civil States in
accommodating them; or whether the government of these should not rather veyle,
and do homage unto that, and deny themselves in their most indeered Principles
and maxims of State, to give all accommodation and honor unto it. The truth
is, that the government of Christ's Kingdom in a civil State, will never do
any great thing for it, except it first receive accommodation from it. The
truth knows no compliance, but only with those that submit to it.

Whereas (page Sect. 7.
6.) he places the whole representative as well Church as State of England in
the Parliament, though I dare not gainsay it, fearing lest Mr. Pryn, claiming
(as it should seem) a privilege to make the privileges of Parliament what he
pleases, should make it a presumptuous and wilful undermining of the
undoubted privileges of Parliament by the very roots: yet I must ingenuously
profess, that it is a notion which I know not how to procure quarter for in my
brain, as yet. What I may do hereafter when the Gentleman shall bestow more
cost and pains upon it to reconcile the disproportion which for the present it
carries to my understanding, I will not predetermine. But none of all the
Authors or Books that ever yet I was debtor unto, for any grain or scruple of
that knowledge wherewith God has pleased to recompense my labor in studying,
ever licensed me to call any Assembly the Representative Church of any State
or Kingdom wherein there is not so much as any one Church Officer to be found

Whereas he affirms it (in the same page) a truth so clear, Sect. 8.
that no rational man, good Christian, or subject, can deny it, that the whole
representative Church and State of England in Parliament, have sufficient
authority by Gods law to overruled and bind all, or any particular members or
congregations of it, as well as the major part of an Independent Congregation,
power to over-vote and rule the lesser part, and to order yea, bind any of
their particular members; though for the danger aforesaid, it be not (perhaps)
so safe for me simply to call the latter assertion touching the comparison
between the two powers, either an error or a mistake; yet that this assertion
should be a truth so royally qualified, that no reasonable man, or good
Christian can deny it, seems not so reasonable. The reason is, because in an
Independent congregation, all the members by free and voluntary consent have
submitted themselves to the regulation and order of the whole body, or (which
is the same) of the major part of it: and therefore this body having received a
lawful power in a lawful way, for the reiglement of her respective members,
may lawfully exercise it according to the tenor and true intent of the
delegation of it: whereas there are many thousands in the Church and State of
England, who by Mr. Prynnes own acknowledgement (p. 24. line 3. 4.) have not
given any such consent for their regulation in matters Ecclesiastical, and
which concern Religion, unto the Parliament; yea, and there are many thousands
more besides those which he there describes and intends, who will not own any
such Resignation. Therefore the difference between the one case and the other,
is very broad, and no less considerable, so that a reasonable man may without
any dispraise to his Reason, and a good Christian, without any prejudice to the
goodness of his Christianity, demurre a while before judgment upon the case.

Besides, there is no question, or ground of doubting, but that a good
Christian may lawfully, and with a good conscience, submit himself unto a
godly, able, and faithful Pastor, together with his people, whom he has good
ground to judge godly, and faithful also, as well for their edification in
their most holy faith, as for the inspection and regulation of themselves in
matters of life and conversation: But whether it be lawful to submit to any
man, or any rank or association of men, (especially of men, of whose
sufficiency and faith fullness in the things of God, and Jesus Christ, we have
either but a very slender or no testimony at all, yea whose persons are
altogether unknown to us) in matters which concern the worship and service of
God, cannot but be a question, and that of great moment, to all considering and
conscientious men, who are not already satisfied in the negative part of it.
The Apostles do not only permit, but give it in charge to Christians in
Church Fellowship, to submit themselves one to another in the fear of God,
Ephesians. 5. 21. i. to be yielding, and tractable, easy to be entreated one by
another. And, submit your selves every man unto another, 1 Pet. 5. 5. If one
man ought to submit to another man in this kind, much more ought one to submit
unto many, and most of all to the whole society of Saints whereof he is a
member. But as touching submission unto any man, or men whatsoever in matters
which concern the worship and service of God, the Scripture is so far from
imposing this upon any man, that it imposes the contrary, and that with great
Emphasis and weight, Call no man your father upon earth, (is our Saviors own
charge, Matthew. 23. 9.) for one is your Father which is in heaven. And in the
preceding verse, Be ye not called Rabbi: for one is your master (or Doctor)
even Christ, and ye all are brethren. And the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are
bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men. He speaks of a servility
or subjection in judgment and conscience, to the decisions or determinations
of men in matters of conscience and Religion. And whosoever does submit or
subject himself in things of this nature unto any man or men whosoever, that
is, resign up his judgment and conscience to be ordered, obliged, and tied,
by the mere authority or magistery of men in such things, Call's men Fathers
on earth, makes himself a servant unto men: and consequently makes himself a
transgressor both of our Saviors injunction and charge in this behalf, and of
his Apostles also.

Thirdly, he that submits himself to a Pastor and Congregation of Saints for
such regulation as has been mentioned, is presumed to know and understand
beforehand, of what spirit both the one and the other are; how matters
appertaining to the worship and service of God, are carried, managed, and
ordered amongst them; so that he may with the full concurrence and consent of
his judgment and conscience, submit himself unto them, as touching communion
with them in their practice in this kind: but what any Synod, Assembly, or
Court of men will determine or enjoin in such things, cannot be known
beforehand by any man; and consequently, no man can with a good conscience
submit himself unto them, as touching any of their determinations or
decisions, until he first understands what they are, and whether according to
the light and judicature of his conscience, agreeable to the word of God.

Fourthly, in case a Pastor and Congregation shall afterward so far alter
and vary from that posture either in Doctrine or practice, wherein they stood,
when a man first joined and submitted himself unto them, that he cannot with
the peace of his conscience walk any longer with them, he may with leave
obtained, or otherwise if by request it cannot be obtained, withdraw himself
without any inconvenience, from their communion, and incorporate himself
elsewhere, as he judges best. This may be done with far less trouble and
inconvenience, then ordinarily a man upon a dislike of his Parochial Pastor,
can remove out of one Parish into another. But when such things concerning the
worship and service of God, which a man cannot with a good conscience submit
unto, shall be enacted and commanded, under mulcts and penalties by those that
have power and authority over us, we cannot refuse subjection hereunto, but at
our peril, and with the sustaining of what detriment or damage, whether in
our estates, liberties, or otherwise, as the commanders shall please to impose.
Therefore the case between a particular Congregation, and the representative
body of a Kingdom, is far different.

Fifthly and lastly, the representative Church and State of a Kingdom, may
(and does ordinarily) differ from it self in point of judgment touching
matters of Religion) at several times, as much as heaven and earth. Such
Bodies in the days of Queen Mary, and before, stood up for Lordly
Episcopacie, which you confess, page 8. that Body which now is, has by
solemn covenant abjured. And besides, enacted many things concerning the
worship and service of God, which other Bodies of the same representation and
power, have since repealed. And the nature and claim of such Bodies as these in
their several successions, is, that what powersoever has been either given
unto, or exercised by any of the Predecessors, of right appertains to the
Successor. So that suppose the representative Body now in being, shall be
freely and willingly submitted unto, as having a lawful power to establish
what they shall please in matters of Religion, as most agreeable to the word of
God: this submission does not only interesse or confirm them in this power,
but in the consequence and construction of it, is the like interessing and
confirmation in the same power, of all their successors, of what constitution
or judgment soever they shall be for matters of Religion. Whereas for
particular Independent Congregations ( loquendum ut vulgus) their present
constitution being sound and safe, as touching their members, being all in the
judgment of charity (and discretion too) persons of conscience, and of
competent understanding, they are not like in an ordinary way of providence, to
degenerate or decline in their successors: and besides, in case they should,
their interest and authority over any of their members, may at any time, and
under their greatest confirmations, be declined without any considerable
damage, or inconveence, as was formerly showed. So that Mr. Prynnes Truth now
under consideration (I mean his Assertion so called) is nothing so clear, but
that a rational man may deny it; yea, the more rational a man is, he is the
more like to deny it.

The Antiquerist having said, Sect. 9.
that the Saints think Christ alone is King over his Churches, and has not
left them to Substitutes, etc. whereas Mr. Prynne, page 6. replies thus; If he
means it only of matters of Faith, or of internal government over the souls
of men, it may pass as tolerable; it is (as I conceive) an expression which may
not pass as tolerable, being worse then an ordinary error, or then more then an
ordinary mistake. He that calls any thing tolerable, must needs suppose it
either to be evil, or inconvenient (at the best.) Now if Mr. Prynne thinks it
either evil or inconvenient, that Christ should be King alone over his
Churches, in matters of faith and internal government of their souls, it is
no marvel if he seeks to interesse men in a Legislative power over his
Churches in respect of their external government; it is a marvel rather, that
he seeks not to infringe his title and claim even to the internal government
of their souls also, and that he anoints not Representative Bodies of
Churches and States, with authority to repeal the Articles of the old Creed,
and to enact another.

Whereas (in the same page) he tells his Antiquerist, Sect. 10.
that he must renounce his oath of Allegiance, his late Protestation, and
National Vow and Covenant, make four or five Canonical Scriptures Apocrypha,
with some such other mormolukies as these, if he thinks Christ to be King
alone over his Churches, in point of external Ecclesiastical government,
Discipline, or Order; I conceive this consequence of his to be inconsequent and
a mistake. For first, the Scriptures he specifies, Rom 13. 1. to 6. 1 Pet. 2.
13. 14. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. speak nothing of Ecclesiastical
Government, nor of any subjection unto Kings or Rulers in matters of
Conscience, or Religion; but only of that obedience which is due unto them in
civil things: yea some of them (the last by name) not so much as of either.
And secondly, for the National vow and Covenant, doubtless they that took and
swear that, did not abjure the absolute Monarchical Independent power of
Christ over his Churches, nor did they swear homage or fealty to any other Lord
or Lords, but with a Salvo jure, etc. saving the rights and privileges of the
Lord Paramount, Jesus Christ; amongst which that is one of the most undoubted
ones, to have the sole dominion over the faith and consciences of men,
especially in things concerning the worship and service of God. And thirdly and
lastly, for the Oath of Allegiance, and late Protestation, either there is
nothing contained in either of these, but what is of a clear and perfect
consistence with this sole dominion of Christ over the faith and consciences of
men: or if there be, the renouncing of them will be more honorable and safe
for Christians, then their taking of them was, or then their standing by their
engagement in that kind will be.

But whereas (page 7.) Sect. 11.
he affirms, that Christ has delegated his Kingly power to Christian Kings,
Magistrates, and highest civil powers; as likewise bequeathed his Prophetical
Office unto Ministers: these certo certius are errors in the highest,
undermining (I shall not abate, wilfully and presumptuously, in the reckoning)
the undoubted privileges of the Throne of Jesus Christ by the very roots. For
are not the Offices of Christ incommunicable? appropriable only unto him who is
(...), God and Man, and Mediator? Or is Christ retired from the throne of his
glory, to live privately as a Recluse, to solace and enjoy himself in some
solitary angle or by-corner of heaven? Or has he eased his shoulder of that
great burden of the government of the world, which was laid by God upon it,
devolving it upon the shoulders of others? Where is then the promise of the
Everlastingnesse of his Kingdom, and of the continuance of his dominion
throughout all ages? And where is the prediction of his delivering up his
Kingdom unto his Father, if he has delivered it up (or down rather) unto men?
Surely he means to call for it again out of their hands, before that day. But
if Kings and Magistrates have the Kingly Power of Christ delegated unto them,
they have all power given unto them both in Heaven and Earth, and consequently
have not only a right and lawfullnesse of Authority to command as well all
the Angels of Heaven, as men on Earth, but also to incline and bow the hearts
of both, to the willing execution and fulfilling of those commands. And if so,
let them impose what Ecclesiastical Government or Discipline they please, they
may, if they please, be obeyed and submitted unto upon what terms, with what
willingness and readiness, and by whom they desire. And if Ministers be
invested in the Prophetical office of Christ, how dares Mr Prynne refuse to
hearken unto them? or engage himself in a theological war against them,
having no part or fellowship in this office himself? Will he subject the spirit
of the Prophets, yea, of those that prophecy in the Authority, and by the
virtue of the Prophetical office of Christ, unto himself, and his own spirit,
being no Prophet at all? Letentur tenebrae, erubescat lux.

Again, Sect. 12.
whereas (in the same page) he votes, that if any man deny a certain odd kind
of verity (so called and asserted by him) he must renounce not only his
Christianity, but his Allegiance and Humanity too; I utterly renounce the
consequence, conceiving it to be tantamont with an absolute mistake. For a man
may deny, that every Christian in point of Conscience is bound by the express
resolution of Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 14, 15. (with several other Scriptures as
little to the purpose) without any danger of blind obedience, to lawful
decreas, consonant to Gods Word, etc. without renouncing, yea, or so much as a
show of renouncing his Christianity (and much more of his Humanity.) For what
has a man's humanity to do with the express resolution of Romans 13. 1. to 6.
Ezra. 7. 26. Josh. 1. 16, 17, etc. Or what has the express Resolution of
these and other Texts, to preserve a man's Christianity from the danger of bind
obedience, even to lawful decrees, in case the lawfulness of them be not
seen, nor so much as examined, by those that submit unto them? A man is in the
same danger of blind obedience, as well in respect of lawful, as unlawful
decrees. Yea, a man that after a serious and conscientious debate, shall upon a
mistaken ground submit unto an unlawful decree, acquits himself more like a
Christian, and with better acceptance unto God by following the light of his
conscience upon such terms, then he that shall subject himself unto a lawful
decree, without knowing, or caring to know, what, why, or wherefore he so does.

Again, Sect. 13.
Whereas (in the same page) he taxes the Anti-querist for presuming an
oversight in the Parliament and Synod, before it be actually committed, and
censures this (imaginary) act of his, as neither Christian, charitable, nor any
way of Christ; and for the proof hereof, cites 1 Cor. 13. 5. 7. Certainly, all
this is an oversight, and nothing else but the presuming of an oversight, where
none is. For he that says thus, Suppose the whole Parliament and Synod should
err in commanding a Government, etc. does not so much as suppose, much less
presume, that either of them will so err; no more then the Apostle Paul, in
saying, If Christ be not risen 1 Cor. 15. 14.
, presumes, that Christ is not risen: least of all does that Text, 1 Cor. 13.
5. 7. prove that act or speech of the Anti-querist here taxed, to be either
unchristian, or uncharitable.

Nor is that marginall note in the same page excusable at any lower rate then a
mistake of that kind, Sect. 14.
which they that speak sparingly, are wont to call an untruth; which charge
the Independent party, that without discovery or proof of their way, they will
have the Presbyterians blindly to submit unto it, as the only way of Christ.
Never was a poor innocent margin compelled to carry a more guilty Annotation
then this. It is the firstborn of abhorrencies in Independency, to compel any
man blindly to submit unto any thing. That infinuation following, is an arrow
shot from the same bow, viz. that the Anti-querist and his, oppose and
prejudicate both the Parliaments and Synods Proceedings, though never so pious,
conscientious and religious. This were something to the purpose, if there were
any thing to the proof. Verum de genere hoc adeo sunt multa, etc.

Whereas p. Sect. 15.
8. because the two Brethren in their Reply to A. S. used this expression
concerning the Congregationall Government, that in time it cannot but overthrow
all other sorts of Ecclesiastical Government, he gathers upon them with this
insulting Interrogatory; Is it not then a turbulent, dangerous, schismatic,
unquiet (that I say not, insufferable) Government by your own confessions,
which will admit no equal nor corrivall, etc. is not this, either through
weakness of understanding, or strength of a worse principle, an insufferable
interpretation? Or can it but call to remembrance, that testimony of those two
against our Savior (who are called false witnesses for their labor, Mat. 26.
60.) wherein they testified, that he had said, I can destroy the Temple of God,
and build it again in three days, as if he had spoke concerning the material
Temple, whereas it is evident from Joh. 2. 21. that he spoke concerning the
Temple of his body? In like manner, what the two Brethren spoke (as is most
apparent in the passage cited by him from p. 111. of the said Reply) concerning
the final prevailing of the Congregationall Government over other Governments,
by reason of that affinity which it has with the Truth, and consonancy with
the word of God, this man will needs interpret, as if they spoke it in respect
of some fierce, fiery, turbulent and domineering spirit, wherewith that way of
Government should be haunted or inspired above all others; yea, his pen
blusheth not to avouch (in effect) that themselves confess as much. The whole
passage in the said Reply, that the Reader may the better judge, is this;
Indeed, by the beauty and perfect consonancy of this Government to the word of
God, it may very reasonably (yea and upon higher terms then of reason, meaning
I suppose, of Faith) be thought that in time it cannot but overthrow all sorts
of Ecclesiastical Government, and stand up it self in their stead. Those words
in this period, it cannot but overthrow all sorts of Church Government, they
borrow from the pen of their Adversary, (as appears by their different
character) in which respect, for a man confederate with him in the same cause,
to put a sinister or malevolent construction upon them, though used by his
opposites, is very unnatural, and a breach of ingenuitie (I verily believe)
without president.

Whereas a few lines after, Sect. 16.
he vapors thus; Will any Parliament, State, or Nation (think you) suffer such
a Government to take root among them, which will un-King, un-Parliament,
un-Church, un-Nation them altogether, and make each several Congregation an
absolute Monarchy, Church, etc. A man would think he were calling for the
making of three Tabernacles, one for Moses, and one for Elias, and a third for
himself, not knowing indeed what he speaks. In case a few poor Christians,
persons truly fearing God, shall be permitted to worship and serve God in such
a way, wherein they may enjoy the peace of their consciences being tender, is
such a permission as this, of any such formidable aspect, as to threaten,
either the un-Kinging of a State, or the un-Parliamenting of a Parliament, or
the un-Nationing of a Nation, or the un-Churching of a Church? Or are such
persons more likely, or upon terms of any more advantage (in case their
inclinations stood for it) to bring any of these doomes-dayes upon a State or
Nation, when they are permitted to worship and serve God with peaceablenesse of
Conscience, then they would be, in case they were compelled contrary to their
Conscience in both? Surely the man to whom the shadows of the mountains
seemed men, was very prudent and advised in his fear, in respect of him that
is terriculamented with such apocryphal pretenses of fear, as these.

Et si nullus erit pulvis, tamen excute nullum:
Quaelibet officio causa sit apta tuo.
Whereas he says, Sect. 17.
p. 9. that in Parliaments every particular man has his vote, though not in
proper person, yet in their Deputies; and yet p. 24. that there be a degree of
vulgar people, who have no votes in Parliamentary elections, (and consequently
can have no Deputies) I shall claim no privilege of determining, which is the
error or mistake; but freely give him leave to be his own carver herein: let
either number 9, or number 24. be condemned for either, that so the Law of
Contradictories however may be satisfied, and all my demands are satisfied in
this particular.

Whereas p. Sect. 18.
9. he so much rejoices over that saying of his own, That there is no example
of gathering Independent Congregations, not of Infidels, but of men already
converted to, and settled in the Christian Faith, unless derived from the
private Conventicles, of Arrians, Novations, Donatists, and other Heretics,
who yet were not Independent among themselves; as if it were a true saying
indeed, and only bitter to Independents, because undeniable; the truth is,
that the truth of it (were it granted) will hardly equal the dust in the
balance, to make the cause he maintains weight. He that says, there is no
example of gathering Independent Congregations of men already converted to, and
settled in the Christian Faith, unless derived, etc. must needs suppose and
grant, that there are examples of gathering such Congregations of men not yet
settled in the Christian Faith, which are not so derived, etc. according to the
tenor of that known maxim; Exceptio firm it Regulam in non exceptis. He that
should say thus, there is no example of any man truly sanctified, that ever
finally apostatis'd from his Christian profession; implies and grants, that
there are or may be examples of persons never truly sanctified, who did so
apostatise. Now if there be examples of gathering Independent Congregations, of
men only converted to the Christian Faith, though not yet established or
settled in it, other then those that are derived from the Conventicles of
Heretics; it is an argument of more strength to countenance the
Congregationall Government, then any Mr Prynne has brought either to disable
that, or to strengthen the other, in whose defense his pen so much triumphs.
Suppose the Apostles did build up or gather Independent Churches or
Congregations only of persons newly converted to the Christian Faith, and not
of such as had been settled herein, yet 1. this amounts to an express pattern
of (and consequently to a sufficient warrant for) gathering Independent
Congregations simply, or in such cases, wherein there is not error in personis.
Nay, 2. if these Apostolical Independent Congregations did at their first
gathering or framing consist only of persons lately Infidells, and as yet
newly converted unto, and not settled in Christianity, yet afterward, the same
Congregations must needs be supposed to consist of persons settled in
Christianity also, unless we will suppose either that such as were converted
by the Apostles to the Faith, were never either by them, or any others settled
herein; or else that upon such settling of them, their Congregations were either
broken up and dissolved, or else specifically changed in their Government.
Either of which suppositions, though to others they may be but as gnats, easy
to be swallowed, yet to me they are Camells, I cannot get them down. So that
we see Mr Prynne has gotten nothing yet by his true undeniable passage, (for
which notwithstanding, he scarcely refraineth from sacrificing unto his pen)
but only the giving of his adversaries such an argument for their cause, which
he will never be able to take away from them. And whereas in the latter part of
this passage, he would insinuate, (that which more plainly he affirms a few
periods after) that those that gather Independent Congregations, derive their
practice from the examples, of Novatians, Donatists, and other Heretics; whom
yet he denies to have been Independent amongst themselves; it is as if he
should challenge women that are modest and chaste, for deriving their behavior
from the example of Joseph's Mistress, or servants that were loyal and
faithful to their Masters, for imitating the practice of Judas Iscariot. Now
since the passage we wot of, whilst supposed true and undeniable, does us more
service, then the eviction of it for false, would do; I conceive not my self
bound, either in point of wisdom or conscience, to make a labor of the
confutation or conviction of it.

Whereas p. Sect. 19.
10. he demands, Why the National Church of the Jews under the Old Testament,
should not be a pattern for us to imitate, as well as their National
Covenant, Fasting, Sabbath-keeping; the question (I conceive) carries an error
(or at least a mistake) in the ground and foundation of it. It supposes, that
we covenant, fast, keep Sabbath, etc. only in imitation of that Nation, who
did the like, and that we have no other ground for these practices, but the
nationalitie of the like observations amongst the Jews: whereas if we had no
better foundation for them then this, the national Idolatries of that people
would be a pattern for us to imitate, as well as these. If Mr Prynne will
needs have the National Church of the Jews, a pattern for us to imitate, let
him procure an Injunction from Heaven for the imitation, and we are ready to
join issue with him.

Whereas p. Sect. 20.
11. he says, that wicked members of a Church, when excommunicated, after they
are baptized, do not actually cease to be members, etc. Certainly it is a
mistake, one or more, if nihil supra. For 1. if such members when
excommunicated, do not actually cease to be members, I would know whether then
they cease to be such potentially only? If so, they ceased thus to be members,
as soon as ever they became members; they were then in potentia remota of
ceasing to be members, as a man is of dying, as soon as he is borne: or if we
speak of potentia propinqua, they thus ceased to be members, upon the
committing of those sins, which rendered them justly obnoxious either unto
excommunication by the Church, or unto death by the Civil Magistrate, before
either of these censures or sentences passed upon them. Therefore if they
actually cease not to be members when excommunicated, they cease not at all to
be members; or at least no otherwise, then they ceased to be before such
excommunication: and if either, what do we with this learned impertinencie,
actually? But 2. if wicked members when excommunicated, do not actually cease
to be members, I marvel our Savior should allow them no better quarter
amongst their fellows, then to be looked upon as Heathens and Publicans? Mat.
18. 17. It seems Heathens and Publicans may be actual members of Mr Prynnes
Presbyterian Church; yea, though they be by the highest hand the Church can
lift up, cast out of it. Ne vere, ne me ad tales compellite coetus. And 3. and
lastly, what mysterious notion he should intend to let in, or what dangerous
conceit he should intend to shut out by that emphaticall insertion, after they
are baptized, is out of the hemisphere of my apprehension. All that I can work
out of it, is this; that there is or may be a twofold excommunication of the
members in a Christian Church; one, before they are baptized, and another,
after: and that by the power of the former excommunication, they actually cease
to be members of their respective Churches; not so by virtue of the latter,
which (it seems) is either more indulgent, or less vigorous and active. If
this be Mr Prynnes Doctrine, it is most properly and peculiarly his; Libera per
primos posuit vestigia Princeps: if it be not his, Sensum and sententiam
vestram, o verba, after they are baptized.

Whereas immediately after, Sect. 21
he argues thus, that since none separated from the Churches of Ephesus,
Colosse, Smyrna, and though they had some corruptions and evil members,
therefore for us to separate from, and un-church such National or Parochial
Churches, which have such members in them, is to un-church all Churches in the
old and new Testament, etc. He commits as many errors in arguing, as a man
shall lightly meet with within such a compass of words. For 1. he must be
beholding either to an abundant weakness or charity (the one) in his Reader,
to obtain the grant of that which is the base or rise of this whole
argumentation, viz. that none separated from the Churches of Ephesus, Colosse,
etc. Negative proofs from the Scripture in this case are not concluding. But
suppose charity should cover the nakedness or weakness of this supposition,
and pass it as a truth, yet 2. that such a supposition should argue, that to
separate from National or Parochial Churches which have evil members in
them, is to un-church all Churches in the old and new Testament, has neither
head, nor foot, neither body nor soul of reason in it. For 1. they who
separate from a National Church, supposing no place or ground for such a
Church under the New Testament, have no ground or color but to judge that such
a Church was lawful, and truly so called under the old: as they who now
separate themselves from Circumcision and other Judaicall observations, as
superstitious and highly displeasing unto God, do in no reasonable
construction hereby deny, but that sometimes they were, or might have been, a
legitimate and acceptable worship unto him. 2. Nor is there any sinew or
strength of reason at all in this position; they who separate from a National
or Parochial Church, which have wicked members in them, do therefore
separate, because of these members, more then there is in this; they who avoid
the company of men with heads, do therefore avoid them, because they have
heads. There may be reasons more then enough, of separating either from a
National, or from a Parochial Church, besides the wickedness of some of the
members of them: yea, I do not conceive that ever any man separated from
either of these Churches, National or Parochial, simply or solely upon this
ground: nor do I judge it a sufficient cause of separation from either. Mr
Prynne himself has separated from the Church of England as Episcopal, and
has given the strength of his assistance to cast it into another frame or
mould of Government, whereby it will specifically differ from it self: and yet
it is a plain case, that he has not made this separation from it, because of
the wickedness of some of the members that were in it, whilst Episcopal;
because it is like to have many of this character, in case it shall be torkened
to Presbyterall. Therefore a man may separate either from a National or
Parochial Church which have wicked members in it, without unchurching (yea, or
disparaging) any Church at all, either in the Old or New Testament.

Whereas p. Sect. 22.
12. he collects thus; If Independents deny that there were diverse particular
Congregations at Jerusalem, then they must prove, that all the Apostles and
Elders at Jerusalem, were Pastors but of one and the self-same Individual
Congregation; it is at least a mistake, though pardonable in a Lawyer, yet not
in a Logician. For 1. suppose there were diverse particular Congregations at
Jerusalem, it does not follow, therefore all the Elders belonging to these
several Congregations, were Pastors of them, except we stretch the
signification of the word, Pastor, beyond the Staple of the Scriptures, (as
Presbyterians I confess, usually do to help themselves at a dead lift) and
extend it unto all manner of Governors and Officers in the Church. And
consequently, a plurality of Congregations at Jerusalem may be denied; though
no proof or supposition be made, that all the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem, were PASTORS to one Individual Congregation. 2. A plurality of
Congregations supposed, it does not follow, that all, or any of the Apostles,
were Pastors unto any of them; Pastors and Apostles being contra-distinguished,
Ephesians. 4. 11. He therefore gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors and Teachers. The Apostles had a Commission to preach unto any
particular Church, or Churches, without being made Pastors unto them: yea,
himself afterward in this very page confesses, that the Apostles were not
immediate Ministers or Pastors to particular Churches. Therefore Mr Prynnes
collection (however) faulters. 3. (And lastly) The presence or continuance of
so many of the Apostles at Jerusalem for a time (for that all the Apostles
should be present at the meeting, Act. 15. is only Mr. Prynnes Gospel) no
ways implies, that their stay there was so much either for the Government or
edification of the particular Church of Jerusalem, whether consisting of one or
more Congregations, as for the general accommodation of the Gospel, and of the
affairs of all particular Churches elsewhere; this City being their
Head-quarter, or Rendevouz, from whence upon occasion they might, and did the
more commodiously issue forth by parties into other parts, upon their
spiritual designs, as God called them, or gave opportunity. So that there is
no necessity at all lying upon them, who conceive that there was only one
Congregation at Jerusalem, to prove, that all the Apostles and Elders there
were Pastors of one and the self-same individual Congregation. He tells me p.
24. of my Independent fabrique fastened together with Independent Grochets: but
I can assure him, that if his Presbyterian fabrique be not fastened together
and supported by better Crochets and Crutches, whether dependent, or
independent, then are to be found in the words either of his twelve
considerable serious Questions, or of his Independencie examined, or of this
his Full Reply, it will drop one piece from another, and the honor of it soon
lie in the dust. The inference which he would make by way of question, in the
words immediately following those already insisted upon, complains of the same
weakness with the former. And then (says he) what becomes of their
independent Churches, which have no Apostle, and only one Pastor, etc. I
presume his Presbyterian Churches want Apostles, as much as the Independent:
and if these be peccant through such a defect, I hope those will not be
justified. But how effeminate and loose a consequence is this: The Church at
Jerusalem had Apostles and Elders to be the Pastors of it: therefore that
Church that has not both Apostles and Elders to be the Pastors of it, is or
can be no true Church; as if Pastors made of Apostles (in case there had been
such) had been of the essence of the Church at Jerusalem. If either Mr. Prynne,
or any other, shall show me any one such Independent crochet as this and twenty
more in this Reply, in any of my writings, I shall freely confess a Judgment
against them to the fire.

Whereas ( p. Sect. 23.
12.) he pretends to find, an impregnable evidence of the lawfulness of
National Synods, Parliaments, in all Christian Kingdoms, and of an Authority
given them to determine all Ecclesiastical Controversies, settle, order all
Church-affaires, etc. in the frequent General National Assemblies, Synods --
among the Israelites, prescribed, appointed by God, and no ways contradicted,
revoked under the Gospel, invested with such Authority, etc. he is
(questionless) mistaken over and over. For 1. the Assembly spoken of 1 Chronicles.
13. 1. to the 14. (the prime place produced by him to prove his General
National Assemblies, Synods, amongst the Israelites, prescribed, appointed by
God) is neither there, nor any where else in Scripture said to have been
prescribed, appointed by God. Nor 2. did this Assembly, consisting (the King
himself excepted) of the Captains of thousands, and of hundreds, of every
Leader, (a very strange Synod to determine all Ecclesiastical Controversies)
either claim or exercise any authority in this kind; but only resolved upon
the sending to, and gathering together the Priests and Levites, with the
generality of the people of the Land from all parts, as not thinking it meet
to remove the Ark without their presence and consent. Nor 3. were the members
of this Assembly, Synod, chosen by the respective Synagogicall Congregations in
the Land; and consequently no such impregnable evidence of the lawfulness of
National Assemblies, Synods, now; though for my part I never questioned the
lawfulness of such Assemblies, Synods, as these, but only the lawfulness of
some power, which some of these claim and exercise. 4. Nor did this, nor any
other General National Assembly, Synod, any where to be found in Scripture,
ever enact any thing concerning the worship and service of God, under mulcts
and penalties, but what God himself had plainly determined and adjudged to be
done, in his Law. Nor was this done by any select Assembly, Synod, consisting
only of Priests and Levites, or of persons voted into places of Authority by
the generality of the people of the Land, but by the generality of the people
themselves met together, with an uniforme, full and free consent and
approbation on all hands. It is said, 2 Chronicles. 15. 9, 10. 12, 13, etc. (another
Scripture cited by Mr. Prynne, to prove the aforesaid gainsaid conclusion)
that all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them out of Ephraim, and
Manasseh, and out of Simeon, gathered themselves together at Jerusalem, And
entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, with all their
heart, and with all their soul, That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of
Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, -- And all Israel
rejoiced at the Oath, etc. Here is no compelling of any man by any
Authoritative Synod of Priests and Levites, nor by any assembly of the Nobles
or persons delegated by the people, to submit-unto such a Law, or such a
Covenant, as is mentioned; but the generality of the people in their proper
persons, did voluntarily and freely with one consent enter into this
association or agreement between themselves, and confirmed it by an Oath. 5.
(And lastly) that which was here generally agreed upon, and solemnly sworn by
the people under the penalty of death, viz. The seeking of the Lord God of
their Fathers, etc. was not any matter of doubtful disputation, any
determination of the sense and meaning of any conttoversall passage of
Scripture, was not any thing ensnaring, any thing destructive to the peace and
comfort of those that were tender and conscientious amongst them: no: it was
nothing but what in expresness and plainness of words, was required of them by
God himself in their written Law Exodus 23. 25. Deuteronomy. 6. 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
and 11. 13. and 13. 14. and 30. 16. Joih. 22. 5. and 24. 14. 23.
(which they had all owned and voluntarily subjected themselves unto formerly
Exodus 19. 8. and 24 3. Deuteronomy. 5. 27. and 26. 17. Josh. 24. 16, 21, 22, 24.
.) The contrary to it, viz. Idolatry, being as expressly and plainly forbidden
in the same Law, and that ten times over Exodus 20. 23. and 23. 24, 32, 33 Deuteronomy.
5. 7, 8, 9, and 6. 14. and 7. 5. 16. and 8. 19. and 12. 30. and 13. 2, 3. and
29. 17, 18.
. Yea, it was the effect of the first and greatest commandment of this Law;
Some lively sparks and impressions whereof remain to this day in the fleshly
tables of men's hearts, anciently written by the finger of God, without the
mediation of Scripture instruction. Thus you see Mr. Prynnes impregnable
evidence for the lawfulness of an Authority in National Synods, Parliaments,
Assemblies, for determining all Ecclesiastical Controversies, etc. plainly
nonsuited, and defaced. -- Irus and est subito, qui modo Croesus erat. No such
authority as that wherein he seeks to infeoffe General National Assemblies,
Synods, in determining Ecclesiastical controversies, etc. will ever be
evidenced from any Assembly, Synod, heard of in the Scriptures.

Whereas (page 13. Sect. 24.
) from the words of his Antagonist there expressed, he draws this conclusion,
Therefore the Infant-Church in the Apostles days was not so complete, perfect
in all points, as the multiplied or grown Churches afterward, either he
amphibologizeth, or else his conclusion is an absolute mistake in reference to
his purpose. For though the Infant-church in the Apostles days, that is,
Christian Churches in their first bud and spring, in and about the beginning of
the Apostles days, and their first going forth into the world to preach the
Gospel, were not so complete, perfect in all points, as either the same, or
other Churches were afterward, viz. toward the later days of the Apostles in
the world, when they had supplied and added all things necessary, and any ways
appertaining to the beauty and well-being of these Churches in point of
Government and Discipline; yet it follows not from hence, that either these, or
any other succeeding Churches after the Apostles days, how multiplied or grown
soever, ever grew to more beauty or perfection in point of government, then
these had attained unto, before the Apostles were taken away by death from
them. This conclusion indeed, if Mr. Prynne could have made lawful prize of
it, from the premises of his adversary, would have smiled a little upon his
cause: but for the other, it holds no correspondencie at all with it, but
rather frowns upon it. For if the Apostles left the Churches of Christ in the
perfection of beauty for matter of government, it must needs follow, that any
variation from that form of government wherein they left them, is rather
matter of deformity then perfection.

Whereas (in the same page) he affirms with an high hand, Sect. 25.
that if the Parliament and Synod shall by public consent establish a
Presbyteriall Church Government, as most consonant to Gods word, --
Independents and all others are bound in conscience to submit unto it, under
pain of obstinacy, singularity, etc. in case they cannot really, by direct
texts, and precepts, prove it diametrically contrary to the Scripture. -- I
conceive it to be a jeofaile in Theology, a mistake in stead of a truth. For
first, a man is not bound in conscience to do any thing that is commanded,
though both the authority whereby it is commanded, yea and the thing it self
which is commanded, be never so lawful, whilst his judgment and conscience
remain considerably doubtful, and unsatisfied touching the lawfulness of it,
especially whilst they vehemently incline to think and judge the contrary;
least of all, whilst the contrary is the absolute and unquestioned decision of
both; yea, though the grounds of such a doubt or determination be never so
insufficient and weak. The Scripture is clear in this, Let every man be fully
persuaded (or assured) in his own mind, or understanding, (viz. concerning the
lawfulnes of what he does) and not build upon, or content himself with the mind
and understanding of others, Romans 14. 5. Again, He that doubts, is condemned
if he eat, because he eats not of faith; i. not out of a full persuasion or
knowledge in himself of the lawfulnes of his eating in such a kind: For
whatsoever is not of Faith [i. is acted or done, and not out of such a
knowledge] is sin, Romans 14. 23. Now certain it is, that no man is bound in
conscience, under pain of obstinacy, singularity, etc. to sin, or bring
damnation upon himself. The truth is, that to scruple or question the
lawfulnes of any thing that is commanded by the high hand of Authority to be
done, is somewhat singular in the world; and so deserves not the pain, but the
honor of singularity: But that such a behavior or deportment as this, should
suffer the pain of obstinacy, is as contrary to reason, as that the Sun
should be arrested for being a nuysance unto the world with his darkness. 2ly,
if by proving the contrariety of what he speaks of, unto the Scriptures, by
direct texts and precepts, he means, the producing of such texts of Scripture
wherein this contrariety is (...) in terminis, or in tofidem verbis expressed,
he binds a heavier burden on the shoulders of others, then he is willing
himself to touch with the least of his fingers, in all he has publicly
discoursed hitherto upon this subject; yea, heavier then either God, or the
common light of reason in men, will suffer to be bound upon them in this case.
The Sadducees were bound to believe the resurrection of the dead by virtue of
this text, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
Exodus 3. 6. wherein notwithstanding there is no direct or express mention made
of this resurrection, as appears Mat. 22. 31, 32. In like manner the
Corinthians were bound to think it a matter of duty to minister in their
carnal things, unto those that sowed spiritual things unto them, by virtue
and warrant of this Scripture, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
tradeth out the Corn, Deu. 25. 4. (as appears 1 Cor. 9. 8, 9.) and yet evident
it is, that the direct letter of such a duty is not here to be found. What
proposition soever, shall, or may be found to be a legitimate and native
consequence or deduction from any text in Scripture being found, ought to be of
the same sacred consideration unto us, and according to the tenor of it, of the
same obligation upon us, with that Scripture-ground from whence it issues and
is derived. For if the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump: and if the
root be holy, so are the branches, Romans 11. 16. Therefore that
Church Government which shall be overthrown by a direct and pregnant
consequence from a text, is as sufficiently overthrown, as if the defeat had
been given by the most direct and express letter of such a text.

Whereas (page 14.) Sect. 26.
he superaddes this notion (in a passage much of the same import with the last
brought under examination) that though the establishment of a government by the
Parliament and Assembly, does not bind all Independents to be simply of their
opinion, yet it binds them in point of practice and obedience outwardly
thereto, and not to separate under pain of arrogancy, faction, schism,
unless they can clearly manifest it to be absolutely unlawful and repagnant
to the Scriptures. I conceive he adds unto his mistakes, if not unto his
errors. For first, whereas he here supposes, that Independenters must separate
from the government that shall be established by Parliament and Assembly, (and
so must undergo the pains and penalties imposed upon that crime by the law of
his pen) in case they do not, or shall not submit unto it, he should have
done well to consider, that separation still presupposes former union. Those
whom God has joined together, let not man separate, Mat. 19. 6.
or put asunder. That woman cannot be divorced, nor yet forsake her husband,
which never was married; no more can Independents be said (unless by saying
that which had been better unsaid) to separate from that government unto which
they never were yet united. Therefore let Mr. Prynne, and all other of the
Presbyterian judgment, know assuredly, that they will never gain any thing but
the wages of unrighteousness by charging their brethren of the Congregationall
way, either with separation or schism.

Secondly, to affirm, that a man though he be not of their opinion, who shall
establish a Government (he must mean, touching the lawfulness of the
Government so established, or else it is nothing to the purpose) is yet bound
in point of outward practice and obedience to submit thereunto, is a note
beyond that Elah of the Familists, wherein they teach, that if a man shall keep
his heart and mind sound and uncorrupted within, he may for his safety or
accommodation otherwise, comply outwardly with any Idolatrous worships or
superstitions, or other unlawful practices whatsoever. This generation it
self, does not hold such an outward compliance as this, simply necessary, in
point of duty or conscience, but only lawful in point of Christian liberty.
Therefore Mr. Prynne wades deeper into these polluted waters, then they.

3. And (lastly) whereas he thinks sufficiently to proviso his former
assertion, by adding, unless they can clearly manifest it to be absolutely
unlawful and repugnant to the Scriptures; the truth is, that here is neither
shield nor buckler that can say it harmless. For 1. it is not the truth or
soundness of a man's judgment standing in opposition to the supposed or
asserted lawfulness of a thing, that makes the practice of the thing, during
the present state of his judgment, unlawful to him; but the very tenor or
state of his judgment in respect of such opposition, whether this state of it
be good or bad, sound or unsound. Much less 2. is it an ability in men to
manifest unto others the truth or soundness of their judgments, when they
stand bent against a practice that is enjoined as lawful, that only can
excuse them from subjection. Men's actions are not to be regulated either by a
Rhetorical or Logical faculty of expressing themselves or their judgments
to the conviction and satisfaction of others; but by those impressions of
righteousness and equity that are in and upon their judgments, whether they
be able to represent or commend them for such unto others, or no. Dan. 3.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, were not able clearly to manifest it unto
Nabuchadnezzar and his Nobles, that it was absolutely unlawful for them to
fall down and worship the golden Image which he had set up: yet was it not
therefore unlawful for them to refuse subjection unto the Kings commandment
in that behalf. If the lawfulness of our refusing our Superiors in their
injunctions and commands, be suspended upon our ability to convince them of
the unlawfulness of these commands, there will not be much danger in it to bid
the Papists God speed, when they bring the Doctrine of blind obedience unto us.
Rare are those superiors, that care to impose any thing by way of command, of
the unlawfulness whereof they can be willing to be convinced, especially by
the commanded: and where there is no disposition, no willingness toward a
conviction, arguments and demonstrations are (for the most part) but as
sounding brass, and tinkling cymballs. Leviathan in regard of the strength and
toughness of his skin and scales, esteems iron as straw, and brass as
rotten wood: The arrow cannot make him flee: the stones of the sling are turned
with him into stubble, Job 41. 27, 28.

Whereas ( p. Sect. 27.
14.) he says, that if the Parliament should settle Independencie, I am
certain you would then write and preach for universal obedience to it, without
dispute; doubtless this certainty of his is but a confident mistake; For 1.
it is no ways consistent with the principles of that Government he speaks of,
to urge or press universal obedience to it; because it professes an absolute
incapacitie in far the greatest part of men (for the present) for it; nor
does it expect that the universalitie of men will ever become capable of it.
This Government pleads for no subjection to it, but from those that are
Saints, at least in view, such I mean, who do not in works or deeds deny that
Faith, which in words they profess. Such as these the Scripture pronounces to
be worse then Infidells: 1 Timothy 5. 8.
and therefore whilst such, they are not capable of part and fellowship in that
Government, which is appropriate to the Kingdom, or Churches of Christ.
Nevertheless, it earnestly prays for, and by every other good way and means
is ready to endeavor the conversion of these unto God: only it judges not
meet to bring them into the Temple, until they be purified.

Nor 2. does this Government press for subjection unto it from the Saints
themselves, without dispute: it cares for no Proselytes, but for those that are
first instructed, and made disciples. It disdaignes so far to undervalue its
beauty and loveliness, as to ravish or force the conscience of any man.

Whereas ( p. Sect. 28.
16.) he makes it an apparent schism, separation from all other Churches, for
Independent Churches to appeal only to Churches of their own party; I
conceive it is a repetition of a former mistake, with the augmentation of a
new. For 1. there is no place for the crimes of schism or separation, but
where a preceding union has prepared it. Well may it be a crime or fault of
another nature or kind in Congregationall Churches, to limit themselves in
point of appeal, unto Churches only of their own constitution; but for the
crimes of schism and separation here charged upon it, it is unquestionably
innocent. And Mr Prynnes Printer (I presume rather casually, then consultedly)
by making it, not an apparent, but an apparent Schism, has much eased the
burden of the charge; and represents the action more like unto it self in
point of truth, then the Author himself intended; for the truth is, there is no
realitie or truth, but only an appearance or show (at most) of a schism or
separation in it.

2. It is but a mistaken supposition in him, to suppose, that in case an
aggrieved party in an Independent Church, shall choose rather to appeal to a
Church (one, or more) of a differing Government and constitution from their
own, that this Church will refuse to be accountable unto the Church or Churches
so appealed unto, because they are not of the same constitution with it self. I
believe there is no Congregationall Church any where, but if it be lawfully and
in a Christian manner required or called upon to do it, will be ready and
willing to render an account of any of her actions or proceedings, not only to
a Presbyterian Church, but even to the meanest member of it. But

3. Why he should call a voluntary account given by a Church, a mere mockery
in stead of an account, unless the Church accounted unto, should have power to
enforce it to correct its errors or injustice, my eyes can see no reason. For
in case the Church which willingly accounts for her actions unto another,
shall, upon the discovery and sight of any error or injustice in these her
actions, as willingly retract and reform them (which, with the help and
assistance of a very little charity, may ordinarily, if not universally, be
presumed of Saints) why shall not such a reformation as this, being voluntary
and free, be every whit as commendable and real, as a reformation compelled or
enforced would be? And consequently, why should not an arbitrary or voluntary
account, be as Christian, as satisfactory, as real, as that which is purchased
by an iron rod? Or does any Church or association of Churches, obtain a
quicker or richer spirit of discerning, or a more accomplished faculty of
convincing Churches that are delinquent, of their errors or injustice, by being
armed with a compulsive power over them, then they were or would be capable of,
if their authority were consultative and persuasive only? Or has a Church
called to an account for error or injustice, any more reason to acknowledge
either for such, because they are adjudged such unto her, by Churches (one or
more) having a coactive power over her, then if this sentence were passed by
Churches not daring to claim, own, or exercise any such power?

4. And lastly, I would feign know, why it should be more schism or
separation, for an Independent Church to appeal only unto Churches of their
own party, and not unto the Presbyterian, then it is for Presbyterian
Churches, to appeal only to Churches of their party, and not unto the
Independent; considering, that Churches of this constitution, are every whit as
much (at least) Churches of Christ, as those of the other. But the truth is, it
being lawful and free (as himself here supposes) for Churches to appeal to
Churches, as well of the one constitution, as of the other, that it is somewhat
an uncouth and strange conceit, to make schism or separation of appealing
either unto the one, or the other.

Whereas ( p. Sect. 29.
17.) he gives us leave to differ in judgment from the decrees of Synods and
Parliaments, when erroneous and contrariant to the express Word, not to our
own fancies, inferences, or opinions; doubtless, he mistakes, taking that
away from us with the one hand, which he gives us with the other; which, I
presume was not his intention. For if we may not differ in judgment from
Synodicall decrees, when they are contrariant to our opinions, we may not so
differ from them at any time. Or may we, or can we differ in judgment from
that, which is not contrary to our opinion? Though Mr Prynne differs in
judgment from those that hold forth the Congregationall way, yet (it seems) he
may be of the same opinion with them concerning that way.

Whereas (in the same page) he demands of us, Sect. 30.
If we deem not our selves more holy then our brethren, or be not sweld up with
spiritual pride, why refuse we to close with them now, as we have done
heretofore? The ground of the demand (questionless) is a mistake, and should
not suffer ultra condignum, if it were called an error. There may be many
reasons why one man closes not with another in point of judgment (and
consequently why not in practice also?) besides deeming himself more holy then
his brother, from whom he dissenteth, or being sweld up with spiritual pride.
I do not conceive that the Apostle Paul deemed himself more holy then Peter,
much less that he was sweld up with spiritual pride, when he not only
dissented from him touching the justifiablenesse of that course and practice
wherein Peter now walked, but (as the text says Gal. 2. 11.
) withstood him to his face; but that the true ground of such both dissent and
resistance, was partly the standing of Paul's judgment in opposition unto, and
dislike of what Peter did; partly the desire he had of doing his fellow
Apostle the Christian kindness of making straight that which was crooked in
his way; partly also (if not principally) his zeal and faithfulness to his
Lord and Master Jesus Christ, and his Gospel, and his Saints, that none of
these might suffer loss or disadvantage in the world by the misprisions, or
miscarriages of any man, how great or holy soever, as far as lay in his power
to prevent it. Nor would it have been any disparagement or dishonor at all to
the name of Mr. Prynne, nor wound (I believe) to his conscience, if he had
waved those hard suggestions we spoke of, and substituted these or the like in
their stead, as the true grounds of his brethrens not closing with him, and
those of his judgment in the Presbyterian way. The truth is, that for my part
(and I verily believe that I may truly speak the same for many thousands more)
any conceit or deeming of my self more holy then others, was so far from
interessing either my judgment or affections for the congregational way in the
least, or from keeping me at any distance from my brethren of a contrary
judgment, that a sense of mine own defectivenesse therein, together with an
earnest desire of better accommodations for my supplies, was not the least of
those motives and arguments which carried and set my heart upon that way. And
here I make open profession in the presence of Heaven and Earth, that if any of
my brethren of opposite judgment, shall give me any reasonable account, or
satisfaction, how in an ordinary way of providence, or experience, I may build
up my self in holiness, better (or, if it be but as well) in the way of
Presbytery, then in that way wherein I am for the present engaged, I will soon
pull down what I have built, and dwell no longer in the Tents of Independencie,
but devote my self, and all my strength and might, to the service of that way,
which for distinction sake is called Presbytery. For I make no question, but
that way of Church Government which has the richest sympathy, and most direct
and full compliance with the edification of the Saints in holiness, is against
all reasons, grounds, and arguments of what seeming strength or evidence
soever, the way which Jesus Christ has sealed.

For any harsh censures cast, or passed by any Congregationall men upon Mr.
Prynne, or other of their brethren of Mr. Prynnes judgment and way, I trust
the complaint is to the height of the crime. I cannot justify one harsh
censure given, by a thousand received: but if there were a Law for any such
atonement, I make no question but that all the Congregational delinquency in
that kind, would be fully purged. If my pen has trespassed in this kind,
(whereof notwithstanding I am no ways conscious, though upon some charge, I
have made diligent inquiry after my own guilt) I hope the last period in this
Mr. Prynnes Reply Where he charge me to have presumptuously undermined the
undoubted privileges of Parliament, with I know not how many more
Anti-parliamentary passages diametrally contrary to my national vow and
coveuant, etc.
, will speak a good word for it, and salve the imputation of such a sin.

Hitherto I have examined only such passages in the Reply which concern the
common cause depending between the two ways of Church Government, so much
engaged in competition. My Pen must now travail for her self, and make trial
of her strength for the redeeming of her own Innocence out of the hand of those
accusations, Sect. 31.
which have laid violent hands upon her. I intend scarce so much as to touch or
mention any thing that was brought to the touchstone in the former part of
this discourse: a single vindication is large allowance for criminations
without either substance, or color of truth: the chief (and almost the only)
thing which I have now to do, is to weigh the discussions of Mr. Prynnes pen
in opposition to those of mine, in the balance of reason and truth, that so
the reader, to whom judgment in this case belongs, may give sentence
accordingly.

But first it is a thing almost incredible, Sect. 32.
(doubtless far beyond the belief of any sober or ingenuous man) that a man
of that Name and Reputation not only for learning, but for Religion also, which
Mr. Prynne is, should affirm, those 15. lines about the middle of page 18. to
be the main doctrine prosecuted in my discourse called (...): the said 15 lines
being nothing else but a rapsody or collection of several words, phrases, and
expressions, scattered here and there throughout the Discourse, some of them
being expressly contrary to those restrictions and limitations, under which the
doctrine there prosecuted, is propounded, and asserted in the explication of
it. As for example; whereas page 18. of the said Theomachia, I express my
self thus; If to attempt the suppression, or keeping down any way, doctrine
or practice, which is from God, be of no less concernment, of no safer
interpretation then a fighting against God, then certainly it is the greatest
imprudence, or improvidence under heaven, for any man, or rank of men
whatsoever, to appear, especially in any high-handed opposition, or
contestation, against any way, etc. In stead of those words, To appear,
especially in any high-handed opposition, he, most unworthily and unchristianly
substitutes these, to appear, or so much as to lift up an hand, or thought
against any way, etc. Which falsification of my words is so much the more
unsufferable because in the explanation of my doctrine, page 12. I express my
self thus: It is not every degree or kind of opposing a way, doctrine, or
design of God, which either the Text, or the doctrine calls a fighting
against God, but only such an opposing which is peremptory, and carried on
with an high hand, so that those instruments of God which he has anointed to
hold forth that way, doctrine, or design of his in the world, are not suffered
to execute their commission, but are countermanded either by the authority, or
over-bearing strength or power of men And immediately after, for the further
explanation of my intent in the doctrine proposed, I distinguish thus: It is
one thing to oppose, or contend against a doctrine or way of God, per modum
doctoris: another to do it per modum judicis: The former I grant, may befall
the best and faithfullest of men; yea, the later I grant to be sometimes
incident to men otherwise upright in the main before God; only affirming that
the children of this later contention and contestation against their maker,
must expect to be taught more wisdom and reverence toward him with thorns and
briers.

And that the Reader may yet more clearly see and judge of Mr. Sect. 33.
Prynnes artifice in swelling my two lines (at most) of doctrine, into his 14.
or 15. of representation, that so he may have the fairer mark, and bigger But
to hit, I shall verbatim transcribe it, as it is laid down about the middle of
page 12. of the said discourse. The content and words of it are only these:
That for any man to endeavor or attempt the suppression of any doctrine,
practice or way, which is from God, is to fight against God himself. Which
doctrine, especially so qualified and understood, as the subsequent explication
states the sense, purport, and meaning of it, I could not lightly expect should
ever have been opposed, or contested against by any that were willing to own
Abraham's relation of friendship unto God. Jam. 2.
But with what success Mr. Prynne has attempted to shake the foundations of
the truth of it, or whether indeed he has attempted this at all, and not
rather (contrary to the Law of all regular disputation) fallen foul only upon
the conclusion it self, without giving any answer at all unto the premises,
shall be presently taken into consideration. In the mean time let me add
this: That if the grossest and most abhorred Heretics in the world, might
have but the same liberty to prove their heretical opinions out of the
Scriptures, which Pryn takes to represent the doctrine prosecuted by me, and
quarrelled against by him, out of my Sermons, they might prove them, and that
(...), and (...), from thence. For what opinion is there, or lightly can be
imagined, but that all the words, wherein it is (or at least very easily might
be) conceived, may be found some where or other scattered here and there
severally in the Scripture, and so be framed together into a sentence? By the
law of such a liberty as this, I might say, that Mr. Prynne, in his Full Reply,
holds, That we must speedily oppose, resist, avoid, suppress, Page 18.
Parliaments, Emperors, Kings, Judges, Magistrates, Ministers, Page. 24.
, even for conscience sake, and the Lords sake too Page 9.
. For all these words and clauses are to be found in this discourse of his, as
the pages cited in the margin do direct: yea, and twenty more as wild and
uncouth opinions, and as far from Mr. Prinnes judgment as this, might by the
liberty aforesaid, be collected out of the same piece.

But let us come to consider those grounds and reasons, Sect. 34.
upon which, in Mr. Prynnes judgment, it may justly be questioned whether the
Doctrine expressed toward the beginning of the last Section ( which is the
maine, indeed the only Doctrine prosecuted in those two innocently-offending
Sermons) be Orthodox or tolerable.

His first Reason is; because it opens a wide gate to the reviving of all the
old, the speading and propagating of all new Heresies, Errors -- without the
least timely opposition or prevention, to the endangering of infinite souls,
and disturbance of the Churches, Kingdoms peace. For there is no Heretic,
Schismatique or Sectarie whatsoever, but pretends his way, Doctrine, practice,
opinions, to be the way of Christ, etc. Will any reasonable man conceive, that
there is any reason at all in all this, to question the truth or soundness of
the prementioned Doctrine? For any man to forbear the suppression of any
Doctrine or Way which is (for any thing that is known to the contrary) from
God, and that least he should fight against God, is this, to open a wide gate
to all heresies, errors, and schisms? Then by the rule of contraries, the
suppression of all Doctrines and ways, which for any thing that is known to
the contrary, are from God, must be the fast-shutting of the gate against all
heresies, errors, and schisms. This is the heart and soul of the first
reason, which interesseth Mr. Prynnes judgment in questioning the
Orthodoxisme, yea, the tolerablenesse of the premised Doctrine. But by the way,
if Mr. Prynnes judgment concerning the Doctrine, be, that it opens a wide gate
to all heresies, errors, schisms, sects whatsoever, both new and old, etc. it
is marvel it should have no further operation upon him, then only to
prevail with him to question whether it be Orthodox or tolerable: Such an
effect or consequent of a Doctrine as this, is foundation large enough to build
a confident determination upon, that it is heterodox and intolerable.

And for the body of this Reason, wherein he informs us at large (and that
with truth enough) that Satan and his ministers also tranforme themselves into
Angels of light, that false Teachers usually come to seduce men in sheeps
clothing, that there is no Heretic, Schismatique, or Sectary whatsoever,
though never so pernicious, gross, and detestable, but pretends his way,
Doctrine, practice, to be the way and truth of Christ; with many other good
sayings to like effect; I cannot but marvel, what a reasonable man should
imagine to be in all this, to make him question the truth of this Doctrine,
that for any man to attempt the suppression of any Doctrine, practice, or way
which is from God, is to fight against God. Because false Teachers pretend
their Doctrine to be from God, does it therefore follow, that the suppressing
of such a Doctrine which is from God, should not be a fighting against God? It
is somewhat an hard case, that a man should be arrested of a presumptuous
undermining the undoubted privileges of Parliament by the very roots, at the
suite of such a consequence as this.

Whereas upon the former assertions, he enters his action in such an
Interrogatory as this: Must we therefore not speedily oppose, resist, avoid,
suppress them now, because they thus pretend they are of, and from God, but
stay till God has renounced them, etc. I join issue with him, and say; that
there is little less then a mere Contradiction in the form of his Plea;
Those Doctrines, practices, opinions, which in the former part of his Plea, he
had censured and condemned for Heresies, Errors, Schisms, Sects, etc. in this
latter part of it he supposes, that God has not yet disclaimed, or renounced
from Heaven; and that we see not their condemnation yet written with the beam
of the Sun. Else why should he represent it as so unreasonable and heinous a
thing, that we should stay the opposing and suppressing of them, till such
things were done? Surely Mr. Prynne cannot be so hardy, as to condemn any
Doctrine or practice for Heretical or errneous, until God has some ways or
other disclaimed or renounced them from Heaven, for such. It is he, not Mr.
Prynne, that must, not only determine, what is Heresy, Error, and Schism,
but also signify his determinations in this kind, before it comes to Mr.
Prynnes turn, or any man's beside, to give any such sentence against them at
the bar of their Judgments.

A second Reason which created that jealousy in him we spoke of, Sect. 35.
against the forenamed Doctrine, is the contrariety of it to forty and one
express precepts and presidents (if my Arithmetique fails me not in the
computation) in the old and new Testament; one whereof ( viz. Jer. 4. 30, 31.)
he avoucheth for pregnant; but the rest (it seems) must be compared together,
or else the contrariety in them to the Doctrine which he opposes, will not
utter it self. And it is well that he can be content to afford us leisure for
the perusal of these Scripture precepts and presidents, though he would afford
us none, to peruse or consider of Doctrines or practices, as we heard before.
But

1. I must profess the second time, that I can little less then wonder, that
the Gentleman should only question or suspect the Orthodoxnesse of a Doctrine,
and not positively and peremptorily conclude it Heterodox, which carries a
contrariety in it to forty-one express precepts and presidents of Scripture.
A man would think by such a streine of tenderness and indulgence as this, that
he were a very fair and favorable interpreter of men's opinions and ways; and
would never exact or stand upon Summam jus (which the Proverb interprets to be
Summam injuriam) with any man.

2. If all the precepts and presidents here drawn together from the
Scriptures, be express, why is that one, Jer. 4. 30, 31. separated from all
its fellows by this parenthes^s of preferment, [a pregnant place] as if all the
rest were barren and empty of that conception, which is indifferently fathered,
or mothered rather, upon them all? and one other of them (viz. Gal. 2. 4. to
18.) singularized with this parenthesis, [a noted place]? If no contrariety to
the suspected Doctrine be found either in the pregnant place, or in the noted
place, I trust all the rest of the places will give place, and confess
themselves strangers thereunto. First, for the pregnant place, Jer. 4. 30, 31.
doubtless, there is not so much as an (...) or an embryo of such a
contrariety to be found there. The tenor of the place is this; And when thou
art spoiled, what will thou do? Though thou cloathest thy self with crimson,
though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face
with paynting; in vain shall thou make thy self fair, thy lovers will despise
thee, they will seek thy life, ver. 30. For I have heard a voice as of a woman
in travail, and the anguish as of her that brings forth her first child, the
voice of the daughter of Zion, that bewaileth her self, that spreads her
hands, saying, Woe is me now: for my soul is wearied because of murderers,
ver. 31. I am not able to discern the least swelling or bearing-out of the
womb of either of these verses, with any contrariety in the least, to the
import of the Doctrine now under protection. To attempt the suppression of any
Doctrine or Way which is from God, may be a fighting against God, and yet God
say to the daughter of his people, And when thou art spoiled, what will thou
do? together with all that which follows in the two transcribed verses. I
believe the noted place is every whit as void of that contrariety we speak
of, as we found the pregnant place to be. Mr. Prynne himself, partly
transcribes, partly argues this place, beautifying the words or clause wherein
he chiefly puts his trust, with emphaticall letters, thus; Paul would not give
way to false Apostles, NO NOT FOR AN HOUR, that the truth of the Gospel might
continue among the Galatians, and resisted Peter to his face, as soon as ever
he walked disorderly, ( he should have spoke more truth, if he had said, as
soon as ever he understood or knew, that he so walked) and gave the least
countenance to false Teachers, etc.

-- Fortasse cupressum,
Scis simulare: quid hoc, si fractis enatet expes
Navibus, aere dato qui pingitur?
Mr. Prynne does very substantially prove, by this passage, and that which
follows, that error in Doctrines, and miscarriages in persons, are to be
resisted and withstood, (by ways and means warrantable by the Word of God) as
soon as ever they are certainly discerned, or known to be such: but here is
not the least semblance of an Argument to prove, either that the one or the
other, ought to be resisted or suppressed, before they are discovered or
manifested to be such; or that being discovered or manifested to be such, they
ought to be either resisted or suppressed by any other means, then what God
himself has authorized in that behalf; least of all, is there any jot, tittle,
or peep of a proof of that, which is the burden of Mr. Prynnes undertaking,
viz. that to attempt the suppressing of any Doctrine or Way which is from God,
is not to fight against God.

Nor does his third Reason any whit more accommodate his enterprise, Sect. 36.
then the former. For what contrariety, or show of contrariety is there in
these unquestionable maxims, of Divinity, Policy, and Morality, Principiis
obsta^e: venienti occarrite morbo, etc. to that Doctrine, which only
pronounces, the attempt of suppressing any Doctrine or Way which is of God, to
be a fighting against God? yea, or to this; that no Doctrine or Way ought to be
suppressed, until it be certainly known, whether they be from God, or no? He
that gave counsel, Principiis obstare, i^ to withstand beginnings, did not
mean to advise men to make resistance against such beginnings, which might, for
ought they know, be as well the beginings, of good, or of strength, as of evil
or sickness; but only such beginnings, which did clearly presage inconvenience
ensuing, if not timely prevented. And though all wise men hold preventing
physique best for their bodies; yet no wise man holds such Physique best, or
good in any degree for his body, which is as like to prevent the health and
sound constitution of his body, as any infirmity or distemper of it. He that
will either lance or sear, before he knows whether the condition of his body
requires either, may abound in flesh, but sure is no true born son of Wisdom.
That creature which is endued by God with principles of discerning, certainly
was not made to act (especially in things of highest importance, as matters of
Religion are) at peradventure.

His 4th and last Reason holds no correspondence at all with the Truth. Sect.
37.
For what contrariety is there in the Doctrine under Mr. Pryns arrest, to the
Policy, Practice of most godly Magistrates, Princes, Ministers, Churches in all
Ages, Nations? When did the Policy or Practice of any of these affirm, that to
attempt the suppression of any Doctrine or Way which is from God, is not to
fight against God? If his meaning be, that the Policy and Practice of the
persons he represents, never indulged any known Heresies, Errors, Schisms;
no, not for an hour, the Doctrine against which he contends, in this contends
not at all against him, but gives him the right hand of fellowship in such an
apprehension. Only it adviceth godly Magistrates, Prince, Ministers, Churches,
to be very careful and wary, of suppressing Angels of light indeed, instead of
Satan transformed into an Angel of light; of baiting and hunting the sheep of
Christ, in stead of Wolves that come in sheeps clothing; of smothering light in
stead of darkness, of smiting truth in stead of error and heresy. And is
there any harm in this counsel or contrariety either to the Policy or
Practice of any wise or godly man? Or, if there be any contrariety to either,
it is because there is a contrariety in them to the Word and Wildome of God.

Whereas in the same Reason, Sect. 38.
he makes himself a further debtor unto me, by charging me, that I plead for
Schisms and CONVENTICLES set up only by private spirits in opposition to the
public established Church-reiglement.

My Answer is:

1. That I know a public Church-reiglement abrogated and demolished, but I
know none as yet established. When Mr. Prynne by his Logique shall convince me
of acting in opposition to that which is not, I trust I shall be provided with
mine to give him a satisfying answer.

2. Whereas he declares against me, as a Pleader for Schisms and Conventicles;
I answer, that he is the happiest man I know of his Profession, if he never
pleaded any worse Cause, then that which I plead in those Sermons. But whereas
in other places of his Reply, his margent glories with quotations in
abundance, here (it seems) it is ashamed, as not knowing what to say, nor where
to find or point at, any pleading for Schisms and Conventicles, as the lines
in the page adventure to affirm.

3. What Mr. Prynnes privy notion of a Schism or Conventicle is, I am not
able to say: but if he be here of the same mind and judgment with his own
marginall note, p. 10. which affirms, that none are Conventiclers but
Heretics and Schismatiques, who wholly separate themselves from our public
assemblies established by law; certain I am, that I plead for no Conventicles
in those Sermons; nor do I approve of the practice of any, who wholly separate
themselves from our public assemblies. But calumniare audacter; aliquid
haerebit, holds good (it seems) in Law. But,

4. If by pleading for Schisms and Conventicles, he means a pleading for the
spiritual liberties of the Congregations of the Saints, and of the Assemblies
of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven, whom Jesus Christ has
made Kings and Priests unto God his Father, Rev. 1. 6.
and who are shortly to judge the world, if the vindication (I say) of the
rights and privileges of these in point of exemption and immunity in their
spiritual affairs, and such as concern the regulation of their consciences in
matters appertaining to the worship and service of God, from the Jurisdiction
and interest of the Commissioners and Delegates of the world; if this (once
again) be pleading for Schisms and Conventicles, I had quitted my self much
more like a faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, if I had pleaded for them yet
seven times more, then now I have done. My sorrow and shame (in part) is, that
I have pleaded this honorable Cause so weakly, as to leave thoughts and
imaginations in Mr. Prynne, which still exalt and magnify themselves against
the righteousness, truth, and equity of it.

5. And lastly, whereas he calls the Church Government which I plead for, a
Government set up only by private spirits; if it be found to be a Government
set up by the Spirit of God in the Scriptures (the consideration unto which all
my pleadings for it in those Sermons are homagers, being all of them
conditional, and none peremptory or absolute) Mr. Prynnes spirit, and the
spirits of all others that shall oppose it, how public soever their persons
may be, will be found to be the private spirits, disallowed in the Scriptures
by the Spirit of God.

Whereas he yet adds, Sect. 39.
that differences and varieties in matters of government are such tender
things, that they cannot be tolerated in one and the self-same Church and
State, without infinite inconveniences and distances, etc. I answer,

1. That differences and varieties in matters of Government, are not things so
tender in any degree, as the consciences of the Saints; and therefore no
reason, that Reason of State should be more tenderly respected, then these.
Better a thousand men inconvenienced in their temporalls, then one righteous
soul wounded in his spiritualls; yea, or then one sin committed to prevent all
those inconveniences. Vna Dei gloria (says Calvin, a great Presbyterian)
praeferri meretur centum mundis. Yea, and one greater then Calvin (I mean the
Apostle Paul) says, (neither says he any thing more then what an whole
Christian State or Nation is bound to say) If meat offends my brother, I will
eat no flesh whilst the world stands, that I may not offend my brother, 1
Cor. 8. 13. But,

2. Whereas we still hear of wars and rumors of wars from Presbyteriall pens,
of infinite inconveniences and disturbances, and turnings of all things upside
down in States, as if they should never die any other death, in case any other
Government should be endured, but their own; the truth is, that such
predictions (or pretenses rather) as these, are but a kind of politic agents
sent forth to negotiate their Cause with the ignorance and simplicity of the
generality of men; who being indifferent for matter of Church Government, but
of firmly-resolv'd judgments to keep themselves as far from all that which is
called trouble or disturbances as possibly they can, are apt to drink in the
impressions of all overtures or pretenses which sound that way, as fishes drink
water, and so are made Proselytes of a zealous inspiration for the Classique
Consistory. Primus in orb Deos fecit timor. That mixture of ignorance and
fear which is commonly found in vulgar constitutions, may easily be wrought
and fashioned by a politic hand, almost into what apprehensions, and
endeavors suitable, a man desires; if his design in this kind exceed not the
compass and content of nature: for the darkness of ignorance has no
communion at all with the kingdom of light; but being in conjunction with an
awakened passion of fear, it disposes the hearts and souls of men to receive
any superstitious impressions of what shape and from soever the intellectus
agens, or he that works upon it, shall desire. For my part, I am not able to
calculate the least rational proportion or conexion between a variety or
diffrence of Church Government, and the distractions, or disturbances in a
State; nor can I easily believe, that all the Presbyterian Writers themselves,
do truly and unfainedly fear any such effect from such a cause, though some
peradventure may. For what if every congregation or Parish in and about London,
had a different government, or way of ordering their Church Affairs, as they
generally have somewhat (more or less) differing in the ordering and managing
of their Vestries, or Parochial civil affairs, the one being supposed as
agreeable to the civil Laws of the State, as the other, and each Parish
respectively satisfied, and well apaid with their own government, I am not able
to discern, nor cast it in my thoughts, how the peace or safety of the civil
State should suffer in the least by it. But I can very easily conceive, how a
State may be very probably disturbed, (and I can give instances of many that
have been) by an universal compulsion of all the subjects thereof, to one and
the same Religion; yea, and how by the like compulsion to one and the same
Church Government. It is very strange to me that they that know (and how
generally it is known) what variety of Churches and Church Government, yea,
and professions of Religion there are, and have for a long time been in the
dominion of the States of Holland, and withal, how pacate, flourishing, and
free from disturbance this State has been; and again, how that not only a
form of Church Government differing from that kind of government which is
more generally practiced throughout the kingdom of France, but even a
different Religion also, have without the least occasion of inconvenience or
disturbance to the State, (yea I might say, to the great advantage and benefit
of the State,) been tolerated, yea little less then countenanced, and that
near the very heart, and chief places of this Kingdom; very strange ( I say)
to me it is, that they that cannot lightly but know these things (besides many
other instances in other States and Republics, of like consideration) should
yet pretend fears, yea certainties of I know not what inconveniences and
disturbances to the State, if any more Church-governments then one should take
place, or be endured in it. They that shall please to peruse page 23. of the
Reply of the two brethren to A. S. shall find many Scriptures, of a friendly
and harmless consistence of several Religions (and therefore doubtless of
several Church-governments) in the same State, besides some others. And Lucas
Osiander in his Epitome of the Ecclesiastical History, written by the
Magdeburgenses, in the 6th Century, relates several examples of successful
issues and events of such mutual tolerations, as we now speak of. Troubles
and disturbances of States, are far more like to be the fruits and consequents
of rigor and hard measure, measured out unto the Saints, then of favor or
condescension unto them for their accommodation. They that think a State should
work wisely for it self, by any hard entreaty of the servants of God, have
forgotten wherefore Pharaoh and his great host perished together in the red Sea.

Whereas p. Sect. 40.
19. he taxes me with a default, that I neither discover unto him what that
Way is, which I there so earnestly plead for, nor produce any one text to prove
it Christ's own way, nor one example to warrant it, etc. My Answer is,

1. I suppose, that an understanding man, as all men acknowledge Mr. Prynne to
be, that prosecutes a Way with so much violence and bitterness, as he does
the Way there pleaded for, understands it all over, through and through, (and
so needs not any further discovery of it to be made unto him). Such a man
(doubtless) will take heed above all caution, of stumbling at that stone above
all other, whereat the Princes of this world stumbled, and were broke to
pieces, when they crucified the Lord of glory, before they knew who he was, 1
Cor. 2. 8.

2. I answer further, that it was no part of my design or intent in those
Sermons, to justify the Way so often there mentioned, simply, or as a Way of
Christ against all contradiction; but only to justify it against those common
exceptions and vulgar objections there insisted upon; and to demonstrate, that
it may be Christ's own Way, notwithstanding any thing that has yet appeared to
take away that crown from it: and so upon this consideration, to persuade men,
as they love and tender their own safety and peace, not to lay violent hands
upon it, until they should have better grounds to judge it none of Christ's
Way, then yet they had any. This being the adequate and precise tenor of my
intention in that Discourse, I kept my self close to it; and so had no occasion
to argue any thing (or very little) in a cataskenastique or positive Way for it.

But because I produce nothing positively to prove the Way I plead for, Sect.
41.
(or rather, against the suppression of it) to be Christ's own Way, Mr. Prynne
takes the courage to assault the credit and reputation of it by four Reasons or
Arguments, (as he desires to have their number thought) though the second and
fourth be but one and the same; and the third, nothing but what he had said
before, and that unsuceessefully, (as was argued in the 39th Section of this
Discourse) and the first, second, third and fourth, nothing to profane the
excellency, or pollute the beauty of that Cause, against which his pen is
armed. But let us answer them, so far as they have not been answered already;
only this one thing preobserv'd, that Mr. Prynn's conscience, with the
assistance of all his four Arguments, does not yet serve him, peremptorily or
simply to condemn this Way, as none of Christ's own Way, but only to suspect it
none of his, as himself expresses himself in the last line of page 19. Now
being advanced no further in the confidence of his judgment against this Way,
but only to suspect it for none of Christ's, I trust, that remembering what
Cameron (a learned Presbyterian) says, viz. that suspicion of falsity, was
ever a calamity incident to truth, he will advance no further in his opposition
to it, until his suspicion be grown up to the stature of a perfect, clear,
and certain knowledge. This only premised, let us try whether the grounds of
his jealousy it self will not shake.

To the first we answer, Sect. 42.


1. That whereas this Way is here charged to be a new Way, never yet heard of,
in any age or Church of Christ; it has been sufficiently proved by those that
have written in the defense of it; that in point of Antiquity, it has the
pre-eminence of its Competitresse to the value of 1500 years, as having been
that Way of Government, wherein the Primitive Churches of Christ, through his
gracious and wise indulgence administered unto them by his Apostles in this
behalf rejoiced for the space of about 200. years, as Mr. Burton in his Answer
to Mr. Prynn's two first pieces upon this subject, lately published, clearly
manifests, p. 19. and 24. Mr Jacob affirms, that for the space of 200. or
300. years after Christ, every visible church had power to exercise
Ecclesiastical Government, and all other Gods spiritual Ordinances (the means
of salvation) in and for it self, immediately from Christ. Sions Prerogative, p.
28, 29.
showing moreover, how these Churches in time came to degenerate in point of
Government, and to lose their spiritual liberties therein.

2. Whereas the opposition of the generality of Magistrates, Ministers and
people to this Way, is pleaded in bar to the legitimacy and truth of it; We
answer,

1. That according to the tenor of Poetical story; Ulysses after twenty years
absence from his house and home, was grown out of the knowledge of his friends
and neighbors; yea, Penelope her self (his wife) knew him not at his return at
first, but upon some conference and discoveries otherwise, he became known
both to the one and the other. Nor should it seem strange to any, that a
Church Government, set up by the Apostles, so many hundredth years since, and
having for a thousand years and upwards been in exile, the rights, privileges
and possessions of it seized upon, and usurped by others, should not presently
at the first return of it, be acknowledged by the generality of men, no, nor by
the generality of her friends themselves, I mean, godly, sober, and
understanding men; whom I call her friends, because I make no question, but
there lies love and friendship to her, at the root and bottom of their hearts,
though there be a crust of enmity and opposition at the top, for a season.
Joseph will in due time, make himself known unto his brethren.

2. Though numbers of those that are opposite to this Way, if we compute the
generality of them, be confessedly far greater, then of those that plead for
her; yet the barren begins to rejoice, and to bear children apace; and the
desolate may in time come to have more children then she that has an husband.
John Baptist had many more Disciples and followers at first, then Christ
himself; yet ingenuously subscribed to the dignity of Christ above himself,
saying, He must increase, but I must decrease, Joh. 3. 30.

3. The judgments both of Magistrates and common people, concerning this Way,
depending chiefly (if not solely) upon the judgments of Ministers, it is the
less strange, that there should be found such a grand concurrence in the
judgments of both against it, especially for a time. There are these twelve
Reasons (among others) why the judgments of Ministers especially may,
according to the course of humane affairs in other like cases, stand off at
some distance form this Government, for a season.

First, their judgments have for a long time conversed familiarly with
another, and that with approbation and contentment; by means whereof there is a
kind of a pleasing sympathy or connaturalnesse grown between them; which is
such a conveniencie or accommodation, that nature will not suddenly quit or
lose, nor without good consideration: No man (says our Savior) that has
drunk old wine, straight way desires new; for he says, the old is better,
Luke 5. 39.

Secondly, godly Ministers (more generally) stand publicly declared in their
judgments for another Government. And how hard a thing is it, even for good
men (in the Philosophers phrase) (...), to do execution upon their own tenets
and opinions, especially when they have owned them in the sight of the world?
The casting out of his son Ismael, is said to have been a thing very grievous
in Abraham's sight, notwithstanding he had the advantage of the express
Commandment of God upon him, to make it easy, Genesis 21. 11. It is confessed,
that this, (happily with some others of the Reasons following) bears as hard
against some Independents in their adhesion unto, and stiff-standing by their
Way, as it does against Presbyterians in their resolvednesse for theirs. But
this rather confirms, then any way infeebles, the argumentative authority of it
for that probation, which it undertakes.

Thirdly, many Ministers conceive, that if they shall pull out but one stone
out of their building, though never so ill laid, they shall shake the
foundations of the whole fabrique, and that in case themselves should begin
with any one of those Doctrines which they have taught, to disclaim it, the
people will follow their example herein, and do the like by all the rest.
Whereas on the contrary, the truth is, that to separate the vile from the
precious, is to raise the honor and esteem of that which is precious; and the
cancelling of some things, which a man has taught, as erroneous, is an high
confirmation of all the rest; according to that School maxim, Exceptio firmat
regulam in non exceptis.

Fourthly, many by being declaredly engaged for such or such an opinion, have
fared the better for it, either in their credits and reputations, or otherwise;
yea, and happily at unawares, have gained deep interest and honor with persons
of name and prime respects in the world, by means of a co-ingagement in the
same opinion with them. Now as our Savior says, Mar. 9. 39.
there is no man that shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak
evil of me; No more will men easily be brought to make refuse or untruth of
any such opinion, which has been, and still continues, such a Benefactresse
unto them. Ministers may truly say in such cases, Beneficium accepi, libertatem
vendidi: i. by receiving a benefit, I have sold my liberty.

Fifthly, many are not able to be baptized with the baptism wherewith Paul was
baptized, Act. 17. 18. where he was charged to be a setter forth of new Gods:
they are not able to bear the reproach of being teachers of new doctrines; of
being charged with whimzies and Independent Crotchets Mr. Prynne. full Replies.
p 74.
, of trading in Apes avd Peacocks M. Edwards Antapol. p. 261.
, etc. and so resolve to hold on in such a way, wherein though they may meet
with some reproves, yet they are sure of far more with them, then they can
fear being against them.

Sixthly, some think it a point of humility to build upon other men's
foundations, and fear they should pollute the memories and honor of Calvin,
Beza, and other famous lights in the Church of God, if they should recede from
their principles in the least.

Seventhly, some have laesum principium, a maimed principle of seeing any thing
that is new, except they see it first, cannot stoop so low, as to carry any
man's honor after him, (especially that converseth upon the earth with him:
Pascitur in vivis livor:) nor yet so far disparage their own parts and
abilities, as to judge any thing which is of a new discovery, to be Truth,
except they be some ways or other interessed in the discovery of it. Ingenio
qui vult cedere, rarus erit. There is a notion (unsound as it seems to me) of
a kind of knowledge supposed to be in God, Twiss de Scientia med.
called Scientia media, lately started amongst the Schoolmen: and how do the
great masters of that learning, contend amongst themselves for the primacie of
that invention? Fonseca stands up, and tells the world, Ego (inquit Fons^ca) in
Academia Con^mbricensi, hoc primus observavi. Imo potius ego (clamat Molina)
apud, Eborenses meos. His non cedit Leonardus Lessius Lovaniensis, and suo
cer^bello, de codem partu ambitiose gratulatur. Pride. Lect. 2. de Scient. med.
that he was the first that observed it amongst his Conimbrians. Nay rather
(says Molina) I am he that first discovered it amongst my Eborans. In comes
Lessius from amongst his Lovanians, and takes away this Crown from them both,
and sets it upon his own brain.

Eighthly, some are of opinion, that matters of truth in point of
Church Government, are neither too great nor too good, to be sacrificed upon
the service of peace; though Luthers saying was, that unus apex verbi, major
est coelo and terra: i. the least tittle, or point of the word of God, is
greater then heaven, and earth.

Ninthly, some are more addicted to Authors then Arguments, for the furnishing
of their judgments, and regulating their consciences in matters of Religion:
and then it is no marvel if these make Silver and Gold of the Presbyteriall,
and Hey and Stubble of the Congregationall way; though it be true also on the
other hand, that in very many Authors, and those of Classique authority, both
ancient and modern, there are manifesta rotae vestigia cernendi, manifest
prints and footsteps of this way See Sions prerogdtive, almost throughout.
.

Tenthly, the Congregationall way puts Ministers upon a more immediate
dependence upon God and his providence for matter of maintenance and outward
accommodation: and how few are there but had rather see, then believe? have the
known Laws of a State, then the unknown purposes and decrees of heaven, the
vouchers of their livelihood and supports to such a proportion or degree?

Eleventhly, (some it is like) are afraid lest the wrath and discontent of the
generality of the people of the Land, should evince the error and untruth of
the Congregationall way, by offering violence to those that shall hold it forth
in practice; and so choose rather to build upon the peoples general acceptance
of the Presbyterian way (which they cannot much question) as an unquestionable
demonstration of the truth and goodness thereof.

Twelfthly (and lastly) others (probably) are jealous, and foresee, that they
shall not be able to give that quarter of contentment to many great persons,
and men in place of authority, in the Congregationall way, which they know they
may in the Presbyterian. Yea, they cannot lightly but foresee, that in the
practice of the Congregationall way, they shall (in all likelihood and without
the gracious hand of God preventing) contract the odium and ill will of many
great ones, who under God have power to grind their faces, and break their
bones. And who will be willing to study and take pains, and be earnest with God
in prayer night and day, for the conviction of such a Truth, which being
discovered, will either expose a man to all that danger of hardship and misery
in the world, which we speak of, or else do him a worse displeasure then so,
by tormenting his conscience, in case he shall refuse to be so exposed?

These with many other like reasons there are, why Ministers (rather then
others) may more generally incline to fall in rather with the Presbyterian,
then the Congregationall way (and consequently why Magistrates and people, who
see much by their eyes, should fall in also) and yet such a constellation no
sign from heaven, but only from the earth, (the element made to be trampled
under foot) of the truth and righteousness of that Way. But that I may not be
mistaken, nor leave the least touch or taste of offense in the mind of any man,
by occasion of the reasons insisted upon, I solemnly profess, as in the
presence of God, that I intend no ill reflection upon any of my brethren in the
Ministry, who are contrary minded to me in point of Church Government, as such
in any of them; nor to infinuate as if they, either divisim or conjunctim, were
swayed in their judgments by any of the said motives in the present
controversy: but to demonstrate against my Antagonist, that such tentations
are very incident to the nature of man, yea, even when it is under the best
accomplishments of nature, industry and grace it self: and consequently, that
his argument drawn, A multitudine taliter sentientium, is of little force. I
freely acknowledge, that Ministers very possibly may have (yea I verily believe
that many have) the Presbyterian way in their hearts, who never consulted with
any of those Oracles about the bringing of it in thither: and that many of this
judgment are as candid, free, unspotted, and untouched by any of those
respects, in their way, as many who embrace the Congregationall way, are in
theirs. Yet

4. I must answer this one thing further to my Repliers Argument, that the
testimony of a few godly persons, having little or nothing of this world to
accommodate their judgments, but a thousand things to distance and distaste
them, is in reasonableness and fairness of construction, of more
consideration for the averment of a truth, then the judgment of many who have
the Sun, Moon, and twelve Stars to give light unto them, I mean all or
most of this worlds endowments to confirm them.

5. (And lastly) the known case happening at the Council of Nice between
Paphnutius and the rest of the learned members thereof, with that of Athanasius
opposing (in a manner) the whose Christian world now turned Arrian, with some
others of like consideration that might be added, have broke the heart of that
Topique place, Quod pluribus videtur, etc. and made it void and invalid for
ever.

To his second Argument, which (it seems) strengthens the hand of his great
jealousy against the Congregationall cause, I answer.

First, I am unduly and untruly charged, to acknowledge the Congregationall
government set up by a few private men, against the Authority and commands of
the Parliament, etc. I no where mention any Authority or command of Parliament
declared against this Way; neither indeed do I know any to this hour. Nor do
I either hope or fear to live to that day, wherein private men may not both
fear God, and obey Jesus Christ, without offending against the authority and
commands of Parliament. But this charge being hard to find in my discourse, and
he that affirms it, being desirous to make it as hard to answer or disprove,
he takes field-room enough for his reference, and in his Margin bids us (in
effect) look from page 30. to 52. telling us, that if we look narrowly enough,
we shall find it somewhere within that circuit, though himself (it seems)
knows not well where.

2. Nor do I any where, either tacitly or vocally acknowledge that this way,
not only denies, but oppugnes the temporal Magistrates, Parliaments, Synods
directions or coercive power in Ecclesiastical affairs. If any man of this way
does deny, much more if he oppugneth either the one or the other, it is not
necessary that he should do either, as a Son of this Way, nor by any influence
of those grounds and principles upon which this Way is built. But I verily
believe, that Mr. Prynne never knew any man of this Way, that ever denied, much
less oppugned any directions whether from Parliaments or Synods, (or from
far meaner hands then either of these) unless they saw or apprehended them
contrary to the mind and will of God in the Scriptures; in which case I have
that Christian and honorable opinion of the author of this charge, that he
would deny them himself. What he means by the word oppugning, in such an
emphaticall opposition to a denying, is none of my understanding. It he means
only a pleading or an arguing in oppositum, I conceive it no ways opposite
unto, but of a just and necessary concurrence with a denial. For he that
denies any thing affirmed by another, is bound to, (or at least very lawfully
may) give a reason of that his denial; which must needs be an oppugning (in
this sense) of the others assertion. If by oppugning, he means, an opposing or
resisting by force, the charge is a most unworthy and unchristian slander. I no
where give the least intimation that the way I plead for in any of her
principles or maxims, thus oppugneth either Parliaments or Synods, either in
their directions, or in the exercise of any coercive power. As for a coercive
power in Synods, I think Mr. Prynnes way denies, if not oppugns, it, as well as
mine. And to gratify the Civil Magistrate with such a power as this, in
matters of Religion, denying him withal any Directive power for the ordering
and government of it (which is the bounty of the Presbyterian way to the
Civil Magistrate The Civil Magistrate arrogates not to himself any directive
power in matters of Religion. A. S. in his Observe. and Annot. p. 5. And again,
p. 7. To grant them such a power ( viz. of judging questions in debate between
the two parties in the Assembly, speaking of the Parliament) were nothing else
but to join your selves with the Arminians, etc.
) is no such eminency of desert at his hand, above what the Congregationall way
does willingly and cheerfully leave unto him. The understanding and reason of a
man, is certainly better then the strength of an Elephant, or a Lion.

3. I absolutely deny, that Mr. Prynne has either largely, or contractedly
proved, either by many Texts, or any Texts, either in his Independencie
examined, or in any other of his writings whatsoever, whether examined or
unexamined the denial of any such coercive power, either in Parliaments or
Synods, to be either directly or indirectly contrary to the Scriptures, which
either the Congregationall way, or any Patron or friend of this way, that I
know of, have denied, or do deny unto either. And whereas his page boasts of
his large proof hereof by many Texts, and by this finger (o) points us to his
margent, as if that would justify and make good this boasting; the honest
margent, as conscious to the vanity thereof, refuses to say any thing at all,
jot or tittle, to it.

4. Whereas he pleads, that Paul himself even in matters of Religion pleaded
his cause before Festus, Felix, and King Agrippa, all this is granted in point
of Truth, but absolutely denied in point of pertinencie to his purpose. If
Independents be brought before Kings and Rulers for Christ's sake, or for their
conscience sake, it is their wisest course (and that which well becomes them,
yea, and that which they would do, if so brought) to plead their cause before
them as well as they can, as Paul did before Festus, etc. But though Paul was a
chosen vessel of Christ to carry his Name before Kings Act. 9. 15.
, yet they were chosen vessels of Satan, who compelled or brought him before
Kings to answer for his life, because he preached and practiced the doctrine of
Christ, notwithstanding he always carried the Name of Christ with him,
whenever he was brought before them. Nor does his pleading his cause before
Festus, etc. any whit more prove that Festus had a lawful coercive power in
matters of Religion, then James his being slain by Herod's sword, or Christ's
being crucified by Pilates power, prove that Civil Magistrates have a lawful
power to sentence the faithfullest and most innocent men unto death. As for
Paul's appeal unto Caesar, (an Heathen Emperor) can we blame him for it, when
as he hoped to find more equal and fair proceedings before him, then at the
Judicatories of inferior Judges? If Mr. Prynne will accept or interpret, either
the pleading of our cause before a Civil Magistracy when we are brought before
it, or an appealing from an inferior Civil Judicatory when we feel or fear
injustice, to a Superior, or an acknowledgement of a lawful power in the
Civil Magistrate to restrain the violence and unjust proceedings and
practices of men against us; if (I say) he will interpret any, or all these, to
be an acknowledgement of a Coercive power in the Civil Magistrate, in
Ecclesiastical affairs, there is an end of this strife between us; we will
all readily subscribe, that such a coercive power as this in matters of
Religion and Ecclesiastical affairs, is the undoubted privilege of the
Civil Magistrate, and of right belongs unto him.

5. We freely likewise subscribe unto those injunctions of the Apostle, where
he injoyns all Christians to pray, even for heathen Kings, Magistrates, and to
submit to all their lawful commands for conscience sake: yea, and are heartily
sorry that any such commands should at any time proceed from Kings,
Magistrates, whether Heathen or Christian, unto which we cannot submit with a
good conscience, and for conscience sake; but are necessitated even for
conscience sake to decline them. Only we question, whether Kings, Magistrates,
Heathen or Christian, have any power from God, to punish good and godly men,
for declining such commands of theirs for conscience sake, which they cannot
for conscience sake submit unto.

6. For those Princes and Magistrates who were long sense predicted to become
nursing Fathers to the Church under the Gospel, we wish them all Christian
care, tenderness, and compassion, according to the nature and tenor of this so
honorable a service and employment, so long sense by prophecy from God
assigned and recommended unto them. But whether it be proper for those, that
desire to be looked upon as nursing Fathers of the Church, to sacrifice the
peace and comfort of one part of the children of the Church upon the service of
the wills or humors of another part of them, I leave to nursing mothers, who
have twins of their womb hanging upon their breasts, to judge and determine.

7. And lastly, for the good and wholesome Laws enacted by Cyrus, Artaxerxes,
Darius, etc. for the worship of God, etc. We gave (I trust) a good and
wholesome answer in the former part of this discourse, published some weeks
since. We freely grant a power, yea, and more then a power, a necessity by
way of duty, in Kings, Magistrates, to further the honor and service of the
true God, and his people in the worship of him. It is only a power of
discouraging his people, of interrupting and hindering their peace and comfort
in the worship and service of the true God, which we conceive incompetible unto
Magistracy, as any gift or donation settled upon it by God.

His third Argument or ground of jealousy against the way of his great
Contestation, Sect. 44.
is, that it appears to be a way that will breed infinite confusions,
disorders, by confounding the bounds of Parishes, etc. We answer

1. That Physicians seldom complain of sickly times; nor Millars of those that
bring griest to their mills. The old saying was, De morbo gaudet medicus. It is
strange to me that Mr. Prynne should thus prevaricate with his profession. But
it may be this argument is figurative, and cat-antiphrasticall: And so, by
confusions, disorders, etc. he means, peace, unity and concord amongst men,
whereby confusions, disorders, and consequently suits at Law, will be prevented
and cut off. And the truth is that such peace, unity, and concord amongst men,
whereby such unchristian mischiefs and miseries as these, may in ordinary way
of providence be prevented, is the genuine and natural product of this way,
and a fruit that is daily gathered from it by many.

2. Whereas he charge this way, with confounding the bounds of Parishes, and
in his margent cites p. 38. to 40. of my two Sermons, for the justification of
this charge; the truth is, that both charge and justification may go together,
and serve in the Forlorn hope, having neither reason nor truth to second
either. For 1. the way he speaks of, intermeddles not with, offers no violence
to the bounds of Parishes only it thinks it equal that the bounds of Parishes
should not offer violence, or be houses of bondage unto the consciences of the
Saints, nor be as bars of iron against them in the way of their comfort, and
spiritual edification. 2. Whereas I am sub-pena'd for a witness against this
way, touching the crime objected, I mean of trespassing upon the bounds of
Parishes. May answer is, that the printed copy of those Sermons of mine, which
I have, has ne gry quidem, either in page 38, 39, or 40. of any such matter:
nor has it any where else, any page, passage, sentence, line, word, syllable,
letter, point, or tittle, amounting to the import of such a charge.

3. Whereas his pen spits this black reproach in the face of Independencie,
that it is a Government inconsistent with Royalty and the civil Government;
My answer is, that look in what degree this accusation and charge would be
weighty and sore, in case it could be proved; in the same degree it is light
and contemptible, through a deficiencie of all, and all manner of proof, or
color of proof, whatsoever. The Roman Empire lost nothing of her beauty,
strength, or interest, by the Churches of Christ practicing this Government in
several places within the bounds and territories of it. If it sustained loss
in any of these, by occasion of this Government, it was not because of their
toleration of, but their opposition to it.

4. Nor is this charge, that it gives way to every sect to choose Ministers,
erect Churches of their own without control, of any better commendation in
point of truth, then the former. For it gives way to no sect whatsoever
without control; it reproves, oppugns, censures, and condemns sects and
sectaries of all sorts; so far is it from granting allowance to them, to choose
Ministers, and erect Churches, without control. Indeed it knows no authority
or commission which it has from God, to countenance the controulement of the
civil sword against such persons, who in the simplicity (not convicted
obstinacy) of their hearts, are misled in matters of Religion: it trembles to
make misprisions in things of that difficult, high, and rare attainment, as the
acknowledgement of supernatural truth is in matters of Religion, and the
things of God, to be matter either of confiscation of goods, imprisonment,
banishment, death, unto men: though it denies not a power of restraint from
opposing the received faith, with public disturbance and offense.

5. Whereas in Answer to somewhat argued by me to make the innocence of
Independencie touching matter of Divisions, as clear as the noone day, he
repones thus; That those who in point of conscience cannot communicate or agree
together in one Church, will never questiolesse accord well together in one
family, bed, Parish, Kingdom, as experience manifests; I answer,

1. That experience manifests the quite contrary. How many Ministers of the
Presbyterian judgment are there in the Kingdom, yea, in and about the City,
that hold communion in all dear and Christian respects, and terms of love and
friendship, with many called Independent, and these again with them? The
difference in judgment between them in point of Church Government, in some
rather increasing, then diminishing or dissolving their familiarity and
acquaintance. How often does Mr. Edwards himself in his Antapologie, acknowledge
his Apologists to be dearly and deeply interessed in the love and care of many
of his judgment Many godly and learned Ministers -- even such as are their
good friends, and tender enough of them, etc p. 3. their friends and familiars,
p. 4. That all the godly Ministers of City and Country should carry
themselves toward you with love, respect, fairness, brotherly kindness etc. Et
max: The Ministers courted them by all ways of respect and often high
entertainment of them inloving speech, friendly countenance, familiar co^ver
sing, etc. p. 226
? Yea, he commends his own love and affections toward them, once and twice and
the third time also I love their persons and value them as Brethren, yea, some
of them above Brethren, and besides that love I bear to them as Saints, I have
a personal love, and a particular love of friendship to some of them, etc.
Epist. p. 7.
. How many families are there in and about the City, wherein the respective
members enjoy themselves together with much Christian sweetness and peace,
notwithstanding relations to several Pastors and Churches among them? I had it
from a person worthy credit in a greater matter, that a friend of his (a man
also very well known to my self, and known for a man both of honesty and
understanding) related to him; how that having but four persons in his
family, (himself being one of the four) and every of these constantly
repairing to a different Congregation and Ministry, yet lived very peaceably,
comfortably, and contentedly together in the same house. Yea, and that he
moreover added; that except he should grant this liberty to the rest
respectively, he could not expect that good accord and agreement with them and
between them in his family, which now he found.

Yea, 2. Experience manifests yet more then this; viz. that not only persons
dissenting in point of Church Government, being otherwise united in the
profession of the same pure, Orthodox and undefiled Religion; but that persons
dissenting in the very substantialls of their respective Religions, do
lovingly and peaceably combine and live together, not only in the same State
or Kingdom, but even in the same City, yea, in the same street or
neighborhood; and are mutually helpful and serviceable one to another in all
matters of civil courtesy, often meet, eat and drink together; yea, and are
all of one heart and of one mind, in promoting and maintaining the peace and
safety of the State where they live. I have received every whit as much as this
in report from persons of good esteem and worth, who have been ey-witnesses and
diligent observers of such things, both in the Low Countries and in France.

Yea, 3. (that which is yet more then all this) the Scripture it self implies,
that persons, not only distanced in their judgments about Church Government,
but about the Godhead of Christ, and truth of the true and Christian Religion,
may not only accord and agree together in one and the same State, as Abraham
and his people did with the Amorites, Genesis 14. 13. with the Philistims at
Gerar, Genesis 20. 1. with the Egyptians, Genesis 12. 10. etc. Christians with Pagan
Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10. 27. but in the one and the same family, yea, and head
also, 1 Cor. 7. 12, 13. 1. Pet. 3. 1. etc.

4. And lastly, Not only experience, but even Reason it self manifests, that
those who cannot in point of conscience communicate and agree together in one
Church, may yet very well accord together, in one family, bed, Parish,
Kingdom: yea, evident it is, that they, who cannot in point of conscience
agree together in one Church, cannot possibly (or lightly at least) but agree
together in family, Parish, bed, Kingdom. For if it be conscience that sets
them at a distance in matter of Church Government, it must needs unite them in
the performance of all such duties, which are clearly and manifestly such. He
that out of conscience abstains from any practice, as not being satisfied in
his judgment touching the lawfulness thereof; cannot but be ready and willing
to practice every such duty, of the necessity where of he stands convinced,
either by the light of nature, or by the Word of God; Conscience being
unpartiall between the negative and the affirmative, and equally respecting its
own comfort and peace in both. Now it is no ways probable, (if possible) that
such as are truly conscientious in point of Church Government, should be
ignorant of such duties required of them by God in the four mentioned
relations, family, parish, bed, kingdom, the practice and performance whereof
will strongly and sweetly unite and accord them in the said Relations,
respectively. All these things considered, I cannot wonder a little, that the
Gentleman, who makes so many Questions, should make that Questionless in the
negative, which is so palpably plain and questionless in the affirmative. But

6. Whereas I only argue and demonstrate, that the repairing of persons out of
several Parishes to one and the same Ministry or Pastor, needs be no more
trouble or disturbance, then the like repair of persons of the respective
Companies in London, to one and the same Hall; he represents this demonstration
of mine, as if I thereby intended to prove or justify the Congregationall
Government simply, and accordingly insists upon 3 differences between the one
and the other. I know nothing but that he might easily have found out not only
3, but 23 differences, and have argued them all with as much pertinencie to his
purpose, as he has done the three. For we do not urge the analogy of the
Government of Companies of Corporations in all the relations or appurtenances
belonging to it, as any ground or proof of the Congregationall Government; we
are better provided in this kind, then so: we only urge the particular
mentioned, to accommodate and heal the pretended offensivenesse in the like, in
this Government. Notwithstanding let us briefly see what advantage he has
gotten against the Independent way, by his 3 great differences found between
several Trades and Hals in one City, Parish, Kingdom, and several forms of
Church Government. As to the first we answer.

1. That it is not so without dispute, as he makes it, whether all Trades,
Societies, bold one another lawful, useful, necessary, agreeable to the Laws
of God, and the Realm. I know both some Trades, yea and some Societies too in
London, much questioned upon all, or most of these particulars. But pass we
this. Whereas he infers upon it, that so they breed no contrariety of opinions
or disaffections, etc. We answer.

2. That certainly experience does not manifest this Contentions, differences,
disaffections, yea and Lawsuits sometimes between Trades and Trades,
Societies and Societies, are known occurrences in and about the City. Whereas
he adds: that each different Church deems the other unlawful, so as they
cannot with safe conscience join or communicate together, and thereupon sever
one from another; We answer.

3. That according to Mr. Prynnes notion of Church Government, it is not
necessary that each different Church should judge the other unlawful, etc.
because he supposes, that the Scripture is so indulgent in this behalf, as to
leave room enough for variety of forms of this Government. So that if he will
but give others leave to be of his judgment, this reasoning of his false to the
ground. But

Fourthly (and lastly) Though each different Church do deem the other
unlawful, and so cannot with safe conscience communicate together in
Church-ship; yet this hinders not, but that they may judge and think as well
one of another persons (and consequently love and affect one another, and
combine together as affectionately,) as persons of several Trades and
Societies do; who have no more communion together in their respective Trades,
then different Churches have in their respective Churches; yea, there is far
better ground (as has been partly touched already) why different Churches,
though they deemeach other unlawful, should yet think better of, yea and love
the respective members each of other, then there is, that persons of several
Trades, or members of several civil Societies, should do either the one or
the other among themselves.

To his second difference, Sect. 45.
I answer,

1. That experience manifests the contrary to what he here affirms, viz. that
the subordination or subjection of several Trades, Societies, to the whole
Corporation, Parliament, or supreme Magistrate, does not keep them all in
peace and writie. What contentiones, quarrels, emulations, suits amongst them
from day to day, any such subordination or subjection notwithstanding?

2. Whereas by way of opposition he adds, that Independent Churches will be
regulated, obliged only by their own peculiar edicts, which must needs
occasion infinite schisms and disorders; We answer.

1. We wish that by way of commendation and praise in many cases, to
Parliaments, temporal Magistrates, and Synods, which is here cast upon
Independent Churches by way of imputation and charge, I mean regulation and
obligement by their own peculiar edicts. But

2. Whereas the charge is thus laid against these Churches, that they will be
regulated, obliged only by their own peculiar Edicts; the truth is, that they
are every whit as willing to be regulated, obliged, by the Edicts of any other,
as by their own, always provided that they be conform to the Word, and this
conformity sufficiently proved and made known unto them. They put no
difference at all between the mind of Christ presented unto them by others or
discovered and found out by themselves. Yea and that subordination and
subjection which they all profess and own to the written word of God, is a
far more effectual and hopeful means, to keep them all in peace and unity,
then that subordination mentioned by Mr. Prynne, is to keep all Trades and
Societies in the same precious posture. Only in this one thing these poor
Independent Churches desire Parliaments and Magistrates and Synods to be
merciful unto them, that they cannot write any of them, infallible, nor yet
subscribe unto any their injunctions or decisions in matters of Faith, or which
concern the worship and service of God, without retaining the Scriptures for
their Counsel, and advising with them what to do therein.

To his third and last difference also, Sect. 46.
we answer.

1. That he says very well, in point of truth, when he says, that Christians,
as Christians, are all of one and the self same society and profession, as
those of one trade and calling are. But this truth as yet, is not at all
conscious to his intention or purpose. Therefore he adds: therefore they
should all have but one Church and Government, as these trades have. Nor does
this, if granted, make any whit more for the Presbyterian cause, then for the
Independent: because it does not follow; Christians, as Christians, ought all
to have one and the same Church and Government: therefore this Church and
Government ought to be Presbyterian. Take a parallel: Simeon and Levi ought to
have been Brethren: therefore they ought to have been Brethren in iniquity.
Take another: A^ania^ and Sapphira, being man and wife, ought to have agreed
together: therefore they ought to have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of
the Lord. But

2. If by his one Church, he means, one and the same Catholic, mystical, and
invisible Church; We answer, that Christians, as Christians, have all one and
the same Church; in this sense, they are all members of this one Church. But if
he means, one and the same ministerial and visible Church, we answer, by
demanding, How can this thing be? We have heard indeed of some Oecumenicall
Councels; but of Oecumenicall visible Churches, wherein all Christians should
be comprehended as members, I believe there has been Oecumenicall silence unto
this day.

3. Whereas he goes about to set the comparison ( of his own making) upright,
by stating it thus: If some of one Fraternity in London (suppose Merchant-t
tylors, Sadlers, etc.) should fall out among themselves, and one would have one
form of Government, another another, and thereupon divide themselves into
several conventicles and pety meetings in corners, not at their common Hall,
and one choose one Government or Master, another another, and so sever the
Company, and continue Independent, this (no doubt) would prove an apparent
schism and seminary of infinite divisions, to the distraction, destruction of
the whole Company and Fraternity; and then adds, This is the true State of
your Independencie: We answer, that the comparison thus stated holds no
proportion or correspondence with the State of Independencie. For,

1. That number of Christians which pleads for Independencie (so called) is not
the whole Socieitie of Christians (nor indeed any confiderable part thereof, in
respect of number) as that Fraternity of Merchant-tayloes or Sadlers the
comparison speaks of, is therein supposed to be the whole Society of such a
Company. Therefore to set Mr. Prynnes comparison upright, and make it agree
with the State of Independencie, in this particular, it must be stated thus;
Suppose two or three members of a numerous and vast company, consisting (it
may be) of ten or twenty thousand persons, should differ from the rest of the
Society in some things about their Government, and hereupon should withdraw
themselves from that Society, and seek incorporation elsewhere; would such a
dissent or withdrawing of so few from amongst so many, any ways threaten the
distraction, much less the destruction of the whole Company?

2. Suppose a considerable part of a Company, should out of a conscientious
dislike of the carriage of things in the Government of the body withdraw
themselves, and refuse subjection to this Government so ordered and
administered; though in probability this act of theirs may occasion some
distraction or disturbance in the rest of the body for a season; yet supposing
it done upon substantial and due grounds, it may be so far bringing
destruction to this body, that very possibly it may occasion the Reformation
and amendment of those things that were unjust in this Government, (and
consequently destructive to the body) and so become a means of the
preservation of it from destruction. And this is the true state of our
Independencie.

3. In case the Fraternity of Merchant-taylors in London should fall out
amongst themselves, and one would have one form of Government, and another
another, and thereupon divide themselves, etc. What ever inconvenience should,
or might hereupon ensue to the Company, yet still it was determined by equal
and prudent Judges, who, or which party gave the chief occasion of these
distractions and rents; there is no reason why any one party should fall foul
upon all the rest, and give an extrajudiciall sentence for themselves. For any
thing that God has yet determined to the contrary, the Independent party of
Christians in the Kingdom, may be as innocent (yea more innocent) of the
breaches and distractions amongst us in point of Church Government, them the
Presbyterian. They that call and plead for that Government which is held forth
in the Scriptures, calling and pleading for it in a regular, meek and Christian
manner, are those that are innocent; and those that call and plead for any
other, or indeed for any in a violent, preposterous, and unchristian manner,
(light the stroke where it will) are those that are guilty. I confess that in
one respect, and that of very great consequence, I could really wish that the
beam were in the eye of Independencie, and the moat in the eye of Presbytery;
because in this case it would (I conceive) be the sooner and the more easily
plucked out. For as Austin said long since: Vitiun quod inebriat multitudinem,
examinis amittit veritatem. A sin or error that has taken the heads and hearts
of a multitude, is hardly curable Gravis enim est, and periculosus error in
plurimis: and multorum lapsus, etiamsi se intelligat, exurgend pudore,
authoritatem sibi praesumit, ex numero habens hoc impudentiae, ut quod errat,
intelligentia^ esse veritatis asserat, dum minus error is esse existimatur in
multu. Hill. l. 6.
An error in a few, is but as smoke, it may be approached unto, handled, and
dealt with, without danger: but in many it becomes a flame of fire; and he that
attempts the quenching of it, had need purify himself, as men at Sea do, when
they see the breakings of Leviathan, and look for nothing but present death.
Job. 41. 25.

4. In case any parcel or less number of the Company of Merchant-taylors in
London, could not with a good conscience continue their union and incorporation
with the Society, apprehending some things sinful amongst them, of the
sinfulness whereof they conceive an unavoidable necessity that themselves
must be partakers, whilst they continue their relation to the Company, the
rest of the Company all this while resenting no evil in the things stumbled at
by those other, and so are able to keep on their way without scruple; in this
case it is so far from being a thing destructive to this Company, that the
party so scrupul'd, should withdraw, that it is the best accommodation, thing
standing as they do, whereof they are capable; it being certain that no Company
or Society whatsoever but suffers loss and disadvantage by union and
communion with such members, who walk with gainsaying judgments, and polluted
consciences with them. And this also is the true State of Independencie. The
Great Community and Society of Christians in the Kingdom, suffer far less
by the Independents withdrawing of themselves from the Presbyterian Government,
their judgments in this point standing as they do, then they would by their
joining with them therein. Their joining with them under the reclamation of
their judgments and conscieaces, would but disaccommodate both parties;
whereas their refusal in this kind, convenienceth both; and so has the true
character of a legitimate contract or bargain between man and man, which still
ought to be so conditioned, that both parties may be bettered in their
conditions by it. Therefore Mr. Prynne has not set the comparison upright to
the point in hand.

5. And lastly, There is no arguing in Divinity, either from conveniences or
inconveniences, from disturbances or from peace, from life or from death,
against the necessity of avoiding sin, and keeping a good and a clear
conscience toward God. Therefore supposing that the Company of
Merchant-taylors in London, would by such fractions and divisions amongst the
members thereof, as are presented in Mr. Prynnes comparison, be in danger of
ruin and dissolution; yet better were it that this ruin and dissolution
should come upon it, then that God should be dishonored by the least sin, or
the meanest soul endangered, for the presevation of it Cum turpis est
medicina, sanari pudeat.
. In like manner, it is more agreeable to the mind of God, and to all
principles of Christianity, that even the greatest numbers and multitudes of
Christians should rather suffer, though very deep, in their external
conveniences, then that the least sin should be committed by the meanest of
them, for their accommodation. And this likewise is the true state of things
between our Independency, and Mr. Prynnes Presbytery. Many other particulars
there are, wherein it might be made further to appear, how ill his comparison
comports with the case and state of Independencie: but enough (as the Proverb
says) is as good as a feast.

To what he subjoyns concerning my present case in my own Parish, Sect. 47.
miserably divided, disordered by my Independent way, etc. I have answered in
part in my Innocencies Triumph. I here add

1. That my Parish is no otherwise divided, disordered, by my Independent way,
then the world commonly is by the Gospel, when it comes in power amongst the
inhabitants thereof. Think not ( says our Savior) that I am come to send
peace on Earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a
man at variance against his Father, and the daughter against the another, and
the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-low: And a man's foes shall be they of
his own household, Mat. 10. 34, 35, 36.

2. It was not my Independent way, (as Mr. Prynne affirms) but the opposition
to it, that caused those divisions, disorders, (if any such be) in my Parish:
If the party which now opposes, had been willing, either to have complied
with him whom they acknowledged for their Pastor, and the rest of their
Brethren, who submitted themselves unto him in this way; or else patiently to
have waited upon God, until he should please to reveal the goodness of the
way unto them, in case they saw no sufficient ground at the present, for their
submission in this kind (as many of the best of them have done hitherto:) there
had been no place for any division or disorder amongst them. And whether it be
not more fitting, for a people to follow their Pastor, giving them substantial
grounds and reasons for that way wherein he desires to lead them; then for a
Pastor to follow his people in such a way, whereof they neither give, nor (I
verily believe) can give, any account like men, I leave to Mr. Prynne, and all
unpartiall Judges, to determine.

3. (And lastly) Nothing is more regular, or of more constant observation in
all ages, then for troubles, commotions, and disturbances, to attend for a
while, any considerable mutation or change, especially, for the better, either
made, or attempted to be made, in any State or Society of men whatsoever.
Calvin in his Preface before his Institutions, dedicated to the King of France,
complains postr^mo no^ satis ca^ did fac^u^t, ^u^ invid. ose co^memora^t,
qua^tas turbas, tumultus, contentiones secu^ traxer^t nostrae Doctrinae
praedicatio, et quos nunc in multis fructus crat. Na^ horu^ malorum culpa
indigne in ipsa derivatur, quae in Satanae militia^ torquer^ debuerat. Et mox:
Haec certissima et inprim^^ fidelis no tanqua dis^^nt tursverbu^ a vi nu^) a
medacibus Dactrinis, quae sefacile produ^t dum aequis on^niu^ auribus
recipiuntur, and a mu^do plaude^te aud^untur.
of the indirect and unworthy dealings of his adversaries, who charged the
preaching of the Doctrine of the Gospel, with being the cause of I know not
what troubles, tumults, and contentions; Whereas such things as these, should
have been charged upon the Militia or Agents of the Devil. And then adds this
memorable saying: Est hic divini verbi quidam quasi genius, ut nunquam emergat,
quieto ac dormiente Satana: It is (as it were) the lot and destiny of the word
of God, never to find Satan in a good mood, or asleep, when it comes abroad
into the world: in the following words, making this a most certain and
faithful mark or sign, whereby it is discerned from false Doctrines, which
(says he) soon bewray themselves by this, that the world applauds them in the
hearing, and gives them intertainment in a posture of fairness, favor, and
peace. What storms, tempests, whirle-winds of troubles, tumults, commotions,
did Satan and his auxiliaries raise in all places and parts in the world
Lutherus velu^^ molum Eridis misit in mu^dum, cujus nuliam omnino part non
turba^a^ video. Erasm. l. 14. ep. 7.
, wheresoever Luthers Doctrine and Reformation did but touch, to render them
the hatred and indignation of the world? Yea, and Luther himself doubted not to
raise it to a general maxim or observation, that Godly men must bear the
name and title of men that are seditious, schismatic, and Authors of
infinite evils and troubles in the world. Pios hoc nomen and titulum in mundo
oportet gerere, quod seditiosiac schismatici ac infinitoru^ maloru^ authors
sunt Luth. in Gal. 5.
That great and blessed alteration and change that God made in the State of
Religion, and things of his worship, by the sending of Jesus Christ into the
world, and the preaching of the Gospel, is called the shaking of the Heavens
and the Earth Hab. 2. 21. with Heb. 12. 26, 27.
, because of the great concussions, troubles, distractions, rents, and
divisions, in the great concussions, troubles, distractions, rents, and
divisions, in the world, which did (and do yet daily) accompany them, by
reason of the pride, ignorance, and unbelief of those which oppose either the
one or the other. And as the Doctrine of the Gospel in the general, never
comes amongst any people in excellency and power, but that it smites the
foundations of that unity and peace wherein it finds them, makes breaches upon
them, renting one part of them from another, upon which discontents and
disorders follow like the waves of the Sea; in like manner, every considerable
piece or branch of the Gospel, in the first discovery and breaking out of it,
even in such places, and among such persons, where and amongst whom the
Doctrine of the Gospel in the general has been of a long time professed, by
reason of the strangeness of it, and that contrariety and crossenesse which
it bears to the judgments and wills of many, must needs be offensive and
distastefull unto them, and so occasion distractions, disorders, discontents.
So that Mr. Prynne by representing my Parish as divided, disordered by my
Independent way, has rather given testimony to the truth and Evangelicalnesse
of it, then brought any argument to disprove either. And to say (as he does a
few lines after) that he needs no other evidence to prove it a schismatic
by-path, and so no way of Christ, then the schisms and discords which it has
raised in other Parishes, is just such a saying and resolution, as that of the
High Priest against our Savior, when he rent his clothes, and said, He has
spoken blasphemy: What further need have we of Witnesses Mat. ^6. 6, 5
? The blasphemy of Christ, and the guiltiness of Independencie touching the
matter of division and disorder, are sins much of the same order and
calculation.

To his fourth and last reason, Sect. 48.
which renders him a man of jealousy against the way of Independencie, and
prevails with him so far, that he cannot (as he says) think it a Way of
Christ; we Answer.

1. That this way is no Pioner or underminer of Parliamentarie Authority: nor
has Mr. Prynne found it, nor ever shall find it such: the principles of this
way being none other then what are laid in the Scriptures, unpossible it is,
that it should destroy, or pull down any thing, which they build up. Therefore
if Mr. Prynne has ought in this kind against any of the sons of this way, let
him implead these in a lawful trial, and spare not; but if for their sakes he
will needs blaspheme the way, he will open a door of example very effectual
for those that are opposite to his way of Presbytery, to heap shame, infamy
and reproach upon the head thereof without end; (yea, and for those also that
are enemies to Christian Religion, to render that as hateful, wicked, vile in
the eyes of men, as themselves can desire it should be esteemed). If all the
errors and misprisions found in the writings of Presbyteriall men, should be
charged upon the way of Presbytery, as the Authoresse and Foundresse of them,
she would appear ten times more erroneous and deformed, then her Independent
adversaries are yet willing to judge or conceive her to be.

2. For the Sons or Patrons of this way (as Mr. Prynne pleases to term them) I
verily believe, that there is none of them all, but are willing, ready and
cheerful to invest Parliaments with as full, high, and complete a power and
Authority, as are by any, by all the rules and principles, either of reason,
or Religion, competible unto men. If Mr. Prynne, or any other of the
Presbyterian way, conceive that in times of Parliaments, when they apprehend
them like to be for them, they may and ought to say, that Gods are come down to
us in the likeness of men Act. 14. 11.
; we confess, that we cannot (our reason, our Religion will not bear it at
our hands) subscribe any such Apotheosie. But let him and his, first survey the
territories, patrimony, and heritance of Heaven, the royalties and prerogative
of the most high God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, blessed for ever, and set
them out by the line and rule either of reason, or Religion; and look what
power, Authority, Jurisdiction soever, shall be found situate, lying and being
without the compass of this line, no ways enterfeering with those that are
within, we all unanimously, universally profess, that incunctanter, and with
both our hands we will cast and heap it upon the Parliament, asking no further
question for conscience sake. Therefore whereas he challenges this way, for
devesting Parliaments of all manner of Jurisdiction in matters of Religion and
Church Government; we answer,

3. That neither this way, nor the Patrons of it, divest them of any, or any
manner of Authority in what matters soever, unto which Mr. Prynne, or any
other Master of the Presbyterian way, is able, Salvo jure coeli, to entitle
them. For jurisdiction in matters of Religion and Church Government, we
willingly give unto them the same line, measure, and proportion herein to the
full, which himself asserteth unto them from the examples of those Kings and
Princes, Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, etc. (which he insists upon p. 20.) Who (as
he here said) enacted good and wholesome Laws, for the worship, honor and
service of the true God. Let him instance particularly in any such Law, or
Laws, enacted by any of them: and (doubtless) none of us will deny the
Parliament a power of enacting (exceptis excipiendis) the like. But if Mr.
Prynnes intent be to make Precedent of whatsoever was enacted or done by any,
or all of these Heathen Kings, Princes, and States, to warrant a lawfulness of
power in the Parliament of enacting or doing the same, we conceive that he
neither has, nor knows where to have any thing to justify such an intent. I
trust that that Law enacted by Nebuchadnezzar and his Nobles, Dan. 3. 6. That
whosoever falls not down and worshippeth, shall the same hour be cast into
the midst of a burning fiery furnace, shall not be drawn by him into
precedent, for the vindication of a Parliamentary Jurisdiction in matters of
Religion and Church Government.

4. Whereas to make good his last charge against the way so often smitten by
his pen, he referres to the passage of the two Independent Brethren recited p.
3. of his Independencie examined, adding (after a parenthesis of much untruth,
there being many that have represented the way he speaks of in her native
colors and lineaments The New England Catechism, called The Government of the
Church, composed by Mr. Cotton, and thrice printed. A Guide unto Sion. Another
small treatise, butful of learning, reading and strength, called, Sions
Prerogative Royal. The answer of the Elders of the several Churches of New
England to 32 questions, sent etc. Another Answer of the same Elders to 9.
other Questions about Church Government. Mr. Thompson and Mr. Mathors answer to
Mr. Charles Herles Independencie. Mr. Tho. Welds answer to Mr. W. Rathbone;
besides many other Treatises published upon this subject.
) that I rather aggravate, then extenuate the guilty of the said passage, by
my explanation, which he there recites; I answer,

1. That for matter of guilt, the passage referred unto, stands as yet,
clear, innocent, and untouched, as concerning any thing in way of demerit,
that has been proved against it.

2. As concerning the explanation, that also keeps its standing, and that upon
holy ground, notwithstanding all that Mr. Prynne has done, or attempted to
do, for the removal of it; -- manet illa, suoque est robore tuta. Yea, the
truth is, that in all his contra-remonstrance, he has not so much as once
touched or mentioned that which is the maine base or foundation of the
principal conclusion managed in the said explanation, and principally opposed
by him. The conclusion is not that which Mr. Prynne extracts from the passage
which he cites, viz. that there is not only an improbabilitie, but an absolute
impossibility, that the Parliament should have any power at all to enact Laws
and Statutes in matters of Religion, Church Government, etc. Here are words,
which the explanation knows not, either in the letter, or in the spirit of
them, as by name these, not only an improbabilitie, an absolute
impossibility, no power at all, etc. but the maine conclusion driven at in the
passage, is this; That the generality or promiscuous multitude of the Land,
have no authority or power from Christ to nominate or appoint, who shall be
the men that shall order the affairs of Christ's Kingdom, or institute the
Government of his Churches. The maine foundation or base of reason, upon which
this pillar of Truth stands in the said passage, is this; Because such an
Authority or power (viz. to nominate or appoint who shall order the affairs
of Christ's Kingdom, or institute the Government of his Churches) is greater
then ever Christ himself had, (I mean as man, or Mediator) at least then ever
he exercised, which in the sequel I explain and prove. Now then this is that
which I say, that Mr. Prynne in all his long reasoning against the Conclusion,
does not so much as with the least of his fingers once touch this ground, or
answer any thing at all to it. So that he has not as yet the least color or
pretense to blame me, if I be not proselyted to his opinion by what he has
written here. And because I desire fair and Christian quarter with him for the
future, I do here promise and protest in the sight of God, Angels, and men,
that if Mr. Prynne shall at any time (God preserving my life and understanding)
plainly and substantially demonstrate and prove, either that the generality,
and promiscuous multitude of the Land, have a power greater then ever the Lord
Christ himself had, or exercised as man, or Mediator; or, that a power to
nominate and appoint whom they please amongst men, to order the affairs of
Christ's Kingdom, and institute the Government of his Churches, is not a power
greater then ever Christ had, or at least exercised, as either man, or
Mediator; I promise and protest again, as before, that if Mr. Prynne, or any
other, shall at any time clearly and fairly prove, either the one or the other
of these propositions, I will pull down with both mine hands, what I have
built up but with one, and without any more ado join judgment with Mr. Prynne
touching the power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion: but till
this be done, I neither see how Mr. Prynne can with a good conscience persist
in his, nor require me to desist from mine. It is true, the Lord Christ as
Mediator, had all power given him both in Heaven and on Earth, Mat. 28. 18.
That is, had the whole and entire execution and transaction of all his Fathers
will, pleasure, and decrees, concerning all men, Angels and creatures
whatsoever, put into his hand and power. And has given him Authority TO
EXECUTE judgment also, because he is the son of man, Joh. 5. 27. But he had no
power or Authority given him, to carry any thing contrary to his Fathers will
or pleasure. Verily, verily, I say unto you, (says he himself, Joh. 5. 19.)
the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do, etc. So
again, ver. 30. I can do nothing of my self -- Now then as Christ had no
commission or power to give eternal life, but only to those whom God the
Father had given unto him, Joh. 17. 2. Joh. 6. 37. So neither had he any
Authoritative power to institute or appoint any other government for his
Churches, then that which he had seen with, or received from his Father: much
less had he any such power, to delegate unto men (least of all unto
unsanctified persons and rude multitudes) a power of nominating whom they
should please, to appoint and settle what government they pleased in the
Churches of God. Certain I am, that Christ never exercised any such power as
this: and therefore have little hope of being convinced that he ever had it.
Howsoever, let us give the Gentleman an unpartial hearing in what he pleads
against the aforesaid Conclusion.

1. To his former marginall Annotation ( p. 22.) honored with a Preface made
of this word, Sect. 49.
Note, wherein he tells me that Gamaliel and my Text never taught me any such
Anti-Parliamentary Doctrine. I answer, that neither does Gamaliel, nor my Text,
nor any other Text whatsoever in Scripture, teach Mr. Prynne to call the truth
an Anti-Parliament try Doctrine. But both Gamaliel and my Text teach me to take
heed of fighting against God; and I being taught so high and necessary a point
of wisdom, conceived it my duty not to eat such a morsel alone, but to
spread a Table for as many of my Brethren as pleased to come, and sit down and
eat of the same with me. I and my Doctrine are only in such a sense
Anti-Parliamentarian, as Christ and his were Anti-Cesarean.

2. To a second Marginall note in the same page, Sect. 50.
ordered likewise to be noted (as the former) I answer likewise, that though
people have authority to nominate such who by the rule of Gods Word may limit
some particulars, though not by their own bare Authority, without, or against
the Word, yet it follows not; either

1. That they have authority to nominate such, who shall have authority by
virtue of such nomination to peremptorize by fire or sword all their
limitations whatsoever, as agreeable to Gods Word. Nor

2. Does it follow, that, in case their limitations should be agreeable to the
word of God, therefore they have power to compel any man by external
violence, to subject either in their judgment or practice unto them;
especially whilst they are not able to convince them of any such excellency in
these limitations, as an agreeableness to the word of God? It is no ways
agreeable to the word of God, that men should be punished either in their
bodies or estates, for not siding with the truth in difficult and hard
Questions; as all such may well be presumed to be, wherein sober and
conscientious persons cannot be satisfied. The word of God does not permit two
persons or parties of a dissenting judgment about an hard case or question, to
judge or think hardly one of another Rom 14. 2, 3, 4.
; much less does it permit them to punish, or lay violent hands one upon
another. Nor

3. And lastly, does it follow, that, though Princes, Magistrates, Ministers,
Parliaments, Synods, should be nominated or elected by the lawful power of the
people, and withal should have Authority by the word of God to limit any
particulars thereof; that therefore this Authority should be derived upon them
by means of such nomination. Every private man has sufficient Authority,
(though perhaps he may want ability of gifts) to limit any particular in the
word of God according to the word of God; this being nothing else but a true
and right apprehending or understanding of this word. Which apprehension or
understanding of his, though he has no power by way of office to impart unto
others, yet has he a right, yea, and an obligation upon him by way of duty,
so to impart it, when God affords season and opportunity, time and place for
it. So that this marginall note is not accessory to any harm done to the said
Conclusion.

3. Sect. 51.
To a third marginall note subservient in the same page to the two former, I
answer,

1. That though it should be granted, that every Magistrate, Parliament and
Synod have power to declare and enjoin, what is necessary to be believed,
practiced, by or according to Gods Word, yet this is nothing more then what
every Pastor or Minister over a congregation, has power to do, yea and ought
to do 1 Timothy 6. 13. 17, 18. 1 Timothy 4. 11. etc.
from day to day in the course of his ministry. But

2. If by declaring and enjoining, he means any such declaring and enjoining,
whereby Magistrate, Parliament, or Synod, shall be enabled temporally to punish
those who shall either not believe, or not practice; I answer, that this is but
petitio Principii, a supposall of that which is the main Question; and
therefore waits still upon Mr. Prynne's pen for a more sufficient proof, the
old writ of Ipse dixit, being out of date long since. We have reconciled the
margent; and nothing doubt but that the page will be of as easy accommodation.
Therefore

4. Whereas he puts himself to the needless labor of repeating the charge
formerly charged upon my Doctrine, a an underminer of the Authority of
Parliaments, etc. I shall take admonition by it, and save a needless labor of
repeating what has been already said in way of answer to it. Only I shall
add, that this Repetition of Mr. Prinnes judgment and charge of my
forementioned Doctrine, compared with my own thoughts and apprehensions of it,
puts me in mind of a saying of a great Casuist: Eadem possunt alicui videri
manifest vera, quae alteri videntur manifest falsa. The same things may seem
to one manifestly true, which to another seem as manifestly false. That
Doctrine which Mr. Prynne arraigns as an underminer of Parliamentary Authority,
I conceive to be a Doctrine of the richest establishment and confirmation to
it: of which apprehension of mine, I have given a sufficient account elsewhere.

5. Whereas he further charge the said Doctrine with contrariety to my late
Covenant and Protestation, and that in the most transcendent manner that ever
any have hitherto attempted in print; and refers himself to all wise men to
judge, whether this be not so; I refer both himself and all his wise men, to
judge, whether I have not given a sufficient answer hereunto in my Innocencies
Triumph. p. 4, 5, 6, etc. yet lest sentence should be given against me herein,
I here add, that certainly no clause in that Covenant and Protestation
intended, that the Subscribers unto it should be bound in conscience by virtue
of such subscription, to make Gods of men, or (which interpreted, amounts to as
much) to give any man Dominion over his Faith It is not safe for any to receive
matters of Religion without terious examination. -- Who ever be the Church, the
Authority of it, is not sufficient; possibly the Church may one and therefore
we must flee to the Throne of Jesus Christ the Head of the Church for
satisfaction. Whom shall we rather believe concerning God, then God himself? if
there were a Council of the most learned Doctors that ever the world had, yea,
if an Assembly of Angels yet in matters of Religion, concerning the good way,
the last Resolution must be into Thus says the Lord. Mr. Th. H^ll (an
High-resolved Presbyterian) in a Sermon, staled the Good old way, Gods way,
etc.) preached before the L. Mayor, etc. Apr. 24. 1^44. pa. 16, 17.
. If this be but granted, my Doctrine is no Delinquent at all against the
Covenant and Protestation.

6. Whereas he promises, or threatens (which he pleases) short answer to my
extravagant discourse; and first alleges that the objection might be made
against the general Assemblies, Parliaments, Kings of the Israelites, who were
chosen by the people, yet they made Laws and Statutes concerning Religion, and
Gods worship, with his approbation: I answer.

1. That the, Sect. 52.
General Assemblies, and Kings of Israel, were not chosen by the people, at
least by any formal free choice of one out of many, as our Parliaments and
Assemblies are. For first the General Assemblies consisted of the generality
of the people, and so were not chosen at all; for where all are admitted, there
is no choice. Or secondly, if by the General Assemblies of Israel, he means
the seventy persons spoken of, Numb. 11. 16. 24. etc. it is evident from the
context, first, that they were not chosen by the people into that Assembly, but
by Moses, and that by express order and command from God. They might possibly
be chosen by the people into the places of Elders and Governors over their
respective Families and Tribes; but they had no right or calling by virtue of
such eldership, to gather themselves into an Assembly of seventy, upon any such
terms, or for any such ends, as the forementioned Assembly were drawn together
by God. Secondly, evident like-wise it is, from ver. 25. that these seventy had
a special anointing of the Holy Ghost from God, and prophesied. Therefore
there is a great difference between this Assembly, and general Assemblies now.

2. Neither were the Kings of Israel chosen by the people, but by God; except
we will call a subsequent consent and that by way of duty and homage to the
choice made by God, a choice. When thou shall come unto the land which the Lord
thy God gives thee, and shall possess it and dwell therein, if thou say, I
will set a King over me, like as all the Nations that are about me, Then shall
thou make him King over thee, whom the LORD THY GOD SHALL CHVSE, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.
14, 15. Saul their first King, was chosen and appointed by God, 1 Samuel 9. 15,
16. So David their second King, 1 Samuel 16. 1. yea his seed likewise was chosen
and appointed by God to succeed in this Kingdom, and to reign after him for
ever, 2 Samuel 7. 12. 16. yea and notwithstanding this general choice and
designation, Solomon their King, is particularly said to have been chosen by
God, 1 Chronicles. 29. 1. So for the Kings that reigned over the ten Tribes, after
the rent of the ten Tribes from the other two; Jeroboam, the first King, was
chosen by God, 1 King. 11. 31. yea and his seed also, conditionally, ver. 38.
But Nadah his son, proving wicked, brake the condition, and cut off the
intailment. Their third King, Baasha, was not chosen by the people neither, but
was fore-chosent by God, 1 King. 14. 14. to do that execution upon the house of
Jeroboam, which is recorded, 1 King. 15. 27, 28, 29. Elab their next King
succeeded his Father, by right of inheritance, and is no where said to have
been chosen by the people into the throne. Zimri the next, was a bloody Traitor
and usurper. The two next following him, Omri and Tibni, were set up indeed by
the people, but not in any way of a lawful and regular election, but by way of
tumult and faction: and the one party prevailing, the King followed by the
other, was soon suppressed. Ahab the son of the prevailing King, without any
election by the people (except a connivence or permission, be called an
election) by the ascent of descent or succession got up into the throne. After
the same manner also Ahaziah his son came to be King. This Ahaziath dying
without children, his Brother Jeboram (another son of Ahath, and next to him by
birth, as it seems) by the privilege of his birth came peaceably to the
Kingdom, without any election by the people any where heard of. 2 King. 1. 17.
The next King, Jehu by name, was chosen by God himself after a special manner,
2 King. 9. 1, 2. and his children after him to the fourth generation (2 King.
10. 30.) to sit upon the throne of Israel, Shallum, who succeeded Ahab and his
race, (their date of Reiglement being expired) came to the Kingdom by blood;
and is indeed said to have smote Zachariah (the last of Ahabs race) before the
people, and so to have reigned in his stead: (2 King. 15. 10.) but by what
maxim enle ley, the murdering of a King before the people, will be
interpreted, a being chosen King by the people, I understand not. Menahem his
successor after a months reign, found the same way to the Kingdom (I mean,
by blood) which his Predecessor had chalked out. Pekahiah his son and
successor, had no other choice we read of, but only by that his relation. Nor
had Pekah who succeeded him in the throne, any other choice into this dignity,
but only by the murder he committed upon his Master; except it be said, that
he was chosen by those 52. men who assisted him in that bloody execution. 2.
King. 15. 25. Nor had Hoshea (the last of these Kings) any other choice,
entrance, or access we read of unto the Throne, but the same with his
Predecessor, a bloody conspiracy against his Lord and Master. So that Mr.
Prynne is absolutely mistaken in the very bottom and groundwork of his first
allegation, affirming the General Assemblies, Parliament, Kings of the
Israelites, to have been chosen by the people.

3. (And lastly) neither did they make Laws and Statutes concerning Religion
and Gods worship, with his approbation, except his approbation went along with
the transgression of his Law. For by this they stood expressly charged, not to
add unto the word which he commanded them, nor yet to diminish ought from it.
Deuteronomy. 4. 2. And again, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. And what addition could be made with an
higher hand, or with more provocation in the sight of God, unto this word of
his, then an enacting Laws and Statutes concerning Religion, and his worship,
whereunto men should stand bound in conscience to submit, as well as unto the
Laws of God themselves declared in this word? Or if it be said, that men were
not bound in conscience to submit to such Laws and Statutes, as well as unto
the Laws of God; then were they not to be punished for non-submission to them,
unless we will say, that men ought to be punished for somewhat else, besides
sin.

To his second reason against the Doctrine and Conclusion aforesaid, Sect. 53.
I answer, that as God himself used the ministry, assistance of Cyrus,
Artaxerxes, Darius, for the building of his Temple, and advancement of his
worship, for which they made Decrees, Statutes; so I conceive he does expect
and require the ministry, assistance of Christian Magistrates, Parliaments,
and Laws and Statutes to be made by them, for the promotion of his worship, But
as Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, made no Decree, Statute, to discourage any of the
true worshipers of God, nor yet to compel them to any kind of worship,
contrary (in their judgments) to the word of God; or in case they did make, or
should have made, any such Decree, Statute, they should have exceeded the
limits of their just power, and not have done justifiably in the sight of God;
So neither can Christian Princes, Magistrates, commend themselves unto God in
any such exercise of their power, whereby they shall constrain or enforce the
conscientious and faithful servants of God to any kind of worship, contrary to
their conscience, or by the performance whereof, condemning it in their
judgments for unlawful, they should pollute and condemn themselves in the
sight of God.

To his third Reason we answer likewise; Sect. 54.
that for most Christian Kings and Magistrates in the world, whether claiming
to be hereditarie, or whether eligible by the people, as the Members of
Parliament are, we CAN without either disloyalty or absurdity, deny them any
such Authority in matters of Religion and Church Government, whereby they
should be enabled to destroy, crush, or undo such persons as live godlily and
peaceably under their jurisdiction, and that for none other reason or offense
on their parts, but either for weakness in judgment and understanding, by
reason whereof they cannot see the agreeableness of those things that are
imposed on them, to the Word of God, (in case they be indeed so qualified) or
else for the goodness of their conscience, which is unwilling to shipwreck
its own peace, by going contrary to its own light and dictate. We freely allow
to all Christian Kings and Magistrates in the world, any Authority whatsoever
in matters of Religion, Church Government, or in what other causes or cases
soever it can be desired either by them, or for them, which will not claim or
challenge a right of power to punishmen for not being as wise, as learned, as
far insighted into matters of Religion as themselves, or for such matters of
fact which are occasioned directly and merely by such defects as these. We
allow a power to all Magistrates to punish the wickedness of men's wills; when
this discovers it self by any suitable action in what matters or cases soever:
but the weakness of men's judgments, we conceive calls rather for means of
instruction, then matter of punishment, from the Magistrates hand. We cannot
judge, that the mistaking of a man's way in a dark controversy, deserves a
prison, or any other stroke with the civil sword.

To his fourth we answer; Sect. 55.


1. That whereas he affirms, that I do not only grant, but argue, that every
private man has, yea ought to have, power to elect and constitute his own
Minister, causing these words to be printed in a differing character, as if
they were mine, and only transcribed by him, citing (in his margin) page 25.
26. as their quarter in my discourse; the truth is, that this is no fair play;
for there is no such line or juncto of wordseither in either of those pages, or
elsewhere in those Sermons. It never came into my thoughts to think, (nor
surely ever issued out of my pen) that every private man has, or ought to have
a power to constitute his own Minister. And besides he puts a more quaint and
subtlle distinction upon me, then I am capable of. I cannot conceive that any
private man has a power to elect or constitute his Minister, except he ought
to have it. That power which God has been pleased to confer upon any man, he
both ought to have, and has; though the exercise and benefit of that power may
be injuriously denied unto him, or withheld from him.

2. Whereas he further presumes, that I will grant, that private men have power
likewise to set up Independent Congregations, which have Authority to
prescribe such Covenants, Laws and rules of Government, Discipline, worship, as
themselves think most agreeable to the Word; and hereupon demands; if then they
may derive such an Ecclesiastical Authority to Independent Ministers and
Churches, why not as well to Parliaments, and Synods likewise by the self-same
reason? I answer,

1. That he is mistaken in his good opinion of my bounty. For I do not grant,
either first, that all, or every sort of, private men have power to set up any
Independent Congregation. Or 2. That any private men have power to set up any
such congregation consisting of other men then themselves: but only to agree
together amongst themselves to become such a congregation. Or 3. That any
Congregation whatsoever has any Authority to practice, much less to
prescribe either such Covenants, Laws, Rules of Government, or worship, as
themselves only think most agreeable to the Word of God; but only to practice
those amongst themselves which they know to be agreeable to the Word of God;
without prescribing either these or any other, unto others. God gives no person
or Congregation any Authority or power so much as to practice themselves what
they simple think most agreeable to his Word, but only that which REALLY IS
agreeable unto his Word; much less does he give either the one or the other
any Authority to prescribe their thinkings in this kind unto others. But

2. Whereas he demands, Why private men may not derive an Ecclesiastical
Authority unto Parliaments and Synods, as well as unto Independent Ministers
and Churches; the account is ready:

1. No private men whatsoever, can in any sense, neither in whole, nor in part,
derive any Ecclesiastical Authority, either unto any Minister, but only him,
unto whom they commit the charge of their ^ouls; nor unto any Congregation, but
only that whereof they are members themselves. Therefore it no ways follows;
Private men have power to derive Ecclesiastical Authority to those
Congregations whereof they are the respective members themselves: therefore
they have the like power to derive the same Authority to Parliaments, and
Synods, whereof they are no members: Take a parallel: The Assistants in the
Company of Chirurgians, have an interest in the Government and carriage of the
affairs of their own Company; therefore they have the same interest in the
Government of the affairs of the Company, of Merchant-taylors.

2. A person qualified for the office and work of the Ministry according to
the word of God, is a subject capable of Ecclesiastical Authority; and may
accordingly by persons Authorized by the word of God thereunto, be lawfully
invested with that power: But we have no rule or direction from the word of God
either 1. to judge whether, or when, either Parliaments or Synods are subjects
capable of Ecclesiastical Authority: nor 2. is there any rule or warrant to
be found there for the Authorizing of any sort, or rank of men, actually to
confer such an Authority or power, in case they should be found subjects
capable of it. Therefore Mr. Prynnes arguing in this place, is of no better
form, or strength, then this: Private men may do that which Gods Word
authorizeth them to do: therefore they may do that also, which Gods Word does
not authorize them unto. But

3. (And lastly) The main foundation and groundwork upon which he builds the
fabrique of his reasoning here, is an utter mistake. For I neither grant nor
think, that private men, either when by consent they first congregate
themselves and choose a Minister or Pastor over them, much less when they join
themselves to a Congregation already gathered and formed, do derive any
Ecclesiastical Authority unto it: but that a company of persons fearing God,
and consenting together to become a Church-body or holy Congregation, have an
Authority (which you may call Ecclesiastique, if you please; but I shall not
commend the term unto you in this case, nor would I willingly call it an
authority, but rather a right or privilege) derived unto them, not by
themselves, but from God. First to choose unto themselves a Pastor, and other
officers, as opportunity shall be, such as are recommended in the Scriptures as
meet for such places, and then by, and together, with these to administer and
order their Church-affaires, in all the concernments thereof, according to the
word of God, in the name and authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
properly, all Ecclesiastical authority is.

To his fifth argument, we answer, Sect. 56.


1. By a demurre, whether God does oft-times makes use of unsanctified persons,
and the rude multitude (which I do not under-value, because I refuse to
entitle them to a power in Church Matters greater then ever the Apostles had)
to advance his glory, propagate his Gospel, promote his worship, vindicate his
truth, edify his Church. A Judas, a Balaam, a Saul, a Gamaliel, a persecuting
High Priest, were not the rude multitude: unsanctified persons it is like they
were, at least most of them: But God did not oft-times make use either of
Balam, or Saul, or Gamaliel, or the persecuting High Priest, either to
propagate his Gospel, promote his worship, edify his Church, etc. but the
Devil oft-times made use of them to the contrary, viz. to hinder his Gospel,
to pollute his worship, to persecute his Church, etc. And for the vulgar
multitude, which he commends as nonesuch, for forwardness to believe, follow,
profess Christ, embrace the Gospel, though he confesses, that many of them
did it for sinister ends; I answer, 1. That this multitude was but one swallow,
(not a multitude of swallows) and therefore not sufficient to make his spring,
of Gods oft-times using the rude multitude to do such and such things. 2. They
that believe, follow, profess Christ, embrace the Gospel out of sinister ends,
when they decline and fall back (as all sinister-ended Professors are like to
do first, or last, and as this vulgar multitude generally did) are like more
to hinder and set back the Gospel by their declining, then ever they propagated
or promoted it by their profesion. But

2. Whereas he inferres, that therefore they may well have power to choose such
persons, who shall and may make Laws, to promote the Gospel and Government of
the Church of Christ; I answer.

1. That Gods power to make use of unsanctified persons, or a rude multitude to
promote the affairs of his Gospel, Worship, Churches, etc. is no argument to
prove, that therefore men may commit the care and trust of these affairs to
such persons or multitudes, or interesse them in any such power, which it is
ten to one but they will use rather in a destructive, then promotive way
thereunto. Gods power to power out a Spirit of prophecy upon a person
altogether ignorant of the Scriptures; and so to power out a Spirit of grace
and holiness upon a graceless and profane person, is no ground or warrant
for a Christian Congregation to choose either such an ignorant or profane
person for their Minister or Pastor.

2. Neither is Gods will, act, or example in this kind, as viz. when to show
the soveraigntie of his power over and above the powers of darkness, and the
God of this world; he makes use of Satan to give testimony unto his Son Jesus
Christ, as he did, Mar. 1. 24. Luke 4. 34. and so to exercise the patience of
Job by afflicting him, as he did, Job 1. Such acts (I say) or dispensations of
God as these, are no grounds for the justification of such men, who shall make
use of the Devil to preach the Gospel, or to afflict the Saints, for the
exercise or improvement of their patience. Therefore nothing that ever God has
done (how often soever he has done it) either by unsanctified persons, or by
rude multitudes, for the propagation of his Gospel, the edification of his
Church, etc. does any ways countenance or warrant men, to invest either the
one or the other with such a power, whereby they may endamage and make havoc
and spoil both of the one and the other. The reason is plain: because the
evil Spirit that said Act. 19. 11.
, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; yet said to the Exorcists, but who are ye? So
the powers of sin and wickedness in men, which will tremble at the voice of
God, and forget their natures and motions at his command, will laugh all the
conjurements and charmings of men in the face to scorn; and will act their own
parts, and drive on their own way with what fury and violence they please,
notwithstanding all charges, intercessions, and obtestations of men to the
contrary. Therefore no power can with reason, equity, or conscience, be put
into the hand of such persons, (I mean persons unsanctified and rude
multitudes) or nominating whom they please (I mean from amongst persons
eligible enough by the Laws of the Land either for Parliamentary or Synodicall
interest) to umpire in the affairs of the Gospel, and to make what Laws they
please for the government of the Church of Christ.

If it be yet objected and said; But why may not unsanctified persons and rude
multitudes nominate and choose such, who by virtue of such nomination may have
power to make Laws in matters of Religion, Worship, Government of the Church,
etc. though not according as they please, yet according to the word of God, and
such as are agreeable thereunto? What inconvenience is there in this? I answer,

1. By way of concession; that the grant of a power in persons so nominated and
chosen to make Laws only of encouragement and protection to the servants of
God, in matters of Religion and Church Government, or to order some
particularities in either, only upon encouragements to those that shall obey
without penal enactions against those that cannot obey, may possibly not tend
or sort to much inconvenience. Nor let any man think, that outward mulcts and
penalties are essential unto Laws, whether in matters of Religion, worship, or
in any other cases. Threatening of bodily punishment (says learned Mr.
Rutherford, one of the Commissioners for the Kingdom of Scotland Due right of
Presbyteries part. 2. page 404.
is not essential to Laws in the general, because some Laws are seconded
only with rewards. Yet this inconvenience (it is like) would attend even such a
power, were it granted; Those Laws which should be made in matters of
Religion, worship, etc. by men in authority, would be of like consequence
amongst the generality of men, with the traditions of the Scribes and
Pharisees, by which they made the Commandments of God of none effect Mat. 15.
5.
; I mean they would so interesse themselves in the hearts and affections of
the common sort of men, that they would soon place more in the observation of
them, then in keeping the Commandments of God. An experiment of which
inconvenience we had in folio, in the Ceremonial and superstitious injunctions
of the late Prelaticall power, when men thought better of themselves for
standing up at the Creed, joining in Gloria Patri, secundum usum Sarum, bowing
at the Name Jesus, cringing before an Altar, etc. then they did of others for
hearing the Word of God preached, with reverence and attention, or for walking
in a conscientious conformity unto it. But

2. If a further power shall be granted unto men so chosen (I mean by
unsanctified persons and rude multitudes, as Mr. Prynne calls them) as viz. a
power of enacting Laws and Statutes in matters of Religion, worship, etc.
under what mulcts and penalties they please, who shall judge whether these
Laws and Statutes be agreeable to the word of God, or no? If they themselves,
the Lawmakers, shall be Judges, miserable is the condition of the servants of
God under them like to be: because it is not to be expected, but that they will
avouch whatever Laws or Statutes they shall make in this kind, to be agreeable
to the word of God. The Popish Parliaments, during the reign of
Antichristianisme in the Land, did no less. If the people, from whom obedience
and subjection to such Laws is expected, shall be authorized to judge, whether
these Laws be agreeable to the word of God, or no; (which of necessity must
be granted, otherwise obedience unto them can never be yielded with a good
conscience) this will reflect prejudice and disparagement upon the wisdom and
prudence of the Lawgivers, (and consequently enervate their Authority)
especially when any of these Judges shall give sentence in oppositum, and
determine a nullitie in such Laws, for want of due correspondence with the
word of God. The nomothetique power or Authority, wherever it resides, will
never consult honor, interest, confirmation or strength to it self, by making
such Laws, which in their very nature, frame, and constitution are matters of
dispute, and which must pass and abide the tests of the judgments and
consciences of the best and wisest of those that are to yield subjection unto
them, and that with so much hazard of censure and contradiction, as Laws made
in matters of Religion, worship, and Church Government, always have been and
ever will be exposed unto. The point of agreeableness to the word of God, in
Laws and Statutes about matters of Religion, will be a far longer suite and
Question between Legislators in that kind, and conscientious subjects, then
ever any Chancerie suite was, or is like to be

3. To me it is a question, whether in this assertion (at least understood
according to the proper importance of the words) Men have power to make Laws
and Statutes in matters of Religion, worship, etc. agreeable to the word of
God; there be not contradictio in adjuncto (as Logicians speak). It is a very
hard matter for me to conceive how any thing should be agreeable to the Word of
God, at least in matters of Religion, worship, etc. but only that, which for
the spirit, matter and substance of it, is the word of God it self. There is no
great agreeableness between that which is necessary, and that which is
unnecessarie; between that which is indulgent and favorable to the Saints and
others in point of liberty, and that which inthrals and brings them into
bondage; between that which is of divine inspiration, and that which is of
humane. Now certain it is, that whatsoever is imposed upon men by the word of
God, is necessary, and of divine inspiration; and whatsoever the word of God
does not impose upon men, it does it in a way of a gracious liberty and
indulgence unto men. And as certain it is, that whatsoever shall be imposed
upon the Saints or others by men, especially in matters of Religion, worship,
etc. which for the matter and substance of it is not the very word of God it
self, is first unnecessarie, (for otherwise we must make the Word of God
imperfect, and defective even in matters of necessity, which is Popery in the
highest) and secondly, it is but of humane inspiration, except we hold
Enthusiasme, and the revelations eccentrick to the Scriptures are yet
authentic and of prophetical authority: thirdly (and lastly) it is an
abridgement of the liberty, a cancelling of that indulgence, wherewith God in
his Word has gratified the world. Therefore whatsoever shall be imposed by men
upon men in matter of Religion, worship, etc. under a pretense of an
agreeableness to the word of God, in case it be not (in the sense declared)
the very word of God it self, it can have no other agree thlenesse with this
word, then Pelop's shoulder, which (if Poets feign not) was made of yvorie, had
with the other limbs and members of his body which were all living and sound
flesh. Yea and whether any Law or Statute, can in any sense be said to be
agreeable to the word of God, which shall make the Saints servants and bondmen,
where God in his Word has either made them, or left them free, I refer to
further and more mature consideration. But

4. And lastly, Suppose it were granted, as a thing convenient, that some
should be entrusted or invested with a power of making Laws and Statutes in
matters of Religion, worship, etc. provided they be agreeable to the Word of
God; yet in as much as the making of such Laws and Statutes upon such terms,
necessarily requires the most exact and profound knowledge and understanding
of the Scriptures; I cannot conceive that unsanctified persons, or rude
multitudes, should be Authorized by God, or by any principle of sound reason,
to have the nomination or election of those men; but rather another Generation,
who may in reason be conceived to have a more excellent spirit of discerning of
such abilities in men, then they. When men stand in need of the help and advise
of a Physician, Lawyer, or Divine, they do not address themselves to a company
of children playing together in the market place, (as our Savior speaks Luke
7. 32.
) to nominate or vote amongst them, what person in any of these professions
they should employ and commit their concernments unto. No more did God ever
issue any commission out of Heaven to unsanctified persons, rude multitudes,
men ignorant of God and of the Scriptures, to nominate or choose for him, who,
or what men he should employ to make Laws and Statutes for his Saints and
Churches, in matters of Religion, and which concern his worship. A man of
ordinary discretion, and that knows any thing of the nature or disposition of
the Fox, will never choose a Fox to be his Caterer (as our English Proverb has
it).

To his sixth and last Argument, I answer, and end.

1. That it is not always found, that those who have no skill at all in Law,
Sect. 57.
Physic, or Architecture, have yet judgment and reason enough to make choice
of the best Lawyers, Physicians, Architects, when they need their help. If this
were true, these professions would prove malignant unto, and eat up the far
greatest part of their own children and professors: there would be very few in
any of them, that ever should have employments. For who is there that would set
a bungler on work, that has judgment and reason enough to choose a
Master-workman? Especially considering what our Engish Proverb says; The best,
is best cheap. There is no man will ride upon an ox, that may have a
well-manag'd and mettal'd gelding to carry him. But

2. Suppose it should be granted, as universally true, that men who have no
skill at all in the said professions, yet had judgment and reason enough to
make choice of the best in every of them respectively, when they stood in need
of their help; yet this supposition must be made withal, that these best
Practitioners, which according to the other supposition will be chosen, have
given a sufficient account and proof, and that to public satisfaction of
their respective abilities in their several professions. Otherwise how shall
they who have no skill in their professions, come to know or understand, so
much as by conjecture, who are the best in them? This being so, Mr. Prynnes
comparison or parallel, halts right-downe. Because many of those, who are by
the Laws of the Land eligible into places of Parliamentarie trust and power,
yea, happily many of those who are of the best and richest accomplishment for the
discharge of that part of this trust, which Mr. Prynne will needs suppose
belongs to them, (I mean in making Laws in matters of Religion, worship,
Church Government, etc. agreeable to the word of God) never have given any
public account or proof (nor perhaps ever had opportunity to do it) of
those abilities which God has given them in that kind. And if so, how should
the rude multitudes, or the generality of the people ever come to know or
understand who are the best or fittest men to be chosen into those great places
of trust and power?

3. When men stand in need of the help either of a Lawyer, Physician, or
Architect, it is a far easier matter to know how to choose a man in any of these
professions, without running the hazard of much detriment in his occasions,
then it is for men to know how to choose men tolerably qualified for
Parliamentary employment; especially, if one part of this employment consists
in making Laws and Statutes in matters of Religion, worship, etc. agreeable to
the word of God. The reason of the difference is plain: Recourse is made to
Lawyers (and so to Physicians, Architects respectively) only for one kind of
help or employment, and that such which is proper to their profession, and
wherein their ability and sufficiency, is or very possibly may be
sufficiently known; But Parliamentarie service or employment consisting
(according to Mr. Prynnes notion) as well in making Church-lawes, in matters of
Religion, worship, and agreeable to the word of God, as in framing Laws
politic, to accommodate the civil affairs of the Commonwealth (which are
employments of a very differing nature, hardly incident unto, and very rarely
found in one and the same person) it must needs be conceived to be a matter of
very great difficulty, and requiring a very choice and excellent spirit of
discerning, to make a commendable, yea, or a competent choice of men for that
investiture and trust. Yea, himself (...) acknowledges little less then an
utter inconsistencie of respective abilities in one and the same person, for
these so different employments; For here he requires, both Politicians and
Statesmen os fit to be consulted with a suit a Church Government to the Civil
State, and likewise an Assembly of Divines, to square it by, and to the word.
But in as much as whatsoever an Assembly of Divines shall determine in or about
Churh-Government, or other matters of Religion, cannot pass into an Act, Law,
or Statute, but by the superveening of Parliamentarie interest upon their
determinations and there being every whit as great (if not far greater)
abilities in Divinity and knowledge of the Scriptures, requisite to enable men
rightly to discern and judge, whether a Church Government, or other Decision
in matter of Religion, be agreeable to the word of God, as there are to
discourse and make out that in either kind which is agreeable thereunto; yea
and further, it being no ways either Christian or reasonable, that a
Parliament should pass that into an Act, Law, or Statute, as agreeable to the
word of God, and obliege an whole Kingdom under mulcts and penalties to submit
unto it accordingly, which themselves are not able to discern whether it be
indeed agreeable unto the word of God, or no; these three things (I say) duly
considered, evident it is, that it is a matter almost of infinite difficulty,
(and therefore not so obvious to unsanctified persons, and rude multitudes, as
Mr. Prynnes would carry it) to discern or make choice of persons of a due
temper and composition for Parliamentarie operations, Mr. Prynnes supposition
being admitted, viz. that making Laws in matters of Religion, as well as in
civil affairs, is a part of these operations. To set then his comparison
upright, we must state it thus: Suppose Mr. Prynne were of none of the three
Professions he speaks of, neither Lawyer, nor Physician, nor Architect, but
stood in need of the help of them all, having 1. a suite at Law of very great
concernment to him; 2. a dangerous distemper or disease upon his body; 3. an
house to build for his necessary accommodation; and in this posture of
necessities, were necessitated or limited to make choice of three men, but all
of one and the same profession, either all Lawyers, or all Physicians, or all
Architects, to minister unto him in all his respective concernments and
necessities; I believe that under such a constellation of circumstances and
occasions as these, though he be a man of far greater judgment and reason,
then the generality of men are, yet he would not find it so easy a matter to
satisfy himself in the choice of his men within the compass of any one of the
three professions. This is the true state and case of the difficulty of
Parliamentarie Elections, upon Mr. Prynnes supposition of Parliamentarie
interest and power.

4. Suppose yet further, Sect. 58.
that unsanctified persons and rude multitudes had skill enough to elect the
most eminent and ablest men for Parliamentary service; yet who knows not but
that there is somewhat (yea, much) more then knowledge of what is a man's duty,
required to make him willing to do it. To him that knows to do good, and
does it not, to him it is sin (says James) Jam. 4. 17. It is no ways
reasonable to think, that unsanctified persons, and men addicted to sinful
lusts and pleasures, should willingly and by the ducture of their own
inclinations, put a power of making Laws into the hands of such men, who they
know are professed enemies to those lawless ways of theirs, and therefore are
like, being interessed in such a power, to make Laws for the restraint and
punishment of them. That God, when he pleases, may by an extraordinary hand
of Providence, overruled the natures and dispositions of men in this kind, and
serve unfanctified persons in their Parliamentary Elections, as he did the
Syrian host of old, which he led blindfold into the midst of Samaria, 2 King.
6. 20.
when they thought they had been going to Dothan, is not denied; yea, it is
acknowledged, that in grace and mercy to this Nation, he has stretched out
that very hand of Providence we speak of in the choice of many members of the
Honorable Assembly of Parliament; whose perseverance in a faithful discharge
of their employment, declares, that their Election was more from God, then from
men. Therefore that one word of Mr. Prynnes which follows p. 24. viz. That the
choice which your vilest and most unworthy of men have made this Parliament,
may for ever refute this childish reason, the corner stone of your Independent
fabrique fastened together with Independent crotchets, unable to abide the
Test; this one word (I say) is no word either of reason or of truth. An happy
election made by men over-acted by God in the action, does no more prove either
a proportionablenesse of wisdom, or a sutablenesse of affection in such
persons to make such a choice, then that praise which God has ordained, and
which he accordingly draws out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, proves
these babes and sucklings to be endued with a natural strength and ability of
yielding such praise unto God: or then the service which the Ravens did the
Prophet in bringing unto him bread and flesh duly morning and evening 1 King.
17. 6.
, proves that they had a principle of reason and understanding, to know and to
consider the necessities of godly and faithful men; or that such men ought to
renounce their estates and callings, and to depend upon Ravens for their
sustenance. And besides, how does the election of so many members of this
Parliament, who stand by their trust with faithfulness and honor, more
refute; then the election of so many unworthy ones, who have not only turned
their back, but head also upon both, confirm my reason? not to mention so many
elections as have been made both in Queen Mary's days, and many a time before
these, of such members, who made many a Law as agreeable to the Word of God, as
harp is to harrow. Which further shows, of how slender esteem in point of
truth, that assertion of his pa. 23. is: where he says, that those that are
unjit or unable to be Members of Parliament themselves, yet have had wisdom
enough in all ages, and especially at this present, to elect the must eminent
and ablest men for such a service. So that if my pen were not more bashful
then Mr. Prynnes, it would say, that the Reason Defendant is by many degrees
more childish then the Reason Plaintiff: and that this Presbyterian engines
wherewith he makes account to batter my Independent Fabric, are made of
Independent metal, able to do no execution at all. There is not one brick or
tyle in all my Independent Fabric, as yet bruised, cracked or shaken, by all
the hot and loud play of Mr. Prynnes artillery against it. But

5. Sect. 59.
Whereas in further prosecution of this last reason, he argues thus: If the
common people, which neither are, nor can be Parliaments, Emperors, Kings,
Judges, Magistrates, Ministers, have yet a lawful power to make others such,
by their bare election, and to give them such Authority and power as themselves
never actually were, nor can be possessors of; then why by the self same reason
may they not likewise delegate a lawful Ecclesiastical Legislative Authority
in Church affairs to their elected Parliamentary and Synodicall members, which
was never actually in themselves, as well as Mr. Goodwin delegate the power of
determining who should be fit persons to receive the Sacrament, and to become
members of his Independent Congregation, to eight select Substitutes, which was
never actually vested in himself, nor transferible thus to others by any Law of
God, or man? In answer (passing by the Grammatical illegality of the period)

1. That Mr. Goodwin never delegated the power he speaks of, of determining
who, etc. to any Substitutes; but this delegation was made respectively by
those, who had power, (yea happily and duty too) by the Law of God, and power
sufficient by the Law of man, to refer themselves for matter of examination
and trial touching their fitness for the Sacrament, unto persons of competent
abilities for such a Christian service. Mr. Prynnes pen is (I think) the most
unhappie and un-successefull in matters of impeachment and charge, that ever
contested against the misdemeanors of men; it seldom or never lays the
indictment right. Here he charge me with delegating such and such a power to
eight Substitutes; a little after, that I have wilfully, yea and presumptuously
undermined the undoubted privileges of Parliament by the very roots: a little
before, that I scandalously term the Commonaltie of the Land, the vilest and
most unworthy of men: not long before this ( viz. pa. 21.) that I preach but
seldom to my Parishioners: that I receive their tithes: that I gather an
Independent Congregation to my self: that I prescribe a Covenant unto them
before they be admitted members of it: that I preach to these alone, neglecting
my Parishioners, etc. in all which suggestions and charges there is but one and
the same proportion of love and truth.

2. Whereas he supposes that the common people, by their bare election, give
such an Authority and power, to Parliaments, Emperors, Kings, etc. as
themselves never actually were, nor can be possessours of; he does not (I
conceive) speak like a man of his profession; certain I am, that he does not
speak the truth; no, nor yet the thoughts of men of learning and judgment in
the point. For 1. (to reason the case a little in point of truth) if the common
people were not actually possessed of that Authority and power, which by their
election they give to Parliaments, Emperors, Kings, etc. I demand, how, or
after what manner they were possessed of it? For in saying, they were not
ACTVALLY possessed of it, he supposes and grants, that they were some ways or
other possessed of it. No man excludes one special modification from a thing,
but for the gratification of another. Now then if the common people were not
ACTVALLY possessed of that Authority and power which by their election they
give unto Parliaments, Emperors, etc. they were only potentially possessed of
it. For actually and potentially, are opposita; yea and of that kind which they
call opposita immediata. So that whatsoever is had or possessed by any, and not
actually, must of necessiue be had or possessed potentially, and potentially
only (at least in respect of an actual possession.) Now then I reason first
thus: If the people have that power though not actually, yet potentially, which
by their election they give to Parliaments, Emperors, Kings, etc. then are
they capable of it even actually also; which yet Mr. Prynne here plainly
denies, in these words, Nor can be possessours of. The consequence is
undeniable: For whatsoever any entire subject has, or is, potentia; there is
no impossibility but that it may have, or be, actu, or actually. So that Mr.
Prynne is here upon the matter in an absolute contradiction. For he supposes
that the people may have that Authority or power potentially, which yet he
says is unpossible they should ever have actually. Again, I would willingly
for the bettering of mine understanding, know and learn, how any person, or
other Agent whatsoever, can actually confer that upon, or communicate that
unto another, which it has only potentially it self. Water, whilst it is
actually cold, and only potentially hot, cannot heat that which is put into
it. Nor can a man that is actually ignorant of such or such a truth, and
potentially only knowing it, actually communicate or impart the knowledge
thereof unto another, by virtue of that potentiall knowledge which he has. No
more can a people that is only potentially possessed of any Authority or
power, actually give or confer it upon any, whether Parliaments, Emperors,
Kings, etc. The ground of all such consequences as these, is that common
principle or maxim in reason: Modus operandi sequitur modum essendi. Things
that have but a weak or imperfect being themselves, cannot give strength or
perfection of being unto others. But had Mr. Prynne said the body of a Nation
have that authority really, vertually, eminently, and collectively, which they
cannot have formally, distributively, and exemptively; I should have had the
less to say unto him.

For the judgment of men learned in matters of this concernment; he that shall
please to read the Discourse of Christophorus Besoldus, entitled, Dissertatio
Politico-Juridica de Majestate in genere, etc. shall find a little Jurie of
Lawyers joining with him in the verdict of his judgment upon the case; the
tenor whereof is, that there is not only an Authority or power, but (that
which is somewhat more) a majesty also in the people, which is coevall with
the Republique or commonwealth it self; and which continues as long as the
body thereof remains, yea and stands firm under all vacancies of Personal
Empire, and all alterations and changes of Government: in which respect he
says it may be called the foundation or groundwork of the Commonwealth. This
majesty in the people he calls, Real; that in the King or chief Ruler,
Personal: this he says, still falls and expires with the death of the person
invesred with it; and returns to the people, or commonwealth. Yea and adds,
that the people in making or setting up a King over them, transfer only a
power of administering, not of constituting the commonwealth. With more to like
effect Eaque (majestas) (...) quae in constanenda) and personalem, (quae in
administranda seu gubernanda Republica consistit) dividi videtur. Et meat
Majestas Realis seu Imper^, Republicae est coaeva; quamdiu corpus ejus durat,
per manet: and etiam sub inter regnis and alterationibus persistit: quam ideo
fundamentum Republicae possu^^ are. Personalis conci^^ cum persona, and ad
Rempublicam redit. Hujus majestatis (...) etiam post (...) Legem, populum
Romanum aliquam retinuesse dicitur majestatem. 4. (...) c. l. 7. (...) maj
statem nostram. F. de captiv. and postium. l. 1. (...) Majestatem publica ad L.
Iulia^ majest. Lex namque Regia de personalis (...) is translatione intell
g^debet: ego in tract. de monarchia cap. 4. number 4. ac (...) per eam populus
potestatem administrationis, non constitutionis. Et constat ex l. 2 1. (...)
administrationem Re publicae, non aliqu^d ultra, Imperatori datum esse.
Christoph. (...) Dess^^ Politico-(...) de Majestate, etc. Sect. 1. p. 5.
Therefore the opinion of this man with his Associates clearly is, that the
people have Really or actually, that Authority or power which by their election
they transfer upon, or derive unto their Rulers and Governors.

3. ( And lastly, for this) whereas he affirms, that such a power, as he
supposes to have been delegated by me to eight Substitutes, is not transcrible
to others by any Law of God or man; and yet demands, Why the common people may
not as well delegate a Lawful Ecclesiastical legislative Authority in
Church-affaires unto their elected Parliamentarie and Synodall members, as I
delegate such a power; I answer and confess, that they may every whit as well
(and no whit better) delegate such an Authority to such their members, as I
delegate such a power to my Substitutes.

6. Whereas in prosecution of his last argument, Sect. 60.
he further argues and interrogates thus; Why may not a man bring an
Ecclesiastical or spiritual extraction out of a secular root, as well as a
Regal, Magisteriall, Parliamentall, Ministerial extraction out of a mere
popular or servile root? or the best strong waters out of the vilest lees? the
richest mineralls out of the coursest earth? the most Orient pearls, out of
the basest Oysters? I answer,

1. That no Regal, Magisteriall, Parliamentall, Ministerial extraction can be
made out of a mere servile root. A people merely servile, can have no
liberty or power to appoint or choose unto themselves either Kings, Masters,
Parliaments, or Ministers. Therefore Mr. Prynnes Question very truly imports,
that the one extraction may ^s well be made, as the other; but it no ways
proves a possibility of either.

2. There is a plain reason, why and how a Regal, Magisteriall, Parliamentall
extraction may be made out of a popular root: but there is a loud reclamation
in reason and Religion both, against a possibility of making a spiritual
extraction out of a secular root. Regal, Magisteriall, Parliamentall
extractions, are in their respective natures and tendencies, means proportioned
to the civil and temporal ends, or good of the people; and God having endued
men, (I mean the common sort or generality of men, the people) with wisdom
and understanding to accommodate and provide for themselves in such things as
these, has given them power accordingly to make use of such principles and
endowments in a regular way, for the accomplishment and obtaining of such ends.
Now civil Rule and Government being a natural, proper, and direct means,
whereby a good society or community of men may best obtain a civil or
politic good, viz. a safe, just, and peaceable living and conversing together
in the world; God therefore has given them a liberty and power to contrive
and cast themselves into what form of Government they should judge most
conducible to such ends. Upon which indulgence or grant from Heaven, they have
a lawful power by consent among themselves to elect and choose whom they please
to govern them, and that upon such terms, as they conceive most agreeable to
those ends. And yet even in this Government it self, one community or
corporation of men have no right or lawfulness of power, to choose or appoint
either Government, or Governors over another: least of all has any community,
consisting of men altogether uncivil, ignorant, and unexperienced in matters
of Government, any lawfulness of power to appoint either Rule or Rulers over
other Societies, whose members generally are of a better accomplishment, for
civilitie, and parts of wisdom, learning, and understanding; But all societies
of men since the dissolution of the Judaicall polity, are left free by God and
nature, to set over themselves what Government and Governors they shall judge
of best accommodation, for their temporal safety and peace. But now in
spiritual things, and matters of Religion, the case is far otherwise;
differing as much from the former, as the Heavens from the Earth. God has not
endued the generality of men with spiritual wisdom and understanding, nor
with the knowledge of those things which are of a supernatural concernment
unto them; and consequently has not invested them with any power of casting
themselves into what form of Government they please in respect of these, nor
of choosing whom they please to rule over them, no nor yet of appointing upon
what terms they will be governed in these. The natural man (says the
Scripture) perceives not (or, receives not) the things of the Spirit of God;
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Now certain it is, that the far greater
part of men in every State Politic or Kingdom, are natural men, and
consequently perceive not the things of the Spirit of God. Many are called,
(says our Savior) but few chosen. And 2. as certain it is, that God does not
interesse or invest any man or men, with a power of interposing in such things,
which are not of their cognizance, and whereof they have no knowledge or
perceivance. Much less 3. has he given a power to natural men who perceive
not the things of the Spirit of God, to appoint Rulers and Governors in these,
over men that are spiritual, and which do perceive them. This were to give a
power unto the blind, to lead not the blind only, but even the seeing also.
Nay, 4. and lastly, God has not given unto spiritual men themselves any power
to nominate or choose men, to make any new Laws or Articles in matters of
Religion, Worship, Church Government, etc. but only to administer, execute and
teach those, which are already ordained and established by God himself, as has
been proved already. Thus then we see there is reason enough and to spare, why
such a spiritual extraction as the two Brethren speak of, cannot be made out
of a secular root; though a Regal, Magisteriall, Parliamentall extraction,
may well be made out of a popular root. But

3. Whereas Mr. Prynne supposes that a Ministerial Extraction (as he calls
it) is, or may be made out of a mere popular or servile root, this
supposition is not made without opposition to the truth. For no people or men,
merely such, that is, as they are simply people or men, have any power
delegated unto them by God or by Christ, to set a Minister or Pastor over them;
neither can they as merely such, by any call, election, or ordination
whatsoever, confer a Pastoral office or dignity upon any man. The reason
is, because it is an essential property or part of the Pastoral office, to
feed, rule, and govern a flock of Christ's sheep Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
, (I mean a Society, or company of such persons, who in the judgment of
charity are to be reputed such) and to administer the seals of the Covenant
ordinarily unto them, etc. Now no company of men, merely and simply as men,
have any power to invest any man, with any authoritative power to perform
either of those administrations. One company or society of men however
qualified, cannot derive any Authoritative power upon any man, to perform the
office of a Pastor to another society of men. Therefore except that company of
men, which calls and chooses a person into the place or office of a Pastor (as
it supposes) be such a flock of Christ as was expressed, their act in so
calling and choosing, is but a nullitie; the person called has indeed and in
truth no Pastoral investiture upon him by virtue of such a call. As for
example; Suppose a company of ignorantly profane, and desperately debauched
men, should make choice of a man of worth, to be a Pastor unto them; the man
thus called and chosen, has no authority or power hereby, either to feed or
govern any flock of Christ, (no, not so much as any flock of Christ in
appearance) or to administer the seals of the Covenant unto any; and
consequently is made no Pastor thereby.

Or if Mr. Prynnes meaning be, that a root merely popular, that is, any company
of people whatsoever, may lawfully call or choose a man to preach the Gospel
unto them, and in this sense be said to make a Minister; I answer; that the man
thus called, is no more a Minister then he was before; nor has he any more
Authoritative power to preach the Gospel unto them, by virtue of such a call,
then he had without it; only he has thereby a greater opportunity, and a
more special invitation from the providence of God to preach the Gospel unto
those who so call him, then unto others. Therefore in this case there is no
ministerial extraction made out of a mere popular root.

4. Whereas he speaks parables, Sect. 61.
and further demands, Why not a spiritual extraction out of a secular root,
as well as the best strong waters out of the vilest lees? the richest mineralls
out of the coursest earth? the most Orient pearls out of the basest Oysters? I
answer,

1. That I know not by what rule of true speaking, Mr. Prynne either calls
those the basest oysters, out of which the most orient pearls, or that the
coursest earth, out of which the richest mineralls, or those the vilest lees,
out of which the best strong waters are extracted. That expression of the Poet,
-- Veios habitante Camillo, -- (...) Roma fuit, I never yet heard censured by
any. Noble births and inhabitants, ennoble Cities and Countries. Mat. 2. 6.
And thou Bethlehem in the land of Juda, art not the least among the Princes of
Juda: for out of thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my people Israel.
By the consent of this principle, which has testimony both from God and men,
those are not the basest, but the noblest oysters, which give birth and
breeding to the most ortent pearls; nor that the coursest, but the finest and
best earth, that yields the richest mineralls; nor those the vilest, but the
most generous and best deserving lees, which gratify their Distillator with
the best strong waters. But

2. (Not to impose any tax upon an acyrologie) there is this plain reason, why
no spiritual extraction out of a secular root, though all those other
extractions may be made out of those respective roots appropriated unto them:
because a man may very possibly find a thing where it is; but it is unpossible
for him to find it where it is not. A man may very easily and very lawfully
extract five shillings out of his purse that has five shillings, or more, in
it: but he that shall undertake to make an extraction of five shillings, out of
a purse that is empty, must Acheronta movere, make himself a debtor to the
black art. The pearl is in the oyster, and the mineral in the Earth, and the
strong water in the lee: and therefore it is no great matter for art and nature
joining together, partly by allurement and invitation, partly by a stronger and
more forcible hand, to sequester all these from their native and proper
elements, and to draw them out of their dark and secret habitations. Nor is it
any ways unlawful thus to practice upon them, because God has not served any
prohibition upon men, to inhibite any such extractions or separations, either
in a natural or artificial way. But there is no such spiritual extraction as
the two Brethren speak of, in their secular root: there is no Ecclesiastical
Legislative power in matters of Religion, worship, and Church Government,
neither formally, nor eminently, in unsanctified persons, rude multitudes, men
ignorant of God, etc. therefore no such power can by any extraction whatsoever,
proceed or be drawn out of these. There is indeed a lawfulness of power in
them (if they had a principle to incline them to the due exercise of it) to
assist the servants of God against violence and wrong, to encourage and
countenance them in well-doing, to admonish and reprove them for doing any such
evil which falls within the compass of their cogniance; yea, there is a
lawfulness of power in them, if they have not given it out of their hands
already, and invested others with it, to make Laws for the regulation of the
Saints themselves, in all their civil affairs, and to restrain them by
mulcts and penalties from all such courses, actions, and practices, which are
properly and in their natures disserviceable unto the common peace, and
weal-publick: And all such power as this, they may lawfully devise, and demise
unto persons meet for the manage and exercise of it; because in this case they
do but give of their own; yea, they give it in a regular and rational way;
upon which terms God has given unto every man a liberty or power to do with
his own what he pleases Mat. 20. 15.
. But the persons we now speak of, never had a power of regulating the Saints
in their Religious or Spiritual affairs; or of compelling them under temporal
mulcts and penalties, to order themselves in the worship and service of God, as
they pleased, or to preach and teach only such points and doctrines amongst
them, as they should think well of. Therefore how they should convey or make
over any such power as this unto others, by a Title or Conveyance good in Law,
I desire Mr. Prynne to consider. If his desire had been to have paralleld the
Brethrens spiritual extraction out of a Secular root, with natural
comparisons or similitudes, he should have done it not with those which he
has made use of in this kind, or the like; for we have showed a manifest and
main disproportion in them; but with these, and such as these which follow: Why
not a spiritual extraction out of a Secular root, as well as a man out of a
mouse, or of water out of a flint, or of the element of fire out of the midst
of the Sea? He might rationally enough have argued and concluded here; Why not
the one as well as the other? But

5. Whereas his Margin demands, Why not a spiritual extraction out of a
secular root, as well as himself extracts many spiritual doctrines out of
Gamaliels Secular speech? My answer is, that he has made this demand at the
peril of his own reputation in what he had said but in the former page, where
he supposes, that God powered out a spirit of prophecy upon Gamaliel, as he
had formerly done upon Balaam and Saul, If Gamaliel spoke as the spirit of
prophecy which was poured out upon him, gave him utterance, his speech was not
secular, but spiritual and divine. And

2. Suppose there was no spirit of prophecy upon Gamaliel, when he spoke that
speech, from which I extract my Doctrines; yet the speech it self, being for
the matter, tenor, and substance of it, nothing but what is fully agreeable to
the undoubted word of God elsewhere, (which I clearly demonstrate in the
particular doctrine handled in those Sermons) it is not to be reputed Secular,
though the person speaking it had been Secular; but Divine, because the matter
of it being a truth of Divine revelation elsewhere, is Divine. This saying,
Jesus Christ is the Sanne of God, or the holy One of God, is not, therefore a
Devilish saying, because the Devil spoke it Mark. 1. 24. Luke 4. 34.
, but an holy or divine saying or sentence, because the truth contained in it,
which is the matter of it, is from God.

But 3. the person speaking it was Ecclesiastical, a Doctor of the Law, Acts
5. 34.

4. And lastly, it was about matters of the Church, and so Ecclesiastical also.

6. Whereas in the context of the same margin, he calls my principal
Argument ( as he calls it) drawn from the non-jurisdiction of the seven
Churches of Asia one over another, a mere Independencie, giving this for the
ground or reason of this so severe an award, that these Churches were under
different civil Dominions, and not members of the selfsame Christian
Republicke; I answer,

1. That why he should call this my principal Argument, which I do not so
much as mention, nor make any argument at all (as least in those Sermons
against which his pen rises up in this discourse with so much indignation) I
am behind hand in my understanding. I suppose he would willingly make that my
principal Argument, from the dint whereof he knows how to contrive some
plausible evasion and escape. It was an wholesome admonition of Austin long
since, Procliviores sumus quaerere potius, quid contra ea respondeamus, -- quae
nostro objiciuntur errori, quam intendere ea quae sunt salubria, ut careamus
errore.
That we are very inclinable and prone, rather to seek out how to answer or
evade those things which are brought to refute our error, then to mind that
which is wholesome, that so we may be free from error. But

2. If that be a reason, why the Churches in Asia had no jurisdiction one over
another, because they were not members of the selfsame Christian Republicke;
then neither had the Church of Jerusalem either divisim, and by it self, nor
yet conjuncti^^ with others, any power of jurisdiction over the Church of
Antioch. For neither were their Churches members of the selfsame Christian
Republicke, no nor yet any other Churches in the Apostles days, there being
then no Christian Republic in the world.

3. Neither can I well understand how the seven Churches of Asia should be
under different civil dominions, when as one and the same man had power to
command that all the world should be taxed, Luke 2. 1. Certain I am, that Mr.
Pryn does not befriend either his own exception, or my understanding so far,
as to inform what these different civil dominions were; or under what or whose
dominion every or any of these Churches did respectively consist. The
consideration whereof moderately inclines me to conceive, that he put this
piece of his answer to the making, and affirmed it only de been esse, that the
seven Churches of Asia were under different civil dominions. Is it not much
more probable, that the Churches of Jerusalem and Antioch, which yet by the
Assertors of Presbytery, are generally and with importune confidence made
confederate in Classique association, were under different civil dominions?
Considering, 1. that their Cities were two hundred miles distant one from the
other (a distance greater almost by an hundred miles, then any two of the seven
Churches of Asia stood one from the other, as will appear presently.) And 2.
that Judea was an entire Province by it self, and Luke 3. 1. is said to have
been under the government of Pontias Pilate. So that subjection under different
civil dominions, is not like to have been any obstruction in the way of those
Asian Churches, to impede their Presbyteriall conjunction, had they felt the
weight either of divine institution, or of any Christian accommodation of their
respective affairs, lying upon them for the engaging themselves in it.

4. And lastly, some that seem to have perfect knowledge of those parts where
these seven Churches with their respective Cities stood, affirm that some of
them were not situate above twelve miles distance from some others of them; and
that the greatest distance between any two of them, was not above an hundred
and twenty miles, which is not the one half of the distance between many
Churches in this Kingdom. So that had the Presbyteriall combination or
subordination of Churches been an ordinance of God, there is little question to
be made, but that these Churches with their respective Angels, especially under
such an opportunity, would have subjected themselves unto the will of God in
this behalf, and not have remained single and uncombined in their government,
as they did.

If it be objected, they were times of persecution; we answer, So were they
afterward, when (as men of the Presbyterian way suppose) they had Presbyteries;
and after that when they had Episcopal government. This has been the case of
the Protestants in France, where they now have, and constantly have had, a
Presbyterial government. So it is of the Papists in England, where they have
had ever since the Reformation, a Papal jurisdiction. And to speak to the
particular, so was it a time of persecution against the Presbyteriall
government in Queen Elizabeth's time, and yet it was then exercised in several
places of this Kingdom. See Rogers Preface to his Analysis of the Articles of
Religion.

6. Whereas he seems to require a reprievement for his opinion, only till
Independents can show him better grounds against it, Sect. 64.
then any yet produced; and inform him why our representative Church and State
should not of right enjoy and exercise as great or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
over all particular persons and Churches, who are members of our Church and
Realm, as any Independent Minister or Congregation challenge or usurp unto
themselves over their own members, etc. My answer is,

1. That now I trust he will willingly surrender his opinion into the hand of
Justice, and plead no further for it. First, because though happily there have
been no better grounds produced in this discourse against it, then have been
formerly in others; yet I cannot but conceive and judge, that better arguments
and grounds against it, have been here produced, then Mr. Prynne has had
either the happiness or opportunity to meet with elsewhere; especially
considering partly the frequencie of his complaint, that Independents have
given little or no account of their way in writing; partly that it is a thing
hardly consistent with Mr. Pryns abilities, being sweetened with so much
ingenuity, not to see and acknowledge the delinquencie of such an opinion, in
whose condemnation so full a Jury of the first borne principles as well of
Reason as Religion, as has been here impannelled, do conspire. And secondly,
because Information has been given him again and again (and more particularly
in the eighth Section, page 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. of this discourse) why our whole
representative Church and State; (though I do not clearly understand what he
means by our Representative Church in this place) but why the Parliament and
Synod should not exercise as great or greater Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over
particular persons and Churches within the Realm, etc. as an Independent
Minister AND Congregation (for his disjunctive particle, Or, turns him quite
out of the way of his question) may exercise over their own members. But

2. Whereas he states the question thus: Whether our Representative Church and
State, may not exercise as great or greater Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over,
etc. as an Independent Minister or Congregation challenge or USURP unto
themselves over their own members; My answer is, that doubtless they may; one
unrighteous or unjust thing, may be as lawfully done as another every whit as
unrighteous and unjust as it. For Mr. Prynne may please to take knowledge, that
Independent Ministers and Congregations do not usurp any power at all unto
themselves over their own members, that is, over themselves; but only
administer that regular and lawful power over and amongst themselves, which
every of their respective members have mutually and freely given one to
another, and every particular member unto the whole body, over it self, and
that as well for its own benefit and behoof, as for the benefit and good of
the whole body. And lawful (questionless) it is (yea matter of duty) for
every man to give such a power of, or over himself, unto others, which he has
sufficient ground either from the Scriptures, or reason otherwise, to conceive
and expect that it will be administered for his good; especially having ground
to conceive yet further, that this act of his, in thus submitting himself unto
others, will according to the ordinary course of Providence and experience, be
of Christian accommodation unto others also for their good. Submitting your
selves one to another in the fear of God, Ephesians. 5. 21. which submission
doubtless ought so far to extend, as in reason it may accommodate, or
promote the edification and spiritual good, both of the persons by whom, and
to whom it is made. And by the same reason it is no usurpation in those, to
whom the submission is made, to administer or exercise that power which is
committed unto them, according to the regular intentions of those who have
given it: yea, such an administration of it as this, is so far from being an
usurpation, that a non-administration of it upon such terms, would be a very
unchristian prevarication both with God and men. Therefore

7. (And lastly, to conclude) Whereas Mr. Prynne referres me to the High Court
of Parliament, either to crave their pardon, or to undergo their justice, for
my Anti-parliamentarie passages, etc. I shall request no other favor of this
most honorable Court, then that I may stand right and straight in their
opinions, and be respited from censure only so long, till my Accuser shall
make good his charge against me by sufficient evidence and proof; and
substantially answer and refute this my Apologeticall plea. When the light of
this day of darkness shall dawne upon me, I shall willingly submit unto his
demand, and either crave the Pardon of that Honorable and High Court he speaks
of, or otherwise undergo their justice: in the mean season I presume he will
subscribe my Petition for a reprieve, as just and equal. And if the result of
his more serious thoughts shall be, to resume and prosecute the bill of
endictment which he has preferred against me; my earnest request unto him is,
as well for his own ease and conveniencie, as mine, 1. That he will not argue
from pluralities, but pertinences of Scriptures; and show how, and wherein
every Text alleged, according to the genuine sense and rational dependence of
the words, stands by him in what he intends to prove from it. And 2. that he
will not place the strength and confidence of his cause, either in humane
Authorities, humane practices, statutes or ordinances of men, excepting only
such, whose truth, justice and equity he shall first demonstrate either from
the word of God; and that not by Texts barely cited, chapter and verse, though
in never such abundance; but thoroughly argued, and examined upon the matter in
question; or else from sound principles of reason and equity, managed in a
clear and rational way, and so drawn up to a fair compliance with the
conclusion, seeking testimony and proof from them. For otherwise, what
sayings, doings, Laws or Ordinances of men soever shall be produced or
insisted upon, for confirmation or proof of any thing; it will be sufficient
to Answer, that men as wise, as just, as virtuous as they, have both said and
done, things neither true nor meet to be done; and have made Laws and Statutes
of no better constitution; yea, and have been of a contrary opinion to Mr.
Prynne in the particular questioned: which made Augustine often decline that
way of reasoning, as we read in his 48. Epistle, and elsewhere. Thirdly and
lastly, that he would put less vinegar and gall into his ink, and more wool
or cotton: or (in the Apostles words, Ephesians. 4. 31.) that all bitterness and
evil speaking be put away, and that we follow the truth in love, and language
that becomes Brethren.

This treble request I make unto him with much earnestness and importunity
upon the supposition aforesaid, because I had much rather yield, might I do it
upon honorable and Christian terms, then to be put to take the field yet
again. As for any opinion held by me, when once I perceive that it will not
make knowledge, I am ready to give the right hand of fellowship unto any man in
casting it out as unsavory salt upon the dunghill. I never yet thought my self
(nor I hope ever shall) such a debtor unto error, as to sacrifice my time,
pains, occasions, credit, conscience, upon the service of it. But unto Mr.
Prynne I shall willingly acknowledge my self a debtor, if he will either acquit
me of my crime by silence, or deliver me from my error by his pen.

FINIS.

