THE DECLARATION OF Colonel Goring. To the house of COMMONS, Together with Mr
Henry Piercies LETTER, to the EARL of Northumberland. And Presented to the
House of COMMONS the 16 of June, 1641.

Printed 1641.

The Declaration of Colonel GORING, to the house of COMMONS. Together with
Master HENRY PIERCIES Letter to the Earl of Northumberland, presented to the
Parliament the 16 of June 1641.
WHat with my own innocence, and the violence I hear is against me, I find my
self much distracted, I will not ask your Counsel, because it may bring
prejudice upon you, but I will with all faithfulness and truth tell you what
my part has bin, that at least it may be cleared by you, whatsoever becomes of
me.

When there was 50000 li. designed by the Parliament for the English Army,
there was as I take it, a sudden demand by the Scots at the same time of 25000
li. of which there was 15000 li. ready, this they pressed with much necessity,
as the Parliament, after an order made, did think it fit for them to deduct
10000 pound out of the 50000 li. formerly granted, upon which, the soldiers in
our host were much scandalized, amongst which I was one, and sitting by Wilmot,
and Ashburnham, Wilmot stood up and told them, if that of the Scots would
procure money, he doubted not but the Officers of the English Army might
easily do the like, but the first order was reversed, notwithstanding, and
10000 li. given to the Scots, this was the cause of many discourses, of dislike
amongst us, and came to this purpose, that they were dis-obliged by the
Parliament, and not by the King, this being said often to one another, we did
resolve that Wilmot, Ashburnham; Pollard, Oneale, and my self, to make some
expressions of serving the King, in all things he would command us, that were
honorable for him and us, being likewise agreeing unto the fundamental Laws
of the Kingdom, that so far we would live and dye with him, this agreed upon
with us, not having any communication with others, that I am coupled now
withal, and further by their joint consent, I was to tell his Majesty thus much
from them, but withal I was to order the matter so, as the King might
apprehend this, as a great service done unto him, at this time, when his
affairs were in so ill a condition, and they were most confident, that they
would engage the whole Army thus far, but further they would undertake nothing,
because they would neither infringe the liberties of the subjects, or destroy
the Laws, to which I and every one consented, and having their sense, I drew
the heads up in a paper, to the which they all approved, when I read it, and
then we did by an oath promise one an other to be constant and secret in all
this, and did all of us take that oath together, then I said, Well Sirs, I must
now be informed what your particular desires are, that so I may be the better
able to serve you, which they were pleased to do, and so I did very faithfully
serve them therein, as far as I could: this is the truth, and all the truth
upon my soul. In particular discourses, after that, we did fall upon the
petitioning to the King and Parliament for moneys, there being so great
arreares due to us, and so much delays made in the procuring of them, but that
was never done.

1. Concerning the Bishops functions and votes.

2. The not disbanding of the Irish Army, until the Scots were disbanded too.

3. The endeavoring to settle his Majesty's Revenue to that proportion it was
formerly.

And it was resolved by us all, if the King should require our assistance in
those things, that as far as we could we might contribute thereunto, without
breaking the Laws of the Kingdom. And in case the King should be denied those
things, being put to them, we would not fly from him, al these persons did act
and concur in this as well as I, this being all imparted to the King by me from
them, I perceived he had bin treated with by others, concerning some things of
our Army, which not agreed with what was purposed by me, but inclined a way
more sharp, and high, not having limits either of honor or Law, I told the
King he might be pleased to consider with himself what should be done, which
way it was fit for him to hearken unto, for us we were resolved not to depart
from our grounds, we should not be displeased, whosoever they were, but the
particular of the designs, or the persons we desired not to know, though it
was no hard matter to guess at them. In the end I beleev the danger of the
one, the justice of the other made the King tell me he would leave all thoughts
of other propositions but ours, as things not practiceable, but desired,
notwithstanding that Goring and Iermin, who were acquainted with the other
proceedings should be admitted amongst us, I told him I, though the other
Gentry would never consent to it, but I would propose it, which I did, and we
were all much against it; but the King did press it so much, as at the last it
was consented unto, and Goring and Iermin came to my Chamber, there I was
appointed to tell them after they had sworn to secrecy, what we had proposed,
which I did, but before I go into the debate of the way, I must tell you
Iermin and Goring were very earnest Suckling should be admitted, which we did
all decline, and was desired by all our men to be resolute in it, which I was,
and gave many Reasons: whereupon Master Goring made answer, he was enggaed with
Suckling, his being employed in the Army, but for his meeting with us, they
were contented to pass it by. Then we took up again the ways which were
proposed, which took great debate, and theirs differed from ours in violence
and height, which we all protested against, and parted, disagreeing totally,
yet remitted it to be spoken of by me and Iermin to the King, which we both
did, and the King constant to his former Resolutions told him, these ways were
all vain and foolish, and would think of them no more, I omit one thing of
Master Goring, he desired to know how the chief Commanders were to be disposed
off, for if he had not a condition worthy of him, he would not go along with
us, we made answer that no body thought of that, we intended if we were sent
down to go all in the same capacity we were in, he did not like that by no
means, and that did work so with Master Chidley, that there was a Letter sent
by some of the Co^manders to make him Lieutenant General, and when he had
ordered this matter at London, and Master Chidley had his instructions, then
did he go to Portsmouth, pretending to be absent when this was a working, we
all desired my Lord of Essex and Holland, that if there were a General at
Newcastle, they were pleased to give out a report that I should be General of
the Horse, but I protest neither to the King nor any else, did I ever so much
as think of it, my Lord of Holland was made General, and so all things were
laid aside, and this is the truth and all the truth I knew of these
proceedings, and this I will and do protest unto you upon my faith, and
Willmat, Ashburnham, and Oneale, have at several times confessed and sworn, I
never said any thing in the business, they did not every one agree unto and
would justify: this Relation I sent you rather to inform you of the truth of
the matter, that you may the better know to do me good, but I should think my
self very unhappy to be made a betrayer of any body: what concerned the Tower
or any thing else. I never meddled withal, nor never spoke with Goring, but
that night before them all, and I said nothing but what was consented unto by
any party, I, never spoke one word with Suckling, Carnarvan, Davenant, or any
other creature, me think, if my friends and kindred knew the truth and justice
of the matter, it were no hard matter to serve me in some measure.

Colonel Gorings Declaration on his Examination, concerning the late
Conspiracy against the State.
HAving been told there was an intention to unite the forces of our Army, and
to put it into a posture of being able, if not of purpose of being willing to
interpose in the proceedings of Parliaments,

I hearkend to the propositions of soliciting a redress, for the miseries of
the Soldiers being the first step to this, in respect of the present
necessities of it, not any future consequence of trouble to those, that were to
procure our relief.

But lest the manner of asking this or the effects of it, being obtained, might
be less just, then the thing it self which was desired, and I might be
involved their crime that had, further ends, perhaps then merely the redress
of our Armies grievances: I thought it not unsafe to take some witness of mine
integrity along with me, and spoke to a noble Lord the very same day when I
assured him there were some Officers of the Army, that were least thought on,
that had greatest zeal to the proceedings of this House, and I thought there
would be an occasion to let him know more of it: within few days after, this
Master Iermin and I being admitted into a Consultation, where we were tied to
secrecy by an Oath, in the company of those Gentlemen I have named in my
Depositions, where their purpose was declared to us in some Propositions, which
were to this effect.

1. First putting our Army into a posture to serve the King.

2. Secondly sending a Declaration to the Parliament, containing that no Act of
Parliament should be made contrary to any former Act, which was expressed that
Episcopacie would be kept up as it is now.

3. Thirdly, and that the Kings Revenue should be established.

This I thought unlawful for our undertakings, since I thought they intended
to interpose the determinations of this House, and it belongs to an Army, to
maintain, not to contrive Acts of State.

I objected therefore against the propositions, and pressed more the follies
and difficulties, then the illegalities of them, not only because I thought
reason a greater Argument with them then Conscience, but because I am so
unhappy of the two, 2 be thought a worse Commonwealth's man, then a Soldier,
and in that quality could procure most credit to my words, and I endeavored to
show them that as the Design would be impious, if their most desperate
Counsel had been followed, so it would have been the weakest that ever was
undertaken, if it were admitted.

And whereas I am said to have a part in this violent Counsel; till the day
before this meeting, I never heard word of it, and knew not when I came to the
Room, whether theirs were not the same with the other, this they may witness
for me, and that I declared, that I would have to do with neither, and that I
expressed a contempt in our meeting in that manner, but I rely upon the
Testimony of some noble Lords of his Majesty's Counsel, and others, how I
protested against all those violent Counsels, even in the birth of them, and
with what pity I looked toward the person of his Majesty, and the whole
Kingdom in this business.

I appeal also to them, and to some members of this House, what my carriage
was toward these Gentlemen, that were embarked in these undertakings, intending
rather to prevent a mischief, by abandoning their Counsels, then to ruin
them, by disclosing them: but mistake me not, for had I known of any former
plot proceeded in, that would endanger or disturb the quiet of his Majesty, or
the peace of this Kingdom, I should not have been contented with declaring
mine own innocence, nor have stayed till the command of this House, or an Oath
extorted from me, a discovery: but by a hasty open Declaration, have broken the
bonds of amity, and friendship, and all former ties, to preserve the duty of a
Subject, and as freely exposed the knowledge of all to the view of the world,
as I have been tender in publishing these purposes, even to my nearest
friends, which had weight enough to crush nothing but the undertakers of it,
and certainly if they had stayed where I left them, there was no conclusion at
all. It appears there were two several intentions digested by others, before
they were Communicated to me; And I knew not whether my harkning to them were a
fault, but I am sure it was no misfortune.

Finis.

