The Right Way: OR A DIRECTION FOR Obtaining good Success in a weighty
Enterprise. Set out in A SERMON PREACHED on the 12th of September, 1648. BEFORE
THE LORDS On a day of Humiliation for a Blessing on a TREATY between His
MAJESTY'S and the PARLIAMENTS Commissioners.

By W. Gouge.

JER. 4. 21. (...)

(...),

Gal. 5. 15. (...),

Greg. Naz. Orat. 14. 6. Quid est Pax? De incertis non judicat: incognita non
confirmat, etc.

Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 147. London, Printed by A. Miller for Joshua Kirton at the
Sign of the Spread-Eagle in Paul's Churchyard, M. DC. XL VIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HOUSE OF PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
THE Occasion of your appointing this Sermon to be preached, The weightinesse
of this work is declared in the Sermon following page 32, 34.
was a Matter of no small moment. It is thus expressed in Your own Order: A day
appointed to be observed by both Houses of PARLIAMENT, for public Humiliation,
and to seek God earnestly for a Blessing upon the Treaty.

The End of this Treaty, is to close up and heal the breaches of this Land.

A pious End!

So great is the Breach, as it gives great and just cause of deep Humiliation,
I may in this case apply the Prophets lamentation for Jerusalem ( Lament. 2.
13.) unto England. What thing shall I take to witness for thee? What thing
shall I liken to thee, O England? For thy Breach is great, like the Sea.

Not without cause therefore have You set apart this day for public
Humiliation. The grounds of this difficulty are set down, p. 34, 35 Virg. AEn.
lib. 6.


To make up this Breach is a matter of great difficulty.

Hic labor, hoc opus est --

It is beyond the wit and power of man to do it.

Good reason therefore there was to appoint the day of Humilation to be a day
also to seek God earnestly for a blessing upon the Treaty.

If the breach be not stopped by a Treaty, by what may it be stopped?

Can it be hoped that it should be done by sword? The Law is dumb while the
Sword is drawn. Silent leges inter arma. Cic pre Milon.


Will Conquerours yield to an Accommodation? Having the staff in their own
hands, Will they not stand upon their own terms?

By force men may for a time be kept in awe. Malus est cust^s diuturnitatis,
metus. Cic. Offic l. 2.
But that AWE is no good keeper of a lasting peace.

Right Honorable, It will be Your Wisdom and Glory, Hominis gratia Numinis
reverentia non est violenda.
to help on this Treaty, Usque ad aras: so far as may stand with piety and
verity: with safety and security of Church and State.

That under GOD, Ye may be happy instruments hereof, two things are requisite,
both on Your own behalf and also on the behalf of all the People of this
Land, whom a good issue of the Treaty does concern.

1. Sound Repentance.

2. Hearty Prayer.

Our sins, our sins have made the breach. Our Repentance must make to the
repairing of the breach. The people repented them for Benjamin, because the
LORD had made a breach in the tribes of Israel, Judge. 21. 15.

Their Cause was just, De victoria sibi non tantum grotulantur, quam de clade
tribus Israeleticae conqueruntur.
yet they repented when they saw how great the breach was. They did not so much
glory in their victory, as grieve for the destruction of a Tribe in Israel.

And is not the breach made among us a great breach? Wolph. Sermon. 91. in Judge.
21.
Surely it is great like the Sea. Who can heal thee, O England?

He, Quise opponit irae Dei saevienti. Hier. Com. in Esa. 58.
and He only, who may most properly be called, The repairer of the breach. To
him therefore let us pray and say, O GOD, thou have cast us off: thou have
scattered us: Frustra operarius omnia moliretur extrinsecus, nisi Creator
intrinsecus latenter operaretur, etc.
thou have been displeased: O turn thy self to us again. Thou have made the
earth to tremble: Thou have broken it. Heal the breaches thereof, for it
shakes.

All outward endeavors of workmen will be in vain, unless the Creator do
also inwardly work. Noveritis vos plus proficere orationibus quam
exhortationibus. Aug de Bon. vid. c. 18.
Know for certain, that more may be done by prayers to GOD, then by persuasions
with men.

My Lords, It concerns You most of all to take care of this Matter: for the
LORD has made You, together with the Honorable House of Commons, Pillars to
support this State.

Mention is made of two Pillars which Solomon made in the Temple: (...) sunt
propria nomina Alteru^ derivatur (...) persecit Inde (...) rectum.
The one whereof he called (...) Jachin: and the other (...) Boaz.

Those two words are used as proper names. The former imports, straitnes. The
later, strength.

If Pillars whereon Edifices do rest be not as Jachin and Boaz, Alterum a
(...) obfirmavit. Inde (...) robur.
straight and strong, they cannot be serviceable. If they be not straight, but
crooked, the building resting on them, may sway aside. If they be not strong,
but weak, and the burden resting on them, heavy, they may fail, and the
building fall.

Integrity and magnanimity will do much for quieting our present distractions.

The LORD pour upon you the spirit of Counsel and Courage.

My Lords, I am

Your humble Servant
Blackfriers London 19. Sept. 1648.
The Right Way: OR A DIRECTION FOR Obtaining good Success in a weighty
Enterprise.
EZRA 8. 21. Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river Ahava, that we might
afflict our selves before our God, to seek of him a right way for us, and for
our little ones, and for all our substance.


THis text is taken out of the first of those Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther.
three Historical books, which the holy Ghost saw meet to be recorded for all
ages, concerning the state of the Jewish Church, after their return from their
seventy years captivity under the Babylonians. Three Patriots came from the
captivity to Jerusalem.


They had three famous Patriots, who each of them one after another, came to
Jerusalem for some special good to the Church of God.

1. Zerubbabel, to re-edifie the Temple: Zorobbabel extronit Tenplum. Civitas
extrusta est sub Neemia, Hier. l. 13. Comment. in Esa.
which, notwithstanding the many impediments which he met withal, at length he
effected.

2. Ezra, to reform Religion: which notwithstanding the many corruptions he
found there, he brought to pass.

3. Nehemiah, to make up the walls of their City, for their better safety and
security: which notwithstanding the many oppositions made against him, he
accomplished.

That which is here spoken of in my Text, was done by the second of those
Patriots: who was a pious Priest, and a prudent Governor.

That he came to Jerusalem, The Context. Esdras restituit legem. Aug. de Mir.
S. S. l. 2. c. 33.
to reform Religion, and to settle the true worship of God, and a good
government in the Church, is evident by this testimony given unto him, Ezra had
prepared his heart, to seek the law of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach in
Israel statutes and judgments, chap. 7. 10. So much is also evident by that
charge which Artaxerxes King of Persia in his letters patents thus gave unto
him, Thou art sent to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to the
law of thy God which is in thine hand, and to carry the silver and gold which
the king and his councellers have freely offered unto the God of Israel; etc.
chap. 7. 14, 15, 23.

The end which he aimed at, being a very weighty and worthy end, he prudently
uses the best means, that he could find warranted in Gods Word, for good
success in his under aching thereabout. That means being here set down in my
Text, I pass by all bie passages, and directly come to my Text.

The Sum of it is, The Sum of the Text.
A Direction for obtaining good success in a weighty enterprise.

I suppose that this general Sum, does sufficiently demonstrate how
seasonable this Text is for our present occasion: which is to crave a blessing
of God upon the Treaty to be had betwixt his Majesty's and our Parliaments
Commissioners.

The first particle in my Text, The meaning of the words.
translated then, is in the Hebrew a copulative conjunction Vau, and. It
knitteth together the care that Ezra had in gathering together such persons as
were needful for him, and might be useful and helpful unto him ( verse 18,
19, 20.) and the means which by Gods Word was warranted for procuring a
blessing upon their endeavors. Humane helps and divine blessing must go
together.
Thus he joyneth humane helps, and divine assistance together. He does this and
that. To omit humane warranted helps, is to tempt God; as the devil would have
Christ done, when he bid him cast himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple,
there being ordinary means whereby he might safely descend, Mat. 4. 5, 6. To
trust to humane helps without God is to neglect God, and to presume: as Asa
did, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12. In his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the
Physicians. Thereby he brought Gods wrath upon himself.

The intendment of the copulative particle in this place is well expressed by
this conjunction of time, Then. For he gathered them together that should help
him, and then, sought a blessing of God.

When he saw it meet that a Fast should be kept, Governors must proclaim Fasts.
then he proclaimed it, I proclaimed, says he. Ezra, who did this, was
appointed by the King of Persia, under whose jurisdiction all the Jews then
were, to be a Governor: For the King appointed him to set other Magistrates
over the people. chap. 7. 25. which shows that he had authority over them. At
least he was, under the King, the chief Governor of these Jews that went along
with him. This therefore which here he does, is an authoritative act. He does
it as a Governor. Governors use to make proclamations.

To proclaim implies two things,

1. To give public notice and warning of a thing to be done. This uses to be
done openly by an Herald or public Crier. The (...)
hebrew word implies that it was done by voice,

2. To lay a charge upon those to whom that notice is given to observe the same.

Thus the solemn feasts of the law at their appointed times were proclaimed,
Levit. 23. 4. Thus Jehoshaphat proclaimed a fast, 2 Chronicles. 20.? and the King
and people of Nineveh, Jon. 3. 5, 7. Herein wicked Jezabel did impiously
imitate a pious practice, 1 King. 21. 9.

That which was here proclaimed was a fast. (...)
A religious fast is a forbearing of bodily refreshments to make one fitter for
pious duties.

A fast is here synecdochically put for prayer also. Fasting and prayer must go
together.
Thus much is evident, by this phrase added in this direction, To seek of God a
right way: and by joining together these two ( verse 23.) We fasted and
besought our God for this. Often are these two fasting and prayer joined
together, as Nehem. 1. 4. Daniel 9. 3. Luke 2. 37. Mat. 17. 21. Act. 13. 3. and
14. 23. 1 Cor. 7. 5. This word, fast is often used synecdochically, for prayer
also, as 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. Jer. 36. 9. Jonah 3. 6. A fast, simply and singly
considered in and by it self, is but such a bodily exercise as profits
little. 1 Timothy 4. 8. For as meat commends us not to God (1 Cor. 8. 8.) so nor
fasting. But fasting joined with prayer is of singular use (it being rightly
and duly used:) and that in three especial respects:

1. Fasting a help to prayer.
It Is a means of quickening a dull spirit, and rousing up a drousie body. In
jejuniis, etc. quam plurimum adjuvatur oration, Aug Probae Ep. 121.
Ye know that eating and drinking use to send vapors into the head which make
a man drousie in body, and heavy in spirit. Now fasting preventeth these
impediments, and thereupon puts a kind of life into a man, and makes him
to pour out his spirit in prayer the more ardently.

2. It enableth a man to continue longer in his devotion. A man after eating
and drinking cannot so long hold out in duties of piety as he that fasteth.
Besides that time which uses to be spent in eating, drinking, and other
refreshments and delights, is by fasting gained for prayer and other sacred
duties. Well observe the most ardent and long continued supplications in
Scripture, and you shall find them supported by fasting.

3. Fasting is a visible testification of our ardent prayer, Iejunium est
adjuterium ^rationis, etc. Nam oration illa est fortis quae fit in spiritu
humili, etc. Chrysostom. Hom 15 in Mat. 6.
and of our earnest desire to obtain that which we pray for: in that, by our
voluntary abstaining from our bodily food and other delights of the body, we
show, that we prefer the thing that we pray for, before them. Yea fasting is
not only a testification if our humiliation, but it is a means to humble the
soul the more: for that is the use of outward rites, both to testify the
inward disposition of the soul, and also to help it on the more.

The place where this religious duty was performed is first indefinitely set
down, (...)
under this relative, there. It has reference to ver. 15. where mention is
made of Ezras gathering together such as should go with him to Jerusalem. At
that place where they were gathered together, there they kept this fast.

2. (...)
In particular this place is set out by a river which ran along by it: for it
is here said to be, at the river Ahava. This name is thrice used in this
Chapter: The river Ahava.
as in this text, in the 15, and 33. verses. We do not elsewhere read of this
name, either in sacred Scripture, or in any other Author. The Septuagint
translate it, (...) Some take Ahava to be the name of a Town: and this river to
be so called, because it did run to Ahava (as verse. 15.) Many rivers are called
by the names of those Towns which they run along by. This may be the same that
is by other Authors called Adiava. Josephus in the eleventh book and fifth
Chapter of the Antiquities of the Jews, says, That this fast was kept by
Euphrates. It may be that this river did stream out of Euphrates, or into it,
as sundry rivers did in sundry places.

But not to insist upon the title, A fast kept by a river side.
certainly the place which is here described by the river, Legi^ a Deo nomullos
ex^ dit^s in excelsis montium: unde intelligitur m^g^ valere petentis ^ffectum,
quam petitionis locum. Aug. de unit. Eccl c. 16.
was a fair and fit place for the Israelites to assemble themselves together
in: like that place which was by a rivers side near to Philippi, where prayer
was wont to be made by Christians, Act. 16. 13. There were in the Country of
Babylon many sweet rivers, and goodly pastures, yea and woods too. Hereunto the
Psalmist alludeth, Psalm. 137. 1, 2. in these words, By the rivers of Babylon
there we sat down, etc. They being many, and the place convenient, there they
perform their solemn sacred duties. The affection of him that prays is more
regarded then the place.

In passing from the charge to the ends of giving it, we may observe a change
of number. The charge about such a thing is thus set down in the singular
number, I praclaimed: But the expression of the ends in the plural, thus, That
WE might afflict OUR selves, etc. The former act of proclaiming the fast,
belonged only to the chief Governor, which at that time Ezra was to those
Jews: but the later acts, of afflicting themselves, and seeking of God a right
way, were common duties appertaining to them all; and for the good of them all:
In which respect the number is justly and fitly altered, and these plurals
used, WE, OUR, US.

That which is here set down as one end of their fasting, The extent of a fast
to afflict ones self. (...)
in this phrase, That we might afflict ourselves, shows the extent of a true
fast. It must be a fast that may be felt: and that so far, as they who keep
it, may find and feel a want of that which they have forborne. This may be one
branch of a Christians self-denial, voluntarily to forbear that which nature
requires, and not to afford unto it that which it craveth. Afflicting
themselves here meant, extends both to men's bodies, and also to their souls:
For a men's self does not consist of body only. This extent of a fast is by the
law thus expressed, Ye shall afflict your souls, Body and soul afflicted.
Levit. 16. 29. The body is afflicted, when it is denied necessaries, so much
and so long as it is very sensible of the want thereof: by a sympathy the soul
also may therewith be afflicted. But the soul is further afflicted, when it is
grieved and disquieted upon the apprehension of Gods displeasure and wrath for
sin, yea and for offending his fatherly goodness: and is thereupon deeply
humbled and cast down. By this kind of afflicting ones self, the body is kept
under and brought into subjection, Non dixit, perdo and punio: sed castigo and
in servitudinem redigo: quod Domini est, non hostis. etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in 1
Cor. 9.
I keep under my body and bring it into subjection, says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
9. 27. Here he uses two words which carry much emphasis, (...), I keep under,
and (...), I bring into subjection. The former word is taken from a Champion or
Wrestler that striveth for the mastery: for it has reference to the 25. verse,
where mention is made of men that strive for the mastery. The later word has
reference to Masters that prudently keep their servants under, Castigo corpus
meum, hoc est, advers^ carne^ pugno. Theopnil. in los.
especially when they begin to wax insolent or wanton. By the body he means the
old man, which is called a body of sin, Romans 6. 6. and the flesh which lusts
against the spirit, Gal. 5. 17.

Quest. Does not this seem to justify that which the Apostle condemns in
this phrase, (...), neglecting or nor sparing the body? Col. 2. 23.

Answ. Difference betwixt keeping the body under, and neglecting the body.
Surely no. There is a great deal of difference betwixt the Apostles mind and
meaning in the one and in the other place. For

1. In the former place the word body is taken figuratively as was observed
before. In the later, properly.

2. In the former place, a man is only restrained from such things as might
please the body, but be a prejudice to the soul. In the later the nature of man
is weakened.

3. The beating down, mentioned in the former place better enableth a man to
holy duties: but neglecting the body, in the later place, does often disinable
him thereunto.

4. The former is warranted by Gods Word, and required therein, Ephesians. 4. 22.
The later is from man's vain invention.

5. The former is a matter of truth and sincerity: the later of hypocrisy and
superstition.

In a word, by keeping the body under the corrupt flesh is tamed: and yet the
strength of a man's outward body not impaired: but by neglecting the body, a
man's outward body consisting of flesh and bone is weakened, and yet the corrupt
flesh not subdued.

The afflicting of themselves mentioned in my text is a branch of that holy
revenge, which is reckoned up among the fruits of godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
and it is an evidence of a broken spirit and contrite heart, which David
styles the sacrifices of God, which he will not despise, Psalm. 51. 17.

Because hypocrites in an apish imitation of the upright, Duties of piety to be
done before God. (...)
plead that they afflict their souls, Isa. 58. 3. it is here required that it
be done before God. Now all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him
(Heb. 4. 13.) As a beast cut up, is in all the inward parts and intrals opened
before the Butcher: or an anatomy before the Chyrurgion: So are all the things
of a man without and within, Oraturus sedet, quod non fit recte nisi in
conspecta Dei, hoc est, in intimo cordis. Aug. ad simpl. l. 2. q. 4.
known unto God. God discerns our secret thoughts and inward disposition,
Thou understands my thoughts afar off, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 2. It
is proper to God alone to search the heart and try the reins, Jer. 17. 10. That
therefore is said to be-done before God, which is done from the heart,
inwardly, sincerely.

This the servants of God do the rather, The Lord in special the God of
Saints.
because God is their God in an especial manner. Before OUR God, says this
holy Priest and servant of God. Indeed the Lord is a supreme Sovereign over
all. All are his servants, Psalm. 119. 91. yet the Israel of God, the Church of
God is a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
People, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Who now should do, that which they undertake, before God,
if not they, who have a special right to say of him, OUR God? This right they
have by virtue of their union with Christ: who thus says, I ascend unto my
Father and your Father, and to my God and your God, Joh. 20. 17.

Besides by this special relation their God, The Lord is not as an Idol.
Jehovah, who is the only true God, is distinguished from the gods of the
Heathen, even from idols, Which have mouths but speak not: eyes, but see not:
ears, but hear not, etc. Psalm. 115. 5, 6, etc.

That which follows in these words, To seek of God is to pray (...)
to seek of him, sets down the most proper end of a Fast, and of the extent
thereof, by afflicting ones self, which is subordinate to seeking of God. To
seek of God, is all one as to pray unto God, and call upon him. They are
therefore often joined together, as synonima, words or phrases of one and the
same signification. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find,
says Christ, Mat. 7. 7. I am sought of them that asked not for me, I am found
of them that sought me not, says the Lord, Isa. 65. 1. In these and many other
like places, to ask and seek, are put for the same duty, namely, to pray. The
Metaphor of seeking implies a careful using of means for obtaining that which
we desire. In this respect the Church thus says, I will seek him whom my soul
loves, Cant. 3. 2.

Now because God only could give that which in my text was sought, they make
their address to God to seek of him.

That which they seek is here in general said to be A right way. What a right
way is (...)
This may be taken literally or metaphorically. According to the letter it
implies a safe and prosperous journey: namely, That the Lord would be pleased
so to direct them, as they might not wander out of the way: nor by enemies, or
any other means forced to fly this way and that way, but that they might safely
come to Jerusalem, which was the end of their journey. In this sense it is said
of God, in relation to his people at another time, He led them forth by the
RIGHT WAY, that they might go to the city of habitation, Psalm. 107. 7. That
thus much is here intended, is evident by the reason of this Fast, thus set
down in the next verse, For I was ashamed to require of the King a band of
soldiers, and horsemen, to help us against the enemy in the way.

Metaphorically a Way is put for a man's conversation or course of life, and
this is counted a right way, when it is ordered according to the rule of
righteousness which is Gods Word. To this purpose the Psalmist thus prays,
Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: And thus promises, I will run
the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart, Ps. 119. 27, 32.
This way is called a good way, Jer. 6. 16. and a perfect way, Ps. 101. 2, 6.

Though the literal sense of a prosperous journey be here especially intended:
yet it may also be extended to the metaphorical sense of a good course of
life. What to be prayed for. 1 Our selves. (...)


That which they here seek, they seek for many.

1. For themselves. For US, say they; for every one is his own keeper, and has
a charge of himself: every one must care for himself and for his own welfare:
and every one is to give an account of himself to God, Romans 14. 12.

2. They seek a right way for their little ones. 2 Our children (...)
Hereby are meant their children: such as could not seek their own good. The
Hebrew word (...) taph, is indeed of the singular number, and never used in the
plural, yet translated in the plural, little ones: for it is a collective
word, and signifies a company of children, and of such as can scarce go. Or if
they do go, they do it weakly and staggeringly. They waddle, as we speak. The
verb that comes from the same root, is applied to the gate of haughty women,
and thus translated, Mincing as they go, or tripping nicely, Isa. 3. 16. The
children comprised under the Hebrew word, were such as they, of whom God thus
says, There are more then six score thousand persons, that cannot discern
betwixt their right hand and their left, Jon. 4. 11. They that were of age and
understanding, whether male or female, Governors or under government, joined
all together in the Fast, and are comprised under this particle US. But the
little ones, who could not join with them in that holy duty, are here
distinguished from them, and are prayed for.

3. 3 Our substance (...)
With little ones they join all their substance. That also they pray for. Under
this phrase, All our substance, cattle of all sorts are comprised, as
bullocks, kine, horses, camels, asses, sheep, goats, even all kind of living
and unreasonable creatures, that they carried with them, and were for their
use: and all manner of household stuff, and other goods that they had; even the
silver and the gold, and vessels that were given to the use of the Temple,
whereof mention is made, chap. 7. 15, 16. etc. The hebrew word is (...) recush.
It uses to be distinguished from souls: namely, from persons that had
reasonable souls: as Genesis 12. 5. where it is said, That Abram took Lot and all
their substance, and the souls that they had gotten: and Genesis 14. 21. where the
King of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons (heb. souls) and take the
goods (heb. substance) to thy self.

Thus these Jews extended their humble and earnest supplication unto God,
Te^peralia si desuerint petenda sunt. Bern. de 4. modis erand.
not only for themselves and their children, but also for their outward estate:
even their temporal and worldly commodities.

This of the meaning of the words. The logical resolution of them follows.

The Sum of the text being as you heard, The resolution of the text.
A Direction for obtaining good success in a weighty enterprise, Two general
points are especially set down therein.

1. The Means used, which was a Fast.

2, The Ends why the means were used.

About the means there is expressed,

1. A Preparation thereunto.

2. The Execution thereof.

The Preparation was by a Proclamation.

The Execution is set down, verse. 23.

The Proclamation is amplified,

1. By the Person that caused it: I proclaimed it, says the Governor.

2. By the Place where the means was appointed to be used, and that

1. In general, in this relative particle, there.

2. In particular, At the river Ahava.

The Ends were two.

One subordinate, That we might afflict our selves. Here the particles of the
plural number WE, OUR, are remarkable.

The other end is the most principal, To seek of God.

The former is amplified by the Person before whom they afflicted themselves,
who is styled their God: Before our God.

The later is amplified by the subject matter that they sought, A right way:
and by the Objects for which they sought it.

The Objects were of two kinds.

1. Persons. Themselves, and their little ones.

2. Things. All their substance.

Theological Observations hence arising are these, Theological observations.


1. From the Person that enjoined all, I observe, That Public duties must have
their sanction from public Governors.

To such Governors it belongs to observe the passages of Gods providence,
Rex episcoporu^ Synodum Constantinopolim convocavit. Socr. l. 5. c. 8.
and to consider what warrantable public duties are by the direction of Gods
Word called for, at such and such times, and thereupon to enjoin a public
observation of such duties: to give warrant and liberty for performing them:
and to see them duly done.

2. From the Proclamation I infer, That

Warning is to be given before hand of public, Observe. 2.
solemn, sacred duties.

The Proclamation mentioned in the text, was made to give all the people notice
and warning of the Fast. This is the rather to be done, that all of all sorts
whom it concerns may from their several habitations assemble together: and
that they may have some convenient time to prepare themselves thereto.

3. From the Means here enjoined, which was a Fast, it is evident, That

Fasting is an especial help to extraordinary prayer. Observe. 3.


Their meeting was to pray. Oration non sit propter jejuniu^, sed jejunium
propter orationem. Chrysostom. hom. 15. in Mat. 6.
Their fasting to do that duty more powerfully. Prayer is not for fasting, but
fasting for prayer. It is here said, that they fasted to seek of God a right
way: and the issue thereof is thus expressed, verse. 23. So we fasted and
besought our God for this, and he was entreated of us. Most of the powerful
and effectual prayers recorded in Scripture, were poured forth on a day of
fast. Christ says of a devil, that by no other means can be cast out, that it
may be cast out by prayer and fasting, Mat. 17. 21.

4. From the Place where this Fast was kept, which was at the river Ahava: an
open and common place, never before set apart: It may be inferred, That

In time of need any convenient place may be taken for duties of piety. Observe.
4.


I say, Vt nobis mos est pro universis orare, sic and ubique fundimus preces.
Theoph. in 1 Timothy 2.
in time of need, because when there is free liberty for people to meet
together in public places set apart for public duties, it is their duty and
it will be their wisdom to take such opportunities, and to make the best use
of them that they can. But when such places cannot be conveniently resorted
unto, bounden duties are not thereupon to be neglected. This is to make the
substance give place to the circumstance. Christ's promise of being with his, is
thus indefinitely set down, Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 20.

5. From the Persons that observed the duty, set down in the plural number,
under this particle WE, it may be gathered, That

For obtaining common and public blessings, Observe. 5.
means are jointly to be used by all whom it concerns. Loquebantur quasi ex
uncore: idcirco orantibus fuit impetrabilis and efficax sermo. Cyp. sermon. 6. de
orat. Dom.


The Proclamation here made tended, to that end, namely to gather them all
together for performing the duty mentioned. A little after this, when another
occasion of performing a public duty was given, they were not only by
Proclamation summoned together, but also a strict penalty was laid upon such as
should not come, Chap. 10. 7, 8. By the assembling of many together, men
mutually stir up the zeal, and inflame the affection of one another: and when
many join bodies and spirits in performing one and the same duty of piety
together, Ex caetu and congregatione multa est sortitudo. Vbi enim fuerint duo
aut tres, etc. Chrysostom. hom. 10. in Heb. ^0,
that duty is the more honorable to God, and the more powerful and prevalent
with him. If God account himself honored by one man's calling upon him, he is
the more honored by many men's joining together therein. As the gathering
together of many waters makes the stronger stream, and the voices of many
together, the louder sound, so the joint prayers of many. This very reason is
pressed in his Majesty's Proclamation for a public general solemn Fast, July
3. 1625. in these words, In humble hope and confidence, that when both Prince
and people together throughout the whole Land, shall join in one common and
solemn Devotion, of sending up their faithful and repenting prayers, to
Almighty God at one instant of time, the same shall be more available to obtain
that mercy, help and comfort from him, which in the present important occasion,
this Church and Commonwealth do stand in need of.

6. From the subordinate End, which was to afflict themselves, I gather, That

A solemn Fast must be such an one as may be felt. Observe. 6.


For this end of old they fasted long. Esther required, That they should not
eat, nor drink three days night or day, Esth. 4. 16. In those hot countries,
they could longer forbear food, then we in these cold countries can; and
therefore did forbear till they were afflicted. For this end in Nineveh they
restrained even their beasts from fodder and water, Jon. 3. 7. They did also
put on sackcloth with ashes, and lay in sack cloth and ashes, Esth. 4. 1, 3.
All this was to afflict themselves the more, and to bring under their bodies.
Iejunium si discretione regatur, omnem carnis rebellionem edo^at, etc. extra
ordinarios motus in cippo claudit and arctat Cypr. Ser. de Ieju^.
If a Fast be discreetly ordered, it will tame the rebellion of the flesh, it
will bind and keep in compass inordinate, and exorbitant motions, and subdue
immoderate appetites. It will so restrain such things as might hinder prayer,
as the soul will be much more free to fly up aloft.

7. From the Person before whom they fasted, namely, Before God, I observe, That

Duties of piety are to be performed as in Gods presence. Observe. 7.


We ought to do nothing, but as in Gods presence: so, as setting God before
us. The word (...) hithhalec, whereby Enochs walking before God is set out,
Genesis 5. 24. and which is required of Abram, Genesis 17. 1. implies a constant,
continual setting of God before their eyes. It is of the seventh hebrew
conjugation, which imports a frequent and constant performing of a thing.
Learned and judicious Tremellius and Junius translate that word indesinenter
ambulare, continually to walk. If we must in every place, and in every duty
that we take in hand, do it before God, much more must we so perform duties of
piety, Deus omnium mentes voluntatesque in ipsis adhuc clausi pectoris latebris
intuetur. Cypr. Sermon. 5. de lapsis
which have a kind of immediate respect unto God, and wherein we have
immediately to do with him. These are most sincerely to be done, because God
beholds the very disposition of men, and their purposes while they are in their
hearts.

8. From this special note of relation OUR, here applied to God, thus, Before
our GOD, it appears, That

The Lord is in special manner the God of his Church. Observe. 8.


Namely, of those that profess his name and believe on him. Therefore such do
not only apply it to themselves, but also others give it unto them: as
Nebuchadnezzar an Heathen Monarch styled the Lord, the God of Shadrach,
Meshech, and Abednego, Dan. 3. 28. and Darius another Heathen Monarch, said to
Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest, etc. Dan. 6. 20. This is a ground of strong
confidence to believers.

9. From the principal End of the Fast, which was, To seek of God, or to pray
to God, it is most manifest, That

Prayer is the most principal means of obtaining blessing blessing from God.
Observe. 9.


This means God himself has prescribed and enjoined for that end: Quod Deus
per suam promisit clementiam per sanctorum implet preces. Hier. Com. in Dan. 9.
There unto has he made many precious promises. Here upon Saints in all ages
have used this means, and found it to be effectual. That which through his
grace he promises, upon the prayers of his Saints, he performs.

10. From the subject matter that is desired, which is a right way, it appears,
That

A prosperous journey may be sought of God. Observe. 10.


Men in their journies are subject to many dangers. The divine Providence can
keep them fare from all their dangers: Yea, he can so order it, that by
mistaking of a way, they may avoid some dangerous plots of enemies against them
Austine relates a story much tending to that purpose; Nobi^-ipsis accidit, ut
in quodam bivio falleremur, and non iremus per eum locum, ubi operiens
transitum nostrum Doxatistarum ^s armata subsederat: atque ita factum est, ut
eoquo tendeba mus, per devium circuitum veniremus: cognitisque infidiis
illorum, nos gratularemur errasse, atque inde gratias ageremus Leo. Aug. Enchid
ad Lau. cap. 17.
That in his journey he came to a two want way, or to a place which went two
ways. In that which led most directly to his journies end, an armed troop of
the Donatists lay, to seize upon him; but he ignorantly fell into the other
way, whereby he escaped that troop, and going the wrong way, though farthest
about, came safely to his journies end, and praised God for that mistake of his
way. God gives to such as seek it of him, Angels to keep them in all their
ways, Psalm. 91. 11. The Heathen supposed that there were certain gods who
directed such as called upon them in their right way, and gave them a
prosperous journey. These they called (...) But indeed it is Jehovah only that
is properly the director of our ways, In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he
shall direct thy paths, Prove. 3. 6. This may also be applied to the
methaphoricall interpretation of this phrase, A right way.

11. From the first sort of Persons for whom they pray, which were themselves,
I collect, That

Men must especially seek blessing for themselves. Observe. 11.


Every man is nearest to himself: and a man's self is the rule of the love of
his neighbor: for thus says the Law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, Mat. 22. 39. I may make from hence such an inference as the Apostle does
from a Bishops ruling his own house, If a man know not how to rule his own
house, how shall he take care of the Church of God? 1 Timothy 3. 5. In like manner
if a man know not how to seek his own good, how shall he take care for the good
of others?

12. From the second sort of Persons, which were their littl ones, I further
observe, That

Blessing is to be sought for our young children. Observe. 12.


Even for such as cannot seek it for themselves. Their welfare is a means of
continuing not the world only, but the Church also in the world. We are
mortal, and shall not always abide here to serve the Lord. As our fathers,
who served God in their generations, are gone, so shall we after a short time:
God knows how soon. But by procuring Gods blessing on our little ones, they may
grow up, they may know God and serve him in their generation, after we are
taken from them. Thus may the eternal God be everlastingly served by mortal
men: one generation serving him after another. To sharpen our prayers, and
strengthen our faith in craving a blessing for our little ones, we may plead
before God that which God himself sais of the children of the Israelites, that
they were born to him, and were his children, Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. On this ground,
though our unworthiness make us fear that God may curse them rather then
bless them, because they are ours, yet we may herewith uphold our spirits,
that they are Gods children, born to him: and thereupon pray that God for his
own sake would bless them.

13. From the Things for which God was sought, which are here called, All their
substance, it appears, That

Blessing may be sought of God for our temporal estate. Observe. 13.


The fourth Petition of the Lords prayer ( Give us this day our daily bread,
Omnia ista bona sunt, and Dei munera sunt. Ne putetis quod aliquis illa poterit
dare nisi unus Deus. Aug. Enar in Ps. 35.
Mat. 6. 11.) gives evidence to the truth hereof. Though, through man's
ordinary abuse of the goods of this world, Christ styles them, Mammon of
unrighteousness, yet he advises us to make to our selves friends thereof,
Luke 16. 9. They are necessary for the very being of our bodies. Life, health,
strength, are preserved by them. They may be a means of continuing the
Ministry of Gods Word and Ordinances among us: and we by them may be many
ways helped, even about the service of God.

These are the distinct Instructions which this text affords. They are many
and weighty. It cannot be expected that I should handle them all at this time
in any large manner. I will therefore collect one general observation, wherein
the main scope and drift of the text shall be set forth: and which shall
comprise under it, most, if not all, of the points before noted. It is this,

In a matter extraordinary, The general Doctrine.
extraordinary means must be used.

To show that this doctrine is the main intendment of my text, two things are
to be demonstrated.

1. The Case, that it was extraordinary.

2. The Means, that they were extraordinary.

Each of these may be made manifest in seven particular branches a piece.

1. These Jews were in a strange land. The extraordinary case of the Jews.
So is the land of their captivity styled, Ps. 137. 4. where thus they say, How
shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land.

2. They were at this time captives: for notwithstanding this and a former
return from the place of their captivity, they were, even after this, counted
and called, children of the captivity, Chap. 10. 7, 16.

3. The name of a Jew, was odious among the Heathen. Many envied them for their
religion and professions sake. When Zerubbabel went to Jerusalem he found
adversaries, Ezra 4. 1. when afterward Nehemiah went, he found those who much
envied that there was a man come to seek the welfare of the children of Israel,
Neh. 2. 10. Haman could suggest to the King of Persia, That the laws of the
Jews were diverse from all people, and that it was not for the Kings profit to
suffer them, Esth. 3. 8. Yea many laid wait for Ezra and his company in the
way, verse. 31.

4. They had no outward guard of horse or foot, for Ezra was ashamed to require
of the King a band of soldiers and horsemen to help them against the enemy in
the way, because they had spoken unto the King, saying, The hand of our God is
upon all them for good, that seek him, verse. 22. Thus they engaged Gods honor
in this case, which makes it the more extraordinary.

5. Of themselves they could not go the right way. Their seeking this of God
implies as much.

6. They had the care of many little ones lying upon them. This made their case
the more difficult.

7. They had a great charge with them: as their own cattle and goods: and a
great sum of silver and gold, which the King and his Councillors had freely
offered unto the God of Israel: and store of vessels for the service of God, v.
33. Chap. 7. 15.

Do not all these particular circumstances make their present case to be more
then an ordinary case?

Answerably the means which they used were extraordinary: as is evident by a
like number of particular instances.

1. A public Proclamation was made to call them all together, The
extraordinary means which the Jews used.
and to give them warning before hand that they might come prepared.
Proclamations use not to be made but in weighty matters.

2. A Fast was enjoined. Fasting has been before noted to be an extraordinary
act of piety.

3. For want of a Synagogue, or a Temple, they continue their fast in the open
air by a river side. This was more then usual.

4. They extend their fast to afflict themselves, that they might sensibly feel
it.

5. They do it not in appearance only, but really, in truth before God.

6. They do not only wish for what they needed, but they earnestly seek it of
God.

7. They plead a special relation betwixt God and themselves, in this phrase,
OUR God.

Lay together the particulars of their Case, and of the Means that they used,
and you shall find the one and the other to be extraordinary: yea you may also
observe all the particulars of the text couched within this doctrine, In a
matter extraordinary, extraordinary means must be used.

This course has Gods Church taken throughout all ages, Extraordinary cases.
1. Obtaining or regaining blessings.
in all manner of extraordinary cases: and that

1. For obtaining good things.

2. For removing evils: and both these about spiritual and temporal, public
and private matters.

For good things, extraordinary prayer has been made, when Saints and servants
of God have seen them needful then to be granted; or when they have been
withheld: or when they have been withdrawn and taken away.

This may be exemplified in sundry particulars.

Moses earnestly prayed for a good Governor to succeed him, Special blessings
extraordinarily prayed for.
Numb. 27. 16. Christ spent a whole night in prayer immediately before his
choosing of Apostles, Luke 6. 12, 13. The Apostles ordained Elders in every
Church with prayer and fasting, Act. 14. 23. The Church fasted and prayed when
Barnabas and Saul were separated to the work, whereunto God called them, Act.
13. 3. The like course should be taken by us in ordaining Ministers, and
setting Officers in their several places: yea and in enterprising weighty
affairs of more then ordinary concernment.

Much more ought this course to be taken when desired and expected blessings
are withheld. This was Hannahs case, which moved her to weap and fast, and pour
out her soul before the Lord, 1 Samuel 1. 7, 15.

Most of all is this to be done, when blessings are withdrawn and taken away:
especially if they be spiritual blessings. The sensible presence, powerful
assistance, and sweet comfort of the Spirit, being withdrawn from David, upon
the great sins which he committed in the case of Bathsheba and her husband, he
penned the one and fiftieth Psalm, which manifests an extraordinary
wrestling with the Lord, to have those blessings restored to him again. His
wrestling in this case was like Jacobs, who would not let the Lord go unless
he blessed him, 2. Preventing or removing evils.
Genesis 32. 26. Hoc est totum quod dicitur malum, i.e. peccatum, and poe^a
peccati Aug. de ver relig. c. 11


Evils against which extraordinary prayer is to be made, are sins or judgments.

Against-sins, such prayers are to be made, to prevent them, or redress them.
For preventing sin, Christ commands his Disciples to watch and pray, that
they enter not into temptation, Mat. 24. 41. By temptations men are drawn to
sin. By being freed from the temptation or assisted and supported in the
temptation, sin may be prevented, Genesis 20. 6. and 39. 7, 8, etc.

For redressing sin after we are fallen into it, two things are to be prayed
for:

One that God would be pleased to pardon it. It was an earnest prayer in this
case that he poured out, who thus prayed, For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon
mine iniquity: for it is great, Psalm. 25. 11. And again thus, According to the
multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions, Psalm. 51. 1.

The other is, that God would work in us repentance, as he who thus prayed,
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned: for thou art the Lord my God, Jer. 31. 18.
The more dangerous the temptations unto sin, whereunto we are subject, are, and
the more heinous the sins are whereinto we have fallen, the more earnest ought
our prayers, in this case to be.

Judgments, How judgments to be prayed against.
against which extraordinary prayer is to be made, are such as are threatened,
and in that respect to be feared; or executed, and in that respect felt.
Against the former, Ipse Dominus frequenter suam mutat sententiam. Nam
proposuerat percutere morte and perdere populu^, sed postea rogatus a Moyse,
reconciliatus est populo suo Ambr Offic. l 3. c. 12.
the King and people of Nineveh fasted and cried mightily unto God, Jon. 3. 7,
8. Thus was that doom reversed and judgment prevented. The like may be done in
a preparation to a judgment before it be put into execution. Haman had prepared
a terrible massacre to destroy all the Jews: but before his cruel plot began
to be put in execution, Mordecai, Esther, and all the Jews, Fasted three days
together (Esth. 4. 16, 17.) Thus the execution of that judgment, so prepared,
was prevented.

Execution of judgment may be considered either in the beginning, or in the
full accomplishment of it. A judgment was begun when the Philistims were
gathered together to Mizpeh: but Samuel cried unto the Lord, and the Lord
destroyed them before Israel, 1 Samuel 7. 7, 10. On Manasseh the judgment was
executed to the full, in that he was taken by his enemy, bound with fetters,
and carried to Babylon: but when he was in affliction he besought the Lord his
God, and humbled himself greatly, and so was freed from that judgment: For he
was brought again into his kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12, 13. As extraordinary
prayer, in these and other like cases, is to be made on our own behalf, so also
on the behalf of others. Moses his mighty prayers (by one of which God was
moved to say, Let me alone: and in another Moses himself was moved thus to say,
If thou will not forgive their sin, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book,
etc.) were made in the behalf of others, Exodus 32. 10, 32.

Weighty grounds there are to press this point of extraordinary prayer in
extraordinary cases. Reasons for extraordinary prayer.


1. 1 Thereby is showed how we are affected with Gods dealing with us
We show thereby that we take notice of Gods footsteps, that is, of his
carriage toward us, and of his dealing with us.

2. We give evidence that we are answerably affected: In that according to the
need wherein we stand of his favor, we do the more earnestly seek it: and the
more heavily we feel his hand lying upon us, the more deeply we are humbled,
and do the more earnestly desire that it may be removed from us. Surely such a
disposition cannot be but very acceptable unto God. God much approves those who
prize his favor and blessing above all other things, and who are much grieved
upon the apprehension of his displeasure against them. Now extraordinary
prayer, for obtaining his favor and blessing, or for removing his wrath and
judgments, gives proof of such a disposition. Nonne oration sic tepida est, vel
potius frigida, and pene nulla, ut neque hoc in nobis cum dolor advertamus?
Aug ad Simplic l. 1. quaest. 2.
There are many who (like millhorses still going round in their usual tract)
content themselves with an ordinary manner of praying: and never take the
occasions which by the divine providence are offered for extraordinary prayer.
So cold are their prayers and livelesse, as they are never troubled at the
fruitlesnesse of them, but think all is well in that they are not such Atheists
as never call upon God. These plainly discover that small, or no notice at all,
that they take of Gods dealing with them. Yea they do further discover a
senseless and wretched disposition, in that they care not to use the means that
are sanctified for obtaining the good things whereof they stand in need, or
removing the evils, which lie heavy upon them. Thus it comes to pass that they
want many blessings, which otherwise they might have: and lie long under many
judgments, which might have been removed, if the foresaid means had been duly
used.

2. Another ground to press extraordinary prayer in an extraordinary case, 2
Extraordinary prayer is extraordinary powerful.
is Gods usual dealing with men according to their dealing with him: Ora
fortiter, and dic Deo, In necessitatibus erue me. Tunc finiuntur istae
necessitates. Aug. Nedib. ep. 71.
even according to the manner and measure of seeking this or that of him.
Prayer more then ordinary is more then ordinarily powerful. Instance this in
my Text: for thus it is said, ver. 23. We fasted and besought our God for this,
and he was entreated of us. Many and admirable have been the effects of prayer
and fasting recorded in Gods Word: and those sometimes for preventing or
removing great judgments: and sometimes for obtaining or regaining singular
blessings. Proofs hereof you heard before. This in general I dare boldly
affirm, That prayer and fasting, being rightly used, was never used in vain:
but some special and extraordinary effect followed thereupon.

Though that particular for which David prayed and fasted, and lay all night
upon the earth, namely, the life of his sick child, were not granted (2 Samuel
12. 16, 18.) yet was not that extraordinary means, which he used, in vain: For

1. That humiliation, supplication and afflicting of himself, was a service
warranted by Gods Word, and acceptable unto God.

2. Though God restored not to the child his natural life: yet he bestowed
upon it eternal life: which may be inferred out of these words which David
used to comfort himself, I shall go to him, 2 Samuel 12. 23.

3. God gave him another son, and that of the same mother, a Solomon, a
Jedediah (2 Samuel 12. 24, 25.) A Prince of peace, beloved of the Lord, who, by
Gods appointment succeeded David on the Throne. It is observable how the Lord
had respect to Ahabs humbling himself before God: for thereby he was moved to
put off the judgment denounced, all his days, 1 King. 21. 29.

True it is, that hypocrites have thus expostulated this case with God,
Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our
souls, and thou take no knowledge? But the fault is there laid upon
themselves, Isa. 58. 3.
That they fasted for strife and debate, etc. Their fast was not such an one as
the Lord had chosen: So as the Lords hand was not shortened, that it could not
save: nor his ear heavy, that it could not hear: but their iniquities had
separated between them and their God, and their sins had hid his face from
them, that he would not hear, Isa. 59. 1, 2.

Let us therefore that do what is warrantable, do it uprightly and fervently:
so may we do it in faith, and be be sure to have it accepted. All things are
possible to him that believes, Mark 9. 23. Surely we fail of much benefit that
we might receive from our prayers, for want of faith.

3. I might here add, 3 By extraordinary prayer extraordinary honor is done
to God.
that by fasting and prayer, which is an extraordinary humbling of our selves
before God, and an extraordinary manner of craving blessing of him,
extraordinary honor is done unto him: for the more we humble our selves for
his displeasure, and stoop under his strokes, the greater testimony we give,
not only to the greatness of his wrath and indignation: but also to the
justice and equity of his judgments: and the more earnestly we call on him for
favor and blessing, the greater evidence we give of our high esteem of them.
Now by how much the more God is acknowledged and justified in his judgments,
and by how much the more Gods favor and blessings are prised, by so much the
more is the Lord glorified. For Gods honor is much set forth in and by man's
acknowledgement of his justice and mercy. Nihil magis agendum est Christian^,
quam ut in omni opere ejus Dei gloria praedicetur. Hier. Com. in 1 Cor. 10.
And who would not do to his uttermost what he can to set forth the Lords
honor? This third ground of the foresaid duty is the weightiest of all the
rest.

If these motives be not of force to enforce this duty of extraordinary
supplication, in an extraordinary case, I know not what motives may be of force
to enforce a duty.

Come we now therefore to the Application of the Point.

1. Too great cause of just complaint may here be taken up, Lamentation for
men's sleighting fasts
by reason of men's slight and careless observing those means which are
warranted and prescribed by Gods Word, for pacifying his wrath, and procuring
his favor. The Lord may justly upbraid to us our fasts, as he did to the
Israelites before mentioned, Isa. 58. 3, etc.

This complaint may justly be taken up, not only against the prophaner sort of
people, but also against many that look Sion-ward. There be of them that on our
monthly days of fast, not only forbear to join with the assembly of Gods
people in those solemn sacred duties: but also follow their secular affairs:
yea their pleasures and pastimes, in a kind of dislike, if not a detestation
of these duties. I will not lay to their charge their disavowing of these
duties, as if so be they thought fasting and prayer unlawful: but their
disesteem of our monthly days enjoined by public authority. The ground of
our monthly fasts.
The authority was first his Majesty's Proclamation, straightly charging and
commanding, That a General, Public and Solemn Fast be kept and held on the
last Wednesday of every month, during the troubles in the Kingdom of Ireland.
This Proclamation was given the eight day of January in the seventeenth of his
Majesty's reign. It has been also ratified by sundry Orders and Ordinances of
Parliament, for a due observing thereof; and it has continued now almost seven
whole years, and that upon just and weighty causes: for the very ground of that
Proclamation still remains, namely, The lamentable and distressed estate of
Ireland. Now why this monthly fast should not be duly observed, I see no good
reason. It may be, that it is disesteemed by many, because it is enjoined by
authority. But that seems to me a strange reason, that that which is a ground
warranted by Gods Word (as out of this text we have formerly showed) should be
a reason to slight it. I know not how it comes to pass, but so it is, that
men's minds are averse from such things as are enjoined by authority, though
they be things lawful and agreeable to Gods Word. Never were Orders and
Ordinances of Parliament more slighted then now, and that in things that
concern their own good. O tempora! O mores! To what times are we reserved? What
are the minds and manners of men?

But it may be, Fasts may be continued while the occasion remains
that another thing scruples their consciences, namely, the set times of fast,
that it is such a day in every month.

I grant that if there were not a continued occasion of this constant course,
there might be some ground of scruple: but that particular ground of enjoining
this monthly fast, still remaining, and other weighty grounds also more nearly
concerning us, namely, the troubles of our own Kingdom, why should we not
persevere in using the means for averting Gods wrath, and the fearful effects
thereof from us? That which is recorded of the Jews annual fasting, in certain
set months, seventy years together (because the judgments, which moved them
first to take up those fasts, continued so long) may be a warrant for our
continued monthly fasts. For they are so mentioned by the Prophet ( Zech. 7.
Public fasts in former times rare, Quid mirum si Christianis temporibus iste
mundus tanquam servus jam sciens voluntatem Domini sui and faciens digna plagis
vapulat multis Aug. vict. ep. 122.
5. and 8. 19.) as they are rather ratified then disavowed.

No marvel that Gods judgments have so long lien upon us, and our neighboring
Nations; seeing the means of removing them are by most either despised, or too
much slighted.

The great complaint of pious Christians in former times was, that public
fasts were not enjoined by public authority. Sometimes a dozen, sometimes more
years passed in this Land and Kingdom without any public fasts, and yet
sundry Parliaments called in those years: sundry Armies sent forth, and sundry
judgments inflicted. I can remember a solemn fast proclaimed, and most
solemnly kept in the year 1588. upon the approach of that Spanish Armado, that
carried the style of Invincible. Admirable was the blessing that followed upon
that fast: for soon after, that proud Armado was strangely dissipated. I do
not well remember another public fast betwixt that and the first year of King
James, wherein was such a raging Plague, as we have not heard of the like
before in this Land. Thereupon a weekly fast was enjoined by public authority,
till it pleased God to remove that plague.

Very few public fasts were betwixt that and another greater plague, in the
year, 1625. when there was also a weekly fast enjoined by public authority: at
which time God gave a very gracious return to the prayers of his people: for
the plague decreased much faster then it increased, and in short time from the
number of five thousand two hundred and five that died in one week, it came so
utterly to cease, as not one at all to die of that sickness.

If it be said, that in those times wherein there were so few or no fasts, God
exceedingly blessed this Kingdom, I answer:

1. That God might put off his displeasure for neglect of those duties, till
after and worser times, and that he may in these our days, remember that
neglect. Such an answer does Jeremy give to the men of Judah that made such an
objection, Jer. 44. 17, etc.

2. Though there were not such extraordinary means publicly used: Frequent
fasts of old in private.
yet they were by pious and devout Christians privately, and that frequently
and fervently used. Never was a Parliament called, never was an Army sent
forth, never was there any public weighty occasion, but that such Christians
as are before mentioned, assembled together, by prayer and fasting, to seek a
blessing of God. I well remember, that at that very time when the Gunpowder
treason was discovered (a Parliament being summoned) there were many assemblies
that by prayer and fasting, earnestly sought of God a blessing upon that
Parliament. Have we not cause to judge, that God had a gracious respect to the
prayers of his children, who almost miraculously discovered such a dangerous,
devilish and matchless treason, as the Gunpowder treason was.

Through the good providence of God, we have had more fasts by public authority
enjoined, in the reign of our present Sovereign, especially since the beginning
of this Parliament, then before time from the beginning of the Reformation of
Religion. But they have been so slightly and carelessly performed, as we have
cause to fear, that this among other sins, has been one that has caused Gods
heavy wrath so long to lie upon us. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation.

But to leave complaints, The weighty occasion of this days fast.
the Doctrine which you have heard largely handled, does justify that course
which the great Council of this Land has taken about this days fast. The
means that we use, has been showed to be extraordinary. He that sees not that
the case wherein we now are, and the occasion of this days solemnity is
extraordinary, is blind, and cannot see far off.

I will not now stand to aggravate this civil war (the severest of Gods
judgments) nor bring to your mind the houses, The calamities of these times.
Towns, and Cities that have been burnt or plundered, or spoiled: nor the
distressed estates of many who in a night of a rich Job have bin made a poor
Job: nor the abundance of blood that has been shed: nor the alienation of
affections, and bitter contentions that have been betwixt such as have been
near in blood and alliance, in neighborhood and friendship, yea also and
betwixt such as profess in truth and sincerity to seek the right and perfect
way of the LORD: neither will I here insist upon the errors, heresies, and
blasphemies that in these days are published: nor the great rent that is made
in this Church by schism. These and other like occasions of humbling our
selves deeply before the LORD, and of crying mightily unto him, I now let pass.

The particular occasion of fasting and praying on this day is to obtain a
blessing from heaven upon the Treaty betwixt his Majesty and our Parliament,
that is now through Gods blessing agreed upon.

Surely this is a very extraordinary case, and that in regard of the Necessity,
Excellency, and Difficulty of the matter undertaken.

1. Such have been the evils of this civil war (whereof a taste was given
before) and many of them do so continue to increase more and more, The
necessity of a Treaty.
as there is a kind of necessity of a good accommodation for composing our
differences: and for settling a safe and well-grounded Peace: which cannot
better be effected then by a Treaty. Such divisions, such contentions, such
confusions there are in this Kingdom, as it is in danger to be utterly ruined,
if some speedy course be not taken to repair, close up and heal the breaches
thereof. It was in the case of a civil war, that the chief Commander on the
one side, said to the other, Shall the sword devour for ever? Know thou not
that it will be bitterness in the later end, 2 Samuel 2. 26. Bitterness there
must needs be in such a kind of war, because on which side soever the
victory falls, Israelites, members of the Church, Professors of the faith
are destroyed. Though the conquered did press that bitterness, yet the
Conqueror gave over thereupon. O that they who through the divine providence
have been kept from the extremity of this war, would lay to heart the
condition of them that have felt it: not of them only who have been on the
other side: but of many also who have been on our own side! They would then see
a necessity of a fair composing our differences, and of yielding to an
accommodation, usque ad aras, so far as may stand with the truth and purity of
Religion.

2. The main and principal matter of this Treaty, Weighty matters to be
treated on.
shows the excellency, weight and worth of it. It concerns King, I might
hereunto have added the benefits of peace. But these have bin distinctly and
largely set down in my Treatise of the Churches conquest, on Exo. 17. 16.. 96.
Parliament and Kingdom. The prerogatives of the one, privileges of the
other, and liberties of the third. It concerns the Church and Commonwealth,
and the good government of both. It concerns the settling of a distracted
Kingdom in peace and quietness: and the establishing of Religion in truth,
purity and power. It concerns the reconciling of adverse parties, even such as
have been in open hostility one against another; and thereby to put and end to
a long, unnatural, bloody, civil war. What more weighty matters can be treated
about.

3. The difficulty of bringing this Treaty to a good issue appears in these and
other like particulars: The great obstacles that lie in the way.
That principles, of old learned, must be unlearned: That long resolved
judgments in sundry cases, must be upon better information, unresolved: That
jus divinum held in opposite cases must be cleared and demonstrated to which
case it belongs: That inbred scruples of conscience must be rooted out: That
imbittered and alienated affections must be altered: That incensed and
exasperated spirits must be calmed: That hostile friends must be reconciled:
That vast debts must be discharged: That the arrears of numberless soldiers
must be satisfied: That restitution of ships, goods, lands, heriditaments,
livings, offices, and other interests must be made: That indemnity for manifold
outrages must be given, and a general oblivion of wrongs must be granted; and
burden of the Kingdom taken off.

Now who can hope that these and sundry other difficulties can be removed for
settling a good lasting peace. God can overcome all difficulties.
Yet surely they must be removed, or a sound peace will hardly be settled. God
to whom all things are possible can do it. He can exalt every valley, and make
low every mountain and hill: Isa 40. 4.
He can make straight that which is crooked, and the rough places plain. He can
cause the Wolf to dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard to lie down with the
Kid: 11. 6, 7.
and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little
Child to lead them: and the Cow and the Bare to feed: their young ones to lie
down together: and the lion to eat straw like the Ox.

The God that has promised to work such strange works can remove the
aforesaid difficulties, God more then ordinarily to be sought unto
and greater then them. But he is to be sought unto, and the more difficult the
case is, the more earnest and fervent must our prayers be. When Herod had
apprehended Peter, and put him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternians
of soldiers, intending to bring him forth to the people, and to slay him:
prayer was made without ceasing, or instant and earnest prayer was made of the
Church unto God for him, and God so heard their prayer as he delivered Peter,
Act. 12. 4, etc.

Who would have thought that the mischievous device of Haman, Hester cum ha
beret necessitate^ interveniendi pro populo suo, quem Rex ubicunque in regn
ejus esset, jusserat trucidari, oravit ad Dominum: cogebat enim eam magna
necessitas, etc Aug. de Gra and lib. arb. ^. 21.
should have turned to such an advantage unto the Church as it did? But that
was from the Lord, and obtained by fasting and prayer, Esth. 4. 17.

O let us make earnest and instant prayer without ceasing to our God, that he
would send down his Spirit to be a Commissioner among other Commissioners that
are to treat about peace: yea that his Spirit would be in every of the
Commissioners, and in our King and Parliament also, to bring their spirits to
yield to that which may make to a good peace: So as mercy and truth may meet
together, and righteousness and peace kiss each other, Psalm. 85. 10. The Kings
heart is in the hand of the Lord as rivers of water: he turns it vvhither
soever he will, Prove. 21.

This phrase, Rivers of water, may be here used metaphorically or literally.
If metaphorically, the metaphor may be taken from Gardiners, or marsh-keepers,
who use to let in streams of water into their gardens, orchards, or medows,
when and where they think good: and to let them out when they will. If
literally, the phrase may have reference to former acts of Gods turning waters
from their natural course, as it pleased him. For the Lord caused the sea to
go back, and thereby saved the Israelites, but destroyed the Egyptians, Exodus
14. 21, etc He made also the waters of Jordan to stay their course, till all
Israel passed over into Canaan, Josh. 3. 16. To these evidences of Gods power
over the water has the Psalmist reference, Psalm. 114. 3, 5. where he thus
says, The sea saw it and fled: Jordan was driven back. What ailed thee, O thou
sea, that thou fleddest? and thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? The Lord
also opened a rock, and the waters gushed out: they ran in the dry places like
a river, Psalm. 105. 41. The Apostle, in reference hereunto, says, That the
Rock followed them, 1 Cor. 10. 4. by the rock metonymically he means the
waters that flowed out of the rock; and they, by Gods ordering providence ran
along in those places whither the Israelites removed their several stations,
and so followed them. The Lord also upon Elijah's smiting the waters of Jordan,
divided them hither and thither. So did he again, when Elisha went over Jordan,
2 King 2. 8, 14. It is also noted, that when the armies of Judah, Israel and
Edom were in a dry place where was no water, unexpectedly there came water, and
the country was filled with water, 2 King. 3. 20. This was done by the Lord. It
is expressly said, Psalm. 107. 33. that the Lord turns rivers into a
wilderness, and the water springs into dry ground. And again, verse. 35. He
turns the wilderness into a standing water, and dry grounds into
water-springs. All these and other like instances evidently demonstrate, that
the Lord has such power over rivers of water, as he can turn and order them,
as it pleases him. Now waters running in rivers have a violent course. He
therefore that can turn them, can much more turn the hearts of Kings. Agit
omnipotens in cordibus huminum etiam motum voluntatis eorum ut per ^os a^at
quod per eos agere ipse voluerit. A^ de gra and lib. Arb c. ^1.
Kings are men: and the Almighty acts in the hearts of men, even he motions
of their will, that he may do by them, what he will do by them. To instance
this in Kings, God turned the heart of Pharaoh to Abram (Genesis 12. 19, 20.) of
Abimelech to Isaac (Genesis 26. 11.) of another Pharaoh to Joseph (Genesis 41. 39.)
Of Achish to David (1 Samuel 17. 6.) Of Ahaziah to Elijah (2 King. 1. 15.) Of
Iehoram to Elisha (2 King. 6. 32, 33.) Of Nebuchadnezzar to Jeremiah (Ier. 39.
11, 12.) to Daniel and his three companions ( Dan. 2. 48, 49.) Of Evilmerodach
to Iehojachin (2 King 25. 27.) Of Cyrus to the Jews ( Ezra 1. 1.) Of Darius
also to them ( Ezra 6. 7, etc.) Of Artaxerxes to Ezra (Ezra 7. 6.) and to
Nehemiah (Nehem. 2. 8.) Of Abasuerus to Esther and Mordecai (Est. 2. 17. and 6.
10.) Of Agrippa to Paul (Act. 26. 28, 32.) and of many others. If thus the Lord
have the Kings heart in his hand, much more the hearts of others. Kings, by
reason of their supreme power, and the dependence of many on them, use to be
most resolute and inflexible in their purposes. He then that can turn their
heart, whose heart can he not turn? Omnium voluntates ita su^t^n Dei potestate,
ut eas quo voluerit, quando voluerii faciat iaclinari Aug. de Gra and lib. Arb
c. 20.
God so has the wills of all in his own power, as he can make them inclinable
whither he will, and when he will: yea though they be many consulting and
consenting together about the same thing. For multitudes are but as many waters
(Rev. 17. 1, 15.) He that can turn the one, can turn the other. Though most of
the Tribes had held with the house of Saul against David, yet God so wrought
upon their hearts, as all the Tribes of Israel came to David, and said, Behold
we are thy bone and thy flesh, 2 Sa. 5. 1. And when they had revolted from
David to Absalom, a while after all the people were at strife to bring king
David to his throne again. Yea the men of Judah having also revolted from
David, it is noted, that the heart of all the men of Judah was bowed even as
the heart of one man unto the King, 2 Samuel 19. 9, 14. There was a Council of
malicious enemies gathered together against the Apostles: but upon the advice
of Gamaliel, they all agreed to let the Apostles go, Act. 5. 40. Thus we see
how God can make Councels and multitudes to yield to good advice, though it be
against their former principles.

Were our hearts well disposed to the duty of prayer which we have in hand, and
did we perform it in faith and with fervency, it might be said of our
performance, as it was said of that performance which the Jews did in my text,
So we fasted and besought our God for this, and he was entreated of us, v. 23.

FINIS.

