For the LORD PROTECTOR.
SIR,
I Stand Amazed to see, that from June last, the time I communicated unto you
the matter of this Book, and that ever since I have not only intended, but
endeavored to the utmost of my power the Printing of it, for the well
disposing and conforming the Parliament, to put in practice what therein is
contained: God has so overruled and prevented me, that until the very day
you dissolved that Parliament, I could never perfect the Book; that very day I
did, and the next God gave me the happy opportunity of presenting it, with a
Letter into your own hand, as you came from your Council: I pray God direct you
and them in all their consultations for the best, I see that Gods own time is
the fittest, and that He only makes choice of Instruments for the bringing
about his purposes, whether to works, or happiness: Evident it is, your Council
may share that with you now, which the Parliament were not fit for then: You
Persons of Worth and Honor, now being of Council with the Protector, You and
He also must do, as this Book directs; God sends and affords to you what he
denied, to the dissolved Parliament.

Worthy Protector and Council, read, know, and see clearly; the Honourablest,
wisest, best, and most considerablest people of this Kingdom desire Kingly
Government, the Person, none but him, whose unquestionable Right the Crown is,
CHARLES STUART.

That you Sir, should bring him in, is the furthest imaginable from most men's
belief, yet that is your duty, this Book will tell you, and how beloved you are
of God, it will tell the people, whom until now never understood you so.

God and this Book will keep up your Honor until your King comes, and then
you and yours having done most Excellent things, God and your King will give
you, and them as much Honor as is requisite.

I know Gods blessing goes with the Book, and that his Prophecy, fulfilled it
must be to your perpetual Honor, security, and happiness, but the Worlds
Amazement.

Sir, be pleased forthwith to read it, readily apply your self to do as it
directs, and never decline well doing all your days, you have both given you
of God from the unworthiest of his, and humblest of your Servants

Walter Gostelo.
From my House in Broadstreet, this 22. of January 1655. Sir,
having presented the Book and Letter to you, Oliver Cromwell Protector, and
since given to every of your Council one of the same, I shall proceed with my
utmost endeavor to possess all Christian Kings with the Book, the Jewish
Rabbis, the Sea of ROME, expose them to sail in the Cities of the three
Kingdoms, present them to both Universities, all which being my duty, as the
servant of God Almighty, and yours

VV. G.




