A State of Glory FOR SPIRITS OF JUST MEN UPON DISSOLUTION, DEMONSTRATED. A
SERMON preached in Paul's Church Aug. 30. 1657. before the Rt. Honorable the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London. By THO: GOODWIN, D. D.
President of Magd. Coll. Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Robert Dawlman. 1657.

TICHBORN Mayor.
Tuesday the first of September. 1657.
IT is ordered, That Doctor Thomas Goodwin be desired from this Court to print
his Sermon at Paul's the last Lord Day. And further, Mr. Alderm. Thomson is
desired to use all endeavors with him to that purpose.

SADLER.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sir ROBERT TICHBORNE, Lord Major: Together with the
Honorable COURT OF ALDERMEN Of the Renowned CITY of LONDON.
Greatly Honored,
THis imperfect Piece, and almost born out of due time, puts it self forth into
the world by your Command, but like Zarah giving out the hand, the body to
which that appertained remaining still in the womb. For this Sermon is but one
member; (and indeed, not so much the Hand, as the Foot, that is, the latter
part) of a larger Bulk or Body of Sermons, preached just before elsewhere upon
those foregoing Verses of this Chapter. My real purpose (after your Order for
this one) was, To have presented the whole entire Discourse unto YOU: and I
found not time, so much as leisure, and spirits failing me in the performance.
I have therefore done as the Midwife for that Child did (in the same Genesis 38.
28.) bound upon this foot (for by your force, and in obedience to you, it comes
wrong and backward) this Scarlet thread of Dedication, saying (as she) This is
come forth first: That if hereafter the rest may see the light, You may know
(if You will vouchsafe it) how to own and appropriate them all as Yours, as
being thus consecrated to You by these (in respect of the publication) the
first fruits of that whole Lump.

And now, what is my earnest desire and prayer for you? but according to the
tendency of the matter, it might be blessed to be an Helper to your Faith,
against the Time of your being unclothed of your flesh, your going into another
world: where you all profess to look for another, and better CITY, that is, an
Heavenly, whose Maker and Builder is God, who has or must work Us for the
self-same thing, or we perish everlastingly.

And, my Lord,

I have particularly directed it to wait on your Honor in the contemplation of
this very Aim, as a Signal whereof, Providence, and not my Design, having
seemed to give forth this semblance in that it allotted no other season (for it
could not come forth one day sooner) for its attendance on you, but the very
DAY of your being UNCLOTHED of your office (which are little civil deaths) and
going out of this your transitory Government over this great CITY ( the best,
and best governed in the world.) But the honor of this performed amongst us,
you still remain clothed with, and will ever wear, yea, and be clothed upon to
a glory for it at the latter day.

Those things even now said unto you all, being the brief Collect of this
ensuing Sermon, I turn into a Prayer for you all, who am

Your true Honourer and Servant in the Gospel, THO: GOODWIN.
Mag. Coll. Oxon. Oct. 23. 1657.
2 COR. 5. 5. Now he that has wrought us for the self same thing is God, who
also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.
THere is no point of more moment to All, nor of greater comfort to Saints,
than what shall become of their Souls when they die: It Is our next stage; and
things that are next, use more to affect us. And besides, it is the beginning,
and a taking possession of Our Eternity.

That these words should aim at this self-same thing, cannot be discerned,
without consulting the foregoing part of the Apostles discourse: and yet I
cannot be large in bringing down the coherence, having pitched upon what this
fifth Verse contributes unto this Argument; which alone will require more than
this time allotted, having also very largely gone through the Exposition of the
foregoing Verses elsewhere: and I now go but on where I left last. But yet to
make way for the understanding the scope of my Text, take

The Coherence in brief thus:

In the 16 Verse of the foregoing Chapter (where the Wellhead of his
Discourse is to be found) he shows the extraordinary care God has of [ Our
inward man] to renew it day by day; where Inward man is strictly the Soul with
its Graces, set in opposition unto Our outward man [the Body with its
appurtenances] which he says daily perishes, that is, is in a mouldring and
decaying condition.

Chap. 5. ver. 1. For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens. In this first verse of this fifth Chapter, he meets with this
supposition: But what if this outward man or earthly tabernacle be wholly
dissolved and pulled down, what then shall become of this inner man? And he
resolves it thus, That if it be dissolved, we have an house, a building of God
in the heavens. And what is the [WE] but this inner man (he had spoken of)
renewed Souls, which dwell now in the body as in a tabernacle, as the In-mates
that can subsist without it? And it is as if he had said, If this inward man be
destituted of one house, we have another. God that in this life was so careful
over this inner man, to renew it every day, has made another more ample
provision against this great change. It is but it is removing from one house to
a better, which God has built. As your selves (to speak in your own language)
if Wars should beset you, and your Countrey-house were plundered and pulled
down, you would comfort your selves with this, I have yet a City-house to
retire unto.

Neither is the terming the glory of Heaven, and that as it is bestowed upon a
separate Soul, alien from the Scripture Phrase, Luke 16. 9. That when you fail,
they may receive you into EVERLASTING HABITATIONS. Death is a failing ('it is
your City-phrase also when a man proves Bankrupt) A Statute of Bankrupt comes
forth then upon your old house ( Statutum est omnibus semel mori) and upon all
you have; and then it is that there is a receiving or entertaining that
otherwise-desolate Soul into everlasting habitations, that is, into an house
eternal in the heavens, as the Text.

Nor yet is the phrase of terming Heaven A City-house, remote neither: for Heb.
11. ver. 13. Abraham and the Patriarchs died in faith, (Mark that!) in faith or
expectation of what? He had told us, ver. 10. He looked for a City whose
Builder is God. What is a City, but an aggregation and heap of houses and
Inhabitants? Multitudes had died before Abraham, and gone to Heaven, from Adam,
Abel, Seth, downwards; and God promises him peace at his death, and a being
gathered to those fathers, Genesis 15. 15. There was then a City built, and
already replenished with Inhabitants; and amongst others, an house provided for
him, that is, his Soul built of God, and ready furnished against this removal.

Verse 2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our
house which is from heaven. In this Verse he utters the working of the
affections of Christians toward their being clothed upon with this house; and
so in order to this enjoyment of it, their DESIRING even to be dissolved: which
Paul also utters of himself, Phil. 1. Now if the first Verse speaks of the
glory of a separate Soul when he calls it an house, this second Verse must
intend the same.

Verse 3. If so be that being clothed, we shall not be found naked. In this
Verse he gives an wholesome Caution by the way; and withal insinuates, why he
used the word clothed upon, in the foregoing Verse, thus, speaking of the
glory of such a separate Soul, even because it is absolutely necessary that all
our Souls be found clothed first, and renewed with Grace and Holiness, and not
be found naked at our deaths, that is, nor devoid of Grace, and so exposed to
shame and wrath, as Rev. 16. 15.

Verse 4. For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened; not for
that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed
up of life. The fourth Verse gives a genuine and sincere account, why a
Christian does thus groan, and that after dissolution it self, in order to this
glory; which he sets out with an accurate distinction of their desires of
dissolutions, in difference from like desires in all other men: First,
Negatively, not for that being burdened we desire to be unclothed, or
dissolved; that is, simply for ease of those burdens: nor out of a despising
of our bodies we now wear (as their Heathen Wisemen and Philosophers did, and
others do) No. But secondly Positively, For this, as the top-ground of that
desire, That we would be clothed upon with that house (spoken of Ver. 1. and
that still taken in the sense, spoken of in the 2. Ver.) to the end that this
mortal animal life which the Soul (though Immortal in it self) now leads in the
body, full of sins, clogged with a body of death and miseries; (each of which
has a Death in it) and so it lives but a dying life; that this life may be
exchanged, yea, swalloed up by that which is life indeed, The only true Life,
the knowing God as we are known, and enjoying him: All which, as to our Souls,
is truly performed at our Dissolution; although the final swallowing up the
mortality of our bodies also, does yet remain to be accomplished: which will be
done at the latter day, at that Change both of Body and Soul, though in respect
of the Body it will be completed as then more fully.

This Interpretation, and the suiting of all the phrases used in this 4th
Verse, to hold good of this Exchange at death, I cannot, through straitness of
time, give an account of now: I have lately, and very largely, done it elsewhere.

This for the Coherence: I hasten to my Text.

TEXT.
Ver. 5. Now He that has wrought us for the self-same thing is GOD, who has
also given us the earnest of the Spirit.
THe current of the four former Verses running thus steadily along in this
channel; the stream in this verse continues still the same.

There is one word in this verse; [(...), For this self-same thing, God has
wrought us] which serves as a clue of thread drawn through the windings of the
former verses to show us, that one and the same Individual Glory has been
carried on all along, and still is in this verse also. So then we see where we
are.

What this self-same thing should be, ask the first verse and it will tell you,
it is That house eternal in the Heavens, a building of God, prepared by him
against the time that this earthly house is dissolved. Ask the second verse, it
is the same house we groan to be clothed upon with, when the other is pulled
down. Ask the fourth verse, and more plainly: It is that life, which succeeds
this mortal life the soul now lives in this body, and swallows up all the
infirmities thereof. And then here it follows, Even for this self-same thing,
etc. So then, if the glory of the separate soul be the subject of any of these
verses, then of all, and so of this verse also.

And to be sure it cannot be that extraordinary way of entrance into Glory, by
such a sudden change, both of soul and body into glory, at once, without
dissolution should be the self-same thing here aimed at. For it was not the lot
of any of those Primitive Christians (of whom the Holy Ghost here speaks this)
[ He has wrought us for this thing] that they should be in that manner
changed, and so enter into glory: but the contrary. For they all, and all
Saints since for these 1600 years, have put off their Tebernacles by death, as
Peter did, and speaks of himself, 2. Pet. 1. 14. and therefore the Scripture
(or Holy Ghost) foreseeing, as the phrase is, Gal. 3. 8. this change would be
their fate, would not have uttered this of them, [ God has wrought us for
this] whom he knew God had not designed thereunto.

Neither is it that those groaning desires spoken of in the foregoing verses,
2, 3, 4. is [ that self-same thing] here (as some would) for indeed as Musculus
well: If the Apostle had said, He that has wrought this thing in us, etc. That
expression might have carried it to such a sense: But he says, He that wrought
us for the self-same thing: And so it is not that desire of glory in us is
spoken of: But us, our selves and souls as wrought for that glory.

If it be asked, what is the special proper scope of these words, as touching
this glory of the Soul? The answer in general, It is to give the Rational
part of this point, or demonstrative Reasons to evidence to believers, That
indeed God has thus ordained and prepared such a glory before the Resurrection.
And it is as if the Apostle had said, Look into your own souls, and consider
Gods dealings with you hitherto, viz.

First, the operation of his hands. For what other is the meaning or mystery
(says he) of all that God is daily so at work at with you, in this life? What
else is the end of all the workings of Grace in you, and of God that is the
worker? This is his very design, He that has wrought us (that is, our souls)
for this very thing is God.

that work gives, there is also over and above the earnest of the Spirit given
to your souls now whilst in your bodies, in joy, full of glories of the same
kind (as earnest are) of what fullness of glory they are both capable of then,
and shall be filled with, when severed from your bodies, Who has [also] given
us [the earnest] of the Spirit.

.
We Preachers have it in use, as to allege proofs of Scripture for the points
or subjects we handle: So to give Reasons or Demonstrations of them. And so
does our Apostle here of this great point he had been treating of: and such
Reasons or Demonstrations run often upon Harmony and Congruity of one Divine
Thing or Truth kissing another. Also upon Becomingnesses or Meetnesses, that
is, what it becomes the great God to do. For instance; In giving an account,
why God in bringing many sons to glory, did choose to effect it by Christ's
death, rather than any other way. It became him (says he) Heb. 2. 10. For whom
are all things, and by whom are all things, etc. And so in the point of the
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 21. Since by man came death, by man came also the
resurrection of the dead; that is, it was congruous, harmonious, it should thus
be; the one answering correspondently to the other. The like congruity will be
found couched here, in Gods bringing souls to glory, before that resurrection.

Now there are two sorts of harmonious Reasons couched in the forepart of
these words, He that wrought us for this, is God.

I. That it is Finis operis and operntis, The End of the Work it self upon us;
and of God as an Efficient working for an End: God has wrought on us for this
very thing.

II. It is Opus Dignum Deo Authore, A Work as he is the great God, and as a
thing worthy and becoming of God as the Author of it: He that has wrought us
for this thing, is GOD.

There is a third point to be superadded; and that is, It is the Interest of
all three Persons: Which how clearly evidenced out of the Text, will appear,
when I have dispatched these former Doctrines.

I. Doctrine.
That it is a strong Argument, that God has provided a Glory for separate
Souls hereafter, That He has wrought us, and wrought on us a Work of Grace in
this life.

Ere the Reason of this will appear, I must first open three things, natural to
the words: which will serve as materials, out of which to make forth that
Argument.

First, that the Thing here said to be wrought, is Grace or Holiness; which is
a preparation unto Glory. (1.) Grace is the Work. And so, Phil. 1. 6. termed,
The good Work. A frame of Spirit, created to good Works: Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his
Workmanship, created unto good Works. The Text here says, Who has wrought us:
There similarly, We are his WORKMANSHIP. And (2.) Secondly, this Work is a
preparation to Glory. For, for one thing to be first wrought in order to
another, is a preparation thereunto. Now says the Text, He has wrought us for
this thing; and Romans 9. 23. it is in terminis, The vessels of Mercy, which he
had BEFORE PREPARED TO GLORY; which was by working Holiness: for it follows,
ver. 24. Even us whom he has called. Likewise. Col. 1. 12. Who has MADE us
MEET to be partakers of the inheritance of the SAINTS in light: Meet by making
us Saints. So then, Had prepared, Has made Meet, is all one with, Who has
wrought us for this thing. Here

principal Subject wrought upon, or prepared and made meet for Glory: It Is
certainly the Soul, in analogy to the phrase here. We use to say (when we
speak of our Conversion) Since my soul was wrought on. And though the Body is
said to be sanctified, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. yet the immediate subject is the Soul;
and that primitively, originally: the Body by derivation from the Soul. And
hence it is, the Soul (when a man dies) carries with it all the Grace by
inherency: All flesh is grass which withers; that is, the Body with all the
appurtenances, says Peter, 1 Epist. c. 1. v. 24. But you, having purified your
Souls, being born again of incorruptible seed (our Bodies are made of
corruptible seed, which is the opposition there) by the Word of God, which
lives and abides for ever: And this is the Word (he says he means) which by
the Gospel is preached (every day) unto you, ver. 25. and by preaching is
engrafted in your Souls, purifying [your Souls] ver. 22. In no other subject
does that Word (as preached) for ever abide. For the Body rots, and in the
grave has not an inherent, but a relative Holiness, (such as the Episcopal
Brethren would have to be in Churches consecrated by them) because once it was
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, who dwells in us.

And that it is the Soul the Apostle has here in his eye, in this discourse of
his in my Text, as that which he intends the Subject here wrought upon,
appears, if we consult the Wellhead of his discourse about the Soul, which is
the 16 ver. of the 4 Chap. Our inward man (says he) is renewed, etc. (there is
your wrought upon here) whilst the outward (the Body) perishes. Which Soul, in
being called the inward man, connotates at once both Grace and the Soul conjuct
together, and distinct from the Body, as well as from Sin and Corruption.
Elsewhere it is declared the subject first and originally wrought on, Ephesians. 4.
23. Be renewed [in the Spirit of your minds.] Look round about the Text, and
what is the [ US] wrought on? plainly this Inward man, by the Coherence before
and after. Ask ver. 1. If our earthly tabernacle (that is, our Body) be
dissolved, WE have, etc. that is, This inner man, our Souls, have; for the Body
is supposed dissolved. So likewise, ver. 4. [ WE] in this tabernacle, that is,
our Souls in these Bodies. More expressly after, ver. 8. our very Souls not
only whilst in our Bodies but when separate from our Bodies, have the [ WE]
given them; We are willing to be absent from the body, and present with the
Lord. The We present with the Lord, and absent from the Body, is nor can be no
other than a separate Soul in its estate of widowhood. And so here, ver. 5.
Has wrought US: The Soul bears the Person, carries away the Grace with it.

Time here specified in the Text, in which we are wrought upon: It is but this
life, and during the term thereof. Has wrought us, says the Apostle; Observa
quod non in futuro dicit, Parabir nos. Non demum parabitur; ubi jam induendum
est, etc. Musc. in lucum.
not in the future. Who shall work us for it: That [hath wrought] referring to
the work of Conversion at the first, Who [HATH MADE] us meet to be partakers,
etc. Col. 1. 12. and who does continue still to work us; the Preterperfect
being often put by the Apostle for the Present, God renewing the inner man DAY
BY DAY, Chap. 4. 16. So working upon it, in order to this self-same thing,
continually. Unto which words there, these here have an evident aspect; yet so,
as that time of working is but during this life: For it is whilst the outward
man is mouldring, and that by afflictions, which during this moment work an
eternal weight of glory, ver. 17. and that is expressly said to be but this
present time, Romans 8. So then, there is NO PARABIT in that other world: But as
Solomon says of man, There is no work after this life; No remembrance, says
David: Eccle. c. 9. v. 10
namely, which has any influence into a man's Eternity. Psalm. 6. v. 5.
So there is no working upon us in order thereunto, after death: God has done
his Do [hath wrought] and man has finished his course; as Paul of himself, and
in this Chapter of my Text, ver. 10. Every man receives the things done in his
body, be they good or evil. Those things that are done in this Body only;
therefore only what in this life he has wrought. And for this he has wrought
us, (says the Text.)

.
These things premised, I come to the Argument to be raised out of them, to
prove the Point in hand.

because they are immediately wrought in the Soul, that therefore when the body
dies the soul shall be taken up into life. That this is a meet and congruous
ordination of God, the Scripture it self owns, and seems so to pitch the reason
of it, in Romans 8. 10, 11. And if Christ be in you the body is dead, because of
sin: but the Spirit is life, because of righteousness. But if the spirit of
him that raised us Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that
dwells in you. He gives an account of what is to become hereafter both of the
bodies and souls of them in whom Christ is. (1.) First, for the body, that is
condemned to die, The body is dead because of sin. By Body I understand the
same which he in the 11. verse terms the mortal body to be raised up, which
(says he) is dead, that is, appointed to die, as one sentenced to death you
term a dead man. And this [ because of sin.] It was meet that that first
threatening of dying should have some effect to evidence the truth of God
therein. Only God is favorable in his ordination in this, that he arresteth
but the Body, the less principal debtor. But that (to be sure) shall pay for
it: It is appointed to all men once to die, even for men that are in Christ, as
this place of the Romans has it. Then (2.) follows, what remains the soul of
such an one when the body dies. [ But] says he, (speaking by way of exception,
and contrary fate too) The Spirit is life, because of righteousness. The
Spirit is the Soul in contradistinction to the Body. This, when the body dies,
is [ Life] He says not living only, or immortal; but is swallowed up into
life: And why? because of righteousness, which is Christ's image; and so
preserves, and by Gods ordination upon dying, elevates the soul, which is the
immediate and original subject of it, (which is the point in hand.) For this
thing it is, God has wrought it. But then because the Quaerie would be, Shall
this body for ever remain dead, because of (this first) sin, and bear this
punishment for ever? No: Therefore (3.) he adds, He that raised up Christ from
the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies. So at last, and then bringing
both body and soul together unto complete glory.

And the congruity of reason that is for this appointment, is observable,
something like to that 1 Cor. 15. As by man came death, so by man came also the
resurrection from the dead. For that sin that condemned us to this death, we
had from the first Adam by bodily generation, as the channel or means of
conveying it, who was (as other) Father of our flesh.

The arrest therefore goes forth against the body, which we had from that Adam,
because of that sin, conveyed by means of our bodies: for though I must not say
the body defiles the soul, or of it self is the immediate subject of sin; yet
the original means or channel through which it comes down, and is derived unto
us, is the generation of our bodies. The Body therefore congruously pays for
this, and the death thereof is a means to let sin out of the world, as the
propagating it was a means to bring sin in: but an holy soul or spirit which is
the Offspring of God, having now true holiness and righteousness from the
second Adam communicated to it, and abiding in it; and being not only the
immediate subject thereof, but further, the first and original subject, from
and by which it is derived unto the body. The womb, into which that immortal
seed was first cast, and in which the inward man is formed, and in respect of a
constant abiding in which it is that seed is termed incorruptible. Hence
therefore, says God of this Soul, [ It is life] It shall live when this Body
dies. There is nothing of Christ's Image, but is ordained to abide for ever. 1
Cor. 13 8.
Charity never fails, His Righteousness endures for ever; 2 Cor. 9. 9.
and therefore is ordained to conserve and elevate unto life the subject it is
in, and that is the Soul. This, as a foundation of the substantial parts of
this first Reason, out of this one Scripture, thus directly and explicitly
holding this forth.

.
I come (2.) to the Argumentation it self, which arises out of these things
laid together. (1.) That the Soul is the immediate Subject of Grace. (2.) The
first and Primitive Susceptive thereof. (3) And it self is alone and
immediately capable of Glory, which Grace is a preparation to. And (4.) that
God before our deaths has wrought all of Grace he intends to work, in
preparation to Glory. Out of all these a strong Argument does arise, That such
a Soul upon death shall be admitted unto Glory; and not be put to stay till the
time of the Resurrection, when both Soul and Body shall be joined again
together. And that this holds a just and meet convenience upon each, or at
least, all these grounds, when put together.

immediate subject of this working and preparation for Glory. Hence therefore
this will at least arise, That the inherency or abiding of this Grace wrought
in this Soul, depends not upon its conjunction with the Body; but so as it
remains as an everlasting and perpetual conserver of that Grace stamped on it;
yea, and carries it all with it self, as a rich Treasure innate unto it
wherever it goes, when separate from the Body. I say, it either has in it,
or appertaining unto it, all that has been wrought for it, either in it, or by
it. Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord: [And their Works
do follow them] They go to Heaven with them, and after them. And in what
subject else is it that the Seed of God remains incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
or the Word of God abides for ever? Ver. 25.
Or how else comes that saying to be performed, 1 John 2. 17. He that does the
will of God endures for ever? Having therefore all these riches by it, and as
complete (as, here, it shall be;) Meet it is, it should partake the benefit
thereof, and live upon them now when it is single and alone, and in its widows
condition. And it is an opportune season, that by a Glory given it for that
holiness, this should now appear, That it was the Soul which was the sole
intrinsic and immediate Receptive of all this Holiness. This the first. Add
also,

first and primitive subject of Holiness, from which it is derivatively in the
body. Meet it was this Soul should not be deferred till the appurtenance of it
be united to it, but be served first, and admitted into that Glory ordained;
and by having it self first possession given of that inheritance, the Body
might in its season be admitted derivatively thereinto from it, Magis
conveniens videtur ut animae in quibus per prius fuit culpa and meritum, prius
etiam vel puniantur vel praemientur. Aquinas cont. Gent. Lib. 4. cap. 91. sect.
3.
after that renewed union with it by the Resurrection. Reason good, that look,
as, in priority, Grace, the preparation unto Glory, was wrought: So, in that
order of priority, Glory it self should be communicated. And therefore seeing
its fate is to abide awhile alone; therefore first to enjoy, and drink both the
juice and the fruit of that Vine it is the Root of.

And (3.) it being in it self, when separate, as immediately capable of this
Glory, as when it shall be again united to the Body: For what is the Essential
of Glory, the substance of that Life that swallows up all? But (as we said on
ver 4.) Gods immediate Presence, and our knowing him face to face, as we are
known. Now of this the Apostle does in these 6, 7 and 8 verses, expressly inform
us, That the separate Soul is not only capable thereof, but that it then
begins to enjoy it: Therefore (says he) we are always confident, knowing that
whilst we are in the body, we are absent from the Lord; (For we walk by faith,
not by sight.) We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from
the body, and to be present with the Lord. Where to be present with the Lord,
and to live by sight, is expressly made the privilege of a Soul absent from the
body; which can mean no other state, than that of the Soul between the death of
the Body, and the Resurrection. For whilst it is present in the body before
death, it is absent from the Lord; and when it shall be present with the Lord,
after the Resurrection, it shall not then be any more absent from the body.
This conjunction therefore of absent from the body, and present with the Lord,
falls out in no state else, but only in that interim or space of time between.
And let us withal view this Place in the light, (by bringing the one to the
other) which that passage, 1 Cor. 13. 12. does cast upon it: For now we see
through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now I know in part, but then
shall I know, even as also I am known. [To see as in a glass darkly] there, is
to [ walk by faith] here: But to see face to face, and to know God as we are
known, (so there) is all one; and to attain to sight, and to be in Christ's
presence (here.) And to be sure, the Body is in no estate whatever capable of
knowing God, as we are known of him: None durst ever ever affirm that. For
besides that, the Spiritual Knowledge of God is proper to an Intellectual
nature: Further, So to know God, as God known us, and so to be elevated to the
similitude of Gods understanding, is not communicable to the Body. We may as
well dare to affirm God himself to be a Body, as that our bodies are capable of
ever being raised up thus to know God. Hence therefore, whether the Soul be out
of the body, as after Death, or so in the body, as it shall be after the
Resurrection; yet still it is the Soul that is immediately alone capable of
that sight and knowledge of God. And therefore seeing it depends not on the
body, it is as well capable of it before the Resurrection without the body, as
after the Resurrection in the body.

Only this must be added, That whilst indeed the Soul is at home in this body,
(this earthly tabernacle) it is not capable of this sight, of the Glory of God,
that is, so as to continue in the body, and enjoy it; for it would crack this
earthen vessel: as 1 Cor. 15. 50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God. And although Paul, as a stander-by, was an over-hearer, and an
eyewitness (by way of Revelation and Vision) of what the Spirits of just men
in Glory do enjoy: 2 Cor. 12.
Even as on the contrary, the Angels are often standers-by on Earth, and
overseers of us, what is therein done, (as the phrase is, Zech. 3. 7.) yet he
was not estated into it, or admitted a possessor thereof himself, no more than
Angels into an earthly estate; and therefore could not say, whether the
Revelation vouchsafed him, might not be in the body, as well as out of it:
Whereas God had otherwise long since peremptorily determined that question,
That no man could see God, and live; that is, at once continue in this body,
and see him face to face. And Paul here in my Text also determines it, That
whilst we are at home in the body, (as now) we are absent from the Lord: They
are two incompatible estates. But still when that which, thus, lets (this body)
is taken out of the way, the Soul it self is sufficiently capable, as truly as
ever it shall be.

.
But if this Argument from these be yet judged not home enough, but short; Then
let us in the fourth place added what force the third Premise will give to it,
concerning the Time of Gods working on us, to drive all closer home; namely,
That God has wrought upon the Soul in this life, all that he ever means to
work, by way of preparation for Glory. For this thing God [hath wrought us]
which though it might with the Enlargements and Sub-arguments that now shall
follow, be made an Argument alone; yet I choose to cast it into this total, to
make the whole the more strong.

Therefore (4.) gather up the Demonstrations thus: If the Soul be the immediate
and first subject of Grace, which is a preparation to Glory, and capable of
this Glory, when out of the body; And God, the great Agent or Worker, has
wrought all that ever he means to work in it, this way, by way of preparation
to Glory: Then, as Peter said in the case of admitting the Gentiles to Baptism,
Acts 10. 47.
What should hinder that these Souls should not be glorified, instantly, when
out of their bodies? If indeed, as the Papists, and corrupted Jews and Heathens
have feigned, there were any work to be after wrought, a Purgatory, or the
like; Then a Demurre or Caveat might be yet put in, to suspend this their
admission into glory: But the contrary being the truth, then, etc. Now the
strength of the Argument from this latter, superadded to the rest, stands upon
two strong Grounds.

First, if we consider what is common to God in this with all other, but
ordinary wise Efficients or Workers, that are intent upon their Ends, which
must be given to him, the only Wise, All-powerful God, (who is here said, as
an Efficient, to work us for this End.) When any ordinary Efficient has
brought his Work to a period, and done as much to such or such an End as he
means to do, he delays not to accomplish his End, and bring it to execution;
unless some over-powring impediment do lie in his way to it. If you have
bestowed long and great Cost upon any of your Children, to fit and prepare them
for any Employment; The University suppose, or other Calling; Do you then let
these your Children lie Truants, idle, and asleep at home, and not put them
forth to that which you at first designed that their Education unto? Will you
suffer them (in this case) to lose their time, Do you know how to do good to
your Children? and does not God? We see God does thus in nature. We say, when
the Matter is as fully prepared as ever it shall be, that the form enters
without delay: Now Grace is expressly termed a preparation to Glory. Also God
does observe this in working of Grace it self, when the Soul is as fully
humbled and emptied, and thereby prepared for the Lord, by John Baptists
Ministry, as he means to prepare it; the Work of justifying Faith presently
follows. In all his Dispensations of Judgments or Mercies, he observes the
same. When men's sins are at full (as of the Amorites) he stays not a moment to
execute Judgment: So in answering the Faith of his People waiting on him for
Mercies. And thus it is for Glory; I have glorified thee on earth, (the only
place and condition of our glorifying God) I have finished the work thou gave
me to do: And now (what now, and presently now remained there, follows)
glorify me, etc. Thus spoke Christ our Pattern.

Secondly, there is this further falls out, in this Case and Condition, of such
a Soul, as does indeed call for this out of a kind of necessity, and not of
congruity only. For whereas by Gods Ordination there are two ways of
Communion with him, and but two, unto all Eternity; either that of Faith, which
we have at present; and of Sight, which is for hereafter. Into these two, the
Apostle resolves all Gods Dispensations to us, ver. 7. of this Chapter, We walk
by faith, (namely, in this life) not by sight. And again, 1 Cor. 13. 12. [ Now]
we see in a glass, [Then] face to face. These two [ Now] and [ Then] do divide
the Dispensations for Eternity of time to come. The like in Peter, 1 Epist. 1.
8. In whom though [Now] you see him not, (as you one day shall) yet believing:
If therefore when the Soul goes out of the Body, that way of communion with God
by Faith utterly cease 2 Cor. 13. 8, 13.
, that door and passage will be quite shut up; God having 1 These. 1. 11 John 6.
28.
fulfilled all the work of faith (The work of God) with power, that ever he
intends: Then surely Sight must succeed according to Gods Ordination, or
otherwise this would inevitably follow, That the Soul would be for that
interim, until the Resurrection, cut off from all communion with God, whatever;
having yet all its acquired holiness of Sanctification abiding in it, and
Righteousness accompanying of it all that while. Look therefore as a Child
has two, and but two ways of living, and when the one cease, the other
succeeds, or Death would follow: In the Womb it lives by nourishment from the
Navel, without so much as breathing at the mouth: but it no sooner comes into
the world, but that former means is cut off, and it lives by breath, and
taking in nourishment by the mouth, or it must instantly die. So stands the
case with the Soul here between Faith and Sight: So that we must either affirm,
That the Soul dies to all spiritual actings and communion with God until the
Resurrection, which those Scriptures so much do contradict, John 9. 51.
He that believes has eternal life, etc. and shall never (no not for a
moment) die; Chap. 11. 26.
(and in those Promises it is not simply a sluggish Immortality, but to live,
and act, and enjoy God (which is our life) must needs be meant:) Or we must on
the other side affirm, That the life of Faith ceasing, and God yet having that
way wrought all that ever he intends, That then, Sight of God face to face
must come in its place: which indeed the Apostle in that 1 Cor. 13. affirms in
saying, ver. 10. When that which is perfect is come, then that which is but in
part is done away. There is not an utter ceasing of the imperfect, and then an
interval or long space of time to come between; and then, that which is perfect
is to come: but the imperfect is done away by the very coming of that which is
thus perfect. And in the 12th Verse he explains himself, That the imperfect is
this our seeing [Now] in a glass darkly, that is, by Faith; and that perfect,
to be that seeing God face to face, as that which presently entertains us in
that other world. Nay, the Apostle admits not so much as a moment of cessation,
but says, That the imperfect is done away, (v. 10.) and vanishes, (as v. 8.)
by the coming in of the perfect upon it: and so the imperfect, namely, [ Faith]
is swallowed up of the perfect, namely, [ Sight.] Now if we thus grant (as we
must) this separate Soul to have this sight, or nothing now left it, to enjoy
God any way by; Then it is no other than Glory, it is admitted unto: For, the
sight of God face to face, and to know as we are known, is the very essence of
Glory, as it differs from Faith. Neither indeed is that ultimate Enjoyment, or
happiness in God, which Souls shall have after the Resurrection, any other (in
Name or Thing) than the sight of God, as it is thus distinguished from Faith;
and therefore the soul is now admitted to the same enjoyment it shall be Then
for Kind, although it shall be then raised and intended unto far higher degrees
of Perfection.

.
And for a Conclusion of this first Point, that which follows in that place
lately cited out of 1 Pet. 1. v. 9. Receiving the end of your faith, the
salvation of your souls, may as fitly serve for the confirmation of all these
latter foregoing Notions, as to any other sense Interpreters have affixed.

I am aware how these words, Receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of
your souls, are interpreted of that joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which
the Verse before had spoken of, In whom though, Now, ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, so as, in those
joys vouchsafed the Saints are said to receive the salvation of their souls,
as being the earnest of it in the same kind, and so a part of the Reward of
Faith received in hand (as we say) and vouchsafed over and above the ordinary
way of living by Faith. This Interpretation I no way gainsay, nor will go about
to exclude: for I know it does consist with that other I am about to give, and
is subordinate to it: But if this Sense should obtain, that it were, Directly,
Alone intended, yet by consequence, and at the rebound, it does strongly argue
the point in Hand. For if whilst Faith continues, God is pleased to vouchsafe
such joys, much more when faith cease, He will vouchsafe a fuller Enjoyment:
for why else are these present joys termed Salvation? That is, in a sort part
of the taking possession of Salvation aforehand, and that as distinct from the
Right to Salvation, which Faith in ordinary gives without such joys at all
times to all believers: they have the name given them, as being an earnest of
the same kind, of that greater sum. And again, why are these present joys
termed the Salvation of their SOULS? But because they are intended by God,
(being also, now wrought immediately in the Soul, without the body's influence)
to be an earnest that it is their Souls, when without their bodies, shall have
that fuller possession given them; and so this earnest assigns this payment
to be made to this Legatee, the SOUL specified as the first receiver of it.
[2.] Every payment having a day, or set time appointed for it, which the
earnest obliges the trustee unto, as well as to make payment it self, and
uses to be at the end of the performance on his part to whom the contract is
made, this therefore is as elegantly designed to be the end of their faith;
there is the day of payment. And [3.] it would be hard to think that God should
give forth joys whilst faith continues; and then for so long a time as till
the Resurrection withdraw all communication of himself, both of faith and joy
(through sight) also. Surely they are not left worse than in this life they
were.

I also know, the Soul being the eminent part of man, is often in Scripture, by
a Synecdoche, put for the whole And I must not deny but that ultimately it is
intended here, it extending it self to the whole of Salvation first, and last
after Faith ended. Which sense on the other hand many interpreters are for.

I only contend for this, That the salvation of the soul is intended also of
that Salvation which falls out in the midst between these joys ( the earnest)
in this life, and that ultimate Salvation at the Resurrection, that is the
Salvation of the Soul, whilst separate, as being the next. It has a weight in
it that Salvation and Damnation should so often be said to be of the soul by
Christ himself, as Mat. 26. 16. What shall it profit a man to gain the whole
word (and so provide for his body) and lose his own soul? And again, in
speaking of the Soul as considered apart from the Body, Mat. 10. 28. Fear not
them that are able to kill but the body, and are not able to kill the soul. But
that which is more conjunct to my purpose; it is observable, that this our
Apostle Peter should choose to use in this Epistle, more than any other
Apostle, this phrase of [ Soul] in relation to Salvation, either as being the
eminent subject, and sometimes as the single subject both of Grace and
Salvation: So in this Chapter, You have purified your souls, etc. as the
immediate susceptive of the incorruptible seed (as was observed.) Then again,
in chapter 2. 11. Abstain from fleshly lusts which war [against the soul] and 8.
25. Ye are returned to the Bishop of your Souls. Which he speaks as being the
eminent part, and (upon separation from the body) the special charge he has
pastoral care of. And more directly to our purpose, chapter 4. last v. he exhorts
them when they come to die, to commit their souls to God, as then being to be
separate from their bodies. Now it were hard to think that this Salvation to
come should bear the title and name of the salvation of the soul in this and
other Scriptures; Heb. 10. v. last.
and that yet when this Soul shall in the other world come to subsist for a
long time single and alone, Jam. 5. v. last.
and then be properly and without figure: A mere soul without a body, a
lonesome soul: That during that state it should not be the subject of this
Salvation, and so intended here, when more properly and literally, if ever, it
is the salvation of the soul. And it would be yet more strange, that the
phrase, salvation of the soul, should be wholly restrained unto that estate of
the soul, when remitted to the body at the Resurrection, and only unto that;
And that word the soul should serve only synecdochically as a part put to
signify the whole man, as then it is to be raised up: but especially, it were
strangest of all, if it should be confined and limited in this place of Peter,
wherein this salvation of the soul is set forth for the comfort of such as were
to lay down their tabernacles of their bodies for Christ (as this Peter speaks
of himself in the next Epistle) and whose faith was then to cease with their
lives, whose expectations therefore he would in this case certainly pitch upon
that salvation of the soul which was next, which is this of the soul separate.
To confirm all which,

That which further invited me to this place, was this phrase [ The end of your
Faith] especially upon the consideration that he speaks it unto, such
Christians, who in those times were (as he foretells, chapter 4. v. 4.) shortly to
be martyred, and at present were sorely tried (v. 7. of this Chapter) and in
the last verse of the fourth, he thereupon instructs and exhorts them to
commit their souls (when they come to die) to be kept by God: And so understood
in a proper and literal sense, this salvation of their souls is in all
respects termed The end of their Faith.

First, in that it is the next and immediate event that Faith ends and
determines in, as Death is said to be the end of life. So noting forth, that
when Faith ends, this Salvation of the Soul begins and succeeds it. The end of
a thing signifies the immediate event, issue, period thereof. As of wicked men
it is said, whose end is destruction, Phil. 3. and Heb. 10. last v. Apostasy
and unbelief are said to be a drawing back unto perdition. And on the contrary,
there Faith is termed a believing to the salvation of the soul: And both note
out the final event and consequent of each, and salvation of the soul to be
the end of faith, when men continue and go on to believe, until their faith
arriveth at, and attaineth this Salvation of the Soul. To this sense also, Romans
6. 22. You have your fruit in holiness, and the [ end] everlasting life. And
the Apostle Peter having in the foregoing verses celebrated the fruits and
workings of their faith in this life, as in supporting them gloriously under
the sorest trials, v. 7. and then sometimes filling their hearts with joy
unspeakable and glorious, v. 8. he here at last concludes with what will be
the end or issue of it in that other life, when faith it self shall cease; and
what it is that then they shall receive, Receiving (after all this) the end of
your faith, the salvation of your souls, (...) in the present, by a frequent
and usual Enallage of time, being put for the future: for ye shall receive (or
being about to receive) to show the certainty of it: that when Faith shall end,
you may be sure on it, even of that Salvation (that great Salvation so spoken of
by the Prophets, v. 10.) of your souls, which as it has no end to be put unto
it, as Faith has: so no interruption or space of time to come between (during
which your souls should not be actually saved) A salvation of your souls singly
(whilst through death they shall so exist) as well as of the same souls
primarily, and more eminently, when both soul and body shall be reunited.

2. The end of your Faith, that is, of your aims and expectations in your
Faith: the end importing the aim or expectation, which is also a proper and
literal sense of that word. And upon this account also the salvation of the
soul, when they should die, that being the very next thing their eyes must
needs be upon, is therefore here intended.

And 3. The end of your faith, that is, as being that for which the great God
(who keeps us by his power through faith unto salvation, v. 5.) has wrought
this faith in you. Accordingly we find it termed the work of faith, 1 These. 1.
3. Which when God has fully wrought, and brought to that degree he aimed at in
this life; (or to use the Apostles own expression of it, 2 These. 1. 11. when
God has fulfilled the work of faith with power, he then crowns it with this
Salvation of the Soul without end. As James speaks of Patience, when it has
had its perfect work, chapter 1. 4. compared with v. 12. and so speaks my Text, for
this self-same thing he has wrought us. And therefore when this Faith shall
cease which he wrought for this, he will attain his end without delay: and you
(says he) shall attain your end also: and Faith thus ceasing if this salvation
of the soul did not succenturiate and recruit it anew, the end of this Faith
were wholly and altogether present destructive loss unto the soul in its
well-being until the Resurrection.

4. The [ End] signifies the perfection and consummation of any thing, (...).
as Christ is said to be the End of the Law, Romans 10. 4. and so the meaning is,
That your faith, which is but an imperfect knowing God, shall then, when it
cease, be swallowed up of sight, (which is all one with that salvation here)
tanquam perfectibile, a perfection, as that which is imperfect is said to be by
that which is perfect, 1 Cor. 13. 10. Thus much for the literal and proper
import of the word [ End.]

Now then. if we take the word [ End] in its proper meaning, and the word [
Soul] likewise in its native proper meaning also, which sense in Reason should
be first served (when the scope will bear it) then it makes for that purpose,
more fitly, which we have had in hand.

.
That nothing may be wanting in this last place cited, to make up all the
particulars in the foregoing Sections insisted on: So it is, that the Apostle
Peter does further plainly insinuate, That this salvation (here) consists in
the sight and vision of Christ (which was one particular aforementioned)
accompanied with joy unspeakable, and glorious. The Coherence (if observed)
makes this forth clearly: For whereas in the Verse immediately foregoing, he
had commended their present state of faith by this, Whom [NOW] though you see
not, yet believing, rejoice with joy unspeakable, and glorious. That [ NOW] you
see not, (in this life) is set in opposition, and carries a promise with it of
a Time to come, wherein they should see, even as Christ said to his Disciples,
Joh. 13. 33, and 36. compared, Whither I go, I [NOW] say to you, ye cannot
come; but thou shall follow me [AFTERWARDS]. So here [ NOW] believing, (which
is the Principle at the present which you live upon) you see him not; but when
the end of your faith shall come, you shall then see him; and in this it is
consists the salvation of your souls. So that still it carries on what I have
before spoken unto, That when Faith cease, Sight comes; yea, perfects and
swallows it up, as was said even now, out of 1 Cor. 13.

And let me add this, That the Apostle on purpose does bring in the mention of
this supereminent fruit of faith, ( Even Now when we see not) that believing,
ye yet rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious: On purpose, I say, to make
way for the raising up their thoughts and apprehensions, how infinitely
transcending that salvation of their souls must be, when Faith ending, they
attain to Sight, To see him face to face, whom their souls have loved: It is
implicitly as if he had said unto them, Oh! think with your selves, what Joy,
what Glory that must needs be, which exceeds and surpasses this that now
accompanies your faith, in an answerable proportion, as much as sight of
Christ's presence, and face to face, must be supposed to excel the knowledge of
him by faith, which sees him but as absent, darkly!

And further, give me leave to improve this Notion: You may take this assured
evidence, That your souls shall then see and enjoy God, when your faith shall
CEASE, which will be, when once your souls shall come to be separate from your
bodies by death: In that, even now, in this life, it is your Souls and Spirits
that are the immediate receptives, or partakers and subjects of such glorious
joys.

The soul enjoys them (though in the body, yet) without the help or concurrence
of the body, or the phantasms of it: yea, such Raptures do pass understanding,
that is, the common way of understanding, which by the use and help of the
body, or images in the fancy, the Mind exercises in other things, and which
do concur with the understanding ordinarily in faith. But this joy falls
into, and is illapsed within the soul it self immediately; yea, the weakness of
your bodies, and bodily spirits, will not permit you to have so much of this
joy, as otherwise the soul is now capable of by faith. And therefore by this
experimental taste aforehand in your own souls, you may be ascertained, That
your souls, when separate from your bodies by death, as well as when united
again unto their bodies, shall enjoy this great Salvation.

And thus much for the first Point raised out of the words, which did undertake
an Argumentation for a separate souls Glory and Happiness. (1.) From the
Condition of the Soul, as the immediate subject of Grace wrought in it. (2.)
From Gods Ordination of the Work wrought, To raise the soul up to life, whilst
Sin should bring Dissolution upon the body. (3.) From the Scope of the Worker,
God himself; who as an Efficient will accomplish the end, when his work for
that end is finished. And all these, as comprehended in what the very first
view and front of the words of my Text hold out, God has wrought us for the
self same thing.

.
But lo! a greater matter is here. It is not simply said, God has wrought us
for this; but, HE that has wrought us for this thing, is GOD: Thereby calling
upon us to consider, How great an Hand or Efficient is here, Even God, who has
discovered in a transcendent manner his Glory, in the Ordaining and Contriving
of this Work unto this great End. Take it Not therefore as a bare Demonstration
given from Gods working US to this end, such as is common to other Agents (as
has been said) But further, a Celebration of the Greatness and Glory of God,
in his having contrived this with so high an Hand, like unto the great God: And
is as if he had said, There is a design in this, worthy of God; HE has shown
himself in this, to be the great God indeed. He that wrought us for this, is
God.

When Gods ordinary Works are spoken of, it suffices himself to say, God did
Thus, or This: But when Gods Works of Wonder, then often you find such an
illustrious note of Reflection upon, and pointing at Him, to have done as God.
And it is ordinary among men, when you would commend the known worth of the
Artist, to say, He that wrought this, is such a Man, so to commend the
Workmanship.

And thus both when the holy Ghost speaks of this Glory it self, (which is the
End for which here) His style is, Whose Maker and Builder is God, Heb. 11. 10.
And in like equipage here of preparation to that End, he says, He that has
wrought us [for this thing] is God. In this very Chapter (2 Cor. 5.) (to go no
further) when the great Work of Salvation, in the whole of it, is spoken of, he
prefaceth thus to it, All things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself,
etc. that is, in this transaction he has appeared like that God [of whom all
things else are] and so more eminently in this than in all, or at least, any
other work. What there is said of Salvation in the whole, is here of that
particular Salvation of a separate Soul. You have the like Emphasis put Heb. 2.
10. of bringing many sons to glory [it became him] says the Text. Now put all
together, and the result is:

The SECOND POINT.
That to have provided a Glory for separate Souls of just men, wrought upon in
this life, is a dispensation becoming the great God: yea, and that there is an
artifice and contrivement therein worthy of God, and like unto himself, such as
he has showed in other his works of Wonder.

There are two Branches of this Doctrine, which I set otherwise out thus:

1. That it is a thing becoming the great God, thus to deal with such a
separate Soul, having been wrought upon.

2. That God has designed, and brings forth, therein, a glorious artifice and
contrivement, such as argues him a God Wise in Counsel, and Wonderful in
Working.

I. First BRANCH of this second Doctrine.

That it becomes God.

The account of this becomingness is best made forth, by comparing and bringing
together into an enterview, both the inward and outward condition of such a
Soul, and then the relations which God bears to it, such as should thereupon
move him (through his good pleasure) thus to deal with it.

You know I at first undertook chiefly Reasons of Congruity or Becomingness,
and such always consist of two parts, and when the one answers and suiteth to
the other, then the Harmony of such a Reason is made up.

Let US therefore consider, 1. What is on the Souls 2. What on Gods
part.

. I. On the Souls part.
Therein two things:

First, the species, the kind, and intrinsecal rank of being, which this
creature (we call the Soul) thus wrought upon stands in before God.

2. The outward condition or case this Soul is left in upon its parting with
the body, unless God takes it up into glory.

First, for its rank or kind of being.

Therein two things.

1. This Soul was by its first creation a Spirit, and that in the substance or
native kind thereof; and in that respect (considered apart for its union with
the body) is in a more special manner allied unto God, than all other creatures
(but Angels) are.

You have the Pedigree of man, both in respect of Body and Soul, set out, Acts
17. the extract of our bodies, in ver. 26. He has made of one blood all
nations of men: So then on that side (as we say) in respect of our bodies,
there is a Consanguinity of all men, being made of one blood, between one
another: But then in respect of our Souls, we are Gods offspring, ver. 28. and
so on that side there is an alliance (not of Consanguinity) unto God, upon the
account of having been created immediately by him, and IN the very substance of
our souls, made like him, and in his Image; and yet we are not begotten of his
Essence or Substance, which is only proper to His Great Son: And in a
correspondency unto this, God is styled Heb. 12. 9. The Father of our Spirits,
in distinction from the fathers of our flesh or bodies: (see the words) which
alliance or fatherhood, take it as in common with all men's spirits, lies in
this, That he not only created our Souls immediately out of nothing, but in
his own Image, as to the substance of them, which image or likeness other
creatures did not bear, which yet were made out of nothing, as the Chaos was;
both which appear, by putting two places together, Zech. 12. 1. He frames
their Spirits (speaking of the Souls of men) and that, [ altogether] says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 33. 15. (so Ainsworth and others read it) that is, both, each
of those Spirits; and also wholly and totally, every whit of the substance of
them: Creatio est productio totius entis; for creation differs from generation
in this, that it is a raising up or producing the whole of a being out of mere
nothing, that is to say, [ altogether] whereas generation presupposes
pre-existent matter; as in the generation of our bodies, which are not wholly
and every whit of God immediately, but he parents afford the stuff, the matter,
and the formative virtue besides, by which our bodies are framed. So then, in
respect of our first creation, our souls (apart considered) are thus allied to
God, which our bodies are not; being Spirits in the very being of them, that
altogether do owe that their being to him.

But there is a taint come upon the souls of all men by sin, so as this
alliance is thereby worn out, yea forfeited, until it be restored. Now
therefore these Souls (the only subject of our Discourse) being such as God
has wrought, and so are become his workmanship by a new and far nobler
Creation, and thereby created Spirit anew, according to what Christ says, Joh.
3.
That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. Hereupon these Souls are Spirit,
upon a double account: as you say of Sugar, it is double-refined; so this is
now become a spiritual Spirit, or Spirit spiritualized and sublimated; yea, and
thereby the inward Sanctuary, The Holy of Holies, the seat of Gods most
spiritual Worship; Romans 7. 22, 25.
which the body is not, but only as it is the outward Temple or Instrument of
this newmade Spirit.

And hereupon that original Affinity to God of Spirit, is not only restored,
but endeared; for now there is both the stuff, or the groundwork, and then the
work-manship, or embroidery upon it, and both of them the works of God; that so
look as the gold wrought upon commends the enamel, and then again the enamel
enhaunceth the value of the gold, so as both are considered in the price; so
it is here with this soul wrought by God in both respects.

.
Secondly, Consider we now again the Case and outward Condition of such a Soul,
that of it self would fall out to it upon the Dissolution of the Body.

1. It fails of all sorts of Comforts it had in and by its union with the body
in this world, Luke 16. 9. When you fail, says Christ, speaking of death, it is
your City-phrase when any of you break, and perhaps are thereby driven into
another Kingdom, as the Soul now is.

2. Then, if ever, a man's flesh and his heart fails, Psalm. 73. 26.

3. And (which is worse0 a man's Faith fails or cease after death, and all
his spiritual Knowledge as in this life, it is the express phrase used 1 Cor.
13. at the 8th verse, and which is prosecuted to the end of that Chapter. And
so all that communion it had with God in this life is cut off: It is of all
creatures left the most destitute and forlorn, if God provides not.

And yet fourthly, It is now upon death (which it never was before) immediately
brought into the presence of God. Naked soul comes before naked God. Eccles. 12.
7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: And the SPIRIT shall
RETURN UNTO GOD that gave it: it is put out of house and home, and turned upon
its father again.

This as to the Souls condition.

II. God part..
This is a special season for God to show his love to such a soul, if ever
before or after, an opportunity, such as falls not out, neither before, whilst
it was in the body; nor after, when it is united to the body again, at the
Resurrection: if ever therefore he means to show a respect unto a poor soul,
which is his so near kindred and alliance, it must be done now. We read in the
73. Ps. 26. My flesh and my heart fails (as at death to be sure it does) but
God is the strength of my heart, both in this life and at death to support me [
and my portion for ever] in the life to come without any interruption or vacant
space of time, as that [ ever] imports: and that David spoke this with an eye
unto the Glory to come, when Heart, and Flesh, and all in this world he foresaw
would fail him, is evident by what he had immediately meditated in the words
before, v. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, so in this life, and
afterward (that being ended) shall receive me unto glory. The contemplation
whereof makes him cry out again, v. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? for all
things else will fail me one day, when my flesh utterly fails me also: And
There is none upon earth (where he had at present many comforts and comforters)
in comparison OF THEE. You see God is the portion of the whole of his time,
even for ever, as v. 26. and his estate in heaven and earth divide that time
and portion between them, and no middle state between both, but when the one
cease the other begins, for between them two must be the [ for ever] and when
all fail him which he had on earth, then God alone becomes his happiness in
heaven. But this only in general shows what God is and will be to a soul in
this condition.

.
But I having undertaken to proceed by way of congruity, I must further, more
particularly show, how in a correspondency to this inward and outward state of
this Soul, he shows himself God, and how meet and becoming a thing it is for
God to receive it into Glory, upon the consideration of many Relations, which
he professedly bears to such a soul.

1. God is a Spirit, and thereupon in a special manner (as Wisd. 11. 26. The
Lord a lover of souls above all his other creation. So it is there, Thou art
merciful to all because they are thine, O LORD THOU LOVER OF SOULS [God is a
Spirit] when therefore this naked, and withal sublimated spirit (by its being
born again by his own spirit) and so assimilated to God himself, a pure spark
now freed and severed from its dust and ashes, flying up (or is carried rather
by Spirits, Luke 26. 22.
the Angels, out of their like spiritual love to it as a Spirit) unto that
great Spirit, Heb. 1. ult.
that element of Spirits, it will surely find union and coalition with him, and
be taken up unto him: for if, as Christ speaks, John 4. 23. God being a Spirit,
therefore seeks for such as worship in spirit and truth, that is, he loves,
delights in such as a man does in a companion or friend, who suits him. And
does God seek for such whilst they are on Earth? Then surely when such Spirits
shall come to him, and have such a grand occasion, and (indeed) the first
occasion in such an immediate way to appear before him, in such a manner and
upon such a change as this, as they never did before; these Spirits also having
been the seat, the inner Temple of all this spiritual worship and sanctifying
of him in this world: surely God who sought such before, will now take them into
his bosom and glory: we also read Isa. 57. 16, 17. of the regard he bears to
persons of a contrite and humble Spirit to revive them upon this superaded
consideration, that they are souls and spirit, and so thereby allied to him,
the lofty one. Hear how in this case he utters himself, The Spirit would fail
before me, says he, and the souls which I have made. He speaks of their very
souls properly and respectively considered, And [ them] it is which he
considering, and it moves him unto pity; for he speaks of that in man, whereof
God is in a peculiar manner the Maker or Creator [ The spirit which I have
made] (says he) and it is one of the eminent titles he takes into his coat,
The framer of the spirit of man within him, Zach. 12. chapter 1. as in many other
places: This is argued also in that he speaks of that in man which is the
subject sensible of his immediate wrath. I will not contend for ever; nor will
I be always wroth. (This I have observed in what is public of mine.) Child of
Light; walking in Darkness.
Now what moves him to remove his wrath from such an one? The spirit would
fail (says he.) Now does God thus profess to have a regard to them in this
life, and that upon this account, that they are Spirits, lest they should
FAIL, or faint; and shall we not think that when indeed otherwise they do
fail (as after death you have heard (even now) Christ himself expresses they
would) and would upon all these considerations beforementioned, sink into
utter desolation, unless they were received into everlasting habitations (as
Christ there also speaks) Do we think that God will not now entertain them? The
time is now come; the full time to have pity on them.

2. God at this season, forgets not, but full well remembers his Relation of
being [ THEIR CREATOUR] both by the new, and also first creation (the new
reviving and ingratiating the remembrance of the first) [ The SOULS which I
HAVE MADE] said he in Esaias. But in our Peter this is more express, and
mentioned as that which indeed moves God (and should be accordingly a support
to our Faith) to take care of our Souls when we come to die, even upon this
account, that he is the faithful creator of them, 1 Pet. 4. last. Wherefore
let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the KEEPING OF THEIR
SOULS to him, in well-doing, as unto a FAITHFUL CREATOR. He speaks this
specially unto such as were continually exposed unto persecution unto death for
Christ in those Primitive times; which therefore, v. 12. he terms the fiery
trial, and ver. 17. forewarns them of a time of judgment was begun, and going
on upon the house of God, such as they had not yet felt; who yet Heb. 10. 32,
33, 34. had suffered reproach and spoiling of their goods (as Peter writes to
the same Jews) hereupon Peter pertinently instructs them to commit the keeping
of their souls unto God. At death you know it is that when men's bodies are
destroyed, and so the season when their souls to be separated therefrom should
be committed to Gods care; as our Darling (as our Translation) or lovely soul,
Psalm. 22. See Ainsw.
when separate (as others) as Christ in David speaks, Ps. 22. And Peter had in
his eye Christ example, and pointed them thereunto, who at his death committed
his separate Soul or Spirit into the hands of God, Luke 23. 46. and the word
commit is one and the same in both these places: (...).
only there is this difference, that whereas Christ says, Father I commit,
Peter substitutes another title of Gods (there being more than one Relation
moving God, and strengthening our Faith to this) even of faithful creator.
And I understand not the first creation only or chiefly here meant by Peter;
but the second creation chiefly (which brings into repute and acceptance with
God the first again together with its own) and so God is thereupon engaged to
be faithful in his care and provision for such souls, according to his
promises: And faithfulness does always respect and refer unto Promises; and
my reason why thus I understand it, is, because I find Gods faithfulness still
annexed unto his calling of us, that is, converting us, which is al one with
this new creation: Faithful is he that has called you, that is, made you new
creatures. 1 Cor. 1. 9. 1 These. 5. 24. And I find that David also urges it upon
God as a motive, as in other Psalms. So Ps. 138. 8. Forsake not the works of
thine own hands, that is, this double workmanship of thine of the first, and
then superadded unto that, of the second creation which he urges thereby to
move him to perfect the work begun, and to be merciful unto him for ever, in
the former part of that verse.

3. God professes himself the FATHER of SPIRITS; which relation, though it
speaks his being the Creator of them, at the first, yet has something more of
bowels in it: it says withal something further, when it falls out that such
Spirits as he is a Father unto by the first creation, are also the subjects of
His eternal love, by Grace and Election unto the Adoption of children, as Ephesians.
1. 3, 4, 5. see the words. Which love, having accordingly taken hold of their
souls by a work of Grace wrought upon them in this life, thereby owning them as
his, in this case, that God that is a father of their Spirits by the law of the
first creation, is in a more transcendent manner become the father of the same
spirits by Grace, and the second Creation superadded: Hence it falls out, in a
parallel way, that (as it was said) such souls were become [ Spirit] upon a
double account, that is spirits for the substance of their being, and again
spirit, by being born again of the [ spirit] so answerably it is, that God
stands in relation unto them as a father of their spirits upon the like double
respect. And this is equitable upon a very great account; for his relation of
Father is more eminent to his Grace by Election, and then again by the grace of
his second Creation then it could be any way supposed to be by the first
creation. And therefore is set and pitched in like singularity and eminency upon
the same object, that is their spirits. And hence it may well, yea must be
supposed and acknowledged, That if God did make such a darling of the Soul,
such an account of it by creation, as to entitle himself so specially the
father thereof, then certainly this love of grace much more has in like
equipage taken up the same gracious special relation in its kind of Father
thereunto: not only because Natura shall never be found to exceed Grace in its
favors; but that indeed the motives are far greater, that God should extend
the like and greater privileges where he meant to love by election and choice,
then he did where he loved only by a due and meet law of creation: So that
when God shall profess himself a father to their spirits, speaking to such as
are his Elect, he strongly insinuates thereby, That he is by Grace likewise
the father of their spirits in a peculiar manner. And truly that speech of our
Savior at his death confirms it, Father into thy hands I commit my spirit: It
was not barely as a father of his spirit by creation (as our all know) but by
everlasting love, and so in that respect also in a peculiar manner the Father
of his spirit; and therefore as to a Father he commends his separate Spirit
unto him. And this he did, although he was to rise again in less than three
whole days space.

Now we read Heb. 12. 12. the Apostle to hold forth this very relation of Gods
being a father of spirits, with this promise thereunto annexed, That they
should live: which relation of Father, etc. although it be there explicitly
spoken in respect of their first Creation (which is common unto the Saints with
others) yet being uttered of and unto men in the state of Grace (as those were
supposed, whom he there exhorts, and that to move them to be subject unto him
as such; with promise, that they should live) it evidently respects not
merely the relation of Father in respect of what was past the act of creating
them, but it looks to the future, That they depended upon him (as children do
upon Fathers for their future livelihood, so these) for to live in him and with
him as a father to their Spirits by Grace. For I take hold of that word [ and
live] this life is well interpreted by ver. 14. They shall see God, that is, be
glorified, and so I conclude all thus, that if he would have them be subject
unto God in holiness, as upon that relation, as unto the father of spirits,
with this promise, That they should live; then surely one special aim of the
promise is answerable, and has this eye, That God as a Father of their spirits
will therefore take care of their spirits singly, and so when separate, that
they shall live. And that accordingly he will give demonstration of this
special relation born to their spirits (when the occasion shall be) considered
apart in bestowing this life on them: and truly when its more proper for him to
show himself a Father then when their souls after their subjection to him in
holiness here accomplished, and when that as naked spirits they come to stand
in need, and stand before him in his presence, being now turned out of house and
home, and quite cashired out of this world, and come stripped and naked of all
but holiness unto their Father (for it is said They return to God that gave
them) who proves to be their Father by Grace. And doubt not of it but he will
certainly then own them, and give them a Fathers blessing, and not reject them
as if they were but Bastards and no children (as that Chapter to the Hebrews
speaks) but as spirits, who as sons that have served him, and been subject to
him.

Add to this, Fourthly, God his being our God, which is more home to the
demonstration of this point then all the former. The Text says, He that
wrought us for this, is God. I add, he is your God. And this alone, if we will
take the Scriptures verdict, will carry it, and lo, as he is styled The Father
of spirits in common, and yet withal a father of their spirits, out of special
love: So in like manner, Numb. 16. 22.
he is styled both The God of the spirits of all flesh, (that is, of man, Job
12. 20.) thus in common; and also to his Elect, I am your God by grace. And
these two relations, God and Father, are commensurate, and exactly parallel,
whether they be applied unto all men in common, or to the Elect in special, he
is termed The God of the Spirits, and likewise, The Father of the Spirits of
all men: So in common, answerably he is Your God, and Your Father, by special
grace to his Elect; both which in this latter respect you find yoked hand in
hand, Joh. 20. 17. Look how far he is a God of the one, so far a Father
also extends in the other: And look how far that he is our God, so far
reaches also that he is Our Father. If therefore the God of our Spirits, to
provide for them because he is our God, then answerably the Father of our
Spirits in the like peculiarness, because our Father. And so the proof of this
fourth Particular, will add further strength and confirmation to that we
presented in the former.

Now that his being our God (which is the substance of the Covenant of Grace)
does engage him to provide glory for separate Souls, That one instance of
Abraham (The Father of the faithful, and we all his sons personated in him) is
a sufficient evidence, God did profess himself The God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and unto Abraham, Genesis 15. 1. personally, I am thy abundant reward,
(which respected the life to come) and his Friend, 2 Chronicles. 20. 7.

Now the Scriptures of the New Testament do improve this relation of Gods unto
us, unto two inferences drawn from Abraham's instance: whereof the one is the
point before us.

The first is Christ's inference from thence, That therefore Abraham's soul
lives, and Abraham both soul and body shall rise again, for God is not the God
of the dead, but of the living, Matthew. 22. 31. Thus Christ.

2. Paul's collection from the same Promise, is, that God had provided in the
mean time for Abraham's soul before the Resurrection, a City, and an House
therein for him. Thus Heb. 11. 16. But now they desire a better country, that
is, an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he
has prepared for them a City. To give light to this, Paul had represented the
story and case of Abraham, and the rest of the Patriarchs, in the verses before,
to have been this; That God had indeed promised the Land of Canaan to him and
them, ver. 8, 9. whereupon, ver. 13. it is said, That these all died in faith,
not having received the promises, being strangers in the land; yea, not having
a foot of land in the Land of Promise, as Stephen speaks, Acts 7. 5, 6, 7. And
also Paul, in the 9th verse of this Heb. 11. Now then, when they died, what was
it their faith expected in stead thereof? The 10th verse tells us, He looked
for a City whose maker and builder is God. From which compared, observe, That
when he died, his faith was thus pitched to look for this City, in stead of
that Land of Canaan promised. This was the expectation of their faith on their
part. Well, but how does it appear, that this flowed from Gods having professed
himself to be the God of Abraham, etc. his reward, and his friend? You have
this clear in the 16th verse, where you have the whole summed up as the
Conclusion of the story, and as the proof and ground hereof; but now they
desire a better Country, that is, an heavenly: there is their faith and
expectation when they should come to die. Then it follows, Wherefore God is not
ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City; which is
spoken in full answer to that their expectation at their deaths, to show, that
God in professing himself to be their God, he had thereby engaged himself
according to his own intent in that promise, to make this provision for them at
their deaths: The words are express, Wherefore God is not ashamed; what should
this mean in this Coherence, but that his declaring himself to be their God,
did import and carry this with it, That he had provided this estate for them at
their death, even an heavenly; and, that otherwise (as the Apostle glosseth
upon it) he had not come up unto the amplitude of, nor filled full this
convenanted Engagement and Profession of HIS BEING THEIR GOD. Will you have it
in plain English (as we speak) if he had not made this provision for their
souls, he would have been ashamed to have been called their God: thus deeply
does this oblige him, That he is our God and Father, which is the point in hand.

And judge of this in the light of all that Reason we have hitherto carried
along; and again, let this inference of the Apostle mutually serve to confirm
us in all that Reason. For poor Abraham to be driven out of his own Country by
God, who called him to his foot, and said no more, but as a Master to his
Servant, Take your Cloak, and follow me (who must presently, without more ado,
trig and foot it after his Master) as Isa 41. 2. and then to live a stranger in
the Land of Promise, upon the faith, that God would be his God: which faith in
him was also to cease when he came to die. If this God in this case should not
have taken care to answer his faith in some greater way, in stead of the
possession of Canaan; and that after, upon his being turned out of that Country
too, which he sojourned in during this life, if God had not provided another
House, or Country, or City for his soul, that was to live, to bring it into,
when it should be deprived of all in this world; The Apostle tells us, God (in
this case) would have been ashamed to have been called his God: which now,
having provided so abundantly for him upon dying, there is superabundant cause
to say, God is not ashamed; for that is a diminutive, implying, That he
infinitely exceeds that their expectation could be supposed to be.

Let us but view the force of this inference of the Apostles (and so of all the
reasonings hitherto read) But according to man, or what is found amongst men,
(and God will be sure infinitely to surpass men in his ways of favor.) Take an
ordinary friend, if his friend be turned out of house and home, plundered,
banished, driven out of all, as the Steward in that Parable, Luke 16. was, and
comes to his friend at midnight, as in that other Parable, Luke 11. 5, 6. will
not his friends entertain him into their houses; as ver. 9. of Luke 16. yea,
and rise at midnight to do it, as ver. 5, 6. in that Parable of Luke 11. shall
profession of friendship engage and oblige men to do this, and shall not Gods
professing himself to be our God, Father, Friend, engage his heart much more?
Nay, will he not so entertain them, as shall exceed all wonderment? What need I
say more than this? Wherefore He is not ashamed to be called their God: He will
therefore give you an entertainment that shall be worthy of his being your God.

The fifth and last Consideration is, That these separate Souls having done and
finished all their work, that in order to glory God has appointed them for
ever to do, they now at death appear before him as a JUDGE AND REWARDER. And
that is the fifth Relation moving God to bestow at this season such a glory on
them. How that then the Soul returns to God, you have heard again and again out
of Eccl. 12. 7. and that it is upon the account of his being the Judge thereof
at the end of their work in this life. The Chaldee Paraphrase has long since
glossed upon it, It returns to God, that it may stand in Judgment before Him.
In this life it came unto God by faith, as the Apostle speaks, believing that
God is, Heb. 11. 6.
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; and now at the end
of its faith, it comes unto God for the reward of its faith, as some interpret
that 1 Pet. 1. 9. (which we so largely have insisted on.) This is certain, That
in that Promise to Abraham, To be his God, he intended and included, his being
to him an exceeding great reward. Genesis 15. 1.
And so we come to connect this fifth Head with the foregoing. And therefore
if the being his God, moved him to prepare that City against his death (as has
been said) Then surely his being his Reward, does also then take place. I shall
not omit it, because it falls in the next Chapter, Heb. 12. 23. that in that
stupendous Assembly of Heaven, God the Judge of all is mentioned between the
Church of the firstborn which are written in heaven; this before: and the
Spirits of justified men made perfect; this after it: For there are none of
these firstborn, or the Spirits of just men, do come to sit down there, but
they pass the award of this Judge first, for they sit down by him; and surely,
having done all their work in the time of that day is allotted to each man to
work in, it is a righteous thing with God to give them a Reward in the evening
of this day, (which is Christ's time set for rewarding, and it is the twelfth
and last hour succeeding the eleventh of the day, See Burgensis, Maldonat. etc.
Lev. 19 13.
Matthew. 20. 6, and 9. compared) which is when the night of death comes. Now
there is a Law given by God, that the wages to a man hired should be given him
(by him that set him awork) in his day, that is, says the Septuagint, the very
same day, so as his work, or the wages of his work, abide not with thee all the
night until the morning, Deuteronomy. 24. 15.
says God, Deuteronomy. 24. 15. Did God take care for hirelings, when their work was
done not to stay any space of time, no not a night, and does he not fulfill this
himself unto his Sons that serve him? Surely yes: he defers not, nor puts them
off to the morning of the Resurrection, as the Psalmist elegantly calls it,
Psalm. 17. last. It abides not with him all that dark and long some night, or
space after death, in which their bodies rest in the grave, which is termed
Man's long home: Eccles. 12. 5.
and, The days of darkness are many (says Solomon) no; he rewards them in the
evening of the day, besides what he will add to it in the morning. It is
observable, that Rev. 6. 9, 10. concerning the separate Souls slain for Christ,
that whilst they cry for Justice on their enemies only, And when he had opened
the fifth Seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the
word of God, and for the testimony which they held, And they cried with a loud
voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth? that they had white robes given them
to quiet them in the mean time; ver. 11. And white robes were given unto every
one of them, and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little
season; till they heard that vengeance also was executed on that Roman Empire
for their blood shed. And thus to deal is a righteous thing with God.

Thus you have seen the Point confirmed from all sorts of relations that God
bears unto us, by congruous Reasons, that so it becomes God, the great God to
do -- He that has wrought us for this thing, is God. And so much for this
first Branch of this second Doctrine.

. The II. BRANCH of the second Doctrine.
That there is a glorious Contrivement and Workmanship carried on in this
Dispensation of his, like unto the great God indeed.

This carries on this Point yet higher. For, it is not only an Ordination
becoming God, (upon the respects mentioned) but there is an Artifice, a
Workmanship in it, such as he uses to show in his Works of Wonder, even in
this, That he should work upon men's Souls in this life, and then bring them
into a glory, he had in the mean space been a working also for those their
souls. This is the great God indeed.

When God secretly bestows Cost and Curiosity in preparing matters for such or
such an end; and then again, as hiddenly, has laid out a greater Art, Skill
and Workmanship upon that End it self; and then has exactly suited and matched
the one to the other: when All comes to be finished, and both wrought and
brought together, then will an infinite surpassing Glory arise unto God out of
all, which deserves to have this Notoriety (that is here) put upon it, He that
has wrought this for that, Is GOD: and lo, this is found here, which is
demonstrated, if we view, 1. Each of these Workmanships singly and apart.

2. Jointly, as designed and fitted each to the other.

.
1. Each singly: If there were no such ordination of the one for the other, yet
so considered, they deserve to have, each, an [ He that has wrought this, is
God] to be written under it.

1. For his Artifice, in working us in this life. Learned Cameron has but one
Note upon this whole fifth Chapter, In his Myrothecium.
and it falls to be upon this very word [ who has wrought] and it is this:
This word (says he) as used by the Septuagint, (...).
signifies Rem expolire rudem and informem, To polish a thing that is rude, and
without fashion: for which he gives instance out of Exodus 35. 33. in Bezaleels
work (whom, as the 31, 32 verses speak of him, God had filled with his Spirit
in all Wisdom, in all Workmanship, to devise cunning work.) And again, the
same word is used of the Temple-work (that other was for Moses Tabernacle) 1
King. 6. 36. by Solomon, which how transcendent a structure it was, you have
all read or heard. An infinitely surpassing Art then has the Spirit himself
(who is the immediate worker in this) shown in the framing, and hewing, and
curiously carving and engraving those living Stones, that grow up into a Temple
unto God, 1 Pet. 2. 5. especially considering the utter remoteness,
indisposedness, yea crookedness and perverseness in the matter wrought upon
(our Souls, filled with the contrary form and workmanship of Satan) Ye are his
workmanship, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 10. And truly, if we could enlarge upon
all the varieties of dealings God uses to each Soul to work it, the several
sorts of gracious dispositions he impresseth and carveth upon it; the manifold
actings of every soul drawn forth by him, you may take a view of some in the
very next chapter to that of my Text, 2 Cor. 6. from the 4. v. In much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, v. 5. In stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings, v. 6. By
pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the holy Ghost, by
love unfeigned, v. 7. By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor
of righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left, v. 8. By honor and
dishonor, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet true: v. 9. As
unknown, and yet well known: as dying, and behold, we live: as chastened, and
not killed: v. 10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: as poor, yet making many
rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. v. 11. O ye
Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged. What a glorious
Embroydery upon the soul of a poor believer will in all these things appear,
when finished! Psalm. 45. 13, 14. The Kings daughter is all glorious within, her
clothing is of wrought gold: she shall be brought unto the King in raiment of
needle work.

2. For his Art and Workmanship bestowed in the glory of the Soul in the other
world; if any work (but Christ, God-man) be his Masterpiece, it is the framing
of that House, and building spoken of v. 1. of this chapter We have a building of
God, a house not made with hands: And the 11. of the Hebrews 10. expressly uses
two artificial words, (...) the Artificer in it, and (...) the Artificer in
it, and the Builder of it, that is, who has shown his art and skill in
building of it. So then in each his Workmanship appears. I do but add this
toward the confirmation of the main point in hand.

Has the Great God perfected both works upon the soul as much as he means to
work in Heaven? Also prepared a Building for it? And will he then (think we)
let both lie empty? of the one, says Heb. 11. 16. [ He has prepared for them
a city] of the Soul, in like manner [ He has wrought us for this self-same
thing] Will God (think we) leave this his House stand desolate, when he has
been at such cost in both? Does any man or Landlord build or repair an house,
and then let it lie empty, when he has a Tenant fit for it? God is said not to
be a foolish Builder in respect to perfecting; and he is much less a careless
builder, to neglect to take his tenants into it, when both are ready and fitted
each for other. This for the first, viz. the consideration of each singly.

.
Let us consider them, next, jointly, that is, as they are in such a manner
wrought apart, so as to suit and match one the other, when brought together in
that manner, as it must be said of them. [ For this thing has God wrought us]
Yea, and therein it is he has appeared to be the Great God.

For therein, even to wonderment, does the Glory of God in his works appear,
and that he is wise in counsel, and wonderful in working, when he has
hiddenly contrived one thing for another, when as each are in themselves, and
apart glorious. It is said by David of himself (and it is true of all men in
their measure) Psalm. 139. 15. I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in
the lowest parts of the earth; that is, in my mothers womb, as the context
shows; which are termed the Lower parts of the earth, as when Christ is said,
Ephesians. 4. to have descended into the lower part of the earth; that is, to be
conceived in the womb of a Virgin; when a child is born, a lump of flesh,
animated with a soul comes forth, curiously wrought, etc. but wrought, for
what? in David's person (in which this was spoken) it was for a Kingdom, the
supremest condition of enjoyments in this World. But in every other man (that
is born) it is that he was curiously wrought, in a fitness and capacity to all
things that are in this world, made and prepared exactly for it long before it
came into the world; you may see it in Adam (our first pattern) more lively.
God was busy for six days in making this world, the Angels all that while
stood wondering with themselves, to what end, Job 36. 7.
or for whom all this was prepared. At the end of the sixth day, they saw God
to set down into the world this little thing called Man; and then they ceased
their wonderment; for they saw all this world (prepared aforehand) set in man's
heart, and all in man curiously wrought and fitted for all things made in this
world, richly to enjoy, as 1 Timothy 6. 17. We may apply that in the Text, to this
it appeared, That he that has man for this self-same thing is God; both works
of wonder apart, and yet as fitted to each other: All wonderment exceeding -- I
might much more enlarge upon the suiting of Christ the Head and Husband, and
the Church His Body and Wife, wrought and growing up to him in all ages, both
apart, secretly and hiddenly prepared, and each so glorious in themselves, and
yet put together. Let us refer our Admiration hereat until the latter day.
Just thus it is in fitting the soul for that glory: and again, that glory in
Heaven for that soul: God works the one for the other apart. -- The very
similitude in the former verses do import so much; He styleth Glory in Heaven a
being clothed upon, and Holiness here he compares to an under-garment, which
that of Glory is to be put over, or upon: There was never a curious Artist in
making Garments that ever took measure of the proportions of an upper and under
Garment, to fit the one to the other, as God has in proportioning his work
upon us here, and his preparation of Glory for each of us in the world to come:
He has took exact measure, and his law is (that designed his own workings on
both hands aforehand) that every man shall receive his own reward according to
his own labor, 1 Cor. 3. 8.

Now the Artifice of God in both these lies in this, That each are hiddenly
contrived apart, and yet so gloriously matched as wrought one for the other;
which is an argument as of two Artificers, the one in the East Indies, the
other in the West; should the one make the Case, the other make the Watch,
unbeknown each to other, and both workmanships of the highest curiosity in
their kind, and when both brought together they exquisitely fit the one the
other.

.
And what? Have I been telling you all this while an artificial pleasant
Story? Does not this Scripture tell the very same? For a close, Do but now at
last take a view and prospect of our Apostles whole discourse. The Round and
Cicle whereof begun at v. 16. of chapter 4. and ends with my Text; and do you not
find it speak (to use the Texts language) the very self-same thing?

1. He tells us there of an inward man renewed, whilst the outward is a
perishing, to the end it may live and subsist alone, when the body is wholly
dissolved; (there he lays his Foundation) And is not this all one with what
the Text says? God works Us (these souls) day by day: Even as the child is
curiously wrought in the womb, to subsist of it self alone in this world, so
this inward man in that other.

2. He then immediately subjoyns ver. 17. that All Afflictions (which are
nothing else but the Perishings of this outward man) as also All things and
dispensations else that do befall us, they are secretly, at work too, all that
while; so set to work by God (who works the inner man daily unto such a measure
of Grace) and these to work, and by his ordination procure a proportionable
weight (for God works all these things in weight and measure) our light
affliction works for us a far more exceeding and eternal WEIGHT of glory -- as
shall in a comely and in the exactest manner answer and suit that curious
workmanship on the inward man; and it is observable that the same word for (
working) is used in that verse that is used in my Text: but yet these are but
outwardly a work, as inferior Artificers or Instruments: Therefore,

3. He further declares, 1. verse of this chapter, That God himself is at work
about this glory, who as the Master-workman, that has the draught and platform
of all before him, drawn by his own designing, he viewing the inward work on us,
the outward work of means and dispensations; and knows aforehand what degree
of holiness to bring us ultimately unto, he according unto these, as patterns,
is a framing a building for us in Heaven, exactly suited to the working of all
the other; which building he prepares and makes ready for this inner man to
entertain it when the body is dissolved: If our earthly house were dissolved,
we have a building of GOD, an house not made with hands, of either Men or
Means, or of our own Graces; but OF GOD. But every soul has a state of Glory
proportioned to all these, 1 Pet. 1.
ready built for it against this time; even as Statues in stone are framed and
carved, to be set up in such a curious Arch framed for them by the Builder. Now
then,

4. Add but the words of my Text, which is the close of this his discourse:
And it opens all the Scene, He that wrought us for this self-same thing is GOD.
The Apostles conclusion answers his beginning; he began in v. 16. chapter 4. and
the circle ends in my Text. And This is GOD, who is wise in working and
wonderful in counsel.

.
But there is a third point yet remains.

Doctrine III.
That it is the interest and engagement of all Three persons to see to it, that
a righteous separate soul be brought to glory at dissolution.

And this carries it yet higher, even to the highest, and gives the most
superabundant security and assurance of this thing that can be given and
superadds above all the former.

But you will ask me, How I fetch this out of my Text? Thus:

1. You see here are Two Persons expressly named, God [the Father] namely, and
the Spirit. This is a Rule, that where the name God, and then some besides
other of the Two Persons, Christ or the Spirit, are mentioned therewith, as
distinct; There God is put personally (not essentially only) to express The
Father: Now here the Spirit or holy Ghost is mentioned distinct from God; For
it is said that This God has given the Spirit; which also Christ so often
speaks of the Father, as I need not to insist on it.

2. It is an other Rule, That in any Scripture where Two Persons are mentioned,
as concurring in any thing, or matter; There the other Third Person also must
be understood to have his special share therein also; as when he wishes grace
and peace from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ; It Is certain the holy
Ghost is as specially understood; as indeed we find him in that Apostolical
blessing as distinctly spoken of as the Father or Christ. Thus it must be here.
Christ must be taken in, who also in John is so often said to give the Spirit,
when the Father gives him, as it is said here he has, For this same thing.

But 3. You have even Christ also not far off interested in this self-same
thing in the next verse, and v. 8. Absence from the Lord, whilst in the body,
v. 6. and presence with the Lord, when separate from the body, v. 8. This Lord
is Christ; the phrase of the New Testament concerning Christ runs in this
style, To be with Christ, This day with me -- To be where I am, and see my
Glory: So Christ. To be with Christ is best of all, and we shall be ever with
the Lord. So Paul.

Use 1.
Does God work Us for this thing ere he brings us to it? What has God wrought
hitherto upon Thee or Thee, in order to this end? It Is a blunt question, but
the Text puts it in my mouth: How many souls are there living in the profession
of Christianity, that know not what this means, to have a work wrought on them
(anew upon them) over and above what moral Honesty (which was Natures
portion) and the common profession of Christianity adds thereunto, by custom
and mere education. An honest Turk professing also and observing the Principles
of his Religion, upon the ground of his education only (and a Religion every
man must have) will as soon go to Heaven as Thou; for all thy Religion is
founded but upon the like foundation that his is. I tell thee, that Christian
Religion is not a thing so cheap; nor Salvation by Christ at so low a rate.
Thou must have a work upon thy soul suited unto all the truths, thus professed
in the power and efficacy of them. They must enter thy soul by a spiritual
faith and frame, and mold it anew to a likeness to them. Carry home therefore
the Caveat our Apostle has put in ver. 3. If so be that being clothed, we be
not found naked of Grace and Holiness wrought, and Christ's Righteousness by
spiritual efficacious faith applied, ( Faith in earnest) bowing the Soul to be
obedient unto Christ, as heartily and as honestly, as it expects salvation by
Christ, as without which thou will never be saved. This is our Religion; and
when at death thy Soul (thy poor lonesome Soul) being stripped of all things in
this world; even the Body and all, shall come before the great God and Jesus
Christ, what will the enquiry be? as Matthew. 22. 11. When THE KING came in to
see the guests, he saw a man had not the Wedding Garment; he spied him out: And
the man was speechless, v. 12. Take him and hind him, (says he) and cast him
into utter darkness, v. 13. The other that were clothed, were admitted unto the
Marriage; and, (as the Psalmist, the words of which are here alluded unto) She
was brought unto the KING (the very Title which in both these places is given
to Christ: see ver. 11.) in raiment of Needle Work, and this clothing is of
Gods working; and so my Text falls in with both: There is no admission unto
Christ without it -- This the first Use.

Use 2.
Has God begun to work this good work in thee? he will perfect it: whereof the
Text gives this assurance, that he has wrought it for this thing, that is, for
this end, and God will not lose his end: Besides, he says he has given earnest.

Use 3.
Thou Saint, be content TO LIVE, for whilst thou live, thou art under Gods
working, in order unto Glory. Value life; it is a season of being wrought upon:
And to be sure, thou shall live no longer, than whilst God is some way or other
a working this. What an advantage is it, that all thy sins, occasioned by
living long, shall surely be forgiven, and nothing of thy score be uncut off
for thee, but all the righteousness that is wrought upon thee, and wrought by
thee, (and therefore wrought by thee, because upon thee; for, being wrought
upon, Acti agimus.
we work, and all is rather, God has wrought us, than that we have wrought)
All thy righteousness (I say) shall remain for ever. 2 Cor. 9. 9.
All the time thou remainest in this life, thy Soul is ripening, or maturing
for Glory.

How great a comfort is that? in explicating the Doctrinal part, I gave
instance of a Child in the Womb curiously wrought all that time, Psalm. 139. 15.
in order to its living and subsisting afterward in this world. It Is a dark
place, the Womb which the Child is wrought in; and it lives there in a stifled
condition, it cannot breathe, it takes nourishment but at the Navel, (a way
invented and prepared of God merely for that season) it lies boiling, tossing
and tumbling, and sleeping away the most of its time, and gives now and then a
faint stirring, to show it is still alive; and it is a life scarce worth the
name of life: Well, but all this is a being wrought and fitted to live another,
freer, and braver life in this world. And this is your present case, your life
is hid, it is to come; all that you find in this world, is but [ that God has
wrought you for the self-like thing] And if this Child we spoke of should be
forced out of the womb before the due time, it would have the more imperfect
life in this world: So here, if you could suppose a Saint should die before the
full birth of his Souls being wrought on -- Therefore be content to wait Gods
leisure, until your change shall come.

Use 4.
No matter what befalls thee, so it works toward this end; let whatever be, so
thou find God to go on with this design, that he works upon thy soul; be it
upward, in communion with himself, or downward, in disowning thy self, thy
vileness and corruptions, so it works. Thou have afflictions that break thy
heart, (as reproach broke Christ's heart, says the Psalmist in his name) no
matter, so they work upon thy Soul. Know then, that they are set awork by the
hand that sent them, to work a far exceeding weight of glory for thee: Phil. 3.
If by any means (says Paul) no matter what, so the work go on. A Carver comes
with his Chissels, and cuts off this piece, and cuts in to that part of the
Stone: No matter; a stately Statue bearing the Image of some Person of Honor,
is to be set up for perpetuity, and is accordingly a framing: So though God
carves his Image out of thy flesh, no matter. Comfort thy self, and think not
much at any condition, whilst (as Paul says) it turns to thy salvation.
Election sent thee not into this world to have a great Name (perhaps God will
load it) nor to be Rich, or to have Power, but to work thee for this self-same
thing; and if thou see that Plough a going (though it makes deep furrows on
thy back, yea heart) yet so, that this seed be sown therein, rejoice, for thou
shall bring thy sheafs with thee. For my self, so that I find Election
pursuing its design, of making me holy, and blessing me with spiritual
blessings in heavenly places, (as Ephesians. 1. 4.) I care not (I would not care)
what befalls me in this World.

FINIS.

