THE SAINTS HONEYCOMB, FULL OF DIVINE TRUTHS, Touching both Christian belief,
AND A Christians life, In two Centuries.

By RICHARD GOVE.

(...).

Isocrat. ad Demonicum. LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivy-lane, 1652.

TO ALL Those that be desirous in a plain and pleasing way, to understand, and
remember Divine Truths for their Souls good: Especially to those that be such
within the Parish of South-Tavistock in Devon, where he was born; in the Parish
of Henton St. George in Somerset, where he lately lived; and in the Parish of
East-Coker in the same County, where he now lives, R. Gove Being desirous to
further his own and heir account in the day of the Lord Jesus, Dedicateth these
plain, and pleasing Expressions of Divine Truths following.

TO THE Well-affected READER WHETHER LEARNED OR UNLEARNED
READER, My purpose and project is in this ensuing Treatise to personate a
single, though not a singular Be. And therefore if I have not flowen through
all the fair and flowery fields of the works of ancient and modern Divines, and
others, to gather the materials of spiritual Honey for thee, thou must remember
it is but one single Be has attempted it, and what one Be can do that? Next,
the Be (be it one or more) sucks not from every flower (he lights on) all that
the flower may yield, but only that which is for his present use: and so have
I done too; and after all my labor Prove. 16. 24.
I have at last made but these two Honycombs as yet, which I here present thee.

But the Be cannot be idle, if the season and weather permit, no more shall I,
especially if I understand that this my first present unto thee in this kind,
be kindly accepted.

I know if thou art one whose stomach is already full, with better Honey of
thine own making, these two plain Hony-combs will not down with thee, for thou
know Prove. 27. 7.
who says it, that the full stomach loatheth the Honeycomb. And therefore
Hieron. Apolog. ad Pammach.
to thee I have no more to say, but what St. Hierom did in a case not much
unlike; Aut profer meliores epulas, et me convivo utere, aut qualicunque nostra
caenula contentus esto. Except I may with thy leave add that passage of St.
Gregory, who fearing (what I now fear) concerning the learned Reader of some of
his works, persuades him yet to read them howsoever, though inartificially, and
rudely penned. Nam saepenumero inter quotidianas Greg. Mag. in praefat. ad suas
in Ezechi^lem Homilias.
delitias, etiam viliores cibi suaviter sapiunt, etc. For oftentimes they that
are fed with delicates, do find better taste, and receive greater contentment in
the homely, and country fare of others, than in the continual usance of their
own so exquisitely dressed cates, and delicates, or at least have thereby their
stomachs whetted, to return again with more eagerness of appetite, to their own
better furnished tables.

But if thou art some poor hungry soul, Jejunus stomachus rar^ vulgaria t^mnit.
Horat. Prove. 27. 7.
which have none, or no better fare of thine own (for whom this especially is
intended) I know this will down with thanks; for to the hungry soul every
bitter thing is sweet.

Howsoever whether it please, or displease, here it is, the Be has done his
part, do thou do thine. And this thou will the better do* if thou turn Be too,
and select out of these ensuing expressions what thou conceivest may best
conduce to thy present or future good, if all please not, or in thy conceit may
not be profitable that way.

Lector vale. Apes sis, non Aranea, Verbum sapienti, Apes sine aculeo non
mellificat,
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 19. for coarser, read courser, p. 5. in marg. for lanquor, r.
languoris, p. 6. in marg. for intravit, r. intrabit, p. 51. l. 21. for dispute
them, r. dispute of them, p. 64. after these words in the margent (hence called
in the Greek) add ((...)) which is there left out, p. 72. l. 8. for (but God,
and man) r. both God, and man, p. 73 l. 10. for escape, r. escaped, p. 75. l 9.
for kill, r. skill, and l. 28, for maee r* made, p. 80. l. 28. for instrumect,
r. instrument, p. 85. l. 12. for regard, r. regarded, p. 147. l. 13. for in
bond, r. in the bond, p. 166. l. 21. for he went, r. went. p. 97. in marg. for
Coninium, r. Caninium, p. 98. l. the last (*And) before, (will not) is left out
p. 101. in marg. for tons, r. Boltons, p. 107. in marg. for meum, r. meus, p.
108, l. 26. there is (re) too much, p. 111. l. 11. for valume, r. volume, p.
178. l. 10. for scent, r. sent, and l. 18. for his, r. their, for p. 193. there
is p. 197. p. 195. l. 15. for their, r. our.

Errata sua quis intelligat, Ps. 19. 12.

HUMANE EXPRESSIONS OF DIVINE TRUTHS.
The first Century.
Expression I. That all men must dye.
MAN is like a book; his See Master Charles Fitz-Ieffries Funeral Sermon on
Eccles. 7. 2. page 8.
birth is the Title page of the book; his baptism is the Epistle Dedicatory;
his groans, and crying, are the Epistle to the Reader; his infancy, and
childhood, are the Argument, or Contents of the whole ensuing Treatise; his
life, and actions, are the Subject, or Matter of the book; his sins, and
errors of his life, are the Errata, or faults escaped in the printing; and his
Repentance is the Correction of them. Now amongst books (we know) some are
large Volumes, in Folio; some little ones, in Decimo sexto; and some are of
other sizes, in Octavo, or Quarto. Again, some of these are fairer bound, some
in a plainer manner; some are bound in strong velame, or leather, and some in
thin paper. Some again have Piety for their Subject, and treat of Godliness;
others are profane Pamphlets, full of wantonness, and folly: but in the last
page of every one of them, there stands a word, which is FINIS, implying the
end of all.

And such is man: for amongst men, some are of a larger size, some of a meaner
stature; some are fairer, some of a coarser complexion; some are stronger, some
are weaker; some are godly, some are profane; some live longer, some a shorter
time: but let a man live never so long, yet comes Death, like Finis at the
last, and closes up all: For this (says Solomon) is the end of all men,
Eccles. 7. 2.

Expression II. That there can be no true peace and agreement between Man and
Wife, when the fear of God is wanting.
IT is a pretty, and a witty observation of a Jewish Rabbine, which he gives
of Aben Ezra in Prove. 2. 17. Vide pagin. in Lexic. in verbo (...).
the Hebrew names of Man and Woman, viz. (...), Ish, the man's, or the husbands
name; and (...), Isha, the woman's, or wives. How that in them there is
contained (...), Iah, which is the name of God: the letters and vowels whereof
being taken away, there remains nothing to be made of the rest, but (...),
Esh, and (...), Esh: that is to say, fire, and fire.

Whereby he would give us to understand, that if God, and his fear, be not
between the husband and the wife, and conscience of duty toward him, as well
as toward one another, there can be nothing expected between them, but fire,
and fire; fire of debate and strife, fire of vexation and grievance, and the
fire of Gods curse, consuming them, and theirs.

Expression III. That when we cannot keep Peace, with Truth, and a good
Conscience, we must part with Peace, rather than with Truth, or a good
Conscience.
FOr herein we must do, as Mahomet Turkish Hist. in the life of Mahomet the
Great.
the Great Turk did, by his fair Lady Irene. He had a Lady of that name, whom
he doted on extremely, insomuch as he left all his Military, and Imperial
affairs, to spend his time in dalliance with her. At which his Subjects took
such discontent, thar they were ready to rise up in Rebellion against him: The
which when he perceived, in the midst of all his Bashawes, and Lords, he struck
off her head with his own hand. Now Irene, in the Greek tongue, signifies
Graece (...).
Peace; rather than we must dote then too much upon Peace, so as to hazard the
Truth, or a good Conscience for her sake, we must be content to have Irene's
head go off, and to make a sacrifice of Peace, rather than the Truth, or a
good Conscience should suffer loss by the enjoying of her love.

Expression IV. That many men make vows, and promises to God, in the time of
their sickness, and distress, which they make no conscience of to perform,
when they are recovered, and freed from it.
ERasmus says, That there was one once Erasmus in Nausragio* Dum fero
languorem, fero religionis amore: Expers languor, non sum memor hujus amoris.
Demon languebat, tunc Monachus esse volebat: Demon convaluit, Demon ut ante
fuit. In English, thus* The Devil was sick, the Devil a Monk would be: The
Devil was well, the Devil a Monk was he.
in danger of Shipwreck, who promised, that if he did escape, he would offer
unto Saint Christophers Image, in the great Church in Paris, a Wax Candle as
big as that Image: and when one that stood by heard him say so, he said, Take
heed what thou promisest; for if thou should sell all that thou have, it
would not buy such a Candle: Peace fool, said he, do thou think I mean to
do as I say? Just so do many deal with God, when they be sick, or in any
great danger, and distress, what fair promises will they make of amending
their lives, and becoming new men? which yet they never intended to do, as
appears by their returning again to their old sinful courses, ( like the dog
to his vomit, and the sow to her wallowing in the mire) when once they are
recovered, and well again.

Expression V. That we must not trust to the prayers of others for us, if we
will neglect to pray our selves for our selves.
THere is an old Legend of a Merchant, Mensa Philosophica Fabde Mercatore.
who would never go to Mass himself, but ever when he heard the Saints-bell
ring, would say to his wife, go thou to Church, and pray thou for thee, and
me. After this upon a time he dreamed, that he and his wife were dead, and that
they both came to Heaven gate, and knocked for entrance: Saint Peter the Porter
(for so goes the tale) opening Heaven gate, and seeing who they were, suffered
his wife to enter in, but thrust him back, saying, As thy wife went to Church
Sicut illa ^ravit pro se, and ^^: ita intravit pro se, and te.
for thee, so likewise she shall go to Heaven for thee too.

Whatsoever the fable is, the moral is good, teaching us, that we must not
wholly rely upon the prayers of others for us, never praying our selves: for
though the prayers of others may be of some avail for us by way of impetration,
when our own are interrupted, See Bishop Lakes Sermons, Alphabet 2. page 539:
Master Harris his Sermon of Peter's enlargement. page 8.
in the time of spiritual distress, or by reason of some other intervening
urgent occasions, which cannot be dispensed with: Yet if we desire to be
accepted of God, and he do afford us the opportunity, we must not wilfully
neglect our own, but must contribute our own Devotion with theirs.

Expression VI. That worldly-minded men will serve God, and hear his Word, no
longer than it may stand with their profit.
STrabo tells a pretty story, How that upon Cael. Rhod. l. 19* c. 11. Antiq.
lect.
a time there came a Musician to show his skill in Jassus, amongst a company of
Fishermen, all which gave him audience, to his seeming, with much attention:
But so soon as ever they heard the Market-bell ring, they ran all away at once
from the Music, every man to his market: only one, that was hard of hearing,
staid still behind, and continued his hearer. The Musician imagining, that the
love of his Music had won him this man's company, when all the rest had left
him, came nearer unto him, and gave him solemn thanks, for that he had heard
him with so good attention, when all the rest had so rudely left him, at the
ringing of the Market-bell. And has the Marketbell rung indeed (quoth he?) The
Musician tells him, it had: Whereupon he also flings away after his fellows,
murmuring, that for his harkening to a Fiddler, he had like to have lost his
market.

Here is a lively resemblance of worldlyminded men, which will seem to be
devout hearers of the Heavenly Music of Gods Word preached unto them, as long
as they may lose nothing by it: but let the worlds Market-bell once begin to
ring, and then they will leave the Word, Duty, Conscience, yea God himself,
rather than their Market of worldly profit shall not go forward: See Ezech.
33. 31, 32.

Expression VII. That as long as we are clothed with the robes of Christ's
Righteousness, we are safe from Gods wrath, and eternal condemnation.
IT is reported of Pontius Pilate, that Franciscus Labata in magno Apparat.
Concionat. ^om. 1. page 185. col. 1. resert ex Doctore Incogn. in illa verba,
Ps. 37. Domine ne in furore tuo argu^s me.
he being sent for to Rome, by Tiberius Caesar the Emperor, to give an account
for putting Christ to death; and understanding that the Emperor was highly
offended with him for that his fact, and not knowing how to appease his wrath,
he thought at last upon this device; he would get Christ's seamlesse coat of the
Soldier, to whom by lot it fell, and when he came to Rome, and was to appear
before the Emperor, he would put it on: the which he accordingly did; and when
the Emperor saw him in that coat, though his wrath before was much incensed
against him, yet now he had nothing to say to him, but dismissed him without
any show of displeasure at all. But when he had thus dismissed him, without
inflicting any punishment on him, he was very much displeased with himself, and
sent for him again in all have, with a purpose to punish him: but when he came
in before him the second time clad in the same coat, he had no more to say to
him now, than he had before; and instead of punishing him, used him with much
respect and honor, and afterward dismissed him again. But he was no sooner
gone out of his sight, but he (remembering his former displeasure against him,
and befooling himself that he had so let him go again, without inflicting any
punishment on him) sent for him again the third time: Pilate now thinking
himself safe, because of the Emperors former favor showed to him, threw aside
the coat, and came before him clad only in his own usual garments: whom when
the Emperor saw, being extremely angry with him, caused him to lose his head,
and life at once. Whether this were true or no, I know not, neither will I
enquire: only thus much it may teach us, that we having, with Pilate,
crucified Christ with our sins, and sinful course of life, there is no hope
for us ever to appear before God with comfort, except we have on us the robes
of Christ's righteousness, Esaias 61. 10. Rev. 7. 14. Philip. 3. 9.
and be found in him, not having our own righteousness.

Expression VIII. How Gods Child may be known from others that are not so, by
his words, and language.
A Father lying on his deathbed, called Master Perkins in his Treatise of the
Government of the Tongue. c. 5.
unto him three children, which he kept, and told them, that only one of them
was his son, and that the other two were only brought up by him, and to him
that was his son he gave all his goods: But which of these was his natural
son, he would not in any wise declare. When he was dead, every one of the
three children pleaded, that he was his son, and therefore that the goods were
his. The matter at last was brought before a Judge, and he did what he could to
end the controversy between them: but being not able by any means to do it, he
took this course with them; He caused the dead corpse of the Father to be set up
against a tree, and commanded the 3 sons each of them to take a bow and
arrows, and to shoot at their Fathers dead corpse thus set up, to see who could
shoot nearest to his heart: Whereupon two of them took the bow, and arrows, and
did shoot (as they were willed) and hit the body in several places, but the
third was angry with them for thus shooting, and when it came to his turn, he
(out of a natural affection of a child to a father) refused, and could by no
means be persuaded to shoot: The which when the Judge saw, he gave this
Sentence, That surely the two first, who had thus shot at their father, were
none of his sons, but the third only, which had refused to do it, and that
therefore he should have the goods.

The like trial may be made, to know who are Gods Children; for they that use
to blaspheme the holy name of God, and to shoot that his name through with
horrible and fearful oaths, (as it is the fashion of too too many to do)
certainly they cannot be (so continuing) the children of God, neither will he
another day so judge them to be, nor any of those goods which he has reserved
in Heaven for those that love and fear him, to belong unto them; but, being the
Children of the Devil, must with him be cast into that everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Expression IX. That whosoever hopes for the Kingdom of Glory hereafter in
Heaven, must make his entrance into the Kingdom of Grace, whilst he lives
here on earth.
FOr as amongst the Romans, Honor had a Temple, and Virtue had a Temple: but
these Temples were so built, and situate, that none could come into the Temple
of Honor, but he must first pass through the Temple of Virtue. So there is a
Kingdom of Grace in this life, wherein God reigns by his Word, and Spirit, in
the hearts of his Children; and there is a Kingdom of Glory in the life to
come, wherein they shall reign with him for ever in Heaven: but God has so
ordered and disposed of these two Kingdoms, that none shall enter into the
Kingdom of Glory hereafter, that does not make his entrance into the Kingdom
of Grace here.

Expression X. That there is no standing at a stay in the way of Godliness.
FOr man, in his going toward Heaven, is like a boat that is rowing against
the Gregor. in pastoral. par. 3. admonit. 35.
stream, or tide, the which will go forward, as long as the watermen ply the
oars: but let them but once withdraw their hands from the oars, the stream,
or tide, will presently carry the boat backward.

So it is with man, in his going toward Heaven, for he goes allwaies against
the stream, against the stream of his own corruptions, against the stream of
the Devils temptations, and against the stream of the worlds solicitations;
and therefore, if he ply not God continually by his prayers, and use all other
good means to set himself forward in Grace and goodness, the stream of his own
corrupt affections (if there were nothing else) would carry him backward, and
make him worse than he was before.

Expression XI. How we may know, whether we belong to Gods Kingdom, or the
Devils.
IN the History of Scotland there is See Master Greenhams Works in Folio, p.
705.
mention made of a Controversy between Scotland, and Ireland, for a certain
Island that lay betwixt both Kingdoms, to which of them it did belong: and
that after much a do, and great contestation for it, they put it to the
determination of a certain Frenchman, who concluded and umpiered the
controversy thus: That there should be put a living Snake into it, and if it
did there live, and thrive, the Island should belong to Scotland; but if it did
not live and thrive there, then it should belong to Ireland; because it is
said, that no venomous creature will live there.

In like manner there is a great controversy between God, and the Devil, about
^he little Isle of Man, the heart of Man, whose it should be, and to whose
Kingdom (Heaven or Hell) it should belong: and there can be no better way to
decide ^he controversy, than to do as the Frenchman did, to try whether wicked
and envenomed thoughts do live, and thrive therein, or no: for if they do,
it is a true sign, that our hearts belong not (as yet) to God, and his Kingdom,
but to the Devil, and his: for a sanctified heart, which is Gods, will be ever
crucifying, mortifying, and killing all such vile lusts, and sinful
affections, and thoughts; and the faith that is in it will purge, and purify,
and cleanse it Acts 15. 1.
from them.

Expression XII. That those whom Christ has redeemed by his blood, he does
also, in some measure, sanctify by his Spirit.
FOr, as in the natural body of man, the B. Andrews Sermons of the
Resurrection, p. 589.
spirit ever goes with the blood, there being in every part thereof an artery
to carry the spirit, where there is a vein to carry the blood: so it is with
Christ, his Blood, and his Spirit, go allwaies together* so that his Blood does
never cleanse any man from the guilt of sin, whom his Spirit does not, in
some measure, sanctify* and free from the power and dominion of sin.

Expression XIII. That there will be sin in us as long as we live in this world.
FOr it is with man as it was with the Mr. Edward Raynolds Sermon of the
sinfulness of sin, page 144.
house wherein was the fretting and spreading leprosy, mentioned Levit. 14.
41, etc. for though that house might be scraped round about, and much rubbish,
and corrupt materials, be removed, yet the leprosy did not cease, till the
house, with the stones, and timber, and mortar of it, were all broken down. So
it is wirh man; Grace may do much, and alter many things that were amiss in
him, and make him leave many sins to which he was formerly given: but to have
sin wholly cast out, and left, that is not to be expected, till this earthly
tabernacle of his body be by death pulled down, and dissolved.

Expression XIV. That to be rich in good works, and to distribute to the
necessities of Christ's poor, and needy members, is the way to lay up in store
for our selves a good foundation against the time to come.
MAny of the ancient Authors, in See Mr. Wakemans Sermon on Eccles. 11. 1. page
86. Et Bellarmini Conciones, Conc. 24. page 196.
their Writings, do make mention of a certain Country, whose fashion was
yearly to choose them a new King, who had for that year absolute authority to
do what he listed: but the year being ended, he was deposed from his place,
and thrust naked into a remote Island, there to end his life in hunger, cold,
and want of all necessaries. Whereof one of them being advertised, thought
aforehand to prevent this inconvenience, and therefore in that short time of
his reign he sent over his wealth, and his treasure into that Island; by means
of which, when he came there, he was ^elieved, and provided for, and did not
live in that misery and want that others his Predecessors had done.

Such is our case; for be we never so noble, never so mighty, never so rich, we
have no assurance of any long continuance in this world, not so much as for one
year; for here we have no abiding City, Heb. 13. 14. and this short time that
we have allowed us, must at last have an end; and as we came naked into the
world, so must we return naked out of it, Job 1. 21. Let us then, with that
wise King, now in the time of plenty, provide against the future famine, and
make us friends of that unrighteous Mammon, that when we want, they may receive
us into everlasting habitations: and let us now send away our wealth before us,
in distributing to the necessities of the poor; for what we give to the poor,
we send before us to Heaven, and there we shall one day find it to our souls
unspeakable comfort. See Luk: 16. 9. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19.

Expression XV. That a Christian, in this life, may be infallibly assured of
his Salvation.
ANd this may be thus illustrated. A See M. Whites Way to the true Church,
Sect. 40. n. 39.
King sends a pardon to forty thousand Rebels, without putting down in
particular the names of any of them; only he puts in a condition, that all
those shall be pardoned that will lay by their arms, and weapons, and come in
to him: the which he sends an Herald to proclaim, and the people hearing it
do accordingly, and thereby know infallibly that they are pardoned. And if any
man should molest them because their names are not expressly written in the
pardon, they might contemn them; and securely conclude their deliverance, from
the Condition that is expressed.

In the same manner do we assure our selves of our salvation: For all men
being sinners against God, he has sent out the pardon of his Gospel, not
writing any man's name therein in particular, but putting in a Condition, that
so many as will be saved by Christ, must repent, believe, and obey him: the
which being published by preaching, as soon as the Elect hear, they receive, and
do know infallibly they are pardoned: And if any would molest them (as the
Papists for example do) because their name is not particularly and expressly
set down therein, they might despise them; and both against theirs, and the
Devils accusations, securely conclude their salvation, from the condition
expressed, thus; He that repents, and forsakes his sins, and believes, and
obeys the Gospel unfeignedly, shall be saved: but I repent, and forsake my
sins; I believe, and obey the Gospel unfeignedly; and therefore I shall be
saved.

Expression XVI. How a man may know whether there be any life of Grace in him.
ANd to resolve this, we need no other B. Andrews Sermon of the sending the
Holy Ghost, page! 645.
signs than we do make use of, to know whether a man be alive, or no. For if
there be any life left in the body, at the heart it will beat, at the mouth it
will breath, at the pulse it will be felt: So where there is the life of Grace
in any man or woman, it will appear to himself by his good thoughts, and holy
desires which he has in his heart; and it will appear to others by the
gracious words that proceed from his lips, and from the good works that proceed
from his hands: And if it cannot be perceived by any, or all these ways, then
certainly there is no life of Grace left in a man.

Expression XVII. That holy and regenerate men, may have unholy and
unregenerate children.
ANd this Saint Austin illustrates by a August* de Peccator. Merit. and Remis.
l. 2. c. 2. and alibi.
twofold comparison; the one of winnowed Corn, the other of the circumcised
Jew. For as Corn that is never so well winnowed, and cleansed from all chaff,
if it be sown, brings forth corn with chaff about it; And the circumcised Jew
begat uncircumcised Children: so holy and regenerate Parents do beget unholy
and unregenerate Children. And no marvel, for they Regeneratus non regenerat
filios carnis, sed generat. -- ut oleae semina non oleas generant, sed
oleastros. August. l. 2. contra Pelag. and Celest. cap. 40.
beget not their Children according to Grace, but according to Nature; for
Grace is personal, but Corruption is natural; and God wills, that they
shall only communicate their nature, and leave the dispensation of Grace to
himself.

Expression XVIII. That Christians should be compassionate, and have a
fellow-feeling of one another misery.
THis Saint Austin illustrates thus: Behold August: tom: 10. hom: 15. de modo,
quo nos invicem diligere debemus. Et tractat: 32. in Johan. and in Psalm. 130.
(says he) the foot treads on a thorn, and see how all the members condole
it? the back bends it self, the head stoopeth, the eye most remote in place
diligently searches, the ears attend where it is said to be, the hands pull it
out, every member is busied to help and succor it, and yet neither back, nor
head, nor eye, nor ear, nor hand, nor any other part but the foot was pricked.
And just so it should be between the members of Christ's mystical body, If one
member suffer, all the rest should suffer with it. See 1 Cor. 12. 26. Romans 12.
15. Job 30. 25.

Expression XIX. That the Devil is most busy to tempt men, when they are about
Gods worship and service.
AENeas Sylvius reports, that Saint Aeneas Sylvius in hist. Council.
Basiliens. ex vita Benedicti.
Benedict coming upon a time to a certain Monastery, and entering into the
Church there (where those of that fraternity were at their prayers) he espied a
multitude of Devils about every one of them; at the sight of which, being
amazed, and much affrighted, he left the Monastery, and went into the Town
adjoining, where there was at that time a great fare, or market, and a
multitude of people come together to buy and sell; and walking up and down
therein, he could there espy but one Devil only, who sat idle, and had
nothing to do; and wondering with himself why there should be so many Devils in
the Church, and they all so busy, and but one in the market, or fare, and he
sitting idle, and doing nothing, went unto him, and conjured him to tell him
the reason of it: which he presently did, saying, that in the Church, when men
be at their prayers, and serving of God, it is supposed that they are going out
of the Devils Kingdom, and are there begging help, and grace from God, that so
they may do, and therefore have need of many Devils to trouble and distract
them in their prayers, to make them uneffectuall: but in markets, and fares,
men are apt enough of themselves to swear, to lie, to cozen, and to commit all
other sins for their profit, or pleasures sake, and therefore one Devil was
enough for them. See Zech. 3. 1. Eccl. 2. 1.

Expression XX. That wicked Masters, and heads of Families, corrupt and undo
their whole Families.
FOr it is with a family, as it is with a See M. Charles Richardson of the
repentance of Peter and Judas, page 21.
fish, the which first takes infection, and begins first to stink at the
head. And therefore (as good Father Latimer was wont to say) if the head of the
fish be sweet, all the body is sweet; but if the head stink, all the body is,
or soon will be naught. So if the Master, or Head of a Family, be good, it is a
great means to make the whole Family good; but if he once be bad, the whole
Family will quickly be so too.

Expression XXI. That it is a dangerous thing to frequent the company of wicked
men.
FOr it may be said of frequenting evil VVillets Synops. Controvers. 9.
quaest. 10. part. 9.
company, as they were wont to say in a common Proverb here in England, of
going to Rome: He that goes to Rome once, sees a wicked man; he that goes
thither the second time, learneth to know him; but he that goes thither the
third time, brings him home with him: So he that frequenteth wicked company,
the first time that he comes amongst them he sees their courses, the second
time he learneth them, and the third time commonly he brings them home with
him.

Expression XXII. What a wonder it is to see men sleep securely in their sins,
without fear of danger.
WE read of a certain Gentleman See B. Kings Lect. 1. on Jonah, page 14.
in Rome, who notwithstanding a great burden of debt wherewith he was
oppressed, did yet sleep quietly, and take his ease, as if there were no such
matter: The which Augustus the Emperor hearing of, when the man was dead, was
very desirous to buy that bed on which he used to lie. At which, when his
servants marvailed (they knowing that he had far better beds of his own) he
made them this answer, That it seemed to him to be some wonderful bed, and
worth the buying, whereupon a man could sleep so soundly, that was so deeply
indebted. And just such a wonder it may seem to any that truly fears God, and
that knows what a debt sin is, to see any to sleep securely in their sins,
that have so many, and such heavy debts one day to answer unto God for.

Expression XXIII. That it is possible for a man to be guilty of many sins, and
yet at the present not to be troubled in conscience for any of them.
IT is a Rule in Philosophy, That no Element Elementum in suo loco non
ponderat. See B. King, ubi supra, page 77.
is heavy, or ponderous, whilst it is in its proper place. As for example, Let
a man that is skillful in swimming dive down to the bottom of the sea, and as
long as he is there he feels no weight, though the water of the whole Sea lie
upon his back; and the reason of it is this, because the water is in the Sea as
in his proper place: but let the same person come out of the Sea, and take a
great vessel full of that water, and put it on his head, and the weight of it
will make him to sink under it: So it is with sin, it seems no burden to a
man as long as it is in the Will, which is the proper seat, and place of it:
but bring it once from thence, and convent it before Reason, and Conscience,
which will show it what an infinite-Majestie it has offended, and what an
infinite punishment it has deserved; and then it will make the sinner to cry
out, as once David did, That it is a heavy burden, too heavy for him to bear,
Psalm. 38. 4.

Expression XXIV. That Justification from the guilt of sin is perfected at
once, and in an instant: but Sanctification from the power and pollution of sin
is by degrees.
THis difference Saint Bernard thus Bernard de Caena Domini.
illustrates: When we fall into sin (says he) we are like unto a man which
falls upon an heap of stones, and in the mire; so as that we are not only
defiled, but wounded also, and sore bruised. Now we may quickly be washed, but
to heal us there needs a longer time. Where by washing away our mire, he
means our Justification, which (he says) may soon be done: but by healing
our wounded and bruised nature, he understands our Sanctification, which is
long in doing.

Expression XXV. How Mercy and Truth met together, and how Righteousness and
Peace kissed each other, in man's redemption.
FOr the illustration of this, the learned Vide Cameracens. in principio, in
lib. 3. sent. Doctor Field of the Church, lib. 5. cap 11. Bernard. ser. 1. in
Annunt. B. Andrews Sermons of the Nativity, p. 99. Doctor Bois his Exposition
of the proper Psalms for several Festivals, part. 1. page 28.
have invented this pretty expression. When God (say they) created Adam, he
gave him all excellent and precious virtues, as Truth to instruct him, Justice
to direct him, Mercy to preserve him, and Peace to delight him with all
pleasing correspondency: but that when he fell away, and forgate all the good
which God had done for him, these virtues left their lower dwelling, and
speedily returned back to him that gave them, making report what was fallen
out on earth, and earnestly moving the Allmighty concerning this his wretched
and forlorn creature, yet in a very different sort and manner: For Justice
pleaded for the condemnation of sinful man, and called for the punishment he
had worthily deserved; and Truth required the performance of that which God had
threatened: but Mercy entreated for miserable man, made out of the dust of the
earth, seduced by Satan, and beguiled with the shows of seeming good; and Peace
no less carefully sought to pacify the wrath of the displeased God, and to
reconcile the Creature to the Creator. When God had heard the contrary pleas
and desires of these most excellent Orators, and saw that there was no other
means to give them all satisfaction, it was resolved on in the high Council of
the blessed Trinity, that one of those sacred Persons should become Man, that
by taking to him the nature of Man, he might partake in his miseries, and be
subject to his punishments; and by conjoyning his Divine nature, and perfection
with the same, might fill it with all grace, and heavenly excellency. And thus
were the desires of these so contrary petitioners all satisfied; for man was
punished, as Gods Justice urged; that was performed, which God had threatened,
as Truth required; the Offender was pitied* as Mercy entreated; and God and Man
were reconciled, as Peace desired; and so was fulfilled that of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 85. 10. Mercy and Truth have met together, Righteousness and Peace have
kissed each other.

Expression XXVI. Of the likeness that is betwixt Christ's Incarnation, and the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and how the one explains the true nature of the
other.
THeodoret in one of his Dialogues See B. Lakes Sermon Esai. 9. 6. Alphabet 3.
page 7.
has an excellent parallel of these two. For as in Christ (says he) there are
two Natures, of God, and Man; so in the Sacrament are there two Substances, the
Heavenly, and the Earthly. 2. As in Christ these two natures are truly, and
entirely, so are those Substances in the Sacrament. 3. As after the Union those
two natures make but one person, so after the consecration the two Substances
make but one Sacrament. Lastly, As the two natures are united without
confusion, or abolition of either in Christ: so in the Sacrament are the
Substances, heavenly and earthly, knit so, that each continues what it was,
and works answerably on us.

Expression XXVII. That the one way which Gods Children have of running to God
in all their distresses, is more worth than all the plots and policies of
worldly men for securing of themselves in such times of trouble.
THis Divines illustrate by the Fable of See M. Mount^gues Sermon. on Psalm. 50.
15. page 8.
the Cat and the Fox, betwixt which the case stood thus: The Cat and the Fox
were upon a time in deep discourse, which was the best way to make escape, when
either of them should be pursued by a kennel of hounds. Reynard discoursed of
this (...).
way, and that way, for he had devises his budget full: but the poor Cat said,
she had but one only way to escape if she should be thus pursued, and (as she
thought) it was a sure one, and that was, to climb up into a tree, or to get up
into an house. Well, as they stood thus discoursing, they heard the cry of a
kennel of hounds coming up hot upon the sent: the Cat seeing them coming, gets
up presently into an high tree, and escapes, whereas the Fox, not being any way
able to escape them, is caught, and torn in pieces, for all his policies. Just
so it is betwixt Gods Children, and worldly men; these think by their policies,
by rheir riches, by their friends, or by some other humane helps, to free
themselves from trouble and distres^e: but Gods Children know no way but one to
escape them, (at least so as they may not hurt them) and that is, to lift up
their eyes, their hands, and their hearts unto God their Father in Heaven, who
is a present help in trouble, Psalm. 9. 9. and whose name is a sure defense
indeed, to which the righteous run, and are safe, Prove. 18. 10. 2 Chronicles: 20.
12. when as worldly men with all their humane abets, and helps, perish under
the weight and burden of them. For all these are but like summer brooks, and
watercourse in the wilderness; which though they run over in winter, when
water needs not, yet most usually are dry without water, in time of drought
and extremity, Job 6. 15, etc.

Expression XXVIII. That Adversity does Gods Child less hurt than Prosperity.
SAint Ambrose reports of the Oister, that Ambr. lib. 5. Hexam. c. 8.
whilst she is tossed and turmoiled by the Crab her enemy, she so claspeth her
shell from this her foe, that then she is in least danger of devouring: but
when without fear she lays open her self to the Sun on the shore, then comes
the Crab, and putting a stone between the lips of her shell, thrusts in safely
his claws, and picks out the fish. Even so, whilst Gods Children are tossed to
and fro in the brinish waters of the sea of this world by crabbed men, and
regredient backsliders, with David, Psalm. 39. 1, 2. they clasp their shell, and
shut up the door of their lips, lest they should offend God, and give occasion
of offense to man by their tongues: but when they are without fear of these
their crabbed foes, they lay themselves open in the Sunshine of prosperity, and
by that are many times undone.

Expression XXIX. That the Devil allureth men unto sin by pleasing Objects,
never suffering them to see the danger they are in, by means of it, till it be
too late.
FOr herein he deals with men, as the Jul. Solinus Polyhist. cap. 27. See M.
Charles Richardson's Sermon. of the repentance of Peter 2nd Judas, page 192.
Panther does with the beasts, which he desires to make his prey. This beast
has a body all painted over with little spots, very pleasant to the eye, and
delightsome to the smell, by means of which many beasts come hastily to gaze
upon her: but withal, she has a very ugly, and grim face, which makes them
afraid to come near. And therefore because she is slow of pace, and cannot by
running get her prey, she hides her face, and shows only her painted skin,
to allure the beasts within her reach, and then suddenly leapeth upon them,
catches, and devoureth them. And just so does the Devil deal with men, when
he would tempt them unto sin, he appears not in his own ugly shape, and
likeness, for then every one would be afraid of him; but appears under some
colorable pretense or other, that he may the more easily circumvent and
deceive them; and when he has gotten them to do as he would have them, then
he aggravateth every sin, and never cease till he have overwhelmed the soul
and conscience with unspeakable horror.

Expression XXX. That an unfruitful Christian is good for nothing.
IT is usual in Scripture to compare the Sea Mr. Edw* Raynolds Ser. on 1 John
5. 12. page 464.
Church of God to a Vineyard, and the Members thereof to Vines. Now we know,
that Vines, if they be not for fruit, they must be for fuel, there is no other
use to be made of them, and to all other purposes they are utterly improper,
and unprofitable: For a man cannot make a pin (says the Prophet Ezechiel,
chap. 15. 3.) to hing any thing thereon, of the branch of the Vine. And so it
is with Christians; either they are fruitful in good works, or they are good
for nothing in Gods account, except it be for fuel for hell fire. See Mat. 3.
10.

Expression XXXI. That even those will lay hold upon Christ and his merits
only, at their death, who in their lifetime seemed to rely on something else.
THese deal with Christ, as that creature See M. Weems his Christian Synagogue,
lib. 3. chap. 6. page 296.
which is called the Amphibion, does with the land. For they that have written
of that Creature, do say, That when he is well, and in health, he lives
sometimes in the water, and sometimes on the land, as it may be best for his
advantage: but when he is wounded or hurt, then he leaves the water quite, and
betaketh himself wholly to the land. So many, whilst they be well, and in
health, can be content to make a show of relying on other things besides
Christ, as on their own, or others merits: but when they once begin too feel
the stroke of death, and are heart-wounded, then none but Christ, none but
Christ. And hereof we have many examples amongst the most learned Papists, See
B. Mortons Grand Imposture, page 413.
which howsoever in their lifetime have professed and maintained the doctrine
of perfection of works, yet on their deathbed, as soon as the least glimps of
the Majesty of Gods Tribunal is revealed to their consciences, and the books
of their consciences begin to be unclasped, and so laid open, that they cannot
but read their sins (which in their lifetime they held as Venial) to be
written in Capital letters, and to be deadly, have been enforced to take
Sanctuary in the wounds of Christ. As did of late Cardinal Bellarmine in his
last Will and Testament, whose words are these, Precor ut me inter electos and
sanctos suos, B* Morton ubi supra. Fox Martyrolog.
non aestimator meriti, sed veniae largitor, admittat. And as did before him
Stephen Gardener, whom when the Bishop of Chichester (that then was) would have
comforted upon his deathbed, with Gods promises, and free justification in the
blood of Christ, he made him this answer: What, my Lord, will you open that gap
now? then farewell all together: to me, and such other, you may speak it; but
open this window once to the people, and then farewell all together: with
diverse others that might be mentioned; all which (to use their own words) held
it a good supper doctrine, See B. Lakes life before his Works.
but not so good to break fast on.

Expression XXXII. That our Forefathers had not so much knowledge as we have
now, but were more fruitful in good works.
THose two Daughters of Laban, Leah See M. Laur. Barkers Epist. Dedic. before
his Sermons on Joh. 21. 22.
and Rachel, Genesis 29. are a lively resemblance of the worlds two ages, the old
world, and this we live in. For as Leah, the elder of those two sisters, was
blear-eyed for her sight, but fruitful in her womb* so was the old world,
something dim-sighted in respect of that measure of knowledge that we now have,
yet was she fruitful, she brought forth plenty of good works; for then men
were just, as Noah, Genesis 6. 9. and walked with God, as Enoch, Genesis 5. 22. And
as Rachel, the younger sister, was well-eyed, very beautiful, but barren in
her womb: so is this latter age, it is very quicksighted, exceeding full of
knowledge, but for her womb, she is barren of good works, and wants at her
knees those blessed twins, of holiness toward God, and righteousness toward
Man, which God in his Word requires.

Expression XXXIII. That the remembrance of our Baptism should keep us from
sin, and from yielding to Satan's temptation.
FOr herein we must do as that Virgin See Mr. Jer. Dykes Worthy Communicant,
page 609.
of whom Luther speaks, who being tempted to sin by the Devil, called to mind
her Baptism, wherein she had vowed and covenanted with God, to forsake the
Devil and all his works; and thereupon thus stoutly made answer to him; Satan,
I am a Christian, and have been baptized, and in my Baptism did vow and
covenant with God, never to do any such things as thou now temptest me to, and
therefore I cannot, I will not hearken unto thee in these things to which thou
do tempt me, for they are contrary to my vow and promise made unto God in my
Baptism: And hereupon she was freed from these his temptations, having quenched
all his fiery darts with the waters of her Baptism. And so might we do too, if
we would but take the like course when we are tempted unto any sins: As to
say thus unto our selves, Is this that I am now about to do, agreeable to my
promise that I made unto God in my Baptism? Did I promise then, that I would
forsake the Devil, and all his works; and shall I now thus wittingly and
willingly break my promise, and sin against God? no, no, I may not, I will not
do it.

Expression XXXIV. That Christians should be heavenly minded, and have their
affections set on things above, and not on things on the earth.
THere be three things in man that may teach him this lesson, the fabric of
his body, the fabric of his eye, and the fabric of his heart.

1. As for the fabric of his body, we Os homini sub. lime dedit, ^oelumque
videre jussit, etc. Ovid. lib. 1. Metamorph.
know, that whereas God has made all other creatures to go with their faces
grovelling toward the earth, he has made man to go upright, and with his face
toward Heaven.

2. For the fabric of his eye, that is also different from other Creatures;
for whereas other Creatures have but four muscles, whereby they can turn their
eyes round about, man has a fifth, whereby he See Mr. Perkins on the Creed, of
the Creation of Man. Ex Columb. lib. 5. cap. 9.
is able to turn his eyes upwards toward Heaven.

And 3. As for the fabric of his heart, we know, that that part of it which
hangs uppermost in the body, is the broadest, and largest, and is open in the
midst of it; but that which hangs downward is very narrow, and close shut: to
show, that our affections to heavenly things should be larger and greater, and
apt to receive heavenly impressions; but toward the earth, and earthly things,
they should be lesser, and should be close shut toward earthly cogitations.

Expression XXXV. That a true Christian must show himself to be a Christian in
all things.
FOr herein we must imitate that good See B. Jewels Ser. on Romans 6. 19. p. 232.
Christian Eusebius, who being demanded, what he was, answered, a Christian;
being asked again what Countryman he was, he said, a Christian; being asked,
thirdly, who was his Father, he said, a Christian; being asked, fourthly, he
dwelt, still he answered, a Christian; and so to all other demands that were
made to him, he replied no other but this, that he was a Christian. As if he
should say, Whatsoever I am, I am a Christian in all. And so indeed should
every true Christian be, a Christian in his general, a Christian in his
particular calling; a Christian in public, a Christian in private; a
Christian in the Church, a Christian at home; carrying himself, if he be a
Magistrate, like a Christian Magistrate; if a Minister, like a Christian
Minister; if a Father, like a Christian Father; if a Master, like a Christian
Master; in a word, whatsoever he is, like a Christian in all:

Expression XXXVI. That the Devil, by little sins, makes way for greater.
FOr the Devil herein deals with men's Vide Holkot in lib. Sapien^. lect. 4. b.
souls, just as thieves do, that intend to rob an house; when those that be
great thieves cannot get in, they put in some little boy at a hole, or window,
who may open the doors to let in the greater. So the Devil first suggesteth
evil thoughts, evil thoughts make way for delight, delight tolleth on
consent, consent engenders action, action custom, custom defense, one still
making way for another, and a lesser degree for a greater, till a man become
beyond measure sinful, and attain to the height of sin.

Expression XXXVII. How hard a matter it is to rule the Tongue.
THis is evident by that which we Tripartit. Hist. l. 8. cap. 1.
read in the Ecclesiastical History, of one Pambus (or Pambo* as some call
him) who being ignorant himself, desired another to teach him a Psalm; who
hearing the first verse of the 39 Psalm read unto him, (which is this, I said I
will take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my tongue) would not suffer
his Teacher to proceed unto the second verse, for (says he) this first verse
is a lesson sufficient, and if I can but learn this, it is enough for once.
Well, away goes Pambus to learn this lesson; and when he came no more near his
Master for three (some say for six) months after, and his Master at last
meeting with him, and chiding him for that he had not come all this while to
take forth a new lesson, he told him, he had not yet learned the lesson he gave
him the last time he was with him, though he had endeavored with all diligence
to do it, it was so hard: Yea forty nine years after being asked by one of his
acquaintance, that met with him, whether he had yet learned the lesson which
his Master gave him? Truly no (says he) and yet I have been these nine and
forty years about it. So hard a matter is it to rule this unruly member of
ours, the Tongue.

Expression XXXVIII. That Grace does correct and amend Nature.
IT was a very wise speech of our best, See B. Halls Heaven upon Earth, Sect. 7.
and (as we hope) our last Cardinal, that ever we shall see in this Land, who
when a skillful Astrologer upon the calculation of his nativity, had foretold
him some specialties concerning his future estate, answered, Such perhaps I was
born, but since that time I have been born again, and my second nativity has
crossed my first.

Expression XXXIX. That in every man which is truly converted, there is a
notable change to be seen from what he was before, in respect of grace and
goodness.
SAint Ambrose makes mention of a Ambros! de paenitent. lib. 2. cap. 10.
certain young man, who had lived a great while in Incontinency, and wanton
dalliance with a loose woman, how that at last coming to a sight and sense of
his sin, and being willing to avoid the occasions thereof, traveled into
another Country; and after he had staid there a good while (not doubting but in
so long a times absence his Paeramour had forgotten him, and her former
affection toward him) he returned home again to his own Country, and to the
place of his former abode; where meeting by chance with his former Lov^, she
told him, that she was the same woman Ego sum ego.
still that he left her: but he modestly told her, that though she were the
same woman, he was not (he thanked God) the same At ego non sum ego.
man he was before, but had altered, and did now hate his former course of life
which he led with her. And so must we be able every one of us to say of our
selves, if we will assure our selves of our conversion. See 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Ephesians. 5. 8. Philem. v. 11.

Expression XL. That Gods Children in their spiritual battle, must not flee,
nor turn their backs.
ANd this is intimated by God himself, See Dr. Bois on the Epist* for the 21^^
Sunday after Trinity, page 164.
by prescribing in his Word what armor a Christian Soldier should have in his
spiritual warfare, against the enemies of his salvation. For we find in Ephesians.
6. 11. that there is the panoplie, or the whole armor of a Christian set down;
as a^ helmet for his head, a breast plate for his breast, a shield to defend
all the fore-parts, greves and shoes for his legs and feet, a sword for his
hands, a girdle or belt to gird all fast about him: but there is no piece of
a^mour at all set down for the back, or back-parts: to show, that a Christian,
in this his spiritual warfare, must not flee, or cowardly turn his back
toward his enemies, but must stand fast, ever resisting them, and fighting
courageously against them to the last.

Expression XLI. What hard hap the word Conscientia, or Conscience, has ever
had in the Church of Christ.
IT is a pretty observation, and a true Fasc. Temp. Anno 1426. Et Pet. Rodulph.
Toss. Hist. Seraph. relig. lib. 2.
one, which a Romish Writer of the Church Story long since made of the word
Conscientia, or Confcience, how that it could never yet be found at once in
full syllables in the Church of Christ. For in the Apostles times, and times of
the Primitive Church, there was Con, and Sci, a devout and learned Clergy, but
then Entia was wanting, they had the induement of the Spirit, but no indowment
of possessions. Afterward when there was Con, and Entia, a religious (yea a
superstitious) and a very rich Clergy, then Sci was failing, they were not then
the learned men: And in my time (says he) Con and Sci are both gone, and now
they be all Entia, they have all the honors, all the Manours, and all the fat
of the Land. And now (to make up the mess) we may, (in these our times) much
fear, lest Con, and Sci, and Entia, be all going, and so not so much as one
syllable left of Conscientia. Sed Deus avertat omen.

Expression XLII. That there is not a like measure of the knowledge of all
Divine Truths required in all.
FOr it is with Christians now under See Dr. Donns Sermons in Folio, page 807.
b. c.
the Gospel, as it was with the Israelites of old in the Wilderness: For as
there, though every one had one and the same measure of Manna, the same Gomer
going through all, Exodus 16. 16. because Manna was meat that would melt in their
mouths, and was of easy digestion: yet all had not an equal number of Quails,
Number* 11, 32. because Quails were birds of an higher flight, and meat of a
stronger digestion. So it is with us now, Catechisticall Divinity, and the
knowledge of Fundamental Truths (without which no man can be saved) is our
Manna, and of this every man is to take in his See B. Vshers Ser. on Ephesians. 4.
13. p. 25. Whitaker de Scriptur. q. 2. c. 15. D. Jo. Whites Defense of his Way
to the true Church, chap. 23. sect. 8.
Gomer of explicit knowledge; as that there is one God, the Maker of all
things, and one Mediator between God and Man, Jesus Christ, conceived by the
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, and the rest, as they follow in the Creed,
with such other Divine Truths, as concern Christian Belief, or a Christians
Godly life. But as for our Quails, those birds of an higher flight, that meat
of harder digestion, such as is the knowledge how to talk and discourse of
these, and other points of Divinity, plausibly; to reason and dispute them
soundly; to bring proofs of Scripture for all that they say, readily; to find
out the abstruse notions of them, severally; and to draw conclusions from them
pertinently, for the settling of our own, or other men's consciences, upon all
emergent doubts that may arise; such an exact knowledge as this is not required
in all.

Expression XLIII. That the least measure of the knowledge of Divine Truths,
where there is a sincere desire, and a conscionable care to use the means to
get more, must not dis-hearten any.
FOr it is with this spiritual light of See Mr. Hierons Sermon called the
Spiritual man's task, on 1 These. 5. 19.
knowledge, as it is with the natural light, the which we know is not at the
brightest and clearest at the first, but shines more and more unto the perfect
day, Prove. 4. 18. Nay at the first breaking and dawning of the day, the light
that is, is but a certain step from darkness, and a degree above it, and so
tempered and intermixed with darkness still, that a man cannot tell whether to
call it light or darkness; nay at the first appearing thereof, darkness is
predominant. Just so it is with the inward man, a little light appears at the
first entering into the estate of Grace, Psalm. 119. 130. but that enlightening is
but weak and duskish, yea and that in men of place too many times, which are
ordained by God to give spiritual light to others; as we may see in Vide
Raynoldi praelect. in Apocryph. tom, 1. praelect. 4. col. 53. ^
Luther, who understood but little at the first concerning the number and
nature of the Sacraments, and other things questioned between the Papists and
us. And therefore, in the Preface of his Works entreats his Reader, to read Oro
pium Lectorem, ut ista legate cum judicio, and multa miseratione, and sciat me
aliquando fuisse Monachum.
them with judgment, and much commiseration, remembering that he had been once
a Monk. The like may be said of Apollos, Act. 18. 26. yea, and even of Christ's
own Disciples, who knew not how to pray, Luke 11. 1. and had either an
unbelief, or a mis-belief (for some* time after their calling) of some chief
Articles of the Christian belief; as appears Joh. 14. 9. Luke 9. 34. and in
diverse other places. And therefore that littleness, and dimnesse of this
spiritual light which we find in our selves, must not discourage us. Nay, if
there be any light at all, it must be rejoiced in, so that we be diligent, with
conscience, and constancy, to use all good means for the increasing of it.

Expression XLIV. That though a man be never so sincerely resolute, and
industrious in endeavor to abstain from all sin; yet as long as he carries
flesh about him, which is a principle of weakness, he will be subject to such
weaknesses.
PArisiensis illustrates this handsomely, See Dr. Hammonds Treatise of
Conscience, p. 12. sect. 40.
thus: First, by the similitude of an armed man, provided with strength and
prowess, who wrestling with another on a slippery ground, (though neither
weapons, nor strength, nor courage fail him) yet may he very probably fall, the
slipperynesse of the footing will betray him to that Secondly, By an horseman
mounted upon an unmanaged, or tender mouthed horse* who cannot with all his
skill, and caution* secure himself from all misadventures; for the horse may
upon a check come ove^ with him, or getting the bit into his teeth may run, and
carry him into the enemies quarters. And thirdly, By a City that i^ provided
for a seige, with works, and men and victuals, and ammunition, and yet by a
treacherous party within, may be betrayed into the enemies hands. So there
being a principle of weakness within us, like that slippery pavement, that
tender mouthed horse, that infidious party, it will still make us liable to
such miscarriages and failings, and sometimes fallings too, notwithstanding all
our courage and diligence, all our resolution, and endeavor to the contrary.

Expression XLV. That God approves of no man, before he have proved him.
IT is wittily observed by Saint Ambrose, Ambros. l. 7. de institut. Virg.
that God, as soon as he had created the heaven, the earth, the night, the day,
the fowls of the air, the fishes of the sea, the beasts of the land, and the
rest of the Creatures, he presently gave them his approbation, saying, that
they were good, as may be seen, Genesis 1. but when he had made man, we read of no
such commendation given of him: And what think we (says he) may be the reason
thereof? Surely it can be but this, to our apprehension, because God saw that
every other Creature would presently, as soon as it was made, reduce its
operative power into act, and perform those actions which Nature (its benign
Parent) had conferred on them* as the fire would heat, the water would moisten,
the Sun would give light, the earth would fructify, and so of the rest: but,
as for man, he foresaw that he would be doing of any thing rather than that he
should do, and therefore first would prove him before he would approve of him,
and first see whether he would do any thing worthy commendation, before he
would commend him.

Expression XLVI. That those whom God intends most highly to prefer, and to
make examples to others for their piety and godliness, he most crosses,
tempts, and afflicts.
WHen God (says one) is disposed to B. of Lincolns Sermon. on Job 42. 12. p. 32.
hang up a Picture in his Church, to be well observed of all that shall come
after, he does it not by limning, and painting, but by the art of embroydering.
For the Painter, we know, deals but in colors, ordinary colors, which
according to the strength of his imagination, he tempers, and lays out to the
view of the eye: but the Embroyderer deals in more costly matter, takes his
cloth of gold and silver, which he mangles into a thousand pieces, bits, and
fragments, to frame and set out his curious imagery. So Almighty God, being to
adorn his Church, not with blocks and stones, but with some rare Pictures of
Christian virtues, works not these in ordinary colors, but in gold and silver,
men of chiefest note for piety and godliness, whom he first mangles, and cuts
into bits and pieces, with crosses, calamities, and deep temptations, and then
makes them up again into most heavenly and Angelical forms and pictures, to be
looked upon by us in the Church Militant, and to look upon him for ever in the
Church Triumphant. Thus Abraham was made a Picture and an example of obedience,
Moses of meekness, David of uprightness, Job of patience, and the like. And
therefore, if God deal thus with any of us, let us not be dis-heartned, but
rather think that God intends us for some eminent piece, and let us thank God
for it.

Expression XLVII. That we believe not the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of
God, so much for the authority of the Church, as for the testimony that they
give of themselves.
FOr it is here just as it was with the Whitaker de Scriptur. q* 3. cap. 8.
Samaritanes, mentioned Joh. 4. 39. It Is true, that the Woman of Samaria by her
Testimony of Christ, had moved a great many of the Samaritanes to come forth,
to see and to hear him: but when they were once come to him, and had heard him
themselves, they said unto the woman, Now we believe not, because of thy
saying, but because we our selves have heard him, and do know that this is
indeed that Christ, the Savior of the world, v. 42. So the authority of the
Church may first move us to acknowledge the Scriptures to be the Word of God;
but afterward, when we have read them, and do in any measure understand them,
then we do no longer believe them to be so because the Church has said it, but
because we our selves do find in them the Spirit of God speaking and
witnessing the same unto us.

Expression XLVIII. What little hope there is of reclaiming one that is given
to drunkenness.
A Gentleman hearing that his Son at the Dr. Bois on the Epist. for the 20th
Sunday after Trinity.
University was given to dicing, answered, That want of money would occasion
him happily to leave that fault. Afterward understanding that he was given to
whoring, said, That either marriage, or old age, would one day cure that folly.
But when he was informed of his wine-bibbing, and of his usual drunkenness by
means of that, Out upon the villain (said the Father) I will surely now
dis-inherit him, for this fault will increase with his years. A Gamester will
continue so long as his purse does last, an Adulterer so long as his loins do
last, but a Drunkard will continue so long as his lungs and life do last.

Expression XLIX. That we must so think of Gods Mercy, that we forget not his
Justice; and of his Justice, so as that we forget not his Mercy.
FOr a man may say of these, as the Auson. Epigram* 10.
Epigrammist spoke of his two poisons: Dividat haec si quis, faciunt discreta
venenum;


Antidotum sumet, qui sociata bibet. Either of them single (though not through
any malignant quality in themselves, but by reason of our corrupt temperature)
becomes rank and deadly poison to us. For take Mercy without Justice, and as a
cold poison it benummeth us, and makes us stupid with careless security; and
take Justice without Mercy, and as an hot poison it scaldeth us, and scorcheth
us in the flames of restless despair: but take them both together, and mix
them well, as hot and cold poison fitly tempered by the skill of the
Apothecary, and they become medicinable.

Expression L. That Christians, living not like Christians, do cause the Name
of God, and their Christian profession to be evil spoken of.
ANd hereof we have a lively example Benzo in his Indian Story.
recorded by him that wrote the Indian History, and therein of the cruelties
See Dr. Joh. Whites Way to the true Church, sect. 49. numb. 5. etc. where they
be set down at large.
which the Spaniards used toward the poor Indians, which made them thus to
blaspheme God, and the Christian Religion. These men (say they) have named
themselves, for credit and authorities sake, the Sons of God; but when we see
their cruelties, and other vile behavior, we cannot choose but say of their
God, and them: What kind of God (with a mischief) is this, that has begotten
such Qualis (malum) Deus iste est, qui tam impuros ex se filios, and sceleratos
genuit? Si pater filiorum similis, minime profecto bonum esse oportet.
impure and wicked Sons? Surely, if the Father be like the Children, there
can be no goodness in him. And afterward seeing their unmeasurable
covetousness, and eager thirst after gold, they would take a wedge of gold,
and holding it aloft, would use these words amongst themselves, Lo this is the
God of En Deus Christianorum!
the Christians!

And the King of Nicaragua meeting on a time with Benzo himself, the Penner of
the Story, said thus unto him, O Christian! What are Christians? And
Christian! Quid sunt Christiani, etc?
thus he answered himself by defining of them:

They desire spice, honey, silk, a Spanish cape, an Indian woman to lie with;
gold and silver they seek for: Christians will not work; they are scoffers,
dicers, blasphemers, fighters, and to conclude, they Omnes mali sunt.
are all naught.

Thus was the name of God, and the Profession, and the Professors of
Christianity, by their lewd behavior derided, defamed, and reproached by
Infidels and Pagans.

Expression LI. That it is a dangerous and damnable thing to seek to Witches
for help, in time of need.
THere are in the world two contrary See Mr. Gatakers Treatise of the nature
and use of lots, page 318.
Powers, and two contrary Kingdoms, the one of God, the other of the Devil;
and these two are so opposite either to other, that he cannot be a subject of
the one, that belongs to the other; and he falls from, and rebelleth
against the one, that flies, or seeks to, or has ought to do with the
other.

As therefore when a Prince shall have proclaimed open war against some
foreign foe; or rather, when he shall have proclaimed some one of his
Subjects, a Rebel, and a Traitor, yea such a one as he will never vouchsafe to
pardon, or to receive to grace and mercy again, and shall thereupon have
prohibited and forbidden any of his other Subjects to resort unto him, or to
have any commerce with him, or with any of those that follow him, and fight
under his colors, yea, and shall have taken a corporal oath of each of them
to that purpose. Now if any of his Subjects, notwithstanding this charge
publicly given, and oath solemnly taken to the contrary, shall resort to such
a one, or have intercourse with him, either directly or indirectly, by himself
in person, or by any that shall deal between him and them; shall he not
undoubtedly be held guilty for so doing, of perjury and disloyalty, yea of high
treason against his Sovereign, and accordingly suffer, and that deservedly, as
a perjured person, a rebel, and a traitor to his Prince?

In like manner then here, our Sovereign Lord and Maker having proclaimed open
war (as I may so say) against the Devil, yea eternal hostility, without hope
of reconcilement; and having pronounced him a rebel, and a rebel
irrecoverable, such a one as he will never receive again on any terms
whatsoever; and therefore has straightly charged and bound all his Subjects and
Servants by a solemn oath, under pain and peril of his perpetual displeasure,
never to have any dealing, either directly or indirectly, either with him, or
with those that associate themselves unto him, either by seeking to him
immediately, or by using such courses as he has been the author and adviser
of, and do require his helping hand. If any of Gods people now shall be found
faulty in any of the premises, must not such a one be held guilty of perjury,
and disloyalty, and high treason against Gods Majesty, and look to suffer
accordingly, as a breaker of his oath, as a violater of his vow, as a forsaker
of God, and Christian Religion, and a follower of Satan, and his accursed
faction? See Levit. 20. 6. 2 King. 1, 2, etc. 1 Chronicles. 10. 13, 14.

Expression LII. That none of any degree, calling, condition, or Country, are
excluded from partaking of Christ, and his merits.
ANd this Divines have explained by See B. Andrews Sermon. of the Nativity, page
36.
diverse similitudes.

1. This was intimated in the place of Christ's birth, which was an Inn, Luke 2.
7. and that we know is for all Hence called in Greek, (...) Luke 10. 34. See
Dr. Playfares Ser. on 2 Cor: 3. 18. page 258.
passengers, of what Country soever; and wherein every one has right. Yea, and
the most common part of the Inn, the Stable: for though travelers sort
themselves, and every one has his chamber to himself, yet in the Stable all
have interest, that is common to all.

2. In the ^itle written on his Cross, which was in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
Luke 23. 38. the three languages that were best known, and most used all the
world over; one of which Pilate supposed every Vide Raynol di praelect. 239. in
Apocrypha. Whitaker. de Scriptur. q. 2. c. 17. in ^ine.
one that was there present (and there were then there at Jerusalem some of
every Nation under Heaven, Acts 2. 5.) could read, and so might publish his
death in all places of the world, for their souls good.

3. In the Titles that are given him in the Scripture: As 1. That he is called
the Rose of the field, Cantic. 2. 1. Now we Flos campi in edit. Latin. vulgar.
Vide Francis. Labata, in mag. apparat. Concionat. t^m. 1. p. 236.
know, that the Rose of the garden is only gathered by the Master, or owner of
the garden, or by those that he does permit, or appoint: but it is lawful for
any to gather the Rose of the field. 2. That he is a Fountain, Zech. 13. 1. and
a Fountain (we know) is open for any man to drink. 3. That he is the Son of
man, for so he delights usually in the Gospel to call himself: he does not
say, that he is the Son of Abraham, the Son of David, or the like, but the Son
of man; as if he did not belong to this, See B. Lakes Sermon. alphabet 3* page 71.
or that family, but were common to all.

4. He had this intimated in his very name Jesus Christ; for he had the Hebrew
So most Divines have observed.
name Jesus, to signify that he was the Savior of the Jews: and he had the
Greek name Christ, to signify the interest that the Gentiles had in him.

5. Some gather it also from Christ's Genealogy, See Dr. Dons Sermon. in fol.
page 243. c. B. Kings first lect on Jonah, page 18. Mr. VVeems his exposition
of the Moral Law, lib. 2. exer. 8. Vt qui propter peccatores venerat, de
peccatoribus natus, peccatum deleret, Hier. ibid. Vide Cyprian. tract. de Sina
and Sion, in initio. Aug. tract. 9. in Joh. Vide Corn. a Lap. in Genesis 1. 28.
See D. Willet on Lev. 1. 5. q. 11.
mentioned Matthew, chap. 1. and by Luke, chap. 3. For therein we find mention
made of Jews and Gentiles; of great men, and meaner persons; of men, and also
of women; and of both sorts, as well of those that were good, as of those that
were bad; and all to show, that as he came of these, so for these too.

6. Others have observed it from the name of Adam (Christ being called the
second Adam, 1 Cor* 15. 45.) the letters of which name being taken severally,
signify all the quarters of the earth. For therein is A. (...), the East; D.
(...), the West; A. again, (...), the North; and M. (...), the South: to show,
that Christ's salvation extends to all quarters of the World.

7. Others think it to be intimated by the Priests sprinkling of the blood of
the Sacrifices round about the Altar, Levit. 1. 5. For this (says Osiander)
did signify that the virtue of Christ's blood, by the preaching of the Gospel,
was to be sprinkled over all the coasts of the world.

Las^ly, Others find it intimated in the very division of Christ's garments into
four parts, Joh. 19. 23. as if this also were to show, that from whatsoever
quarter we come of all the four-parts of the world, if we be naked, Christ has
garments of salvation to cloth us.

But let all these conceits of men be as they will, this we are sure is Gods
truth, that there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female, but all are one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 28.
See 1 Cor. 12. 13.

Expression LIII. That though Christ be the Savior of all sorts of men, yet
not of all of all sorts.
ANd therefore when it is said, that Christ is the Savior of all, it is not
meant of all in general, but of all that are capable of salvation. Hence this
word Omnes redimuntur per Christum, soli electi in Christo. Vide Davenant. in 1
Col. 14. page 89. Aug. de Corr. and Gratia, c. 14. See Dr. Saundersons Sermon. on
1 Cor. 12. 7. p. 113. Dr. Benefields Sermon. on Luke 9. 23. page 4, etc.
[ all] in other places of Scripture, is interpreted only of his people, Mat.
1. 21. of his body, Ephesians. 5. 23. and the like.

And this Divines do thus illustrate: When we say, all do go to School to
such a School, all do go into such a door, all do travel such a way, etc. we
do not mean hereby, that all persons whatsoever do go to such a School, or go
into such a door, or travel such a way; but all that do go to School in such
a place, all that do go into such a house, all that do travel to such a
place, do go to School there, do enter in by such a door, and do travel
such a way.

Expression LIVE. That Faith only justifies, but not Faith alone.
ANd this may be thus illustrated: It is the Sea Mr. Perkins Reformed
Catholic, tir. Iustific.
eye only that sees, and no other member besides, and yet the eye alone
without the head, or separated from the head, sees not at all: So faith Fides
sola est quae justificat, fides tamen quae justificat non est sola, Calvin. in
Act. S^n. Trid. Sex. Sess. Ant. tract. Theo^. p. 336. col. 2.
only justifies us in the sight of God; but that ^aith which does thus
justify us, is not alone.

Luther on Gal. 2. 16. adds another illustration of it, thus: Christ Jesus
(says he) is our husband, and we are his spouse: now the Bridegroom must be
alone with the Bride in his secret chamber, where, with the hand of faith, she
embraces him; whereas all the servants, and the rest of the family, are for
that time put out: but afterward, when the chamber door is opened, and he
comes forth into the waiting room with his Bride, where the servants and
handmaids attend, then every one in his place is ready to wait on them, and to
do their duty; Hope does her duty, Love hers, and so of the rest.

Expression LV. How he that breaks one Commandment breaks all, or is
guilty of the breach of all.
FOr it is here, as it is with a meteyard, the whole consists (we know) of
diverse parts; as the half-yard, the quarter, the half-quarter, the inches, and
all these together make up the yard; insomuch, that if you break or cut off but
one inch, or but the least part from it, it is no longer a yard; but in
breaking off of that one part, you have broken the whole yard; for the yard is
not a yard, except that, and every other part be in it. And just so it is with
Gods Commandments; there be ten of them, as so many several pieces and parts,
to make up the whole Law: So that if but one Commandment be broken, the whole
Law is broken. And the reason hereof, given by Divines, is this, because See
Mr. Jer* Dykes Worthy Communicant, p. 19.
the Law is wholly copulative, as appears Deuteronomy. 5. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. where
the particle [ And] stands amongst the Commandments, as did the taches and
loops amongst the curtains of the Tabernacle. For as there the taches put into
the loops, did couple the curtains of the Tabernacle, and did join them so all
together, that they might all be but one, Exodus 26. 10, 11. So this copulative
particle does couple all the Commandments together, to make them all one Law:
So as that he which did uncouple but one curtain only of the Tabernacle, did
uncouple the whole Tent, so he that breaks but one Commandment, breaks the
whole Law.

Only to make this a little plainer, it See Mr. Don. Dyke of the
deceitfulness of the heart, cap. 8. p. 114.
must be remembered, that there is a twofold breaking of the Commandments,
habitual and actual: Habitual, in the preparation, purpose, desire, and
disposition of the heart: Actual, in the outward deed. Now howsoever he that
breaks one, breaks not all actually, yet breaking that one habitually, he
breaks them all habitually, his heart stands alike affected to break any of the
rest, and whenever occasion shall serve, he will break them too.

Expression LVI. That Christ, though he were both God and Man, yet he suffered
not in his Divine, but in his Humane Nature.
ANd this may be thus illustrated: First, Vide Bezae Theol. Epistolas, Epist.
60.
A man (we know) consists both of soul and body, and yet when he is dead, or
buried, though we say such a man is dead, or such a man is buried, yet we do
not understand it of his soul, for that can neither be dead, nor buried, but of
his body only.

2. Thus: A Carpenter cuts down a tree, or cuts a piece of wood, on which the
Sunshineth; the which is not cut, or hurt with the stroke of the axe, though
that tree, or that piece of wood on which it shines, be chopped and gasht with
many a cut.

3. Thus: Aaron was appointed by God, Levitic. 16. to take two goats, whereof
one was to be killed, and the other was to be let go, and to be led into the
wilderness for a scapegoat. The former of which (say Divines) prefigured the
Humane Nature of Christ, which was crucified, and killed; and the latter his
Divine, which though it gave virtue, value, and efficacy of merit to his Humane
Nature, and to the sufferings thereof, yet suffered not with it, but like the
scapegoat, escaped them, and was free from them.

Expression LVII. That there is not more sin now (since the preaching of the
Gospel is become so common) than there was before, in the time of Popish
ignorance, and darkness.
IT has been an old, and is still is a common See M. Hierons Preachers plea,
page 495.
complaint amongst ignorant people, that the world was never so bad as it has
been since we have had so much preaching; but it is a false charge, and
imputation, as may be thus illustrated. If a man come into a room in the
nighttime, where there is no light, all things may be out of their places, and
order, and the room all dirty and dusty, and yet he not see it, nor take any
notice of it: but let the same man take a candle in his hand, or come in
thither at noonday, and he will quickly see and discover all that is thus
amiss therein; and yet we cannot say, that his bringing in the candle, or the
daylight, did make it so, but only discovered that it was so. And just so is
it here. For in the time of Popery and ignorance, when the Scriptures were
either wholly detained from men, or locked up in an unknown tongue, there were
as many sins then, if not more, than are now: but for want of the light of
knowledge, they were not known to be such, or not such heinous sins (many of
them, and those heinous ones too, going under the name of Venials) as now by
the Sea Mr. Francis VVhites Defense of D. Jo. VVhites Way to the true Church,
page 29. where there are many such heinous sins set down out of their own
Authors.
clear light of the Gospel they do appear to be.

Or it is here, as it is with an house, into which the Sun does not shine; for
there is as much dust flying up and down in the air then, as there is when the
Sun shines into the room, but it is not discerned so well as it is then: for
when the Sun does shine in at a window, or door, where the Sunbeams do come,
you shall see moats in the Sun, and much small dust, which before you saw not,
nor took no notice of. So in the time of blindness and ignorance there were
many sins in men, of which there was no notice taken; but now since the Sun of
righteousness is risen, and does begin to shine into men's hearts with the
lightsome beams of his Word and Spirit, there is not the least peccadilio, but
themselves or others will quickly discern it. And this is the true reason why
many think there is more sin now, than there was in former times.

Expression LVIII. That all quiet Consciences are not good Consciences.
TO make this appear, Saint Bernard Bern. lib. de Conscientia, sect. 2.
distinguishes Consciences thus: There be (says he) four kinds of
Consciences. 1. There is a Conscience that is good, but not quiet. 2. There is
a Conscience that is quiet, but not good. 3. There is a Conscience that is both
good, and quiet. And 4. There is a Conscience that is neither good, nor quiet*
The two good belong properly to the godly, and the two bad to the wicked, whose
Conscience is either too too quiet, or too too unquiet, but in neither any true
peace. Others, the better to express See Mr. Jer. Dykes Treatise of a good
Conscience, page 30. And M. Sa. Wards Ser. on Heb. 13. 18. called Balm from
Gilead to recover Conscience, page 25.
this, make three sorts of quiet bad Consciences: The 1. A blind and ignorant
Conscience. The 2. A secure Conscience. And the 3. a seared Conscience.

1. Blind and ignorant Consciences are such as speak peace, or rather hold
their peace, because they have not skill enough to accuse, and find fault: and
such most commonly are the consciences of the ignorant, and vulgar sort, whose
consciences want mouths to speak, because they want eyes to see their sins, and
their misery by reason of them: but there will come a time (and no man knows
how soon it will come) when these consciences shall have their eyes opened, and
then also shall their mouths be opened, and these quiet consciences shall both
bark, and bite too.

2. Secure Consciences are such, as want not so much an eye to discover sin, as
a good tongue to tell of it, and to find fault with it. So that it many times
sees his Master to do evil, and knows it to be evil, but either cares not to
speak unto him of it; or if it do, it is quickly snibd, and silenced again, by
being made to believe, that either it is a small, and venial sin; or if of a
greater magnitude, that they will cry God mercy for the present, and find some
time to repent of it hereafter. But this is no true peace neither; it may be a
truce for a time, wherein there may be a cessation of war for a season, but yet
so, as that it is all that while making provision of arms and ammunition, and
is raising of more forces against the time that the truce shall be ended, that
then it may set upon them with more violence, fury and fierceness, than ever
before.

The 3d and last is the seared Conscience, of which mention is made, 1 Timothy 4.
2. where the Apostle uses a metaphor borrowed from Surgery. Now Chirurgions
(we know) when they cut off a limb from any part of the body, they use to sear
with an hot iron that part from which it is cut; and that part upon the
searing, will gather such a crusty brawninesse, that prick it, or cut it, it
feels nothing, being altogether insensible. And thus it is with many men's
consciences, let them commit what sins they will, yea sins never so heinous,
and yet they are never troubled at them, they feel no stirrings, nor stings of
conscience for them: but there will come a time, when God will take off this
seared crustinesse, and so pare them to the quick, that they shall feel to
their everlasting horror in hell (if not before) what now they were not
sensible of.

Expression LIX. How far the Graces of Gods Spirit, in the heart of his Child,
may decay.
ANd this may be illustrated thus: there See D. Sclater on 1 These. 5. 19. page
526, 527.
be in saving Graces three things considerable, the habits, the acts and
operations, and the degrees and measures of them: All which, how far they may
decay, this short Scholasticall Distinction shows; Habitus non amittitur, Actus
intermittitur, Gradus remittitur. The plenary habits of saving Graces cannot be
lost; the Acts and Operations of them may admit, though not an utter loss, yet
intermission; as in sleep, we lose not the faculty, but the use of sense; and
as a man in his drink, or over-carried with violent passion, loses not the
faculty, but the use of Reason. Lastly, The degrees and measures of saving
Graces formerly attained to, may be much abated; as appears in the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 4. who is there said to have left his first love.
Which is not so to be understood, Non amisit charitatem, sed de charitatis
fervore nonnihil remisit. Viegas in loc.
as if he had lost the habit, or wholly the exercise of that Grace, but only
the vigor and heat thereof that once appeared in him. Much like that
Archbishop of whom we read, who was a most hot and servent Monk, an hot Abbot,
a lukewarm Bishop, and a remiss Archbishop. For so Pope Vrbane saluted him.
Vrbanus servus servorum Dei, Vide Jacob. Usser. de Eccl. Christ. succes^* page
191.
Monacho ferventissimo, Abbati calido, Episcopo tepido, Archiepiscopo remisso.
Girald. Cambrens. Itinerar. Cambr. lib. 2. cap. 14.

Expression LX. That God is not the Author of Sin.
THere are in every sin that is committed See B. Kings lect. 18. on Jonah, page
238.
two things considerable; the Act, or Action done, and the obliquity, defect,
and sinfulness of the Action. The Action it self (as an Action) is from God;
for in him we live, move, and have our being, Acts 17. 28. but the obliquity,
the defect, the sinfulness of the action, that is from man's natural
corruption, or the Hominem fecit Deus, peccatorem homo. Aug. The Devil is the
father that begets sin, Ioh. 13. 2. But our own hearts are the mother that
conceives it, brings it forth, and nurseth it, Iam. 1. 14.
Devils instigation, or both. For it is here, as it is in a lame leg, wherein
are two qualities, ability to go, but unability to go upright. The going and
stirring it has is from the virtue that moves it (as when a rider drives or
spurreth forward his lame horse) but the lamenesse and debility belongs to
another cause, as the distortion, or crookedness, or some other impotency in
the leg it self. The like is, in the striking of a jarring and untuned harp, or
other musical instrument, the fingering and making it to sound, is from the
Musician, and him that plays on it; but the jarring and discord that it
makes in the sound, is from the Instrument it self, or from the untuneableness
of the strings. The Earth also (we know) gives fatness, and juice to all kind
of plants, and some of those plants yield pestilent and noisome fruits: But
where is the fault? in the nourishment of the ground, or in the nature of the
plants, which by their native corruption decoct the goodness of the ground
into venom and poison? The goodness and moisture is from the earth, but the
venom from the plants; the sounding from the hand, the jarring from the
Instrument; the motion from the rider, the lamenesse from the leg: So the
Action or motion is from God, the evil in the Action from the impure fountain
of thine own heart:

We may sum up all with that known See Dr. Bois on Epist. for 1. Sunday in
Lent, page 28.
School distinction, Deus deficit gratiam detrahendo, Diabolus afficit malitiam
apponendo, Homo seipsum inficit duritiem contrahendo; God withdraws his
grace, the Devil suggesteth the temptation, and Man takes the occasion. So
that though God be Actor in malo, yet can he by no Aug. lib. qu. 83. qu. 3. and
21. and alibi.
means be Author mali.

Expression LXI. That our best Actions are tainted with sin.
THe Papists charge us, that we say, that See Abbot against Bishop, part. 2.
sect. 44. p. 574. Dr. Jo. Whites Way to the true Church, sect. 40. number. 23, and
24.
the best actions of the Godly, done in the state of grace, are sin. We say no
such thing, but that sin only cleaves to them, and in part blemisheth them. As
water running through a miri^ channel is mudded, and wine put into a fusty
vessel is changed thereby. Neither is it any let hereunto, that these our
works are wrought in us by the Spirit of God, from whom there comes no defect,
nor imperfection. For it is herein as with a Scrivener, teaching a Child to
write; for though he hold the Child's hand in every letter, and dash that he
makes, yet the writing will bear witness of the Child's imperfection, and not
be as when the Scrivener writes it alone by himself. So God by his Spirit
writing his Law in our hearts, yet has not given us so great perfection, but
that the best works he teaches us bear witness of our natural infirmity so
far, that we may confess and say with Saint Augustine, That all our Aug. de
Civ. Dei, lib. 19. cap. 27.
righteousness stands rather in the remission of our sins, than in any
perfection of justice.

Expression LXII. That a regenerate Christian must not be dis-heartned, though
for the present the unregenerate part do prevail over the regenerate, and the
flesh over the Spirit.
FOr the Spirit, and the regenerate See Mr. John Downhams Christian warfare,
part. 4. l. 2* c. 4. sect. 6.
part, is like a child, which though it be little and weak in respect of his
stature and strength, yet is still growing, and waxing stronger and stronger,
till he comes to be a man of ripe and perfect age. Whereas the flesh, and the
unregenerate part, is like an old man, worn out with age, and decrepit. Now
though the old man be for the present of greater stature, and much stronger
than the child, yet here is the child's comfort, he knows that he increases
daily, and waxes stronger and stronger: but the old man decreaseth and
decays, waxing every day more feeble than other* till at length all his
strength be by death wholly abolished: so as now the child, that was before but
little and weak, being come to man's estate, may triumph over him, and trample
on his grave. Just so it is with the flesh and the spirit, the unregenerate and
the regenerate part of a Christian, that, like the old man, may for the present
be more vigorous and strong than the infant-like regenerate part that is in a
Christian, and with his strength may be able to wrong it, and wound it, and
give it many a foyl, and fall: but here is his comfort, he knows that the old
man, like the house of Saul, waxes weaker 2 Samuel 3. 1.
and weaker; and the new man that is in him, like the house of David, waxes
stronger and stronger, and shall continue so, till it have gotten a full and
final victory over it.

Expression LXIII. That one sin continued in without repentance, may damn a man
in the end, as well as many.
FOr it is herein as in a Ship at Sea, August. in S. Joh. tract. 1^. c. 9.
wherein if there be but one leak unespied, through which the water may come
in, and that being not stopped, or the water pumped out in season, even that
will in time so fill the Ship with water, that it will cause it to sink, though
not so suddenly, or speedily, as where there be many and great inlets and holes
made into the sides of it. So it is with the soul of man living here on the Sea
of this world. He that has many and great sins may sink sooner into the
bottomless pit of Hell, than he that has but few, or lesser. But yet he that
has but these, or any one of these, if he continue in them, or suffer them to
continue in him, and does neither ply the Pump of Repentance to cast them forth
of his soul, nor does use the means to stop those inlets that may let in more,
shall sink thither too in the end as well as the other.

Expression LXIV. That there will come a time, when the words of Gods Ministers
(which we now forget, or regard not) will be remembered.
I have read of words uttered in a great See Dr. Joh. Whites Defense of his Way
to the true Church, chap. 55. sect. 3.
frost, which so freezed in the venting, and as they were spoken, that they
were never heard till a thaw came, a long time after. So fares it with many
Sermons, and other heavenly instructions of Gods Ministers, they are so little
regard, and so little use is made of them by many that hear them, for the
present, that they seem to freez in the cold hearts and ears of their hearers:
but many times upon their deathbeds, and sometimes too before (when the hand of
God is in any grievous manner upon them, or theirs) there comes such a thaw in
their Consciences by means of the fire of Gods wrath, that those Sermons, and
those other holy instructions (so much slighted heretofore) are now remembered,
and made use of, for their terror and discomfort.

Expression LXV. That when Gods Holy Spirit, by his quickening and sanctifying
Grace, enters into the heart of man, it brings life and holiness not to one
only part, but to all at once.
FOr Grace comes into the soul of man, See Mr. Pembles vindiciae Gratiae, or
Plea for Grace, page 7.
like light into the air, which before dark, is in all parts at once
illuminated; or as heat into cold water, that spreads it self through the whole
substance; or as the soul into the body of Lazarus, or the Sh^namites child,
not by degrees, but all at once infused, and giving life to every part. So is
our new man born at once, though he grow by degrees; that is, the soul in our
conversion is at once re-invested with the Image of God in all its faculties;
so that though the actions of Grace do not presently appear in each one, yet
the habit, the seed, the root of all divine virtues is firmly re-implanted in
them, and by the strength of this Grace given, they are constantly disposed to
all sanctified operations.

Expression LXVI. That the actual operations of Grace appear not perfectly nor
equally in every part of a regenerated Christian.
FOr the case is not altogether alike in See Mr. Pemble, ubi supra, page 9.
our new, as in out natural birth; here all parts are nourished alike, and
grow proportionably unto full perfection, if the body be healthy, and of good
temper. But in the birth of the new Creature it is otherwise; he is crazy and
sickly from the very womb, and first conception, infirmity and corruption hangs
upon every joint and limb of him; so that allthough there be life in every
part, yet every part thrives not equally, nor is alike active in its
operations. It Is with him as with infants, that are ((...), Syderati) or (as we
say) planetstrucken, taken with some ill air, in whom some parts grow wearish
and withered, whilst others grow strong and lusty; all grow and have life, but
those more slowly and weakly, which diversity makes the body somewhat deformed,
though not monstrous: So in Grace, every faculty is quickened with spitituall
life and strength, and yet one may have a more free exercise of this gracious
power than another, which may be hindered and kept under through some stopping
of the Spirit, some ill humor unpurged, some corrupt custom, company, or
example, inclining it another way. And this appears by manifest experience; for
who does not see that one and the same man may be eminent in some one or few
graces, which in others may attain but to a very mediocrity?

Expression LXVII. That it is an unwise, and no safe course for any man to put
off his repentance till his old age, or deathbed.
WEre not that Carrier a fool, that Vide Bellarm. Conciones, Conc. 45. page 415.
being to go a far, and a foul journey, and having choice of strong and lusty
horses, would lay the greatest and heaviest pack upon a poor, weak, sickly,
decrepit, and lame horse, which is scarce able well to bear himself, and suffer
the other that are strong and lusty, to go empty, or lightly laden? And is not
that man as errand a fool, that will lay the heavy load of repentance (a load
that the strongest and lustiest will find heavy enough to bear in his best
health, if it be born as it should be, and as God expects) upon his old and
decrepit age, or upon his sick, weak, and even dying body; neither of which are
well able to bear and endure the infirmities, miseries* pangs and pains that
do accompany themselves; and suffer his youth, and stronger age, wherein he
has both health and strength, and is free from all such encumbrances, to be
empty, and void of such penitential thoughts?

Expression LXVIII. That Gods favors, and his many and manifold blessings
bestowed upon us, should oblige us rather to serve God, than his enemy the
Devil.
FOr make it thine own case. Thou take See M. Steph. Jeroms seven helps to
Heaven, on Simeons dying Song, p. 232.
some poor, desolate, fatherless child into thine house, and bring him up,
and providest all necessaries for him: Or thou take into thy family, and
entertainest a servant, and give him meat, drink, apparel, wages,
countenance, house and harbor, and what else he can desire for his being, or
well being in thy service: would thou now take it well, if either this child
or servant whom thou have so much favored, and done so much for, should reject
thee (thou still out of thy love continuing his means and maintenance, and all
thy former favors) and go and ingratiate himself with thy mortal enemy, and
serve him? And can thou then think that God (who has done infinitely more
for thee, than ever thou did, or were able to do for this child, or this
servant) should take it well at thy hands, if after all these his favors
conferred on thee, thou should leave him and his service, and go and serve
him who is the professed enemy of God, yea and his deadly and mortal enemy,
the Devil?

Expression LXIX. How dangerous a thing it is to mock and scoff at Gods
judgments.
ANd hereof we have a fearful example See Mr. Perkins on the Creed, of Gods
Omnipotency.
related by Master Perkins. Upon a time (says he) not far from Cambridge, one
being with his Companion drinking in an Alehouse on the Lords day* when he was
ready to depart thence, there began a fearful storm, with very great lightning
and thunder: whereupon his fellow earnestly entreated him to stay a while
longer, to see whether it would cease; but the man mocking and jesting at the
thunder, said (as the report was) That this was nothing but a knave Cooper
knocking on his tubs, and therefore come what would, he would go, and so went on
his journey: but before he was come half a mile from the house, the same hand
of the Lord which before he had mocked, in a crack of thunder struck him about
the girdle steed, so as he fell suddenly down dead.

Expression LXX. That Gods Child cannot be silent in the wrongs of God his
Father.
HErodotus reports, that when King See Dr. Hackwell on the 101 Psalm, page 132.
Croesus was assaulted in the sight of his dumb Son, the force of nature
wrought so powerfully in him, that it unloosed the strings of his tongue, and
he cried out, O Villain, kill not the King! The truth of the Story I leave to
be defended by the Authors of it: but this I am sure of, that scarcely any
outward action more clears our inward grace of Adoption, arguing us indeed to
be the Sons of God, than when we are truly sensible of the dishonor offered
to God our Fathers name.

Expression LXXI. That at the day of Judgment we must give God an account what
we have done here in this world, and in what a woeful case they will be, that
can give no good account thereof.
IF a Merchants Factour after many See Parsons Resolut. 1. part. chap. 3. sect.
8.
years spent beyond the Seas, return home to give accounts to his Master,
should yield a reckoning of so much time spent in singing, so much in dancing,
so much in drinking, so much in gaming, and playing, and the like; who would
not laugh at his accounts? But being further asked by his Master, what time he
had bestowed on his merchandise and trading for which he had sent him thither;
and he should answer, that he had spent none at all in or about that, nor had
not so much as thought of that all the while he was there; who would not think
him worthy of all shame and punishment? And surely with much more shame and
confusion of face shall they stand before God at the day of Judgment, who
being sent by him into this world for this errand, chiefly to serve him, have
notwithstanding neglected the same, bestowing all their studies, labors and
cogitations on the vain trifles of this world, and never so much as thinking on
the main errand for which they were sent hither.

Expression LXXII. That the least and meanest of Gods Creatures serve to set
forth the glory of him their Creator, and may be in their places some way or
other useful to man.
FOr it is here as it is in Music; for See Mr. Edw. Rainolds Ser. on 1 Eccles.
14. page 2.
as there every prick, and quaver, and rest, do serve in their order to
commend the cunning of the Artist, and to delight the ear of the hearer, as
well as the more perfect notes. So the least and meannest of the Creatures were
at first filled with so much goodness as might not only declare the glory of
God, but in their places minister content to the mind of man.

Expression LXXIII. How little reason men have to grow proud, because they have
more, or better gifts than other.
FOr we are to consider, 1. That the Sea Dr. Saundersons 1. Ser. ad Clerum, on
Romans 14. 3. page 12.
more gifts or graces any man has, God looks that he should be the more
thankful unto him for it. 2. That he expects he should do the more good
with them. And 3. That he will charge him with so much the deeper account for
them at the day of judgment.

Expression LXXIV. That Children, though richer and more eminent in respect of
place, or grace, than their Parents, must not contemn their Parents, or neglect
their duty toward them.
ANd hereof we have a notable example Vide Stapleton. de tribus Thomis, c. 1.
page 12.
in Sir Thomas Moor, who being Lord Chancellor in his time, and consequently
in an office next and immediately See Mr. Joh* Days festivals, sermon. 8. page
229.
to the King himself, and having his own Father living, and at that time but
one of the inferior Judges of the Kings Bench, (that then was) never went to
Westminster Hall to sit in the Chancerie there, but first he would go up to the
Kings Bench, where his Father then sat, and there on his knees would ask him
blessing before a multitude of beholders: So little was he ashamed of his
Father, though then in a far lower condition than himself.

Expression LXXV. How Saint Paul saying, that we are justified by faith without
works, Romans 3. 28. And Saint James, saying, that we are justified by works, and
not by faith only, Jam. 2. 24. may be reconciled.
THere has been (says Master Fox) See Mr. Fox his Sermon of Christ crucified,
page 68.
a long contention, and much ado in the Church, to reconcile these two places
of Scripture; but when all is said that may be said touching them, there is
none that can better reconcile these two different places than you your selves,
to whom we preach: And how is that? I will tell you (says he) Do you join the
lively faith, that S. Paul speaks of, with those good works that Saint James
speaks of, and bring them both together into one life, and then have thou
reconciled them: for so shall thou be sure to be justified both before God by
Saint Paul's faith, and before men by Saint James his works.

Expression LXXVI. That all pray not with like devotion.
TO show this, the Talmudists of old Vide Coninium de locis N. Testament. c. 5.
p. 38.
observed in the peoples prayers, three sorts of Amens: all which were faulty.
The first they called a (...) Pupillum. (...) sur reptitium. (...) sectile.
faint Amen, when they prayed without fervency. The 2d they called, a hasty
Amen, when they said Amen, before the prayer was ended: and the 3d they called
a lazy Amen; when they pronounced Amen at length, as if they mere Yawning, or
gaping, and ready to fall a sleep, and so dividing the word, as if it were
A-a-men. Only he that prays devoutly, says Amen as well with his heart, as
with his tongue, and observes the due time, place, and order when, where, and
after which it is to be pronounced: manifesting therein his assent to the truth
of what has been said in prayer unto God, his earnest desire to have it
granted, and his faith, and belief, that so it shall be in Gods good time, if
he thinks it good, and expedient for him.

Expression. LXXVII. That all hear not the Word of God with like attention, and
reverence, and desire to profit thereby.
TO show this, the Jewish Rabbines have observed amongst their hearers, See in
Mr. Th^mas Goodwin his Jewish antiquities li. 1. cap. 7. and Mr. Alexander
Roberts his sacred septena^y page 57.
that there were always some, which were like sponges, that sucked, and drew in
any liquid thing they met with, whether it were clean and wholesome, or foul,
and infectious: and such were those hearers, that wanting judgment, took all
for truth, that was taught them. Others were like an hourglass, which takes in
the sand with great deliberation, till all be run in, but being once turned,
lets all run out again: and such were those hearers, that seem to hearken
very deligently for the present, will not depart till all be ended, but being
once out of the Church, and turned to some worldly employments, they forget all
that they heard before. A 3d sort were like a streiner, which lets go the wine,
milk and other good liquor, and keeps in only the lees, and dregs, and the
worst matter: and such are those hearers, that in hearing let go any thing,
that may be for their souls good, and keep only that which is of least
account, and to as little use. Lastly, A 4th sort there were like unto a fine
sieve, which did only let out the dust and seeds, but kept in the good corn:
and such hearers were they, that heard the word with an honest heart, retaining
what might be for their souls good, and letting go that which might either hurt
themselves or others.

Expression LXXVIII. That weak performance in prayer, and all other Christian
duties, is better than whole omision.
ANd hereof we have a pretty example. See Mr. Thomas Fullers good thoughts for
worse times, p. 122
For there was not long since a devout, but ignorant papist dweling in Spain.
He perceived a necessity of his own private prayers to God, besides the Pater
Nosters, Ave Mary's, etc. used of course in the Romish Church. But so simple
was he, that how to pray he knew not. Only every morning, humbly bending his
knees, and lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, he would deliberately
repeat the Alphabet. And now (said he) O good God, put these letters together
to spell syllables, to spell words, to make such sense, as may be most to thy
glory, and my good.

And so let us do too; if we cannot pray as we would, or as we ought, let us
fall to this poor-pious-mans A. B. C. D. E. etc. let us do what we can, in
praying, hearing, receiving of the Sacraments, other Christian duties, and
leave the rest to be supplied by Gods holy Spirit, Romans 8. 26, 27. and to be
perfected by Christ's intercesion for us, Revel. 8. 3, 4.

Expression LXXIX. That it is better to be Gods servant, than man's.
ANd hereof we have a lively example See Mr. Boltons quatuor novissima, page 8.
in Cardinal Wolsey; who when he was cast out of King Henry the Eights favor,
and saw himself likely to be called in question for his ill management of those
affairs of State, and other businesses wherewith the King his Master had
entrusted him; made a ruefull complaint, and cried out, when it was too late,
Oh, (says he) if I had been but as careful to serve God my Master in Heaven,
as I was to serve the King my great Master on Earth, he would never have left
me in my gray hairs.

Expression LXXX. That many under the show and pretense of Religion, do undo
themselves, and others.
WE read of two famous Thieves in Hieron. Nig. Ep. ad Marc. Ant Michael* in
Ital. princip. l. ^. Vide Rainoidi Ep. ad Angl. Seminaria ante lib. de Romana
Idololat. sect. 3.
the Kingdom of Naples, the one of which called himself Pater Noster, and the
other Ave Maria; and that these two had robbed and killed an hundred and
sixteen men, before ever they were taken: but being taken, they were punished
by the Magistrate, with hot burning pincers, and were chopped and cut into many
pieces and gobbets. So there ever have been in the Church of God in all ages
(and I pray God there be not such now) who under a pretense of long prayers,
zealousseeming See B. Andrews Ser. of Repentance on Mat. 3. 8. page 240.
preaching, devout Auricular Confession is turned into Auricular Profession.
hearing, and such like formal shows of Religion, do undo both themselves,
and others too in the end. See Mat. 23. 14, 15. 2 Timothy 3. 5.

Expression LXXXI. That the good Thieves late Repentance on the Cross, is no
warrantable president for any, to put off his Repentance till the last.
FOr first, it was but one, that is said Legi ( inquit Augustinus) and perlegi
Scripturam, and neminem inveni ni duobus millibus annorum salvatum in fine nisi
latronem in Cruce. Vide Nichol. Laurent. advers. desp. page 371. See B. Andrews
Sermon. part. 1. page 180.
thus to have repented; and one Swallow (we know) makes not a Summer; neither
of one example, without a precept, must we conclude any thing from Scripture.
Now put the case that a certain man, traveling on the high way, should find a
sum of money in a purse, enough to defray all the charges of his journey; and
another hearing of it, and being to take the like journey, would hereupon
purposely carry no money with him, hoping to find money enough upon the way to
defray his journey also; would we not take him for a very fool? Or if the
Prince of any Country should of his mere grace, and favor, send a pardon for
one that were upon the gallows, and ready to be turned over; would any wise
man commit the like offense, in hope to find the like favor?

2. This example was extraordinary, yea Mr. Daniel Dyke of Repent. c. 17. page
162.
even a very miracle, with the glory whereof our Savior would honor the
ignominy of the Cross: We may almost (says one) expect a second crucifying
of Christ, as such a second Thief. Christ then triumphing on the Cross, did as
Princes do in the triumph of entering into their Kingdoms; they pardon gross
offenses before committed, which perhaps they will never pardon again as long
as they live.

3. His repentance (though late) was true, as appears by the fruits of it; for
he confesses his sins, and earnestly prays for pardon of them; he shows a
marvailous strength of faith in Christ, that he did acknowledge him to be his
King, and Savior, when he was in the lowest degree of his humiliation, even
when he hanged upon the Cross, derided of his enemies, and forsaken of all his
friends; he reproves his fellow thief, and patiently submits to his
deserved punishment.

Take heed therefore of making this Thieves repentance a president for thee to
follow, in hope to find the like mercy, lest it be proved to be true in thee,
which is said in the Spanish Pour un lad^on pier den muchos el me son. Vide
Francis. La bata, loc. com. tom. 1. page 164.
Proverb, That for one Thieves sake, many a one finds no entertainment. And
never forget that golden saying of Saint Augustine, That there is one such
example of finding mercy at Gods hands, upon late repentance, left registered in
Scripture, that Vnus ne quis desperate, unicus ne quis praesumeret. August.
none might despair; and there is but one, that none should presume.

Expression LXXXII. In what a dangerous condition they are, that fight Duels,
or single Cambats, to vindicate their honor.
IT is here (says Saint Gregory) as it is Greg. in Pastor. part. 3. admonit.
10.
in a Cockpit; for as there the Master of the Cockpit, or one that has
Cocks, sets two Cocks a fighting, of purpose to make him sport; and when he
has suffered them to fight unto the death of one, or both of them, he sups
with their bodies. Even so (says he) the Devil (the Master of such hot spurs)
sets them together by the ears, that after mutual conflict, and much sport
they have made him therein, (the one, or both of them being killed) he may sup
with their souls in his infernal house in Hell. And Saint Bernard gives this
reason for it; For (says he) if in Bern. Sermon. ad Milites Templi, c. 1. fol.
100. col. 1. Occisor lethaliter peccat, and occisus aeternaliter perit. Idem c.
2. fol. 401.
fighting thou have a mind to kill another man, and art slain thy self, thou
die a Murderer; and if thou prevail, and kill the other, then thou live a
Murderer: but whether thou live or dye, conquer or be conquered, it is not
good to be a Murderer.

Expression LXXXIII. How apt men are (that are at variance) to mistake one the
other, and to think, and to take all things at the worst.
WHen the men of Syria were at See Mr. Egeon Askews Brotherly Reconcilement,
page 58.
feud with the Romans, they sent but these four letters by an Herald, S. P. Q.
R. which in too much suspicion of defiance, they thus construed, as if they had
meant, Syris populis quis resistat? Who may resist the people of Syria? And
thereupon they answered them back with the same Characters, S. P. Q. R. which
they also too credulously expounded, Senatus, Populusque Romanus, The Senate,
and People of Rome. Thus witty malice in the Syrians, and Romans, from a
mis-construction, collecteth enmity; whereas charity in either ( which thinks
not evil) might have expounded them thus, Sapiens populus quaerit (...), Wise
men seek strength by unity.

Expression LXXXIV. What a dangerous thing it is in a family, where the Wife
will strive with the Husband for superiority.
FOr this family would be like Plinies Pl^n. Not. Hist.
Amphisbaena; a Serpent which has an head at each end of her body; both which,
whilst they strive for the mastery, they do in the mean time toil the body
miserably, and in the end rent and tear it to pieces: Cardinal Wolsies style,
Ego, and Rex meum, was insupportable in the Politiques; so is I, and my
Husband, in the Oeconomiques. Dr. Bois on the Gospel for the first Sunday
after the Epiphany.
So do these the family, by this ungodly contention.

Expression LXXXV. That the doubtings which a Christian finds in his heart,
must not discourage him from going to God for comfort, and salvation. See Mr.
Edw. Rainolds Ser. of the life of Christ, on 1 John 5. 12. page 509.

FOr it is with Gods Child, as it was with the Lepers in the famine of Samaria,
2 Chronicles. 30. 19. 2 King, 7. 34. The Syrians, they knew, had food, and Samaria
had none, and therefore they resolved to venture abroad: yet this they did not
without much doubting and distrust, because the Syrians whom they should meet
with were their enemies: Howsoever this resolution overruled them, because in
their present estate they were su^e to perish; in the other there was room for
hope, and a possibility of living; and that carried them to Hesters resolution,
Hest. 4. 16. If we perish, we perish. So Gods Child knowing that God is
plenteous in power, and mercy, and so likely to save him; and that he himself
is void of all help, and hope tending that way; does therefore resolve to
renounce, and leave himself, and his own ways, and to betake himself to God;
and though he cannot choose but look upon him, as one that is become his enemy
for his sins, and therefore may fear to be rejected: yet because in respect of
his sin, there is a certainty to perish; and in respect of the infinite mercy
that is in God, there is a possibility not to perish: therefore upon this re
resolves to adventure to go unto God, in the name and mediation of Jesus
Christ; and if he must perish, he will not reject himself, but will cast
himself upon the infinite mercy of God in Christ; and then if he perish, he
perishes.

Expression LXXXVI. That where men are stiff, and stubborn, and will not yield
one to another in things fitting and reasonable, there is little hope of peace,
at least of a durable peace betwixt them.
IT is a common Proverb amongst the Duro con duro, non fa bon muro. See Mr.
Cudworths Supplement to Perkins on Gal. 6. 1. page 360. col. 2.
Italians, That hard with hard never makes a good wall: by which is signified,
that as stones cobbled up one upon another, without mortar to combine them,
make but a tottering wall, that may easily be shaken: but if there be mortar
betwixt them, yiedling to the hardness of the stones, it makes the whole like
a solid, continued body, able to endure the greatest opposition. So those that
be at variance, if they shall both of them be as stiff as stones, which will
not yield by any means one to another in any thing, but both continuing fast,
froward, hasty and resolute in their opinions, have little hope ever to be
reconciled; or if a peace be made betwixt them, that ever it will hold long.

Expression LXXXVII. That he that cannot read, may yet spell so much of the
Godhead in the Book of Nature, that it will leave him without excuse, Romans 1.
20.
ANd this Divine Du Bartas translated Du Bartas, 1. day. 1. week.
into English, thus pithily and prettily expresses;

The World's a School, where in a general story,
God allwaies* reads dumb Lectures of his glory.
Yea (says he)
The World's a Book in Folio, printed all,
With Gods great works in letters Capital:
Each Creature is a page; and each effect,
A fair Character, void of all defect.
Therein our fingers feel, our nostrils smell,
Our palats taste, his virtues that excel.
He showed is to our eyes, talks to our ears,
In the ordered motions of the spangled spears.
And yet for all this, how many be there, that cannot, or will not learn this
lesson?

And this the same Divine Poet taxes prettily thus:

But as young truants, toying in the schools,
Instead of learning, learn to play the fools:
We gaze but on the babies, and the cover,
The gaudy flowers, and edges gilded over;
And never further for our lesson look,
Within the valume of this various Book.
I add,

And therefore if we be well whipped for it,
Let Us thank our selves, and after learn more wit.
Expression LXXXVIII. That in the Godhead there be three Persons, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and all three but one God.
THis is a Divine Truth, more certainly to be received by faith, than to be
conceived by reason, for it is the most mysterious of all the mysteries
contained in the Bible. Our formerly mentioned Divine Poet speaks thus of it:
In Sacred sheets of either Testament, Du Bartas ex Lombardo, sent. lib. 1.
did. 2.

It Is hard to find an higher Argument,
More deep to sound, more busy to discuss;
More useful known, unknown more dangerous.


But yet as difficult as the thing is, Divines Vide Zanch. de tribus Elohim,
lib 8. cap. 6.
both Ancient and Modern, have in their Writings brought many similitudes, and
resemblances to express it by. Amongst them all, this is one of the clearest,
viz. The light of See Mr. Perkins on the Creed: Of the Trinity.
the Sun, the light of the Moon, and the light of the Air; all which are for
nature and substance, one and the same light, and yet are they notwithstanding
three distinct lights too; for the light of the Sun is of it self, and from no
other; the light of the Moon is from the Sun, and the light of the Air is from
them both. So the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are all one simple, and
undivided Godhead, but yet three distinct Persons; the Father having the
foundation of personal subsistence from himself, and from no other; the Son
from the Father, of whom he is eternally begotten; and the Holy Ghost from the
Father and the Son, from both which he eternally proceeds.

Expression LXXXIX. How much some Hearers have their Preachers person in
admiration.
ZAnchius reports, how that a Frenchman Zanch. Epistante Miscellan.
in Geneva protested, That if Saint Paul and Calvin should preach both at the
same time, he would leave Paul to go to hear Calvin. God grant that we have no
such hearers in these days.

Expression XC. That small sins may be reigning sins.
FOr we know there are Reguli, as See Mr. Edw. Rainolds Sermons of the
sinfulness of sin, page 293.
well as Reges, Kings of Cities, and narrow Territories, as well as Emperors
over vast Provinces. And a small sin committed with a high hand with more
security, presumption, and customarinesse than others, will more wast the
Conscience than a far greater out of infirmity, or sudden surprizall: as as
a small stone thrown with a strong arm will do more hurt than another that is
far greater, if it be but gently laid on, or sent forth with a fainter
impression. And who knows not, that Ships do oftentimes miscarry upon sands,
as well as upon rock^?

Expression XCI. That privy and secret sins, which never break forth into
light, may be reigning sins.
IT was a great part of the state and pride See Mr. Edw. Rainolds ubi supra, p.
294.
of the Persian Kings, that they were seldom seen by their Subjects in
public. And the Kingdom of China at this day is very vast, and potent, all
though it communicate but little with other people. So our secret sins, such as
privy pride, hypocrisy, self-justification, malicious projects against the
Word and Worship of God, etc. which lie stifled within, may be most powerful,
when they are least discovered*

Expression XCII. That sins of Ignorance may be reigning sins.
FOr it is not men's knowledge of a See Mr. Edw* Rainolds ubi supra, p. 295*
King which makes him a King, but his own power. Saul was a King when the Witch
of Endor in 1 Samuel 28. knew not of it. And Ahab, and Jeroboams wife were as
truly Princes in their disguise, as in their robes.

Expression XCIII. That even our very Concupiscence may be a reigning sin.
FOr as a Child may be born a King, See Mr. Edw* Rainolds ubi supra, p. 296.
and be crowned in his Cradle, so sin in the womb may reign; and to speak
properly, there is the reign of it chiefly founded; for they are our lusts
which are to be satisfied in any sinful courses we take: all the subsidies,
succors, aides, contributions, which are brought in, are spent upon our lusts.
And therefore not to mourn for, and bewail this natural concupis^ence, as
David did, in Psalm. 51. 5. and Paul in Romans 7. 23. is a manifest sign that even
lust and concupiscence reign in us.

Expression XCIV. That even sins of Omission may be reigning sins*
FOr as in matters of government, a See Mr. Edw. Rainolds ubi supra, p. 296.
Princes Negative voice, whereby he hinders the doing of a thing, is oftentimes
as great an argument of his Royalty, as his Positive commands to have a thing
done: So in sin, the power which it has to dead and take off the heart from
Christian duties, from communion with God, from knowledge of his Will, from
delight in his Word, and the like, is a notorious fruit of this reign ^f sin.

Expression XCV. That a Christian should be more willing to suffer a greater
injury, than to revenge a lesser.
ANd this (says Saint Augustine) August. Epist. 5. ad Marcellinum.
methinks Christ himself, in that precept of his in the Gospel, Mat. 5. 39.
seems plainly to intimate; where he bids us, when we are smitten on the right
cheek, which blow coming from the left hand, (the weaker of the two by nature)
is less sore, and grievous, we must turn the other check also, that it may
receive a greater blow from the right hand, which is stronger than the left,
and falls not so light where it lights.

Expression XCVI. That the Tongue is a notable means to discover the
soundness, or unfoundnesse of the heart.
FOr man is like a Bell, and his Tongue like the Clapper of the Bell. Now we
know that a Bell as long as he stands still, and is neither rung nor tolled,
may have a flaw, craze, or crack in him, and not be discerned by any that do
behold him: but let it be but once rung, or tolled, and the Clapper strike
against the sides of it, and it will presently appear to the ears of all that
hear it. So it is with man, he may by his outward looks, and carriage, promise
much soundness, and sincerity of heart to all those that behold him; and as
long as his clapper, his tongue, stands still, he may be thought to be
without any great craze or crack in him: But let that once stir, and then you
will presently see whether it be so, or no; For out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth will speak, Mat. 12. 34.

Expression XCVII. That Man bears misery and frail^y in his very name.
THere be but four usual Hebrew See D. Donns first Sermon. on Genesis 1. 26. page
26.
names by which Man is called in Scripture, Ish, En^sh, Gheber, and Adam; and
of these four, three of them do absolutely carry misery in their
significations, so that it is three to one against any man, but that he is
miserable. One name of man is Ish, and that they derive a sonitu, to show that
man is but a voice, but a sound, but a noise: he begins the noise himself, when
he comes crying into the world; and when he goes out, he commonly ends it with
a groan. But Ish may perchance be Ha-Ish, and with that Emphasis in Hebrew, it
commonly denotes See Bishop Lakes Sermons* on the first Psalm, page 3.
some great man: Well, let it be so; but then his second name Enosh, abates
that greatness; for Enosh is mere calamity, misery, depression, or (as some
render it) oblivion; as if he were a thing, which for his very misery were
scarce worthy to be taken notice of, and remembered. His third name Gheber, has
in it indeed some taste of greatness, and power; and yet I, that am that man
(says the Prophet, Lam. 3. 1.) that Gheber (for so is the word there) I, even
I, have seen affliction by the rod of Gods wrath. But suppose man were (as the
name signifies) Ghe^er indeed, great, and power^ull; is he sure so to
continue? No, his fourth name Adam, pulls down his plumes, and tells him, that he
is but an Adam signifies red earth. Vide Cornel. a Lap. in Genesis 2. 7. p. 60. (
b) Genesis 3. 19. Eccles. 12. 7. Terms have returns, and so has man's life; two
especially, Repentance is one, Death is the other. See Dr. Clerks Sermon. on
Eccles. 12. 7. page 533.
earthly Creature, made of earth, and therefore to ( b) return to the earth
again, God knows how soon, how suddenly.

Expression XCVIII. That Death makes all men equal.
SOme, to express this, compare the life See Arch* ^. Abb^ts F^nerall Sermon. on
Esaias 40. 6. page 7, and 8.
of man to a game at Chesse, where there be diverse degrees of men, standing
every one in his place on the Chesse-board, whilst the game is playing; whereof
some be Kings, some Queens, some Bishops, some Knights, some Rooks, and some
Pawns: and amongst these, first, one is taken away, then another, and so one
after another, till the game be ended; and when the game is once ended, then
they are swept all into the bag together, where none is better than other, and
the Sea Dr. Bois on Epist. for 1. Sunday after Trinity.
meanest many times lies uppermost, and the greatest underneath.

Others express it thus, by that Story of Vide Francis. Laba^. in mag.
Apparat. Concionat. t^m. 2. page ^07.
Alexander the Great; wherein it is reported of him, that he having heard of
Paradise, and what a brave place it was, was purposed to search it out. And as
he was thus in his search, and his soldiers marching before him, they came at
last to a certain inaccessible place, where there appeared unto them one in the
likeness of an old man, who bid them return back to Alexander, and to tell
him, that he labored ^n vain to find out Paradise, for the way to Paradise was
humility, which he was ignorant of; and he withal gave them a little stone,
and bid them carry it to Alexander, and to tell him, that by that little stone
he might come to the knowledge of himself. Now the stone was a very precious
stone, and had this quality, that if it were put into a scale, it would weigh
down all that was put against it: but if there were but a little earth put upon
it, it would be no heavier than any other stone of like bigness. So that
hereby was intimated, that though Alexander, for his power and prowess, did in
his lifetime excel all others, yet being dead, and buried, he would be but as
others were.

Expression XCIX. How short and uncertain the life of man is*
THe Learned do observe, that in the Francis. Labat. ubi supra, tom. 1. page
455.
Hebrew tongue (which is full of mysteries) the same word signifies both life,
and death, viz. Metin; only with this difference, that if the word have a
prick over it, it signifies life; but being written without a prick over it,
it signifies death: to show, that life and death differ but in one prick or
point, and that, that falls to life's turn, to have it; because our life is but
a prick, a point, a moment, yea Punctum* est vita nostra, and adhuc puncto
minus. Senec. ibid.
less than all these (in comparison of death) nothing.

Expression C. That death is unavoidable.
SAint Austin prettily expresses this, August. lib. 13. de Civit. Dei, cap. 11.
thus: The Verb morior (says he) which in Latin signifies to dye, could
never yet be declined by any Grammarian by the same rule that other Verbs be
declined by: which (whether it have so fallen out by humane ignorance, or
divine providence) may teach us (says he) this lesson;

That though we may by some means or other decline and avoid other things that
may hurt us, in some cases; yet we can in See Mr. Will. ^ords Fun. Se^m.
preached at Constantinople, page 16. Flectere per varios docuit qui nomina
casus; H^u cadit, and casum hunc flectere non potuit. See Dr. Bois on the
Gospel for the first Sunday after T^inity.
no case decline death, but first or last it will seize on us.

And the same August. de Verbis Dom. Ser. 21. cap. 2, and 3.
Father has another witty expression of it, thus. All other things which
belong unto us (says he) whether they be good or evil, are uncertain, only
death is certain. For when a child is conceived, we can say but thus, perhaps
he shall be born, perhaps he shall be abortive. Again, when he is born, all
that we can say is but this, perhaps he shall live till he come to man's estate,
perhaps he shall dye before. Again, when he comes to man's estate, all that we
can say is but this, perhaps he shall marry, perhaps he shall not; perhaps he
shall have children, perhaps he shall have none; perhaps he shall be rich,
perhaps not; perhaps he shall be honorable, perhaps not; perhaps he shall live
till he be old, perhaps not: and so he goes on with many other perhaps to the
like purpose. But when all is said (says he) Can any man say the like of his
death? Forte morietur, forte non morietur; Perhaps he shall dye, perhaps he
shall not dye? No, Fortasse in omnibus ferme rebus humanis, sed non in morte
locum habet. Vide Bellarm. Conciones, Conc. 1. de Morte, 420.
none can say so of this, For it is appointed unto all men once to dye, Heb. 9.
27.

HUMANE EXPRESSIONS OF DIVINE TRUTHS.
The second Century.
Expression I. That seeing God is our father, we need not to be dishearted in
our distempers, and damps of prayer.
FOr suppose the dearest son of See Mr. Boltons instructions for the comforting
of aff^^cted conscences, page 359.
the lovingst Father, should lie grievously sick, and out of the extremity of
anguish, should cry out, and complain unto him, that he is so full of pain in
every part, that he knows not which way to turn himself, or what to do; and
thereupon should entreat him of all loves, to touch him tenderly, to lay him
softly, to assuage (if it may be) his pain, and to give him ease: How ready
(think you) would such a father be, with all tenderness and care, to put to his
helping hand, in such a ruefull case? But yet if this child should grow sicker
and weaker, so that he could not speak at all, but only look his father in the
face with Watery eyes; and moan himself unto him with sighs and groans, and
other dumb expressions of his increased pain and desire to speak: would not
this yet strike deeper into the fathers heart; pierce and melt it with more
feeling pangs of compassion; and make his bowels yern within him, with an
addition of extraordinary dearness and ear to do him good? Even just so, and
much more too, will our heavenly father be affected, and deal with us in
hearing, helping, and showing mercy, when all our 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. Zech. 9. 1.
Romans 8. 26, 27
strength of prayer is gone, and we can but only look up to him with our eyes,
and ply him with our groans and sighs.

Expression II. That seeing God is our father, we need not to be disheartened,
if we cannot pray so fluently and eloquently as others can.
FOr is not a father more delighted See Mr Bolton ubi supra page 361.
with the stammering and stu^tering (as it were) with the inarticulate, and
imperfect talk of his own little child, when it first begins to speak, than
with the exactest eloquence of the most famous Orator upon earth? So surely is
our heavenly father better pleased with the broken interrupted passages and
periods of prayer, in an upright heart, heartily grieved that he can do no
better, nor offer up a more lively, hearty, and orderly sacrifice, than with
the excellently composed, fine-phrased, and most methodicall petitions of the
learned pharisie, and selfconceited zelot in the world.

Expression III. That seeing God is our father, we need not to be disheartened,
at the faintness of our faith, and fear of letting go our hold of God.
WHen we see a father holding a little See Mr. Bolton ubi supra page 363.
child in his arms, is the child (think we) safe by his own, or by the fathers
hold? It clapseth about the father with his little weak hands as well as it
can, but the strength of its safety is in the fathers arms: Nay, and many times
the father holds the faster when he perceives the child to have left its hold.
Just so stands the case betwixt God and us: we are tied (as it were) unto God
our Father by a double bond, 1. Of his Spirit; 2. Of our faith. We lay hold on
him by faith, and he on us by his Spirit. Now our infant-like, and weak faith,
many times lets go (to our seeming) our hold of him, and therefore presently we
think all our hold of him is gone, and begin to cry out, we are undone, we
perish, and there is no hope any more in God for us. But we are herein
deceived, for though we have let go our hold of God by faith, yet has he not
let go his hold of us by his Spirit, but rather holds us the faster to himself
thereby; the Devil, nor all the powers of darkness being able to take us out
of his hands.

Expression III. That seeing God is our Father, we need not to be disheartened
at our failings of new obedience.
FOr the case is here also, as it is between See Mr Bolton ubi supra page 36^.
a father and his son. A father has a son whom he sets about some work, and
the son improves the utmost of his skill, strength, and endeavor, to do it
according as his father would have it done: but when he has done all that he
can, he sees that he comes far short of what he himself desired, and his
father expected, and therefore weeps, and takes on, and is much troubled that
he can do it no better to give his father contentment. Now what man is there
whose heart is warmed with the tenderness of a fathers affection, that would
not be ready to pardon and pass by all the defects, and failings in this kind?
And shall God our heavenly father (think we) show less mercy and pardon to his
children, when they are willing to do what he enjoins them, and be heartily
sorry that they can do it no better? No surely it cannot be.

Expression IV. That seeing God is our father, we need not to be disheartened,
if he to our seeming do sometimes hide his face from us.
A Father solacing himself with his little child, and delighting in his pretty
See Mr. Bolton ubi supra, page 366.
and pleasing behavior, is wont sometimes to step aside into a corner, or
behind a door, of purpose to quicken yet more his child's love to him, and his
longing after him, and to try the impaciency and eagerness of his affection. In
the mean time he hears it cry, run about, and call upon him, and yet he stirs
not, but forbears to appear: and all this not for want of love and compassion
to his child, which (the more it takes on) the more abounds in him toward it;
but that it may the more dearly prize his presence, when it again enjoyes it,
and they may the more merrily meet and rejoice the more in one the others
company. And so deals our heavenly father with us, he sometimes hides his face
from us, and withdraws his quickening and refreshing presence for a time, not
for want of love, but to put more life and heat into our affections toward
him, and to cause us to relish i^ more sweetly when we have it again, to
preserve it more carefully, to enjoy it more thankfully, and to shun more
watchfully whatsoever might again bereave us of it.

Expression V. That seeing God is our father, we need not to be disheartened, if
he in times of trial seem to leave us to our selves.
FOr we sometimes see a father setting down his little one upon its feet to try
its strength, and whether it be able to stand alone by its self or no: but
withal he holds his arms on both sides of it to uphold it, if he see it
incline either way, and to preserve it from hurt. And in like manner we may
assure our selves, that God our heavenly father takes care of us with
infinitely more tenderness to uphold and preserve us in all trialls, either by
outward afflictions or inward temptations.

Expression VI. That seeing God is our Father, we need not to be disheartened in
the sense of our unworthiness.
IF any child might have despaired ever See Mr. Bolton, ubi supra, page 368.
and Mr. Rob. Harris his Sermon. called Absaloms Funeral, page 33.
to have regained his fathers love, upon the sight and sense of his own
unworthiness, Absalom might have been that child: For would any father love
such a son as had defiled his bed, such a son as sought his fathers Kingdom,
and life? And yet one such father we meet with, viz. good David; who (though
his son did not submit, did not crave pardon, did still continue in arms
against him) yet commands that no harm be done him, 2 Samuel 18. 5. Yea, and when
he heard of his death, did ever father so take on for the death of a child, as
he did? crying, O Absalom my son, my son Absalom, would God I had died for
thee. And if there be so much affection to be found in a natural father,
toward so ungracious, and every way so underserving a child, what then may we
expect at the hands of God our heavenly father (whose love as far exceeds
ours, as the heavens are above the earth) though we are every way unworthy of
any such love from him?

Expression VII. That God being our father, we need not to be disheartened, when
we cannot do what he commands as well as others of his children.
FOr suppose a father should call unto See Mr. Bolton ubi supra, page 372.
him in have two of his children, one of three years old, another of thirteen:
they both make all the have they can, but the elder makes much more speed; and
yet the little one comes wadling, as fast as it can; and if it had more
strength, it would have matched the other. Now would not the father (think you)
accept of the younghst utmost endeavor, according to its strength, as well as
of the elders faster gate, being stronger? I am sure he would, and that with
more tenderness too, and taking it in his arms to encourage it. And so
certainly will our heavenly father deal with us, in the like case about our
spiritual state, being true hearted, and heartily grieving, praying, and
endeavoring to do better.

Expression VIII. That God being our Father, we need not to be overmuch
distracted with the carking care for the things of this life.
A Little Child dwelling at home under See Mr. Hierons Sermon called the
minority of the Saints, page 35.
his Fathers wing, takes no thought for any thing, not for meat, not for
apparel, nor for any other necessaries, but relieth wholly upon his fathers
careful providing for him; so that when he wants any thing, to him he
presently resorts, and never looks further. And shall the Child of an earthly
Father be so void of carking care for the things of this life, because he has
a Father to provide all needful things for him? And shall the Child of God
forget that he has a Father in Heaven, who is infinitely more able and willing
to do the like for him?

Expression IX. That all that bear the name of Gods servants, are not his
servants indeed.
WE would all be thought to be Gods See Mr. Hierons Sermon called the Platform
of obedience, page 337.
servants; but when we are looked into, we shall be found to fail in a
principal part of service. For why? We will be said to be his servants, but we
will do our own work, and so are rather his retainers than his meniall
servants: For retainers (we know) are willing to belong to such a Nobleman, or
Gentleman, but yet it is but for their own private advantage, for their
countenance, or for the avoiding of some other charges: but in the mean time
they would have their own liberty to follow their own business, to live at
their own home, to come and go at their own pleasure, etc.

And such servants generally men would be to the Lord; willing they be to
shroud themselves under that name, because they think, that in the end it will
go well with such; and it may be also, they think it a disgrace to be said to
be of no religion; yet for all that they are loath to be tied, they desire to be
free still, and to be at their own disposing, serving God now and then, and
that perhaps out of formality more than conscience, when their own occasions
will give leave.

Expression X. How Christ's birth differs from the birth of others.
THe Scriptures tell us, how that man Aug. Sermon. 20. de Temp*
comes four ways into the world: 1. By the help of man and woman* so all are
usually born. 2. Without any man or woman, and so the first man was created. 3.
Of a man without a woman, and so was Eve made. 4. Of a woman without a man, and
so was Christ born.

Expression XI. How many ways a man may forswear himself.
THere be three ways (says Lombard Lomb. lib. 3. sent. did. 39.
out of Augustine) by which a man may forswear himself. 1. When he swears that
which is false, and he knows it to be false. 2. When he swears that which is
true, but he thought it to be false. 3. When he does swear that which is false,
but he held it to be true.

The two first kinds are abominable, but the third in the Court of Conscience
(says one) is no sin; because a man may swear See Dr. Bois on the Decalogue,
com. 3.
that which is false, and yet not swear falsely.

Expression XII. How this word Amen is used in Scripture.
THis word Amen is taken in Scripture Vide Lexic. Theologic. in verbo Amen.
three ways.

1. Nominaliter, as a noun, and so it is as much as true, or truth; and so it is
taken in the end of every one of the four Gospels, and in other places, as Rev.
3. 14*

2. Verbaliter, as a verb, and so it is as much as So be it; and in this sense
it is to be taken in the end of the Lords Prayer, Mat. 6. Luke 11. and in
diverse other places, as Deuteronomy. 27. 15, 16, 17, etc.

3. Adverbialiter, as an adverb, and so it is as much as verily; and is so used
often by our Savior, especially in Saint John's Gospel.

Expression XIII. How a Christian may put on Christ.
A Christian (say Divines) may put on Luther and Melancthon in Romans 13. 14.
Christ two ways. 1. By putting on his merits by the hand of faith, applying
them to himself in particular. 2. By putting on his manners, imitating him in
those gracious virtues which were in him, as in love, patience, humility, and
the like, Ephesians. 5. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 21. Mat. 11. 29.

Expression XIV. What right and title Christ has to Christians souls.
CHrist (says Bernard) has a threefold Bern. lib. 3. de consider.
right unto them. 1. Jure Creationis, by the right of Creation, Genesis 2. 7. 2*
Merito Redemptionis, by the merit of Redemption, 1 Cor. 6. 20. 3. Dono patris,
by the gift of God his Father, Joh. 17. 6, 7, and 9.

Expression XV. How many ways Christ is said to come, in the Scriptures.
CHrist is said in Scripture to come three Bern. Ser. 3. de Adventu Domini.
ways, which Saint Bernard thus wittily and pithily expresses; Venit ad
homines, venit in homines, veniet contra homines; He came unto men, he comes
into men, and he shall come against men: He came unto men in the days of his
Flesh, he comes into men daily by his Spirit, and he shall come against men at
the day of Judgment.

Expression XVI. How things are said to be immortal.
SOme things have a beginning, but have See Mr. John Days 7 lect. page 152.
no end, as the Angels, and the souls of men. Some things have no beginning,
yet have an end, as Gods eternal decrees. Some thing again there is that has
neither beginning, nor end, as God himself.

Expression XVII. How unwilling men are to confess their sins.
MEn are apt (says one) to decline sin Biga Salutis, Dom. 8. post Pentecost.
throughout every case; as In Nominative per superbiam, in the Nominative case
by pride, striving to get them a name. In Genitivo per luxuriam, in the
Genitive case by lust and luxury. In Dativo per symoniam, in the Dative case by
bribery and symony. In Accusativo per detractationem, in the Accusative case by
backbiting, slandering, and false accusation. In Vocativo per adulationem, in
the Vocative case by flattery, calling that good and commendable, which
deserves no such commendation. And Lastly, In Ablativo per Rapinam, by rapine,
usury, and extortion: but yet they will not confess so much in any case.

Expression XVIII. That there is discretion to be showed in giving of our Alms.
A Man that gives alms (says Austin) August: lib. 1. de Ser: Dom: in Monte.
may give omni petenti, to every one that asks, but not omnia petenti, not
every thing that he asks; or we must not give all, and leave nothing for our
selves, and ours: For an alms-giver must be like unto one that has a Homo qui
erranti comiter monstrat viam, quasi lumen de suo lumine accendat, facit, ut
nihilo minus ipsi lucea^, quum illi accenderit. Ennius in Tull: Offic: lib. 1.
Candle lighted, by which he must so light another man's candle, that he do not
put out his own.

Expression XIX. How this word (World) is taken in Scripture.
THere is Mundus mundus quem formavit Deus; a good world, formed by God at the
first, Acts 17. 14. 2. There is mundus immundus, quem deformavit Diabolus; a
bad world, deformed by the Devil, 1 John 5. 19. 3. There is mundus mundatus,
quem reformavit Christus; a new made world, reformed by Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 19.

Expression XX. That nothing can satisfy, and fill the heart of man, but only
the Blessed Trinity.
FOr the heart of man is made like a Ludovic. Vivaldus de veritate
contritionis, sol. 87.
triangle, and the world is round like a circle: now a circle (we know) cannot
fill a triangle, but there will be still some corner empty. Which does intimate
unto us, that the whole world cannot satisfy and fill the heart of man, it is
only the blessed Trinity can do it; and therefore God reserves that to
himself alone, Prove. 23. 26. And this much is intimated in the Latin word Cor;
for those three letters taken initially, will make up Camera Omnipotentis
Regis, the Chamber of the Allmighty King.

Expression XXI. That a Christian never knows God, nor himself better than in
adversity.
A Pollonius writes of certain people In mirabilibus historiis.
that could see nothing in the day, but all in the night. In like manner many
Dr. Bois on the Gospel for the 4. Sunday after the Epiphany.
Christians at this day are so blinded with the sunshine of prosperity, that
they see nothing belonging to their good; but in the winter night of adversity
they can discern all things.

Expression XXII. That no fortification can keep out Gods vengeance from any
place, where sin is entertained within.
When Phocas had built a mighty Cedren. hist. page 54^.
wall about his Palace for his security, in the night he heard a voice saying
unto him, O King, though thou build as high as the Clouds, yet the City may
easily be taken, the sin within will mar all.

To the same purpose another relates a Joh. de P^om. tit. pax. art. 4. See Dr.
Willet in Levit. page 647.
story of a wicked City, which fearing the invasion of a potent enemy, sought
relief of a neighboring Prince, charging their Ambassadors to relate to him
what forces they were able to levy of their own: The Prince replying to the
Message, demanded of them that were sent, what coverture they had to defend
their heads from the wrath of Heaven; telling them withal, that unless they
could award Gods anger, he durst not join with them, God being against them.

Expression XXIII. That Gods Children in this life, by reason of the
intermixture of crosses, and comforts, may seem to be half in Heaven, and half
in Hell.
PEtrus Tenorius Archbishop of Toledo, Vide Lorin. cap. 2. prolego^. in
Ecclesiastem.
having a long time considered the weighty reasons on each side, whether King
Solomon were damned, or saved; and not knowing how to resolve the doubt, in the
end caused him to be painted on the walls of his Chapel, as one that was half
in Heaven, and half in Hell. The which picture is a lively representation of a
Christian in this life; for in respect of his many and manifold troubles and
afflictions he meets with here, he seems many times to himself, and others, to
be half in Hell: Again, having tasted the first fruits of the Spirit, and the
comforts and consolations that accrue unto him thereby, he seems to be half in
Heaven.

Expression XXIV. That where there is no Unity, there can be no life of grace.
FOr as the spirit of a man does not quicken August. serm^ 2. ad fratres in
Eremo.
any member or part that is separated from the rest; and as those bones in
Ezech. 37. 7. which the Prophet saw scattered in the field, had no life in
them, till they were gathered together bone to his bone* so the Spirit of God
does not animate and quicken any with the life of Grace, that are not united to
their brethren, and fellow members of Christ's mystical body, in bond of love,
and peace.

Expression XXV. When God will not hear our prayers.
GOd (says one) will not hear the Maldonat. in Mat. 7. 7.
prayers, even of his own children, when they ask either mal^, or male, that
is, either things in their own nature bad, or not good for them, or good things
for bad ends. See Mat. 7. 11, etc. Jam. 4. 2, ^.

Expression XXVI. How Gods Word must be kept by us.
WE must labor (says one) (when See Mr. Hierons Sermon called the Doctrines
Trial.
Gods Word has been heard, or read of us) to keep it three ways: 1. In our
memory. 2. In our affection. 3. In our practice. In our memory, by remembering
it, Prove. 4. 21. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. In our affection, by loving and esteeming of it,
Psalm. 119. 97. and 72. And in our practice, by endeavoring to lead our lives
thereafter, Psalm. 119. 11.

Expression XXVII. How we must first seek the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, Mat. 6. 33.
GOds Kingdom, and his righteousness See Mr. Hierons Sermon called the
Christians Livelihood.
must be sought, first in each man's life, first in each day of man's life, and
first in each business of each day, Eccles. 12. 1. Psalm. 119. 147. 1 Cor. 10.
31.

Expression XXVIII. How we must not unjustly deprave, nor unjustly deprive
those of their dignities, and offices, that have not deserved it.
I have read of a reverend and religious See Sir Rich. Berkleys tract of
Felicity, lib. 5* page 451.
Archbishop, who (being a long time depraved, and in the end deprived of his
dignities and offices by two corrupt Cardinals his Judges, and a false-hearted
Advocate (his familiar friend) out of the bitterness of his spirit made this
appeal from them unto the Lord of Heaven; God knows (says he) to whom all
things are naked, that I am unjustly condemned; yet I will not appeal here from
your sentence, for that I know ye shall sooner be believed in your lying, than
I shall be in speaking the truth; and therefore I receive this heavy censure,
for the rebellions of my youth, and other sins. Nevertheless I appeal from
your judgment, to the Judge eternal, and only wise, which is Christ Jesus,
before whom I summon you. The Cardinals fell into a laughing, and said, That if
he would go before, they would follow. It happened that the poor Bishop, having
withdrawn himself into a Monastery, died within a year and half after; and the
Cardinals hearing thereof, in a scoffing manner said one to another, that they
must go seek the Archbishop. Now within a few days after, one of them was
bloudily slain, and the other grinding his teeth, ate up his own hands, and
died mad. And lastly, the Judas that betrayed him, (I mean his false friend)
was so mortally hated of all men for his sedition and cruelty, that being
assaulted in a Monastery, he was there butchered, and his carcass cast into
the Town ditch, where lying three days, all sorts of people, both men and
women, used all manner of despite upon it. An example very remarkable, teaching
us to take heed of the like sin, left the like judgment betide us.

Expression XXIX. What sins are to be reputed sins of Infirmity.
SIns of Infirmity, 1. Are usually sins of See Dr. Sclaters Sermon. ^n Phil. 4.
13. page 3.
incogitancy, besides the purpose of a regenerate Christian, general or
particular. Such was Peter's denial, Mat. 26. 35. which we there find was
purposed against. 2. In sins of Infirmity, as the temptation is sudden, so the
consent is not without some reluctation wrested from us, and ever there is more
or less resistance before consent. 3. Sins of Infirmity in Gods Children have
commonly for their ground (if they be in themselves notorious, and gross sins)
some strong passion in nature, something that is with nature very prevalent, as
fear of death, worldly shame, disgrace, and the like. 4. Sins of Infirmity, as
in their temptation they are sudden, and some way resisted, so in their loose
they give farewell in bitterness, they end in mourning; witness Peter, Mat.
26. 27. and David, Psalm. 6. 6. 5. and lastly, Sins of Infirmity are never sins
of Custom, yea seldom or never iterated (I speak still of gross sins,
notoriously known to be enormous) but fortification is ever there planted,
where the breach has once been made. Thus No^ fuit aliquando ebrius, quamvis
absit, ut fuerit ebriosus. August. de peccat. merit* and remiss. lib. 2. cap.
10.
Noah, though he were once drunk, yet was no drunkard; and Judah never came
near Thamar more, Genesis 38. 26.

Expression XXX. How far Saints practice may be our pattern.
THeir actions admit of this distinction: See Dr. Sclater on 1 These. 1. 6. page
49.
1. Some are noted as sinful, wherein they bewrayed humane infirmity: these
are spectacles of natural frailty, not examples for like practice. 2. Some
were done by special dispensation; so Abraham attempts to slay his son, Genesis
22. 9. so Israelites rob Egyptians, Exodus 12. 35. Now dispensations stretch not
beyond the particulars to whom they were given. 3. Some they did by special
and extraordinary calling; as Abraham leaves his Country for pilgrimage in
Canaan, Genesis 12. 1, 4. and John Baptist professed a kind of Eremitage; and yet
neither the one a pattern of Popish pilgrimage, nor the other of their
Eremiticall life. 4. Some are occasioned by special necessity of times, or
appearance of scandal; so Primitive Christians had all things common, Acts 4.
32. and Paul makes his hands to minister to his necessities, Acts 20. 34. And
yet here is neither footing for Anabaptisticall Community, nor for Ministers
using manual labor, except where cases and times are alike. Lastly, Some were
according with the general Law moral, as those of patience, humility,
obedience, etc. and herein indeed is our bond of imitation.

Expression XXXI. That all are not alike carnal, nor* alike spiritual.
THere be (says Saint Austin) three August. contra Julian* Pelag. Vide Zanch.
de redempt. page 59.
sorts of men: some are only spirit, without flesh; such are the Saints in
Heaven: some are only flesh, without spirit; such are men unregenerate: and
some again are partly flesh, and partly spirit; and such are all the regenerate.

Expression XXXII. That men are apter to take notice of other men's mortality,
than of their own.
FOr here it is, as when two boats meet upon Mr. Jo. Down. Warfare, part. 2.
lib. 2. c. 29.
the water; they which are in the one seem to themselves as if their boat stood
still, and that the other goes swiftly; whereas in truth they make alike speed
both of them. So men are ready to think, that though others run toward death
with posting have, yet they in the mean time stand at a stay.

Expression XXXIII. That it is a sure sign we love God, when we love our
brethren.
FOr as lines in a circle, drawn from the Doroth* Doct. 6* ne judicemus
proximum.
center to the circumference, the nearer they come to the center from whence
they proceeded, the nearer needs must they come one to another; and the farther
off they go from it, the more are they distant one from another. So Christians,
the nearer they come to God (that indivisible Center, of whom, and to whom are
all things, Romans 11. 36.) in their love, the nearer must they needs come in
affection one to another; and the farther they go from him in that, the farther
off they are from one another in the same affection.

Expression XXXIV. How much God loves Unity.
WE read in Genesis 1. that when God had created every days work, he gave his
approbation of every days work severally, saying, that it was good: but of the
works of the second day, we find no such approbation given. And what (says
Hieron. in Haggaeum.
Saint Hierom) think we, may be the reason hereof? Surely (says he) in my
opinion, this seems most probable, because two, or the second, is the beginning
of Division, and makes the first breach or division of Unity, which the God of
peace hates.

Expression XXXV. That he that kills a man destroys Gods Image.
THey write of Phydias the Painter, See M. Weems his Exposition of the Moral
Law, lib. 2. com. 6. exercit. 1.
that he painted the image of Minerva, and his own image, so cunningly
together, that none could deface or mar the image of Minerva, but he must needs
deface and mar likewise the image of Phydias: neither could any mar the image
of Phydias, but he must also mar the image of Minerva. So the Lord has placed
his image so cunningly in man, that whosoever defaceth his image, defaceth the
man; and whosoever kills the man, defaceth the image.

Expression XXXVI. That filthy speaking is a sign of a desperate estate of the
Soul.
THere is (says one) an odious disease See Mr. Yates his Ibis ad Caesarem,
Epist. to the Reader.
in nature, or rather against it, which causes a man or woman to cast up the
excrementious filthiness at his mouth, which should go downward; and it is a
disease so dangerous and desperate, that Physicians usually call it, Miserere
mei Deus. And it is much to be feared, that they are in as desperate, and
forlorn a condition, that use their tongues to filthy and unsavory language;
for if God remedy them not, man cannot; and therefore let us leave them to his
mercy.

Expression XXXVIII* That the Church of God in this world, is like a Man of War
at Sea.
WHose Master is Christ; whose See Mr. Gossens Trumpet of war, P. F.
Mast his Cross; whose Sails his Sanctimony; whose Tackle Patience and
Perseverance; whose Cast-peeces, the Prophets, Apostles, Preachers; whose
Mariners be the Angels; whose Fraught is the souls of Just men; whose Rudder is
Charity; whose Anchor is Hope; whose Flag in the top of her is Faith; and the
word written in it, is this, Premimur, non opprimimur; We are cast down, but we
perish not, 2 Cor. 4. 8.

Expression XXXVIII. What good things are in peace, and what evils in strife
and contention.
IT is observable, that amongst those seventeen See Mr. Bucks treatise of the
eight beatitudes, p. 298.
sins which Saint Paul calls the works of the flesh, Gal. 5. eight of them are
of the adverse party to peace, viz* hatred, variance, emulations, wrath,
strife, sedition, heresies, envyings; and that all the nine fruits of the
Spirit there reckoned up, are peace, and the assistants thereof. Which shows,
what a concourse of fleshly evils is in strife, and that all good things which
we can expect from the Spirit, are in peace. Hence even the Heathen feigned
Eirene (Peace) to be Pansanias in Atticis, p. 13.
the nurse of Pluto, their God of Riches.

Expression XXXIX. That a man may be the better for hearing of Sermons, though
he remember little of what he has heard for the present.
FOr it is here as it is with a foul sieve, the which is cleansed by the water
that runs through it: So our souls are cleansed by the Word which we hear, though
it for the present be not remembered.

And hereof we have a pretty example, Ex vitis Patrum, part. 2* fol. 168.
in the Lives of the Fathers: How one upon a time bemoaned himself to an Abbot,
for that he had often heard the admonitions of the Ancients, but retained
nothing: whom the Abbot bad, to take one of two empty vessels, which chanceably
stood by, and to put water into it, and wash it: which done, the Abbot asked
him, which of the two vessels was the cleaner? he answered, that into which the
water was put: Then said the Abbot unto him, So is it (my son) with the soul
that frequently hears the Word of God, though for the present it retains
nothing of the things which it hears, yet it is more cleansed than that which
hears nothing at all.

Expression XL. How men that make a show of great zeal at the present hearing
of the Word, may (after it is heard) be never the better.
FOr such hearers many times are like iron, the which in the fire seems to be
very fire; but remains iron still; and within a little while after it is taken
out of the fire, shows it self to be no other.

Or we may compare them to passengers at sea, or which use to go to sea of
purpose to be sea-sick: for these as long as they be on the sea, are so
sea-sick, that a man would think they would vomit up all their entrails; but
being once on the land again, they are as well as ever they were before. So
many hearers of the Word, as long as they be in the Church, seem to be
Sermon-sick, as if on a sudden they would leave all their old sinful courses
of life; but being once out of the Church, they think no more of it, but remain
as they were before.

Expression XLI. That Confession of a man's sins unto God, is an excellent means
to keep sin from hurting of him.
IT is written of the fish Scolopendra, that having sucked in the fishers hook
and bait, that sweet sour morsel,

She has a rare trick to rid her from Du Bartas, 1. week, 5. day.
it,
For instantly she all her guts will vomit.
So when we have swallowed down the Sea Dr. Bois on the Gospel for the third
Sunday in Lent.
Devils hooks of sin, covered over with some worldly alluring baits, that they
may not hurt us, we must pour out our souls unto God, and cast out all the
baits of Satan within us, by hearty confession.

Expression XLII. That they that are poor in spirit, and they that are
persecuted for righteousness sake, are in the happiest condition of all others.
IT is true, that in the eight Beatitudes Vide Bern. Sermon. 4. de Adventu.
mentioned Mat. 5. the bliss is not only enjoyed in heaven, but tasted also
upon earth; yet the poor and the persecuted therein mentioned, as most going
out of themselves, and having least of the earth, have most of heaven, and
peculiar fruitions of God, and blessedness: and that is the reason, that
whereas in the rest the promise and reward runs in the future, as they shall be
comforted, they shall be satisfied, etc. To poverty and persecution it is not
so much promised as exhibited; and therefore to them it is not said, theirs
shall be, but theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Expression XLIII. That the greatest judgments of God have lighted upon the
proud, and his greatest mercies on the humble.
FOr pride made Angels Devils; yea even Lucifer the Prince, and highest of all
in the orders of Angels, for his pride, in assaying to be like God, fell from
the top of Heaven to the bottom of Hell, as the blackest and worst of Devils;
and he that succeeded him in his place, had the name of Michael given him
(says one) which signifies, Quis sicut Deus? Who can be Isidor. Pelus. lib.
1. ep. 15.
like God? to warn all creatures to take heed by his fall, of the like sin,
lest they incur the like punishment.

And as for humility, the sacred Virgin, because she humbled her self more than
any other woman, or man, therefore found greater favor and grace with God than
any other woman, or man, yea or Angel; for she was A phrase used by Gerson,
Dionys. Carthus. and others.
Comparentalis Deo Patri, Mother to him to whom God was Father.

Expression XLIV. That pride is the first, and last vice of ^ Christian.
ANd therefore not unfitly may it be Vide August. in Psalm. 7.
called, the heart of the old man, that is in every regenerate Christian; which
is the first part of man that lives, and the last that dies.

Expression XLV. What is the best way to let out pride and vainglory out of the
heart.
IF a man have a bladder that is full of wind, the way to let the wind out of
it, is either to untie the neck of it, or to prick it, or to rend it. So the
way to let pride out of the heart, is, 1. To untie that which keeps it in,
which is our high neck, whereby we conceit too highly of our selves, and our
own worth. 2. To prick it with remorse, Acts 2. 37.
and hearty sorrow for sin. And 3* If that will not do it, to rend it ^^l 2.
13.
even in pieces, with the remembrance of Gods fearful judgments due unto it.

Expression XLVI. That God sometimes heals, and cures sin by sin.
THey write of Treacle, and Mithridate Vide de Kempis de imitatione Christi,
lib. 1. cap. 13.
(which are both sovereign remedies, or antidotes against poison) that they are
made of such things as are in their own nature no less than poysonfull. So of
sin, which is the venom and poison of the old Serpent, God is pleased
sometimes to make a sovereign Antidote against sin.

Expression XLVII. That zeal is best preserved in an humble heart.
THe best way to keep fire alive, is under ashes. So zeal, which is the fire of
the Spirit, is best preserved in an humble soul, remembering it self to be dust
Genesis 18. 27. Job 42. 6.
and ashes.

Expression XLVIII. That grief for other men's sins is a good testimony of being
a living member in the body of Christ.
FOr a member (says Saint Bernard) Bern. de been vivendo, cap. 13.
is sensible of pain, as long as it is in the body; and so is every good man*
and therefore he that is not grieved, and mourns not for the sins and
infirmities of his fellow members, is no member (at least no living member) in
the body of Christ.

Expression XLIX. That the way to Heaven is by weeping Cross.
FOr no Christian must entertain the Sea Mr. Buck his Treatise of the eight
Beatitudes, page 86.
thoughts of traveling to the heavenly Jerusalem any other way than Christ
went to the earthly; and it is written, that he went to that Jerusalem (which
signifies, the Vision of Peace) by Bethany, which signifies, the House of Grief.

Expression L. That it is not in the power of any Preacher to convert all that
hear him.
MElancthon somewhere writes, that Melanct.
when he began to preach, he was in hope to convert all that should hear him;
but that afterward he found their Dutch proverb too true, That he was too
young a Scholar to make a Lamb of an old Fox.

Expression LI. That there are no real contradictions in Scripture, though in
some places of it there may seem to be such.
THe which Epiphanius does illustrate See M. Weems his Exercit. Divine, part.
4. page 81.
by this comparison: When a man (says he) is drawing water out of a deep well,
with two vessels of a different metal; the water (if a man look into the well,
as it is coming up) will seem to be of a different color; but as it comes
nearer and nearer to him, the diversity of colors vanishes, and the water in
both vessels appears to be of one color; and when we taste it, it has the same
relish. So (says he) allthough at first sight there may seem to be some
seeming contradiction in the holy Scriptures, yet when we better consider of
it, we shall find no contrariety at all, but a perfect harmony.

Expression LII. That the soul of man can be at no rest, till it return to God.
FOr it is with the soul of man, as it is See M. Weems ubi supra, par. 3. page
216.
with the Needle of a Compass, which allwaies trembles, and shakes, till it
turn to the North pole: but being turned directly thitherwards, it is quiet,
and stands still. So the soul of man, being by sin turned away from God, is
never at rest till by true repentance it return to him again.

Expression LIII. That riches are like thorns.
FOr thorns, we know, are pricking things, and so are riches; for they have (as
one well observes) three sorts of pricks, Ludolphus.
by which they prick and wound our souls.

Puncturam laboris in acquisitione.
Puncturam timoris in possessione.
Puncturam doloris in amissione.
They prick us with labor in getting them.
They prick us with fear in keeping them.
They prick us with grief in losing them.
Expression LIVE. That the more God does bless us, the more we should bless
him.
FOr God in bestowing his benefits, is See D. Donns Sermons in Folio, page 550.
b.
like one that makes a Clock; for as he bestows all his labor on the several
wheels within, only of purpose that the Bell above might thereby be made to
sound, and the Hand without give knowledge to others how the time passes. So
all that God gives us, is but for this end, that we might thereby make open
declaration of his mercies, and to let others see how bountifully he has dealt
with us, that he may be the more glorified both by us and them.

Expression LV. How hard a thing it is to recover a man's good name, if once
lost.
THe which one prettily expresses, See Howels Epist. vol. 2. epist. 14.
thus. It happened, that upon a time Fire, Water, and Fame, went to travel
together: but before they set forth, they consulted, that if they lost one
another, how they might meet again. Fire said, where you see smoke, there you
shall find me; Water said, where you see marsh, or moorish low grounds, there
you shall find me: but Fame said, take heed how you lose me, for if you do,
you will run a great hazard never to meet me again.

Expression LVI. How that covetous and worldly minded men do think that they
are good enough, if they have goods enough.
HEnce (one says) that covetous and See Dr. Bois on Epist. for the third
Sunday in Lent.
worldly-minded men can in this life sing no other tune, but Sol, Re, Me, Fa;
that is, solares me facit; they are then only made, when they are made rich:
but I will add, that if they keep this tune till death, they shall in Hell be
taught another tune, which is the tune of Lachrymae; where there shall be
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for ever.

Expression LVII. Why the Woman was made of the ribs of man, and no other part.
THe Woman was not made of a bone See B. Kings Sermon called Vitis Palatina,
page 26.
of the head, to show, that a Woman must not be Domina, the ruler of her
husband; nor of a bone of any anterior part, to show, that she is not Praelata,
preferred before the man; nor of a bone of the foot, to show, that she must not
be Serva, an handmaid to her Husband; nor of a bone of any hinder part, to
show, that she is not post-posita, set behind the man; but of a bone of the
side, of a middle and indifferent part, to show, that she is Socia, a Companion
to the Husband; for, qui junguntur lateribus socii sunt* they that walk side by
side are companions. Again, of a bone under the arm, to show, that she must be
protected and defended by the Husband; and of a bone not far from his heart, to
show, that he must affect and love her.

And if at any time she prove hand, and unkind to her Husband, or crooked and
perverse, he must remember whereof she was made, viz. of a bone, therefore
hard; of a rib, and therefore crooked: but howsoever she prove, whether kind or
unkind, there is no putting of her away; but, as the Rabbines Proverb is, Os
quod in sort tua cecidit, rodas. Drus. in Adag. Ben-Syrae.
The bone that is fallen to our lot, we must gnaw.

Expression LVIII. That there are corruptions in all callings; and that there
are few of any calling, but do prevaricate.
IT was a smart invention of a Satyrist, See Mr. Tho* Adams Sermon. called the
Barren Tree* page 55.
who having placed the Emperor, and the Pope, reconciled, in their Majestic
Thrones, brought in the states of the world before them.

First comes a Counselor of State, with this Motto, I advise you two.
Then a Courtier, I flatter you three.
Then a Husbandman, I feed you four.
Then a Merchant, I cosen you five.
Then a Lawyer, I rob you six.
Then a Soldier, I fight for you seven.
Then a Physician, I kill you eight.
And lastly, a Priest, I absolve you all nine. This was his Satyr of his
times; God grant it be not too true of ours.

Expression LIX. That the way to be assured of our Election, is to be assured
of our Repentance, and Sanctification.
IT was a good saying of Bradfords, See Mr. Dan. Dyke of Repentance, page 183.
That we must first be in the Grammar School of Repentance, before we come to
the University of Predestination.

And Cardinal Pool answered not amiss to him that demanded, what course
should be taken in reading of the Epistle to the Romans; First (says he)
begin at the twelfth Chapter, and read to the end, and practice the precepts of
Repentance, and Mortification; and then set upon the former part of the
Epistle, where Justification and Predestination are handled.

Expression LX. That the eye is the occasion of more sins to the soul, than any
other member.
I have read a Dialogue betwixt the eye, See Dr. Hackwell on Psals 101. page
113.
and the heart, which of them it was which did work most mischief to man; and
when they could not agree, Reason umpired the matter, and decided the
controversy; by imputing the cause of sin to the Heart, and the occasion of
sin to the Eye; the Eye being the Pander, and Broker, and the Heart the
Strumpet.

Hence it is, that the same word in the Hebrew, signifies both an eye, and a
fountain; to show, that the eye is that from whence sin springs, and flows. And
because the eye is the most sinful member of all others, therefore has God
put tears (which (we know) are, or should be the true testimonies of
repentance) into the eye, and into no member else.

Expression LXI. That many worldly-minded men do purposely forbear coming to
Church, lest hearing their profitable sins reproved, and disproved, they might
be persuaded to leave their sins, and with them their profit.
I have read of a certain holy man, who Heming! in Ioh. 5. col. 318. I.
by calling on the name of Christ, used to cure all sick and diseased people
that he met with, whatsoever their disease was. And therefore certain crafty
beggars, which made a benefit by showing their sores, and other infirmities and
diseases, when they heard that he was coming where they sat begging, would
purposely get out of his way, lest they should be healed against their wills,
and by being healed, be deprived of their former gain. And just so do many
worldly-minded men forbear to meet Gods Ministers in the Church, or in private
to confer with them, lest by the powerful work of Gods Spirit in their
Ministry, they should be converted, and so made to leave their gainful sins of
usury, extortion, cosenage, and the like.

Expression LXII. That there are some Preachers in these days, which are so
far from making their hearers to understand what they say, that they scarce
understand it themselves.
I have read of a certain Outlandish See Abbots against Bishop, part. 2. page
170.
Mathematique Reader, whose tongue having outrun his wits, and making a
discourse of he knew not what, asked his hearers at length, Intelligitisne? Do
you understand what I say? And when they had answered, No; Profecto nihil miror
(says he) neque enim ego intelligo meipsum; Truly I do not wonder at it, for
I do not understand my self. The application is easy.

Expression LXII. How the Devil steals from us our souls whilst we stand
gazing on the vain pleasures of this world.
IT is written of them who tame the Sea B. Cowpers Treatise called The Mirror
of Mercy, page 488. col. 1.
Tygre, that when they have taken away the young one, in the absence of the old
ones; and knowing, that finding their young one missing, they will speedily
upon the foot, or scent, follow after them, they set up looking-glasses all
along the way where they go with it; unto which, when the old ones come, and
seeing in the glasses some representation like themselves, they there stay
viewing and beholding it so long, till the huntsmen, which have their young
one, be gotten far enough off, and be in safety with his prey.

And just so deals the Devil with the men of this world; for he having stolen
away our souls, sets up some deceitful looking-glasses in our way through this
world, whereon whilst we stand gazing, and beholding the vain pleasures and
delights therein represented unto us, he carries away our souls into his
infernal house, never to be recovered more.

Expression LXIII. Why the Devil is called the Devil in English, and Diabolus
in Latin.
SOme think he is in English called the Sea M. Greenhams Works, page 845.
Devil, quasi Do evil. Others fetch his name a Divellendo, because he by his
temptations seeks to pull or pluck away Man from God.

And for his Latin name Diabolus, some think he is so called of duo two, and
bolus a bit, because the Devil makes but two bits of a man, the one of his
body, and the other of his soul.

But the best derivation of the word Diabolus, See Mr. Thom. Taylour on Christ's
combat with Satan, page* 25.
is from (...), which signifies, to accuse: For he accuses, 1. God to man; so
he accused God to our first parents, as if he did envy their felicity, and did
deal overhardly with them, in his restraining them from that fruit which might
be so profitable to them. 2. Man to God; so he accused Job to God, telling him
that he served him but in hypocrisy; and that if he would but afflict him a
little, he should see, that he would curse him to his face. Job 1. 9.
3. Man to man, by stirring up jealousies and suspicions in men's hearts of one
another; as in Saul's heart toward David, and in many others mentioned in
Scripture. 4. Man to himself, by raising despairing thoughts in men's hearts
upon the sight of their sins; as in Cain, Achitophel, Judas, and others.

Expression LXIV. That worldly wise men be but fools in Gods account.
AChitophel was as worldly a wise man See B. Andrews Sermon of the Gunpowder
Treason, page 955.
as any we read of, insomuch that his counsel was holden as the Oracle of God,
2 Samuel 16. 23. and yet as wise as he was, a fool might have claimed kindred of
him; and so much his very name intimates; for Tophel, is, a fool; and Achi, is,
a cosen germain, at the least, if not nearer; and so (as wise as he was) he was
but Germanus stulti, cosen germain to a fool.

Expression LXV. That God can curse our very blessings.
WE read, that on a certain time Vide Pomerium Dominic. 12. post festum Trinit.
Sermon. 108. t.
here in England, there was like to have been one of the fruitfulest years for
Corn that this Land ever saw: ^ut when harvest drew near, there came ^n
infinite number of flies into every quar^r, and corner of the Land, and spoiled
and devoured all that promising crop: The which, when men saw, they took some
^f these flies, and spreading their wings ^broad, they found written on one of
^em this word, Ira; and on the other, Dei; to show them to have proceeded ^om
Gods anger, and wrath for our ^ns.

Expression LXVI. That our sinful hearts are the cause of all our troubles,
and miseries.
ANd this may be illustrated by the Plut. lib. de Ser. Numb. vind: See Dr.
Willet in Levit. 26. page 723.
example of Apollodorus, who in his dream saw himself excoriated by the
Scythians, cut in pieces, and boiled; his heart crying out all the while,
(...), I am the cause of all these thy torments: And so may every one of our
hearts say to us.

Expression LXVII. Why we should love one another.
THis one briefly and pithily expresses, See Mr. Thom. Adams Sermon. called The
Churches Happiness.
thus: Dilecti diligamus, we are loved our selves, therefore let us love;
Dilectos diligamus, they are beloved whom we are charged to love; yea,
Diligentes diligamus, they all so love God, and us, whom God commands us to
love.

Expression LXVIII. When our love is inordinate.
SAint Austin prettily illustrates that, thus: Diligens non diligenda, aut
aeque diligens, quod minus, vel amplius diligendum est; aut minus, vel ampl^^s,
quod aeque diligendum est, contrae ordin^m charitatis diligit; That is, He that
loves things that are not to be beloved; or loves things equally, which are
less, or more to be beloved; or loves less, or more, that which is equally
to be beloved, he loves not as he should love.

Expression LXIX. How those that cannot have the waters of life, the Word of
God (when they would) preached unto them, must make the best use of it they
can, when they have it.
FOr herein Christians must do as Camels Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 18.
are said to do, when they have traveled long without water through sandy
deserts, Implentur cum bibendi est occasio, and in praeteritum, and in futurum;
When they meet with water, they drink for thirst past, and thirst to come.

Expression LXX. That every man must abide in that calling for which God has
fitted him.
WHen Robert Grosthead Bishop of See Mr. Fullers Holy State, page 46.
Lincoln, met with a Husbandman who challenged kindred of him, and thereupon
requested him to bestow an Office on him; Cosen (quoth the Bishop) if your Cart
be broken, I Will mend it; if your Plough be old, and decayed, I will give you a
new one, and also seed to sow your land: but an Husbandman I found you; and an
Husbandman I will leave you.

Expression LXXI. That we must not take the Devils part against God.
FOr herein we must be like the Spanish See Mr. Fuller, ubi supra, page 51.
Soldier, of whom it is reported, that (whereas all other Nations are
mercenary, and for money will serve on any side) he will never fight against
his own King.

Expression LXXII. That God has no dumb, or still-born Children.
FOr it may be said of all Gods Children, as it is reported of Saint Rumbal,
Cambden^ Britan. in Northamptonshire.
How that he spoke as soon as he was born: So all Gods Children, as soon as
they be new born, will speak to God, or of God, or for God, as occasion is
offered.

Expression LXXIII. That Religion does not abolish and take away cheerfulness
from the Professors thereof.
IT has been an old, but a false taken up proverb amongst many, that Spiritus
Calvinianus est Spiritus Melancholicus, and that Religion does dull men's wits,
and make them Melancholy: But Athanasius Athanasius in ejus vita.
gives us an instance to the contrary in Saint Anthony the Monk, how that he
might be known, amongst hundreds of his order, by his cheerful fac^; he having
ever (though a most mortified man.) a m^rry countenance.

Expression LXXIV. How many do love to tell lies of themselves.
SUch men may fitly be compared to Stowes Survey of London, page 528.
the Bell in the Clock-house at Westminster, which had this inscription about
it; King Edward made me,
Thirty thousand, and three:
Take me down and weigh me,
And more shall ye find me.


But when this Bell was taken down, and weighed, this and two more were found
not to weigh twenty thousand.

Expression LXXV. That the way to become good, is to live in a continual
expectation of Death.
WE read how Henry a German Surius in vita Sancti Henrici, Jul. 14. and Baron.
in anno 1007.
Prince was upon a time admonished by revelation, to search for a writing in an
old wall, which should nearly concern him; the which he accordingly did: and
having found there the writing, and looking into it, he saw only these two
words ( Post Sex) written therein: whereupon conceiving that his death was
thereby foretold, which after six days should ensue, passed those six days in
a constant preparation for the same: but finding the six days past without the
effect he expected, he successively persevered in his godly resolutions six
weeks; and his death not happening then neither, he kept them on six months, and
after that six years, thinking that then it might happen to be; and on the
first day of the seventh year, he was chosen Emperor of Germany; wherein he
(having gotten such an habit of piety before) carried himself like a most
godly, and good Emperor, and like a right religious Christian, to his dying
day.

Expression LXXVI. Why the Devil having (by Gods permission) all that Job had,
in his hands, would spare his Wife, Job 1. 12.
WAs it, think you (says Saint See Dr. Donns Sermon. in fol. page 751. b. And D.
Clerks Sermons, page ^98.
Austin) because the Devil is merciful? No: Noverat (says he) per quam
deceperat Adam: ideo suam reliquit adjutricem, non mariti consolatricem: He
knew how he had deceived Adam before by his Wife; and therefore he spared her,
that in the time of Jobs trial, she might rather help the Devil to promote
his cause against Job, than any way to be a comfort to him, as indeed she did,
Job 2. 9. for there like a Devil incarnate, And that Women may be such Devils,
see Saint Paul's phrase, (...), Tit. 2. 3.
she bids him curse God, and dye, rather than to continue still in his
uprightness with so much affliction. A temptation that the Devil himself
would not own, and therefore puts her in his room to play the tempter for him.

Expression LXXVII. That poor men are not to be contemned.
GReat men (says one) are but the Sea Mr. Edw. Rainolds Seron Eccles. 1. 14.
page 11.
greater letters in the same volume, and the poor the smaller: Now though those
take up more room, and have many times more flourishes, yet they put no more
matter nor worth into the word which they compound, than these do.

Expression LXXVIII. That alms must be given of goods justly gotten.
IT is worth our noting (says one) that See Mr. Thom. Goodwins Moses and
Aaron, page 82.
the Hebrew word (...), Tsedacha, signifies alms, and signifies also
justice; whereby is intimated, that the matter of our alms should be goods
justly gotten. And to this purpose the alms-box is called in Hebrew (...),
Kuph^ Schel Tsedacha, the Chest of Justice.

Expression LXXIX. That a good wife can hardly be chosen out of a wicked and
irreligious family.
THis is intimated in that* Rabbinicall Vide I^. Causabon. Exercit. 13. 37.
Proverb, viz. Take not a wife out of that family wherein there is a Publican,
for such are all Publicans.

Expression LXXX. That the way to amend all, is every one to amend one.
WE all cry out, the days are evil, See Mr. John Jones his Ser. called
Lo^dons looking back to Jerusalem* page 48* 49. Mr. Gatakers Epist. Dedic*
before his Sermon called Noah's Obedience.
whilst we all help to make them worse; all complain, all censure, none amend:
but if every one would amend one, all would be better. For it is here as it is
in a City, or Town, where the way to make the whole street clean, is, every man
to sweep before his own door.

Expression LXXXI. That sin is the cause why God makes our enemies to prevail
over us.
ANd therefore an English Gentleman, Mr. Heylin.
at our expulsion out of France, being demanded by a French Cavalier, when they
would return again, made this plain, and pithy answer, When (says he) your
sins are greater than ours.

Expression LXXXII. That Gods Children, the more God seems to thrust them
away from him, the more eagerly do they press toward him again.
FOr Gods Child (says one) is like a See Mr. Gatakers Sermon called David's
Remembrancer, page 50.
water-mils wheel; the which, the more violently it is driven away by the force
of the water, the more violently does it still turn again upon the stream.

Expression LXXXIII. How we may become better.
ONe wittily shows the way in three Alsted. Systema^. Theol.
words, Explorandum, deplorandum, implorandum; We must search and try wherein
we have done amiss; we must be heartily sorry for it, and implore Gods grace
to help us, and to strengthen us in better courses for the time to come.

Expression LXXXIV. How we may comfort our selves against the fear of being
rejected by God.
HErein we must take the same course See Dr. Donns Sermon. on Esa. 50. 1.
that the Jewish Wives did against the Bill of Divorce given them by their
Husbands.

For 1. If it were not Sepher, that is, Heb. (...) Graec. (...).
written in an entire book, not in pieces, and several parts of a book, it was
invalid, and of no force: So though we find some parts and passages of
Scripture to make against us; if the whole Book of God (one place thereof being
compared with another) do not prove as much, we are safe enough.

2. If it were written in the Husbands bedchamber, it was invalid also, and
of no force: So if we have nothing to plead for our final rejection by God,
but only Gods eternal decree of Reprobation, which in his ecret and sacred
Counsel (as it were in his bedchamber) is past upon men, we are not much to be
troubled at that; especially if we find in our selves the evident tokens of our
effectual vocation, which is the way to make sure our election, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

3. If it were not written by a public Notarie, that made it also invalid,
and of no force: So if our final rejection by God be only ascertained to us
by private men, and not by the public Ministry of the Word, who only have
authority to bind and loose, Joh. 20. 23. we are not much to be disheartened.

4. If the Bill, or Book of Divorce, were interlined, it was also invalid, and
of no force: So if the Bill, or Book of Gods final rejection of us, be
interlined with the blood of Christ, by the hand of faith, it is reversed, and
will be of no force against us, Col. 2. 14.

Lastly, If it were blurred, or blotted, it was also invalid, and of no force:
So if we can (as we read this fearful Bill of Divorce) but blur, or blot it
with our unfeigned tears of Repentance, as did David, Psalm. 6. 6. or Mary
Magdalen, Luke 7. 38. or Hezechiah, Esai. 38. 5. or Peter, Mat. 26. 75. it will
be of no force against us.

Expression LXXXV. How dangerous a thing it is; carelessly to neglect the
hearing of the Word.
THey say there is a way of Castration by cutting of the ears; for See Dr.
Donns Sermon. in Fol. page 331. b.
there are certain veins behind the ears, which if they be cut, disable a man
from generation. So if we cut off our ears, that is, intermit our ordinary
course of hearing, there will follow a castration of the soul, and the soul
will become an Eunuch, and we grow to a barrenness, without any further fruit
of good works.

Expression LXXXVI. How we may become right Doers of the Word which we have
heard.
THere are two kinds of doers, (...), and (...); which the Latin See B.
Andrews Sermon* part. 2. page 136.
likewise expresses in Agere, and Facere: Agere, as in Music; where when we
have done singing, or playing; nothing remains. Facere, as in building;
where, after we have done, there is a thing permanent. And we have both these
words in our English tongue too; Actors, as in a Play; Factor, as in
Merchandise: When the Play is done, all that the Actors do, vanishes; but of
the Factors d^ing, there is a gain, a real thing remains. Now when the
Scriptures exhort us to be doers of the Word, as Jam. 1. 22. the word they use,
is (...), Fact^res; to show, that when we hear the Word, we must not be Actors,
as Players on a Stage, to have nothing remaining in their lives, when we come
off the Stage, and the Sermon is ended: but we must be Factors, and do as they
do, to bring home with us some gain, for our heavenly Masters glory, and our
own souls good: Convertendo Scriptur as in operas (as Gregory says) by
changing the Word that is audible, into a work which is visible; and the Word
which is transient, into a work which is permanent.

Expression LXXXVII. That one Kingdom of Heaven, which Gods Children shall
enjoy hereafter, is more worth than all the Kingdoms of this World.
THe Story makes mention, that when See M. Harris on Mat. 5. 3. page 58.
Charles the Fifth, in a challenge to the King of France, commanded his Herald to
proclaim it with all his titles; as, Charles Emperor of such a place, King of
such a place, Duke of such a place, etc. bids defiance to the King of France:
The King of France bids his Herald to proclaim only thus, The King of France,
The King of France, The King of France, bids battle to Charles Emperor of
Germany, etc. Intimating, that one Kingdom of France was more worth than all
those empty titles. So may we, that are Gods Children, oppose the Kingdom of
Heaven to all the Kingdoms of this World, and the riches, honors, and
pleasures of them: so that when the men of this world cry out, and vaunt of
their riches, honors, pleasures, and what else this world can afford, let us
cry, Heaven, Heaven, Heaven; that answers to all.

Expression LXXXVIII. That Gods Children should do nothing unworthy of the
Children of God their Father.
FOr here in Gods Children should do, as See The Holy Court, page 9.
Boleslaus the fourth King of Poland did: For he bearing the picture of his
Father hanged about his neck in a plate of gold, when he was to speak or do
any thing of importance, he took this picture, and kissing it, said, Dear
Father, I wish I may not speak, or do any thing in this business (that I am
now undertaking) unworthy of thy name. And so should Gods Children do too, in
all their undertakings, call to mind that God is their Father, and do nothing
unworthy, or unbeseeming the Children of such a Father.

Expression LXXXIX. How many hear Sermons, more to be able to talk of them,
than to live according to what they hear in them.
THese hearers (says one) are like to the Sea Will^t on Levit. page 266.
Weasell, which conceives in the ear, and brings forth in the mouth.

Expression XC. What is the right way to become one of Christ's Disciples.
HErein we must do, as that cunning See B. Jewels Ser. at Court, page: 104.
Musician (of whom we read) would have his Scholars to do, that were put to
him to learn Music; as soon as any such came to his School, he would (before
he did teach them any thing) send them to a rude and ignorant Minstrell in the
Town, to hear him a while: but withal he gave them this Item, saying,
Whatsoever you see him do, see that you avoid it, for he is unlearned, and his
manner of fingring is naught; see therefore that in playing, you for your parts
do the contrary. So whosoever will be one of Christ's Disciples, must have a
care to mark and observe what courses wicked men take, and to do the contrary.
See Romans 12. 2. Exodus 23. 2. Ephesians. 5. 11. Joh. Epist. 3. 11. Ephesians. 4. 17.
Hos. 4. 15.

Expression XCI. That Christian love, and Charity, is the chiefest lesson that
any Christian can learn.
THe Ecolesiasticall History reports, Vide Hieron. in Epist. ad Galat.
that Saint John the Evangelist, that beloved Disciple, and chief Doctor of
Lov^, (as appears by his Epistles) when he grew so old, that he was not able to
go, was fain to be carried to Church; and when he was brought thither, being
not able to preach, and use any long discourse to his Auditors, did use to say
nothing to them at all their Church-meetings, but only this, Filioli diligite
invicem, My little Children love one another. And being asked, why he
reiterated this saying so often, and taught them nothing but this; he said, Hoc
praeceptum Domini est, and si solum fiat, sufficit: This is the Lords
Commandment, and if this alone be done as it should be, it is sufficient.

Expression XCII. That occasions of sin proffered, will soon discover
counterfeit Christians.
WE read of a certain Juglers Greg. Nyssen. tom. 2. De Professione Christiana.
Ape, which being attired like a reasonable Creature, and dancing curiously to
his Masters Instrument, deceived the people of Alexandria, until one espying
the fraud, threw a few Dates upon the Stage; which the Ape no sooner espied,
but he tore off his Vizard, and fell to his victuals, to the scorn of his
Master: Which gave occasion to the Proverb, An (...), Lucian.
Ape is an Ape, though he be clad never so gaily. And this does Gregory Nyssen
apply to men, that call themselves Christians, profess that they know God, and
that their hope is in Heaven: but no sooner does any vanity come in their way,
but their heart does betray where their treasure is.

Expression XCIII. That there is a certain fullness of sin, See Genesis 15. 16.
Joel 3. 13.
unto which when the wicked ones come, Gods Judgments are at hand.
WE read in the Prophet Zachary Zech. 5. 6, etc. See Mr. Edw. Rainolds Ser. on
Eccles. 1. 24. page 49.
of an Ephah, a measure whereinto all the wickedness of the Jews (there
figured by a woman) shall be thrown together; and when this measure of sins is
full to the brim, then there is a mass of lead, importing the firmness,
immutability and heaviness of Gods Decree, and Council, which seals up the
Ephah, never more to have any sin put into it: And then come two women, with
wind in their wings, which are the Executioners of Gods swift and irreversible
fury, and carry the Ephah between Heaven and Earth (intimating the public
Declaration of the righteous judgments of God) into the Land of Shinar, to
build it there an house; denoting the constant and perpetual habitation of the
wicked in that place of bondage, whether the wrath of God shall drive them; for
building of houses argues an abiding.

Expression XCV. How a man may subdue his unruly lusts.
COncupiscence, or lust (say Divines) See Dr. Bois on the Gospel for the 15th
Sunday after Trinity. And Mr. Tho. Myriels Sermon on Cant. 5. 2* page 82.
is like fire, and our body is like a seething pot. Now a seething pot (we
know) may be cooled diverse ways. 1. By withdrawing the fuel that thus makes
it boil over. 2. By stirring and lading it. 3. By casting cold water into it.
And 4. By taking it quite from the fire. So must we deal with our bodies, when
they boil over with lust. 1. We must withdraw the fuel that nourishes it,
keeping a more temperate and moderate diet than before. 2. We must stir, and
lade the pot, by exercising our bodies in some honest and lawful calling. 3.
If this will not do it, we must make use of water. 1. Of the water of true
penitential tears for our former lustful, and luxurious lives. And 2. Of that
water of our own cistern, which Solomon speaks of, Prove. 5. 15. and which Saint
Paul, 1 Corinthians. 7. 2. calls, the having of a man's own wife; for that he there
shows, verse. 9. to be an excellent means to allay these fiery and burning
lusts. And Lastly, If all this will not do it, then we must take the pot off
the fire; that is, shun all opportunities and occasions which have been a means
heretofore, or may be a means hereafter, to provoke us to lust, and
uncleanness of life.

Expression XCVI. How the body and blood of Christ, with all the benefi^s of his
death and passion, may become ours, by the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper.
FOr it is here, as it is in conveying See Dr. Joh. Whites way to the true
Church, sect. 51. number. 10.
of land: when land is conveyed by writing and seal, though it be not contained
in the wax and parchment, but lies peradventure an hundred miles off; yet it
is truly present, and thereby infallibly given to him, with whom the covenant
is made. And he that should account such a conv^yance executed, but bare
parchment, would be refuted by every tenant in the Country, who esteem their
leases to have the ground so united to them, by virtue of the bargain passed
between their Lord, and them, that thereby they can occupy it safely, and
maintain their right against all intruders that would molest them. So is it in
the Sacrament, whose outward elements, though we call bread and wine, yet bare
bread and wine we call them not, but the Sacrament of the body and blood of our
Savior Christ; the which whosoever receives worthily, receives therewith, by
virtue of Christ's Word, and Promise, the very body and blood of Christ his
Savior, to all intents and purposes, for the comfort and nourishment of his
soul, as truly as he receives the outward elements of bread and wine for the
comfort and nourishment of his body. I say still, that it is so to the worthy
receiver; for otherwise it is here again, as in the usance of a conveyance. If
a conveyance made to Peter, lying upon the table, be given to Richard; or if
Richard fraudulently take it away, he receives nothing but bare wax, and
parchment, by reason the covenant was not made with him, but with Peter; he is
not the party that has the right, though to Peter it be a further matter then
bare parchment. And so the unworthy receiver, being not the party to whom the
promise is made of receiving Christ, with the benefits of his death and
passion, receives only Panem Domini (as the Fathers speak) The Bread of the
Lord; but not Panem Dominum, The Bread which is the Lord.

Expression XCVII. That an hearty desire, and sincere endeavor to be perfect,
is perfection in the sight of God.
LVther writes of one Staupitius, a Luth. in Gal. cap. 5.
godly learned man, how that he had vowed a thousand times, that he would
become a better man; yet for all his vows, he perceived no improvement, or
bettering of himself. Now in that he was not better, he was imperfect; but in
as much as he desired earnestly, and endeavored to be a better man, he was
perfect. Agreeable to which is that of Bernard; for he is confident, Bern. ad
Garin. Abb. ep. 254.
that Indefessum proficiendi studium, and jugis conatus ad perfectionem,
perfectio reputatur; That an indefatigable desire of profiting, and continual
endeavoring to be perfect, is perfection.

Expression XCVIII. That Gods Children must be sanctified throughout. 1 These.
5. 23.
THe Scriptures usually call Gods Children by the name of Temples; See B. Lakes
Sermons, Alphabet 1. page 150.
as, 1 Cor. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 6* 19. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Now there was no part of the
Temple of old, but was holy; yea all the limits thereof round about were so
too, Ezech. 43. 12. The innermost part of it was the place of Gods residence,
and therefore was called Sanctum Sanctorum, the most holy place: The next to
that was Sanctum, holy; and the rest Sanctuarium, partaking of holiness,
though in a lower degree. So in Gods Children, the heart and soul of man being
the place of Gods residence, must be most holy; the senses coming nearest to
that, must be the holiest next; and our bodies, the outermost parts of this
Spiritual Temple, must have their measure of holiness too, for even they are
to be the Temples too of the Holy Ghost; as in 1 Cor. 6. 19.

Expression XCIX. How a man may try the sincerity of his heart.
DIvines in their Treatises, and Writings, See Dr. Saundersons 1 Ser. ad
Populum, page 299.
have set down sundry notes, and marks, whereby to make this trial: but I
shall only commend unto you two out of all that variety, which two are indeed
as good as a thousand; namely, Integrity, and Constancy: for these are not to
be found in any Hypocrite.

1. Integrity, Psalm. 119. 6: Luke 1. 6. Opus Imperfect. in Mat. hom. 45.
For this is a true Rule in Divinity, Quicquid propter Deum fit, aequaliter
fit; Whatsoever we do for Gods sake (in obedience to his commands) we do it
equally.

2. Constancy; for (as Seneca observes Senec. Epist. 120.
more like a Divine, than a Philosopher) Qualitatis verae tenor permanet, falsa
non durant; Qualities that be true, be permanent, but false ones endure not.
And this is prettily gathered from the very name of Truth in Hebrew; for (...),
Emeth, Vide Cornel. a Lap. in Ep. Pauli, page 328. col. 2. b.
in Hebrew, which signifies Truth, comes from the root (...), Aman, which
signifies firmare, or stabilire, to confirm, or establish.

Now to make a sincere Christian, both these are requisite; for it is in the
soul, as it is in the body. 1. Physicians say of heat, and sweat, and such like
things, Vniversalia salutaria, partialia ex morbo; If a man be hot in one part,
and cold in another, as if the palms of his hands burn, and the soles of his
feet be cold, then all is not right: but if he be of an indifferent equal heat
all over, that is held a good sign of health. 2. They say, if heat come by
fits, and starts, and paroxisms, leaping eftsoon, and suddenly out of one
extreme into another; so as the party one while gloweth as hot as fire, another
while is chill and cold as ice, and keeps not at any certain stay, that is an
ill sign too; and it is to be feared, that there is an Ague either bred, or in
breeding: but if he continue at some reasonable certainty, and in a good
mediocrity of heat and cold, it is thought a good sign of health.

And just so it is in the state of our souls; if the Graces that be in us be
universal, equally bent upon all good, and equally set against all evil
things; and if for the most part, and in the ordinary constant course of our
lives, we have the practice of Repentance, Obedience, and other fruits of
Grace, in some good comfortable measure, it is a good sign of a sincere heart
toward God: but if we repent of one sin, and persist in another; if we obey
one Commandment, and break another; if we are zealous in one thing, and cool in
another; if we hate one vice, and love another; or if we have any of these
things only by fits, and starts, and sudden moods, and no otherwise, we have
just cause to fear, that we are still Hypocrites, and no sincere-hearted
Christians.

Expression C. How that to fear God, and to keep his Commandments, is the whole
duty of man.
THat which our English Translations render ( the whole duty of man) the Vulgar
Latin renders thus ( hoc est omnis homo, this is all man) or as Junius and
Tremelius render it ( hoc est totum hominis, this is the whole of man.) And
well may it be so said to be; for as the Jewish Rabbines have wittily observed,
there are Vide Tostat. in 1 Ruth, qu. 24. Munster. in praecept. affirmat. and
negat* Lorin. in Act. Apost. page 586. col. 1. a.
in all the Law of God but 613 Precepts; whereof there are 365 Negative, as
many as be days in the year; and 248 Affirmative, as many as be joints in man's
body: to show, that God looks that the whole man, all the days of his life,
should serve him, and keep his Commandments.

Which that we may the better do, Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole
matter (says the Preacher) Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is
the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12. 13.

Walafrldus Strabo de rebus Ecclesiasticis. Si quid in hoc (Lector) placet,
assignare memento Id Domino; quicquid displicet hocce mihi.
A CATALOGUE of some special Books Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel
in Ivy-lane, London.
The Names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor, D. D. Viz.
1. The Liberty of Prophesying, in 4o. 2. Episcopacy Asserted, in 4o. 3. The
History of the Life and Death of the Ever-Blessed Jesus Christ, in 4o. 4. An
Apology for Authorized and Set-forms of Liturgy, in 4o. 5. The Rules and
Exercises of Holy-Living, in 12o. 6. The Rules and Exercises of Holy-Dying, in
12o. 7. Twenty eignt Sermons preached at Golden-Grove; together with a Sermon
preached at Oxon. on the Anniversary of the fifth of November, in fol.
The Practical Catechism, with all the other English Treatises of Henry
Hammond, D. D. in two Volumes, in 4o. Certamen Religiosum; or, A Conference
between the late King of England, and the Marquess of Worcestor, concerning
Religion, at Ragland Castle; together with a Vindication of the Protestant
Cause, by Chr. Cartwright, in 4o. The Psalter of David, with Titles and
Collects, according to the matter of each Psalm, by the Right Honorable Chr.
Hatton, in 12o. Boanerges and Barnabas, or Judgment and Mercy for wounded and
afflicted Souls, in several Soliloquies, by Francis Quarls, in 12o. The Life
of Faith in Dead times, by Chr* Hudson, in 12o. Motives for Prayer upon the
seven days of the Week, by Sir Richard Baker Knight, in 12o. The Guide unto
True Blessedness, or a Body of the Doctrines of the Scriptures, directing man
to the saving Knowledge of God, by Sam. Crook, in 12o. Six excellent Sermons
upon several occasions, preached by Ed. Willan, Vicar of Hoxne, in 4o.
Animadversions and Observations upon Sir Walter Raleighs History of the World,
by Alex. Rosse, in 12o. The Dipper dipped, or the Anabaptists duck'd and plunged
over head and ears; By Daniel Featl^y D. D. in 4o. Hermes Theologus, a Divine
Mercury; new Descants upon old Records, by Theoph. Wod^note, in 12o.
Philosophical Elements, concerning Government and Civil Society, by Thomas
Hobbes of Malmesbury, in 12o. An Essay upon Statius, or the five first Books of
Publ. Papi^ius Statius his Thebais, by Tho. Stephens Schoolmaster in S.
Edmonds-Bury, in 8o. Nomenclatura Brevis Anglo-Latino-Graeca, in usum Scholae
Westmonasteriensis, per F. Gregory, in 8o. Grammatices Graecae Enchiri^ion in
usum Scholae Collegialis Wigorniae, in 8o. Devotion digested, in several
Discourses and Meditations upon the Lords most holy Prayer; together with
additionall Exercitations upon Baptism, the Lords Supper, Heresies, Blasphemy,
the Creatures, Sin, the Souls Pantings after God, the Mercies of God, the Souls
Complaint of it Absence from God, by Peter Samwaies Fellow lately Resident in
Trinity Coll. Cambridge. A Discourse of Holy love, by which the Soul is united
unto God: Containing the various Acts of Love, the proper Motives, and the
Exercises of it, in order to Duty and Perfection, by Sir George Stroad Knight.
Of the Division between the English and Romish Church upon the Reformation; By
way of answer to the seeming plausible pretenses of the Romish Party; by Henry
Fern.
The End.

