Sion-Colledg visited. OR, Some brief Animadversions upon a Pamphlet lately
published, under the title of, A Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, and
to our Solemn League and Covenant, etc. Subscribed (as is pretended) by the
Ministers of Christ within the Province of London.

Calculated more especially for the vindication of certain passages cited out
of the writings of J. G. in the said pamphlet, with the black brand of
Infamous and pernicious Errors, and which the said Ministers pretend (amongst
other errors so called) more particularly to abhominate.

Wherein the indirect and most un-Christian dealings of the said Ministers, in
charging and calling manifest and clear Truths, yea such as are consonant to
their own principles, by the Name of infamous and pernicious Errors, are
detected and laid open to the Kingdom, and the whole world.

By the said John Goodwin, a servant of God and men, in the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST.

I write not these things to shame you: but as my Beloved [Brethren] I warn
you, 1 Cor. 4. 14. Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. Non sentimus nos
p^rire, dum perimus in turba. Sen. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton,
at the entering out of Lombard Street into Popes head Alley, 1648

Sion-Colledge visited.
IT is a sad Observation, but full of truth; that Religion never had greater
enemies, than those of her own house; yea then those, who were pretenders in
the Highest to her Advancement. When a Commodity is engrossed, and brought
into few men's hands, it is so much the more like to suffer, to be adulterated,
and imbased. It was never well with Christian Religion, since the Ministers of
the Gospel, (so called by themselves, and so reputed by the generality of men,
for want of knowing, and considering better) cunningly vested that privilege
of the Church, of being the ground and pillar of Truth, in themselves; claiming
Nebuchadnezzars prerogative amongst men, over the Truths of God; whom he would,
he slew, and whom he would, he kept alive: and whom he would, he set up, and
whom he would, he put down Dan. 5. 19
.

There came lately out of the Press a few papers, stiling themselves, a
testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ, and pretending to a subscription, by
the Ministers of Christ within the Province of London. I wish, for these
Ministers sake, to whom (I appeal to him, who searches my heart and reins) I
wish nothing but good, and for the truths sake also, that I could conceive the
impudence or boldness of any man, so great, as to present them in print unto
the world for the Authors, or Subscribers of such a piece of weakness (to
forbear words of more provocation, though of truth) without their knowledge,
or consent. I should be enabled by such an apprehension, both to maintain in my
self (at least for a time) those honorable thoughts of their persons, which
(my witness is on high) I have always unfeignedly labored to do, though
still opposed by themselves, in my way; as also to comfort my self over that
Religion, which they, and I, Jointly profess, that it should not suffer upon any
such terms of disadvantage and dishonor, which those papers, if ever owned by
the persons, whose names are subscribed to them, are like to expose it unto.
The image and superscription stamped upon the piece, and the men, (especially
some of them) whose Names are affixed, if not enforced, to it, are so unlike
and contradictious the one unto the other, that being not able to found an act
of judgment or conjecture, who should be the Author, or Authors of it, upon
both jointly, I am in some straight, on which hand to lean; whether to judge
and conclude any of those learned and pious men, whose Names are subscribed, or
those weak and unworthy ones, whose image and superscription the piece
bears, for the Authors of it.

But that neither Dr Gouge, nor Mr. Calamy, nor Mr Case, nor Mr. Cranford, nor
any of those great Names of men, which parallel with these, were either the
Authors, or Subscribers of the said Pamphlet, these considerations (methinks)
should be sufficient demonstrations unto any man.

1. The very title it self, and that in the first and principal part of it,
contradicts the tenor of the Book, and that in more places than one. The
title pretends thus (in the first words of it) A testimony to the Truth of
Jesus Christ. Whereas the Book it self, testifies against the truth of Jesus
Christ, viz. by numbering the precious Truths of Jesus Christ, amongst infamous
and pernicious errors. Witness 1. page 5. where this assertion, that no
writing whatsoever, whether Translations, or Originalls, are the foundation of
Christian Religion, is made an infamous and pernicious error. For is not this
a clear Truth of Jesus Christ, and asserted (in part) in terminis, (but with
fullness of evidence otherwise) by the great Apostle, where he says, that
other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ 1
Cor. 3. 11.
? Except Jesus Christ be transubstantiated into ink and paper, no kind of
books or writings whatsoever, neither Translations, nor Originals, can be (in
the Apostles sense) any foundation of Christian Religion. Again, is it not a
precious Truth of Jesus Christ, that no act of man whatsoever is any foundation
of Christian Religon, the Apostle affirming (as we heard) that other foundation
can no man lay, but Jesus Christ: and yet the denial of the act of man to be a
foundation of Christian Religion, (as viz. the believing of the English
Scriptures*to be the Word of God) is by the said book (page 5.) ranked amongst
infamous and pernicious Errors? The Scriptures indeed or the word of God, are
(in a regular sense) the foundation of Christian Religion: but to believe them
to be this foundation, cannot be the foundation it self, but only a
superstructure, or building upon it. So that it is only the denial of a
superstructure to be the foundation, which is charged by this learned Province
of Subscribers to be an infamous and pernicious Error against the Divine
Authority of Scriptures. More instances of this kind, by the light whereof the
palpable interfeerings between the Title, and the Book it self, may be
clearly seen, we shall have occasion anon to observe. And is it not a very hard
piece of belief, to think that learned and pious men, should so far forget
themselves in the body of their Book, as to break the Head and title of it?

2. In the latter part of the said title, in these words, and to our solemn
League and Covenant, there is too little good sense to answer the worth and
parts of the men mentioned. For what can reasonably be meant, by a testimony to
our Solemn League and Covenant? Do they mean, that in the Book it self,
they give the same Testimony to their Solemn League and Covenant, which they
do to the Truth of Jesus Christ? Though the truth is, that it is a very poor
and empty testimony given to the Truth of Jesus Christ, to make infamous and
pernioious errors of what opinions, assertions, and Truths, they please,
without any manner of conviction. To cry out: It is not meet that such, or such
opinions should live, or be tolerated (as if life and toleration were an
heritage appropriate, and belonging of right to their opinions only, how
inconsistent soever either with reason, or with Truth) is little better
testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, than that deportment of the Jews was
unto Moses, when they cried out with a loud voice, stopping their ears* and
ran upon Stephen with one accord, to cast him out of the City, and stone him,
Acts 7. 57. But I trust their meaning is not, that they intend by their Book,
as solemn and Sacred a testimony to their League and Covenant as they do to
the Truth of Jesus Christ: 1. To assert the worth and excellency of it with as
high an hand, with as much zeal, vigor, and vehemence of spirit, as they
intend to the Great Truths of Jesus Christ, though they make no difference (in
words) between the one, and the other. For otherwise, the solemn Covenant they
speak of, being only matter of engagement, not of assertion or opinion, I
know not what testimony it is capable of: unless they will call a regular,
full, and through observation of it, a testimony unto it: which is a testimony
(if testimony it be) unpossible to be rendered unto it in this, or in any other
book, or writing whatsoever; the best part of this testimony consisting in
going before one another in a real, not verbal, reformation. But what it is
they mean, or would have others to conceive they should mean, by calling
their piece, a testimony unto our Solemn League and Covenant, I solemnly and
seriously profess is above the reach of my understanding, or learning,
reasonably to imagine. Have I not then reason to doubt, whether any of those
men of renown, and not rather some petty Scribe, was the Compiler of it?

3. Whereas to amplify and enrich their Title, they add (over and above the
former expressions, of a Testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ, and, And to
our Solemn League and Covenant) these words: As also against the Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times, and the Toleration of them; I
submissively demand of them, whether there be any thing more, any further
matter of consequence held forth in these words, above what was contained in
those first words, A testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ. If so, I desire to
know where, or in what part of the book, they give testimony unto the Truth of
Jesus Christ? and again; where, and in what other part of it, they give
testimony against Errors and Heresies? I can find no other Testimony given in
it to the Truth of Jesus Christ, but only that (which I confess is very
unproperly so called) which stands in a citation of certain passages, or
sayings out of other men's writings, imperiously sentenced for Errors and
Heresies; as if the Chair of Papal infallibility were of late translated from
Rome to Sion-Colledge. If not, they shall do honestly and well in the next
Impression of the book, (though it had been more honesty to have done it in
the first) to leave out of their Title, the false flourish, of, A testimony to
the Truth of Jesus Christ, as also those words, And to our solemn League and
Covenant (there being no such thing in all the book, as any testimony
thereunto) and content themselves only with calling it, A Testimony against
Errors and Heresies, only mollifying it with this soft and Christian
explication [ as we count and call Errors and Heresies.] For certainly there
are in these papers, that are so called, Errors many, and Heresies many; which
yet have nothing of the nature, but only the names of both. So then these
words in the Title, As also against errors, etc. being so merely and broadly
tautologicall and empty, are a ground of conjecture unto me, that the men
prenamed with their compeeres, are wholly innocent from the offense committed
in making the book.

4. Whereas the Title is yet further extended by the addition of these words,
And the Toleration of them; which is a mere nonens, a thing not in being, I
cannot conceive that the judgments or parts of the said persons should so
far fail them, as to appear in print, and that (...), with a testimony in
their pens against that, of which God made the world; I mean, nothing, or that
which is not; I might further add, nor is ever like to be. For if a captious
pen had the expression in hand, it would find no difficulty at all in carrying
it into such a sense, which would import a calumniating insinuation against the
Parliament, as if they were so inclinable to grant an universal Toleration of
all Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies; that unless they were counterbalanced
with the fear of displeasing these men's zeal, burning so vehemently in
opposition thereunto, there were no other means under heaven to take them off
from it; yea it may not without some ground of probability be conceived; that
the Authors of these papers proclaim so loud their enmity against Toleration,
to make the friendship of all lukewarm and formal professors round about them
(being the great bulk of the Kingdom) who know not what to do, what shift to
make for a Religion, if the State be not merciful unto them in providing one
or other for them. But as far as yet I have understood, or do for the
present apprehend the Genius or temper of the Parliament, in reference to an
universal Toleration, I have reason to judge them by many degrees further from
it, than to stand in need of the importune heat of these men, to quench their
inclinations to it.

5. The Book it self being every whit as capable of bearing the Title of, A
testimony against Truth, sound and orthodox opinions, as* against Errors and
Heresies, (as has already, in part, and will more fully appear hereafter) it
is a piece of Incredibility to me, that men of that note and interest, of which
the persons named, with several others of the same line, are known to be,
should so prevanicate with their respective reputations, as to prefix a
single-coloured title before a parti-colored book.

6. Whereas all the Errors mustered together in the book, are said (in the
title page) to be collected out of their Authors own books alleged in the
margin, and yet (in fair and full contradiction hereunto) are said page 2. to
be the very dregs and spawn of those old accursed Heresies, which have been
already condemned, dead, buried, and rotten in their graves long ago, and are
now by evil men and seducers, raked out and revived (by which this present
generation however is fairly acquitted from being the authors of them,
Revivers being no Authors) I cannot so far undervalue the worth of the
persons named, as to judge them conscious of so gross an oversight, or
(consequently) interessed in the composure of the piece.

7. Whereas the subscribers of the book, style themselves (in the title page)
not partitively, some of the Ministers, but collectively, The Ministers of
Christ within the Province of London, there being to my knowledge, several
Ministers of Christ within the Province of London, and those not of the
abhorred order of Independency neither, and yet commensurable too, both for
parts and worth, with the tallest of the subscribers, though not equal (it may
be) to some of them in Church livings by two or three, for whom God (it
seems) has provided a better thing than to suffer them to fall into the
snare of so unworthy a Subscription, I must dispense very far with my
thoughts concerning the goodness of the consciences of the men I have named,
with their fellows, to judge them so much as acquainted with the first page of
the book. I cannot so far suspect their skill in Grammar, as to suppose them
ignorant of the difference between some of the Ministers of Christ, and, the
Ministers of Christ (simply,) nor would I willingly suspect the goodness of
their consciences so far, as to to think they would wittingly, and only to
ferve a turn, as viz. to make the concurrence seem the greater and more entire
in the eyes of their simple ones, write the one, when as the truth would only
bear the other.

8 Whereas they entitle their book, A Testimony to our solemn league and
covenant, and page 28. acknowledge, that neither is this, nor any other Oath
otherwise to be interpreted, than according to the common, plain, and true
Grammatical sense of it, confident I am, that according to such an
interpretation as this of the said Covenant, they have not done any thing at
all in a regular and due pursuance of it in this piece, but several things
most notoriously and palpably against it, and with the violation and breach of
it.

First, all they can with any tolerable color pretend to be here done in
pursuance of their Covenant, may be recalled to these two heads. 1. That which
is pretended to be done in order to the extirpation of Errors, Heresies, etc.
2. Their pleading for Presbyterian government. Now (for the first) that here is
nothing done in any regular or due way for the extirpation of Errors, Heresies,
etc. is evident: For what is it they do in order hereunto? To scrapple
together a few sayings, or passages out of several men's books here and there,
without taking any notice, or giving any account of their true sense and
meaning in them; yea, and some of these as fair, clear, obvious Truths, as
ever themselves delivered any; yea sometimes to falsify their sayings, by
leaving out some material words in the bodies of them* and only to clamor and
cry out upon them, and call them, horrid and prodigious opinions, (as page 23.)
infamous and pernicious errors, (as page 5.) the very dregs and spawn of
those old accursed heresies, etc. (page 4.) Antiscripturisme, Popery,
Arrianisme, Socinianisme, Arminianisme, etc. (as page 33.) I say only, to
pour out floods of such reproachful and foul language as this, upon men's
sayings or opinions, without so much as levying one word of an argument against
them to convince the Assertors or maintainers of them, or without answering so
much as any one reason or ground, upon which they build such assertions, is a
course and practice, not only irrelative altogether to the extirpation of
Errors and Heresies, but very pertinent and proper for the further propagation
and radication of them. For when men shall speak evil of that, as an Error, or
Heresy, against which they have nothing of moment, or which is solid, to
oppose, the Assertors may very reasonably suppose, that they speak this evil of
it, not out of judgment, as knowing it to be an error, but out of affection
only, not being willing it should be owned for a Truth. In which case they
cannot lightly but be further confirmed in their error (if error it be) than
before.

Again 2o. when men shall rend or tear a parcel of words out of the body of a
large and entire Discourse, which may probably carry some face or appearance of
an hard or unsound saying, which notwithstanding by the Authors explication is
reconciled, made fully and fairly consistent with the Truth, without so much as
mentioning or intimating the Authors explication of himself in these words,
and then to insult and stamp with the foot, and cry out, Error, Heresy,
Blasphemy, Anti-scripturisme, Arminianisme, and I know not what, will any man
call this a way, method, or means, for the extirpation of Error and Heresy?
and not rather a direct course to harden and strengthen men in both?

3. When men for want of such sayings, which are erroneous and heretical
indeed, in the writings of such men, whom their carnal interests call upon
them to expose, to the uttermost of their power, to the public infamy and
reproach of being counted Erroneous and Heretical; shall pitch upon such
passages and sayings for their purpose, not which are ambiguous, or of a
doubtful interpretation, and so capable of a sinister or erroneous sense, as
well as of a good, but which are pergnant and generally acknowledged truths,
yea and fairly consistent with their own principles; I refer to the
judgments and consciences of all men, who lie not under the sad judgment of
selfe-condemnation, whether there be any thing regular, or of any probable
tendency in this, for the extirpation of Errors and Heresies; and not rather
much, which directly tends to the further radication of them. They acknowledge
and profess unto the world, (page 28.) that they still stand as firmly engaged
to the real performance of their covenant with their uttermost endeavors, as
at the first taking of it. I appeal to their own consciences; let these judge,
whether barely to cite a few men's sayings, and several of these rational,
orthodox, and sound (according to their Authors sense and explication) without
so much as showing or pointing, where, or in what part of these sayings, the
supposed error should lie, be the utmost of their endeavors for the
extirpation of Errors and Heresies. If it be, then are they most unworthy their
places in the Ministry: if it be not, then are they covenant-breakers by their
own confession. And whether the Authors of the Subscribed piece now under
examination, have therein done any more, than what has been now mentioned in
order to the extirpation of errors and heresies, I am freely willing to make
themselves Judges.

The night is too far spent for them to think, that men even of ordinary
judgment or consideration, will now measure or judge of Error and Truth, only
by their Magisteriall votes, or imperious decisions, either because they are a
multitude, or because they lay claim to Moses Chair, calling themselves, the
Ministers of Christ. Indeed when it was midnight, the gross darkness of
Popish ignorance and superstition as yet spread upon the face of the nation, it
was enough for a Province of Priests, or Clergymen, gravely met together in
the Name and Authority of their sacred Unction, to stigmatize what opinions
they pleased, for Errors and Heresies, and so to render them unclean, and not
lawful to be received or believed by their blind Proselites. But the
Dayspring from on high has now (blessed be God) visited this nation, and men
have put away those childish things from them, to believe as the Church (i. as
the Clergy) believes: to call Error, whatsoever 52. Churchmen, though in
conjunction with threescore Church Livings, or more, shall baptize by the name
of Error: to build their Faith, and soul-provisions for eternity, upon the
sandy and slippery foundations of the judgments (or affections rather) of such
men, who have put the stumbling block of their iniquity, (I mean this present
world, and self-interests) before their faces. These things considered, evident
it is, that the Architects of the building called, A Testimony to the truth of
Jesus Christ, etc. have not laid so much as one stone aright in all this pile,
for their purpose of extirpating Errors or Heresies. Therefore, as to this
point, they have done nothing at all in pursuance of their Covenant, but
several things (as has been showed) to the violation of it. The Covenant
binds them to endeavor the extirpation of Errors and Heresies: and they have
endeavored, or at least directly acted toward, the establishment and further
rooting of them.

Secondly, neither have they pursued their Covenant (according to the plain and
true Grammatical sense of it) in pleading as they do for Presbyteriall
government. For first, it is the Assertion and Confession of that great
Hyperaspistes of this government, Mr. Edwards, that the Covenant of the
Kingdoms does not tie us to the government of the Church of Scotland Antap.
page 259.
. If not so, hardly then to Presbyteriall Government. And secondly, whether he
had confessed it or no, the truth it self hereof had been never the further
out of the way. For certain it is, that there is not so much as any one
syllable, word, clause, or sentence in it, by which, according to the plain and
true Grammatical sense, it engages any man to the contending for, or
endeavoring of Presbytery. Presbyterian Government is but Apochrypha in
respect of the Covenant. And though with Magisteriall confidence enough they
conclude (but without premises) page 24. that Presbyteriall government (truly
so called) by Presbyteries and Synods, is that Government which is most
agreeable to the mind of Jesus Christ revealed in the Scripture, yet as if
their consciences had not taken the expression well at their hands, by that
time they come to page 34. they abate of their former reckoning half in half.
For here, speaking of the Government they had declared for, which (say they) we
CONCEIVE to be most agreeable to Scripture. But upon these terms, they that
should declare for the Independent government conceiving it to be most
agreeable to the Scripture, should pursue their engagement by the Covenant,
every whit as much as they. Therefore in whatsoever they say or plead in their
Testimony for Presbyterial government, they do nothing at all in any pursuance
of their Covenant, according to the plain and true Grammatical sense of it,
but only in pursuance of such an interpretation or sense of it, which lying
most commodious for their honor, profit, and ease, has by the mediation of
their affections, prepared it self a way into their judgments, and has there
obtained the pre-eminence above all others: it being very incident to men, to
suppose (as the Apostle expresses it) gain, godliness. 1 Timothy, 6. 5.
i. in all matters of question and dispute, to judge that most agreeable to the
mind of Jesus Christ in the Scriptures, which is best consisting with worldly
ends. So that howsoever they flourish in the front of their book, as if they
meant to give such an high and honorable Testimony to their Solemn league and
Covenant; and again in the reere, as if they had accordingly avouched that
Covenant which they have sworn to God, Page 34.
in this piece; yet the clear truth is, that their flourish, is all their
fight; they have not struck so much as one stroke with their pen in any
legitimate or direct prosecution of their engagement by it.

And though it had been no great work of super-erogation in case they had done
ten times more than now they have, of such a tendency and import, especially
upon such a goodly frontispiece of pretense, being also numerous enough (if not
many to spare, and of super-abounding abilities for such a work yet had they
not violated this their Covenant, and that ten times over, yea and this in the
most notorious and shameless manner (in stead of keeping it) they had
consulted much better both for their credits and consciences, than now they
have done. The truth is, they have made more breaches upon their Covenant in
this little piece, than can readily be brought to account, or ranged into form.
For how often do they dissemble and prevaricate with their professions? And
again, after all their shameless and most notorious prevarications, and
unconscionable dealings, how do they in the close wipe their mouths (with you
know who,) professing that all that they had done was in the integrity of their
hearts to discharge their duty conscientiously, in appearing for God, his
Truth, and cause of Religion. (p. 34.) But

1o. Was it in the integrity of your hearis to discharge your duty
conscientiously, that you charge him with errors against the divine authority
of the Scriptures (as you do page 5.) who you cannot but know has bent
himself with the uttermost of his endeavoure for the vindication of their
Divine Authority, yea and who you have reason to judge has labored in this
argument, as much, if not more, and this with as much faithfulness, as any of
you all? How did not your hearts smite yo in drawing up this bloody charge
against him, lest that very book of his, which you had in your hands when you
did it, and which you cite in your margin, should rise up in judgment against
you in the great day, considering that your consciences could not but tell you,
that he had dealt faithfully, thoroughly, and sincerely, in pleading the cause
of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures therein? Is this your real
Reformation, to cry out Midnight when the Sun shines in his might upon your
faces?

2. Was it to discharge your duty conscientiously, that you cite some of my
words barely, suppressing (craftily) my sense and explication of them, being
near at hand, as you do twice (for failing in your wickedness) page 5. of your
book? Or do I not, plainly, clearly, and distinctly enough, declare unto the
world (in my Treatise concerning the Divine Authority of the Scriptures) in
what sense I hold the Scriptures, whether Translations, or Originalls, to be
the word of God, and consequently the foundation of Christian Religion, and in
what not? Let the 13th and 15th pages of my said Treatise be looked upon.
Therefore for these men, to cite these words from my pen, Questionless no
writing whatsoever, whether Translation or Originalls, are the foundation of
Christian Religion, which clearly relate in the passage where they stand, to a
sense a little before explained; without citing, or so much as intimating those
other words of mine, wherein (in a true and orthodox sense) I assert them to be
of Divine Authority, and none other but the word of God Divine Authority of
Ser. asserted, p. 13.
with more to this purpose) can it be by the mediation of any charity
whatsoever conceived, to be any other appearing for God, his truth, and the
cause of Religion, than theirs was, who appeared before Pilate to testify
against Christ, that he should say, I am able to destroy the Temple of God,
and to build it in three days Mat. 26. 61.
?

3. Was it in the integrity of your hearts, and to discharge your duty
conscienciously, etc. that you must needs make it an Error or Heresy (as you
do, page 12.) to say, that it were a needless thing for Satan to blind the
eyes of natural men, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ
should shine unto them, if they had not eyes to see, and to receive this
glorious light of the Gospel, when it was declared unto them? Is this to
appear for God, or his truth, to appear against evident reason, yea common
sense it self? Is there any need of charging a stone, that it do not speak;
or a deaf man, that he do not hear; or a blind man, that he do not see? Must
we needs speak nothing but nonsense, and inconsistencies, to be free from
Errors and Heresies? Is this the Suprcma lex in the Republique of Presbytery?

4. I beseech you, Brethern, answer heartily, and in the integrity of your
hearts, where, in what phrase or clause, of the period insueing, lies the
Error, or Heresy; for you charge it with one, or both, page 12. If God should
not make men capable of believing, I mean, indue men with such principles,
abilities, or gifts, of reason, judgment, memory, understanding, by the
diligens improvement whereof, they might come to be convinced of a willingness
or readiness in him to receive them into grace and favor, upon their
Repentance and turning to him (upon which conviction, that Repentance and
turning unto God, which we speak of, follows) they which are condemned, would
have their mouths against Gods proceedings with them thereunto, and furnished
with an excuse? The period (setting the parenthesis aside, which I suppose is
innocent) is but one plain hypotheticall or connex proposition. Now though I
confess that consequences in such propositions may be weak and false, as well as
categoricall assertions; yet amongst all the old accursed Heresies, so long
since condemned (as you speak) and which you say are now raked out of their
graves, and revived, I remember none that was ever put into any man's roll or
catalogue of Heresies, in an Hypotheticall form. If your reading or memory
will instruct me better, you shall find me a Disciple tractable enough. But for
the consequence in the proposition rehearsed, which you put down in your
Catalogue for an Error or Heresy, it is built upon this principle, or maxim:
that a true plea of want of power for the performance of what is commanded, is
an excuse in the case of nonperformance. If this principle fail, the said
consequence is weak: but if strong and pregnant, the consequence is partaker
with it in both. But however, doubtless neither the integrity of your hearts,
nor the goodness of your consciences would have suffered in the least, though
you had not compelld a poor plain hypotheticall proposition, which never did,
nor meant, either you, or any other man, the least harm, to bear the cross
of being numbered amongst Errors or Heresies.

5. I desire also some ingenious shadow (at least) of a reason from you, how it
relates to the conscientious discharge of your duty, to cite an whole page
together (besides what you fraudulently leave out, as not serving your turn;
and what you cut off, by an etc.) consisting of three or four and thirty
lines, under the name and notion of one and the same error. Was it to
represent me to your Reader as a man of monstrous and prodigious errors? one
of which could not be expressed or contained in fewer words, than would fill an
whole page in 4o; nor this without the interposall of an et caetera, and a
false finger besides? Or was it to edify the world in the knowledge and
consideration of your great zeal, and unwearied pains, to discover errors; so
that rather than one of these should escape you, you would undergo the labor
of transcribing whole pages together? Or was it for fear, in case you had
determinately pitched upon any one line or sentence, you might more easily have
missed the error, and have beaten a bush, where the bird was not? Or was it in
hope, that within so large a circuit or compass of ground, your Reader possibly
might find two or three errors, though your selves could not well tell where
to find any? But if you be unwilling to render unto me a reason of this your
extraordinary Quotation, give me leave to render one unto you. I suppose the
Reason might well be, because in that wherein you magnified your selves, God
had a mind to be above you for the propagating of his Truth. For whereas you
(it is like) meditated an unusual Citation to show the world a more than
ordinary error; God might suffer you to take this compass of matter, that so
that great and precious Truth of his, which you call error, contained therein,
might be presented from your hand with so much the more advantage to be
discerned, acknowledged, and received by men; yea by such men, who probably
might never have had the opportunity to have seen so much of it, but by means
of the book.

(...). Doubtless the passage though injuriously dealt with (as we shall show
presently) and purloin'd of some of its strength, toward the beginning, yet
carries light in abundance in it for the conviction of any ingenuous and
unprejudiced man, that what is asserted therein, is truth.

6. Would not the integrity of your hearts to discharge your duty
conscientiously, suffer you to pass by similitudes, comparisons, and
resemblances, but that these must be crucified too for errors and heresies?
Doubtless never were parables or similitudes arrested, or attainted of error
or heresy, until now. A considerable part of that long error we spoke of,
cited by you in folio (p. 11.) consists of a similitude. When you make errors
and heresies of similitudes, you give us just occasion to think, that you are
not so much troubled with some men's errors and heresies, when you find them,
as you are with seeking errors and heresies in other men, until you find
them. But they that will find knots in rushes, are necessitated to knit them
themselves. But I beseech you, tell me seriously: is it matter of conscience
indeed with you, to punish the innocent with the guilty? If so, I am not for
your Laws, nor Commonwealth. But

7. What say you to the mangling, maiming, and deforming the sayings of your
Brethren, when you cite them, by leaving out very emphaticall and material
words, and clauses; yea such Scripture expressions, as you found in them? Or
do you not in citing the passage (lately pointed at) with which you are
pleased to adorn your Catalogue of errors about natural man's free will (p.
11.) after these words, (line 11.) in a way of justice, leave out all this [
and according to the Law, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, this man
having cut off the legs of another.] Were you afraid, that the passage would
not look so like an error, as you would have it, if any lineament of
Scripture should be seen in the face of it? What you express in your
Testimony, you say, (p. 3.) that you express not with a bitter, but with a
bleeding heart: but what you leave out, relating to this, and to other passages
cited by you (of which notice has been already taken) I fear you leave out,
rather with a bitter, yea and bloody, than bleeding heart.

8. Do you in the integrity of your heart, and cut of conscience to appear
for God and his Truth, judge it an Error, or Heresy, to say, that if a
Doctrine be asserted by Paul and Peter, it ought to suffer no disparagement for
being found among the Tenets of Arminius? For of this assertion of mine you
make an Error ( page 13.) unless the words imprisoned in a parenthesis, which
are these, [ as most assuredly it is] must bear the blame. Do you not want
Errors and Heresies to complete your catologue and roll, when you are
necessitated to muster and take in such as these? Are not most of your own
Doctrines found amongst the Tenets of Arminius? Some of you (I suppose) cannot
be ignorant, but that they are: but do you therefore judge them Errors or
Heresies? yet

9. The testimony now under contest, is in nothing more unlike, at least more
unworthy, the Ministers of the Province of London, than that importune, and
most unnatural strain in it, which presents sayings and opinions, for
Errors and Heresies, which are fairly and fully consistent with their own
principles and grounds. Hereof many instances might readily be produced, were
not prolixity inconsistent with our present design. Is not that of the
Apostle, Other foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11.
one of their principles, and maine grounds? and yet (p. 5.) they make me
erroneous, for not granting another foundation besides Jesus Christ, viz.
Translations and Originalls: which notwithstanding, sensu sano, I do assert
also for foundations. Again, is it not one of their own Principles, that no
act performed by man, can be the foundation of Christian Religion? Yet page 5.
they stigmatize me as an erroneous person, for affirming the act of Believing
the English Scriptures to be the word of God, to be no foundation of Christian
Religion. Yet again: is not that of Paul, That was not first, which is
spiritual, but that which is natural; and then that which is spiritual, 1
Cor. 15. 46.
another of their principles? yet ( page 14.) they represent it for an error
in me, to say; doubtless men are natural men, before they are sprirituall,
and supernatural. Once more, is it not a ground and principle of their own;
that men are but natural men, till Faith comes and makes them spiritual, or
supernatural: yet they condemn it ( page 14.) for an error in me to affirm,
that we cannot be made spiritual or supernatural, but by believing. Yet once
more; Is it not one of their own principles, that God has promised favor,
acceptance, yea and salvation it self, to those, who shall believe; yet they
make me a transgressor in point of error, for saying, that if it be possible
for natural men to believe, then may they do such things, whereunto God has
by way of promise annexed grace and acceptance. Yet once again: I suppose it
is a principle or supposition of theirs; that the Apostle all along the 11th
chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, speaks of such a Faith, which is true
and saving: and yet (p. 15.) they make me an Erroneous offender, for saying,
that to believe, 1. that God is: 2. that he is the rewarder of those who
diligently seek him, is all the Faith or belief that the Apostle makes simply
and absolutely necessary to bring a man unto God. 1. into grace and favor with
him. Caetera de genere hoc adeo sunt multa, etc.

10. Certainly it cannot be out of the integrity of your hearts to discharge
your duty conscienciously, etc. to dissemble, connive at, and take no notice
of, the very self same opinions published, printed, countenanced, recommended,
by men of your own Interest and party, yea by some amongst your selves,
honoring such with the titles of Orthodox and sound men notwithstanding, for
which you most unworthily, and contra-conscienciously defame others, who do
not syncretize with you, laboring in the very fire day after day, in your
preachings, in your printings, in your conversings, to render them the
off-scourings and abominations of men. Let all the passages and sayings, which
with all your double diligence, and the help of an evil eye, you have
discovered and found in all my writings, and presented upon the Theater of your
testimony, as containing matter of error about natural man's free will, and
power to good supernatural, be drawn together, and the rigidest extraction
made of whatsoever imagination it self is able to imagine erroneous in them;
there will be found the very same spirit and quintiscence of error (if yet it
were error) clothed too with visibility enough, in that discourse of Mr. John
Ball, entitled, A treatise of the Covenant of Grace, lately published by Mr
Simeon Ash (one of the Subscribers.) recommended to the Christian Reader by
three of them more, viz. Daniel Gawdry, Edmond Calamie, Anthony Burgess
(besides two more of the Assembly.) The said Author, p. 44. of this Discourse,
writes thus. No man is hindered from believing, through the difficulty, or
unreasonablenesse of the command, or through his own simple infirmity, as
being willing and desirous to believe, but not able; which inability deserves
pity: but his inability is of corruption and wilfulness: he does not believe,
because he will not: he is unable, because he does not covet or desire, which
is inexcusable. Is there not every whit as much power, and freedom of will
here attributed unto natural men, as can be wrested or wrung out of any, or
all those erroneous passages of mine, (erroneously so called) which are cited
in the Provincial Testimony? Do I there say any whit more, or does Mr Ball
here say any whit less, than that in case natural men were not wilful, they
have a sufficiency of power to believe? And that it may not be pretended that
this passage fell from this Authors pen at unawares, or that the contents of it
were not his settled and bestresolved judgment, you shall find the very same
things, and almost in the very same words, re-asserted by him, page 226. of the
same Discourse. Are those opinions erroneous, or heretical in Independents,
which are orthodox and Canonical in Presbyterians? Or if they be as erroneous
in the latter, as the former, why is not I. B. brought upon the Stage, as well
as I. G. in the habit and reproach of an Erroneous and Heretical man? Yea and
why do not Simeon Ash for publishing, and Daniel Gawdry, Edmond Calamie, and
Anthony Burgess, (together with Edward Reynolds, and Thomas Hill) for
countenancing and recommending erroneous and heretical opinions, bear their
proportions also in the Censure and shame? Accessaries deserve to suffer, as
well as principalls. It is said indeed of the Donatists, that they disparaged
and condemned all other Christians, but were indulgent in point of censure,
toward their own Donatistae qui praese omnes alios Christianos conde^nabant,
se veritate^ censurae in suos relaxabant. P. Mart. Loc. p. 785.
: and of Eunomius the Heretic, that he bare with all manner of wickedness in
his own seat Eunomius suis Sectatoribus quodvis scelus indulgebat.
Are not these Sons of Presbytery to be found in the same condemnation? Is
their love any whit more extensive, than only to cover the multitude of their
own sins? or their zeal, than to censure and punish the sins of other men? Is
this their faithfulness unto God, for which they seem afraid ( page 34.)
lest the world should frown upon them? Or is this the fruit and product of
their glorious Profession ( page 5.) that as Ministers of Christ, and Stewards
of the mysteries of God, in zeal to Gods glory -- from their very hearts and
souls, they utterly detest and abhor all the errors, heresies, and
blasphemies whatsoever swarming amongst us in these times, howsoever minced,
masked, and palliated, and by WHOMSOEVEREMBRACED and COVNTENANCED? Can the
children of this Profession be ignorant, that there are amongst themselves
discrepances in judgments, and contrarieties in opinions? Or does not this
plainly imply, that there is apprehension of error in the respective
Dissenters amonst them? yea it is famously known, that some of the ablest and
most learned amongst them, differ from the greatest part, if not from the
generality, of his fellows, in matter of opinion, and that about a subject of
as high a nature, as any within the whole compass of Christian Religion. If
then in zeal to Gods glory, they from their very hearts and souls utterly
detest and abhor, all the errors, heresies, and blasphemies amongst us, by
WHOMSOEVER embraced and countenanced, how comes it to pass, that they do
not declare with the same acrimonie of spirit, and height of indignation,
against their own errors (mutually so believed) wherein they rise up, like
Lions, against the supposed errors of other men? Brethren, give me leave to be
serious with you: I believe you are straightened in your own bowels, in
comparison of the enlargment which you have in mine, (though I fear, you
believe nothing less.) I hear of many complaints, and sad regrets from you; as
that the Ministers, and the Ministry of Christ, are of later times, much
despised: your Auditories, much depopulated: your respects with the people,
brought well nigh to a morsel of bread. I beseech you consider what I shall
say unto you: has he that voluntarily puts his singer in the fire, any cause
to complain, that the fire burns him, and puts him to pain? Or he that sowes
only tares in his field, to find himself agrieved, that the earth makes him
not a return in wheat? Or is it any wonder at all, if, when under a pretense
of so much zeal to Gods glory, such integrity of heart, such
conscienciousnesse of appearing for God, his Truth, and cause hf Religion, such
unpartiall detestation of all errors, heresies, and blasphemies amongst us, by
I plead for no error, truly so called: nor for any persons, worthy blame and
censure. Let malefactors and thieves be crucified, but let not christ be
crucified* with them.
whomsoever embraced and countenanced (with many such like glorious and
glittering professions and protestations more, wherewith your Testimony is
garnished) you do in the very face of all these professions, all things
contary, stigmatize the Truths of God, with the odious and hateful names, of
infamous and pernicious Errors and Heresies, set your selves to pull down with
both your hands the precious names and reputations of the faithful servants of
God, you Brethren, and this without any cause at all given by them, report
their sayings by halves, leaving out their explications, on purpose to defame
them, represent such opinions and assertions as erroneous and heretical in
them, which you allow for orthodox and sound in your selves, exasperate and
incense the sword of the Magistrate against such as are peaceable in the Land,
and wish you no harm; soment divisions, multiply distractions, obstruct the
quiet composure and settlement of things in the land, recompencing no degree of
all this unworthiness, with any proportionable or considerable good; Is it any
marveil (I say) if, going thus to work, coupling such vile and unworthy actions
with such precious and specious professions, you sink and fall in the hearts of
men daily more and more? Know this for a certain, that the hearts and
consciences of men will never be able to rise up before you, and call you
Blessed, unles they be helped up by the hand of some visible worth, and
excellency in your ways. Following showrs of uprightness and sincerity from
your hearts and hands together, will make your crowns of honor to flourish
again upon your heads; which otherwise will certainly languish, fade, and die
away. In the mean time (to return to our business in hand) though I find the
best of you no better, than a bryar unto me, in pursuing me with the out*
cries of your pens for a man of I know not how many, nor of what, errors; yet
are there four men amongst your 52. who have appeared in this ostracisme
against me, to their deeper shame, and confusion of face, than others. For
what? they who publish and print books of errors, they who countenance and
recommend books of errors, to be read; can these men find in their hearts to
lift up their heel against those, who shall receive them from their hand?

Delicti fies idem reprehensor, and Author?
At scelus hoc meriti pondus, and instar, habet. i.
What (man!) the Author, and rough Censor both
Of the same crime? the crime, if crime it be,
Which I committed have, yet merit does
Praise, and approvement, not reproof, from thee.
Mr. Ash, Mr. Candrey, Mr. Calamie, Mr. Burgess? How could these names of men
anoint Mr. John Ball with oil, and salt me withfire, only for speaking what
he speaks, yea and what themselves speak in him, or in that book of his,
which they recommend unto me (amongst others) Let the Sun of Christian
ingenuity be ashamed, and the Moon of humane candor be abashed. For
(questionless) such a thing has not been heard of, either amongst the sons
of Nature, or of God, for many generations.

But for the opinions, or opinion rather; (for though the citations be many,
yet the error, if error if must needs be, contained in in them all, is, for
substance, but one) which this grand Subscription voteth an Error in me about
natural man's free will, and power to good supernatural; I desire the whole
Covent, or College of the two and fifty, and all that dogmatize with them
against the said opinion, to take knowledge, 1. That it is no new or strange
doctrine in the Reformed Churches: 2. That it was a doctrine taught and
avouched by some of the Reformers themselves; and those not of the least note,
either for Learning or Religion. One instance in either shall suffice for the
present.

For the former, that the Doctrine condemned for Error by the Error-makers of
the Province of London, is the publickly-received doctrine of the reformed
Churches within the Province of Orleance a In quo nihil, quod Ecclesarum
nostraru^ orthodoxaru^ fidei ^repugnet, repe^imus; e^que nomine dig number publica
luce judicavi. mus.
in France, appears from several passages in a Treatise of Paulus Testardus,
Pastor of the reformed Church at Blois, entitled, (...), Sen Synopsis de
natura and gratia; the said passages being compared with the approbation of the
book printed in the beginning of it: The tenor whereof imports, that the said
book was ordered by a Synod of the reformed Churches in the said Province, to
be perused and read by two of the Ministers (there named) who give this
testimony of it upon their reading, that they find nothing in it repugnant to
the doctrine of their Orthodox Churches, and in that respect they judge it
worthy publication.

The said Author in the treatise mentioned, having (p. 83, 84, 85. etc.
asserted and cleared three several ways or means, whereby God calls men unto
communion in that covenant of grace, which he has made with mankind, the
first, by Providence; the second, by the Ministry of the Word; the third, by
the effectual workings of his Spirit. P. 91. he affirms, That in all these
ways or methods of calling men, God does not only show unto the sinner what
his duty is to do, but also exhibits and gives unto every man thus invited and
called, power wherewith to perform it, and be saved, if he will: insomuch, that
if he that is invited [or called] in the most general [and lowest] way of
invitation of all, be not saved, he is altogether inexcuseable before God. This
the Apostle Paul teaches expressly: That which may be known of God (says he)
is manifested in them, or unto them ( meaning the Gentiles) for God has made
it manifest, etc. that they might be without excuse. But certainly, excuseable
they had been, if they had been willing, and only wanted power Qod in omnibus
vocandi rationibus, deus peccatori, quid debeat non modo ostendit, sed and omni
invitato, vocato, det posse illud praestare, and salvari, ^i velit: adeo ut si
non salvaturis, qui generalissima tantu^ ratione invitatus est, fit prorsus
inexcusabilis cora^ Deo. Id express* docet Paulus, (...) (inquit) (...)
manifestu^* factum est in ipsis (gentibus scilicet) Deus enim manifestu^ secit,
etc* ut inexcusabilis ipsi sint. At certe si, etsi maxim voluissent, non
potuissent, ^uisse^t excusabiles. P. T^st^r dus, Synopsis. Thesi 121. p. 91.
There is not an hairs breadth of power to superuatur all good, more
attributed by me unto natural men, than is clearly, and above all controversy
asserted in this passage; which yet is avouched (as ye have heard) by two
sufficient witnesses, and these of the approved order of Presbytery it self, to
be the doctrine of the Orthodox Reformed Churches within the Province of
Orleance in France. But whereas my London Subscribers transcribe so many
passages of mine under their Title, or Head, of, Errors about natural man's
free will, and c. let all these passages be sifted, from the first to the last,
by lines, words, syllables, and letters, yet will there not be found the least
or lightest infinuation of any freeness of will in natural men to any good
that is supernatural: yea they that have been the most constant and
intelligent hearers of me in the course of my Ministry, cannot but testify on
my behalf, that I have still upon all occasions, resolved the condemnation and
perishing of men into the most miserable and strange servility, bondage and
thraldom of the will to corruption and vanity: yea and have urged and pressed
the necessity of the grace of God for turning the captivity of it, and setting
it at liberty. Therefore, O Province of London, study thy Teachers, that thou
may know what, and what not, to learn of them. It were easy to draw forth
many more passages out of the Treatise specified, of the same import and
inspiration with that which has been produced; but this is sufficient for
these two ends and purposes;

1o. To demonstrate, that the authority of a Province of Ministers, though all
receiving the honor of Orthodox from one another, is yet a miserable support
or stay for the judgments or consciences of men, in matters of doctrine. That
which is asserted for Orthodox and sound by a Province of Ministers in France,
is importunely censured and condemned for an infamous horrid, and pernicious
Error, or Heresy, by a Province of the same profession in England.

2o. To show, with how good a conscience the Subscribers jointly affirm, (as
they do, page 3. that they find, to the abundant satisfaction of their
judgment, and rejoicing of their spirits, the confession of faith humbly
advised by the Assembly of Divines, singularly pious, prudent, sound, and
agreeable to the Scriptures, and CONFESSIONS OF OTHER CHURCHES. If it be
agreeable with the Confession of those Churches lately mentioned, they have as
much, or more, need to confess their fault, as their faith.

As to the second particular, wherein I affirmed, that that Doctrine which
these men call infamous, pernicious, horrid Error and Heresy, was also taught
to the full extent and compass of what I deliver in it, by some of the chief
Reformers themselves, it appears sufficiently by this ensuing passage from M.
Bucer, who in his Enarration of the Epistle to the Romans, chap. 2. verse. 14.
writes thus: Hic duo observemus; Deum nullis unquam saeculis homines doctrina
salutis destituisse: proinde, quicuuque unquam perierunt, sua culpa periisse.
Naturam ita perfundit sua Iuce Deus, ut hi tantum a justitia alieni maneant,
qui eam ultro a se rejiciunt.
Here let us observe two things; that God in no age whatsoever, left men
destitute of the doctrine of salvation: Therefore whoever at any time perished,
perished through their own default [or neglect.] For God so bedeweth (or
washes) Nature with his light, that they only remain strangers unto
righteousness, who willingly, and of their own accord cast it from them. There
are at this day nations not a few, to whom the Gospel of Christ is not
sincerely preached: Others there are, who hear nothing of it. But if these did
not voluntarily put from themselves the desire of righteousness, the Lord
(questionless) would so animate them with his Spirit, that they should, or
might, perform the things of the Law, commit themselves wholly to his (grace,
or) goodness, and do unto their neighbors what they would that they should
do unto them. Hence it would come to pass, that God would sooner send an
Angel unto them, as Sunt and hodie Gentes non paucae, quibus Evangelium Christi
haud quaquam sinceriter praedicatur: sunt quae de eo nihil prorsus audiunt* Hi
autem si non ultro justitiae studium repudiarent, Dominus indubie spiritu suo
sic eos animaret, ut quae legis sunt praestarent, committerent se totos ipsius
bonitati, proximis facerent quae cucupiunt fieri sibi. Hinc fierer, ut Deus
citius Angelum eis mitteret, uti fecit Cornelio, quam ut ignorare eos Christu^
suum pateretur. Sed dum impie ingrati iniquitate sua detinent revelatam jam
ipsis veritatem, merentur, non solum ut nihil praeterea boni Spiritus
accipiant, sed etiam ut dentur in sensum reprobum, etc. Alterum hic observandum
est, ut ipsi quoque huic operi legis, quod in scriptum est cordibus nostris,
recto illi, ut divinitus impresso sensui, quo perpetuo vocamur ad sancta and
honesta studia, revocamur a pravis, auscultemus, cogitationes nos accusantes,
and co^scientiam contra nos testificantem, exaudiamus. -- Deum sane ipsum
rejicimus, cum sanctis hujusmodi cogitationibus non obsequimur.
he did unto Cornelius, than suffer them to remain ignorant of his Christ. But
whilst through impious ingratitude, they detain his truth revealed unto them,
in unrighteousness, they do not only deserve to have no more of the good
Spirit given unto them, but even to be givenup to a reprobate sense, etc. The
other thing here to be observed, is, that we our selves also hearken unto the
work or effect of the law, which is written in our hearts, that same right and
divinely-impressed sense of things within us, whereby we are continually called
upon for holy and honest courses, and called back from those that are
dishonest, and that we narrowly listen unto and mind, those thoughts which
accuse us, and our conscience, when it witnesses against us. -- Verily, we
reject God himself, when we do not yield obodeince to such holy cogitations as
these. I appeal to the consciences of the Testimony-Subscribers themselves,
whether this passage be not much fuller and ranker of the spirit of that
opinion, which they reckon amongst the very dregs and spawne of those old
accursed Heresies, amongst noisome, infamous, horrid, and pernicious errors,
than any, than all the passages they have raked together out of my writings.
Yea if they please, they may read more of the same Authors judgment upon the
same point, and to the same purpose, in what he comments upon verse 25. of the
chapter; where (amongst other things) he conceives, that Paul offered this to
the consideration of the Jews, that the Gentiles, even before Christ was
revealed unto them, were partakers of true righteousness Sed ut superius
quoque ostendimus, magis id ex instituto Pauli suit, ut objiceret Judaeis,
Gentes etiam ante revelatum eis Christum, verae justitiae fuisse compotes.
. which is a saying ten degrees beyond the line of any of mine. And yet M.
Bucer was never (to my knowledge) counted an Arminian by any, nor branded for
an Heretic, or a man of a rotten judgment, by any, unless it were by the
Ministers of the Province of Babylon, who (as the story says) dig'd him out of
his grave, and made a sacrifice by fire of his dead and buried corpse unto the
Genius of their bloody Religion. It were easy to fill many pages with passages
from other orthodox and Reformed Authors, as Melancthon, Musenlus, etc. wherein
they deliver many things fully consonant with what I have written, and the
Subscribers branded with the broad seal of their authority, for erroneous. But
miserable is the condition of Truth, which must not be suffered to pass by the
warrant of its own light, without letters of recommendation from the darkness
of men. Nor were it any matter of much more labor or difficulty, to bring in
antiquity it self, and particularly those very Authors who were the greatest
opposers of Pelagius, and the then errors denominated from him, as Hierome,
Austin, and Prosper by name, with their mouths wide opened in approbation, and
co-assertion of the same things, for which I am arraigned at the Tribunal of
Sinon The Ancient Records, (as I (...) informed) m^ntion it by the name, not of
Sion, but Sinon College. But they that have authority to make errors, may
change names at pleasure.
College, as an Heretic. It is Manichisme Manichaeorum est, hominum damnare
naturam, and liberum auserre arbitrium. Advers. Pelag. in proem.
(says Hierome) so condemn the nature of man, and to despoyle it of Free Will.
(unless any man can find better, or more proper English for, liberii
arbitriu^. And elsewhere, thou blasphemest in vain, continually buzzing it in
the ears of the ignorant, that we condemn Free Will: let him be c^demned, who
condemns it Frustra blasphemas, and ignorantium auribus ingeris, nos liberum
arbitrium condemnare. Damnetur ille, qui damnat. Ad C^esiphontem
* Yet again in another place: We so maintain Free Will, that we deny not the
adjutory (of grace) to it in all things Sic liberum servamus arbitrium, ut ei
per singula adjutorium non negemus. Hicron. l. 1. Dial. advers. Pelag.
. Augustine himself, the famous Antagonist of Pelagianisme, maintains to the
full whatsoever is asserted by me, concerning the will and power of man. If
there be no grace of God (says he) how does he save the world? If there be no
Free Will, how does he judge the world Si non sit Dei gratia, quomodo salvat
mundum? and si non est liberum arbitrium, quomodo judicat mundum? Aug. Epist.
46.
? And again, The Catholic Faith, neither denies Free Will, either in respect
of a bad life, or of a good: nor does it attribute so much to it, as if without
the grace of God it could do any thing, etc. Yet again, The Pelagians conceit
that they know some great matter, when they say, God would not command that
which he knew could not be performed by men. I wonder who knows not th^^ Fides
Catholica non liberum arbitrium negat, sive in vitam malam, sive in bonam:
neque tantum ei tribuit, ut sine gratia Dei valeat aliquid, etc. Aug. Epist. 47.
. It seems Austin supposed no man ignorant of the truth of that, which these
Subscribers persecute under the name of a pernicious error. Magnum aliquid
Pelagiagiani scire se putant, quando dicunt, Non juberet Deus, quod sciret non
posse ab homine fieri: quis hoc nescit. Aug. de Great. and lib. Arbitr. c. 16.
The fame Author yet again, We exeorate the blasphemy of those, who affirm,
that God enjoy^^ any thing that is impossible unto men, and that the commands
of God cannot be observed and kept by every man in particular, but only by all
men in common, or in general Execramur blasphemiam eorum, qui dicunt
impossible aliquid homini a Deo esse praeceptum; and mandata Dei non a
singulis, sed ab omnibus in communi posse servari. Idem.
. I^ Austins verdict will pass, the Subscribers are the Blasphemers, not the
Author of the divine authority of the Scriptures asserted. Consonant to the
last recited saying of Austine, is this of Basil the great, It is impious to
say, that the precepts of the holy Ghost are impossible (...).
. So that evident it is, that these men confute Pelagianisme by plain
Manicheisme; nay, that which only themselves call Pelagianisme. For it clearly
appears by the writings both of Hierome and Austin, that the question between
Pelagius and them, was not whether man has freedom of will, either in respect
of good or evil: for these Fathers constantly defend themselves under the
shield of this assertion against Pelagius his charge. Dicat Pelagius, per
gratiam nos posse praestare legem Dei, and pax est. Aug.
But whether men, notwithstanding their freedom of will, did not still stand
in need of Ajutorium gratiae, the auxiliary or adjutory of grace, both for the
performance of, and perseverance in, what was good. But these men have
exchanged the Fathers adjutorium, into their own compulsorium. For me, I never
denied, but always have asserted the necessity of grace by way of adjutory;
only the necessitation or compulsion of grace, is no Article of my creed.

Reader, I had not troubled thee with so much as any one of these quotations,
but that it is the calamity of these times, to judge Truth and Error still
commensurable with the votes of those men, who having engrossed the honor and
repute of being ORTHODOX men unto themselves, square these votes of theirs
concerning Truth and Error, not by any principles of the cleerest reason, nor
yet by the Scriptures soundly interpreted and understood, but only by the
Traditions of the Elders, and by what they read in the writings of such men,
whom they are pleased to take into part and fellowship with themselves in their
own glory, and vote, ORTHODOX.

But to leave this; there is yet one thing more in the Testimony (so called) to
the Truth of Jesus Christ, etc. which has too much shadow in it for the
pensill of such exquisite Artificers, as the Ministers of the Province of
London: and therefore, represents it with much suspicion of being a spurious
and suppositious piece, and not the genuine (...); of such masters. For does
not this testimony once and again ( viz. p. 24. and 26.) commend the
government, whereunto the hearts of the Authors seem to be so impotently
lifted up, by the success wherewith it has been crowned? Doubtless the real
and true Ministers of the Province of London, having such abundant opportunity
of converse with travelers from all parts, cannot but be full of the Truth of
this Information, that there was more of the truth and power of Religion in
England under the late Prelaticall Government, than in all the Reformed
Churches besides. The best success, which they can with any color of Truth
entitle this Government unto, is but the success of the Gardiners sheers,
which prosper only to the keeping all even and smooth in the privet-hedge, by
the snipping off, and keeping under those thriving twigs and branches, which
otherwise would out-grow their fellows, and hinder uniformity.

Lastly, me thinks there is too palpable a reflection of prejudice and
dishonor upon the Parliament in several passages and strains of this piece,
to issue from between the feet of the sacred Conclave of Sion-Colledge; though
wiser men (I confess) than my self, resent the affirmative stronger in this,
than the negative; conceiving an evil eye looking out of a fair face of words
upon the Parliament, to be no dissenting character of the Genius of the
Ministers (indeed) of the Province of London.

To draw toward a conclusion; if any man shall ask why I could not be content
to sit down by my charge, with the same patience wherein others charged as
well as I, possess their souls; no man's pen moving against his accusers, but
mine? I answer.

1. I was loath, that either the stones in the walls, or tiles upon the houses,
should take the honor and comfort of this service, out of my hand. If these
should hold their peace (says Christ) the stones would erie Luke 19. 4.
. The honor of Christ must be vindicated: and if the Jews, who are a people,
will not do it, the Gentiles, who are no people Romans 10. 19.
, shall and will. If men endued with reason and understanding, shall not appear
in asserting the honor of God against those, who sin with an high a hand
against it, the inanimate and senceless creature will certainly rise up, and
take away this Crown from them.

2. The demand proposed, supposes that, which ought not to be supposed; viz.
that my patience is not only exercised, but overcome, by my Charge. The truth
is, though I do not ^it down by it in patience, yet I rise up with it, and
bear it upon my shoulder, with more than patience; even with joy and
gladness; as I stand charged from Heaven to do: My Brethren, count it all
joy, when you fall into diverse temptations Iam. 1. 2.
. I trust the tenor of my Answer does no ways imply, that there is so much as
the least hair of the head of my patience fallen to the ground.

3. One part of the rest, who are compelled to drink of the same College cup
with me, may possibly either have reversed the errors here charged upon them,
or otherwise be conscious to themselves of insufficiency to defend them.
Another part of them, for ought I know, may rise up in their own defense, as I
have done; yea, and possibly may prevent me. But for those Assertions of mine,
which these Ministers have Baptized by the name of Errors, I neither know any
reason why I should proscribe them, nor yet despair of strength from God,
sufficient to maintain them against all contradiction whatsoever. But

4. (And lastly) The chief motive which engaged me to this undertaking, was,
because I look upon my self as the chief, if not the only person, for whose
sake the 52. hands were at this time drawn out of the bosom to smite the rest.
When the Chief Priests and Elders, had with more than ordinary diligence and
importunity wrought Pilate to sign his warrant for the crucifying of Christ,
because matters deserving death were not so clear against him, as they desired;
they procured two thieves to be crucified WITH HIM, the one on his right hand,
the other on his left Mar. 15. 27
, who in all likehood had not suffered death, at least at this time, but only
to color over the foul act of crucifying Christ, with the justice of their
execution (if yet this execution it self were allowable by the Laws of God)
and to represent the Lord Christ as a man only worthy such company. In like
manner, I have some reasons importuning me to conceive, that this Court of
Assize was called principally, if not only for my sake: and that no Testimony
had been given at this time, either to the truth of Jesus Christ, nor against
the Errors or Heresies of other men, had not the two and fifty prudently
judged it expedient that my Name should be blasted, and not the reputation of a
whole Province of Ministers suffer by the greenenesse of it. The grounds of my
belief in this point are,

1. The sore wound given to their Cause by Hageomastix Displayed, etc. was
never mollified with oil, until now. They never eased themselves of that
sorrow, till this Congregatio magna being called to advice about the cure,
prescribed this Recipe in order thereunto; viz. that 4. or 5. innocent lines of
this Treatise should be cited to appear upon a Stage, purposely built for
errors and heresies, and here receive the shame due to innocence and Truth.
But in vain have they rubbed themselves and their sore upon this Dictamnum
Dictamnus, or dictamnum, is an herb (in English Ditanie) having a property to
draw out any thing fastened in the body; upon which wild beasts are said to
rub themselves, when they are hurt, or wounded, for their ease and cure.
the imflammation is never a whit allayed by it. Yea to this day -- Haeret
lateri aethalis arundo; nor have the 52. hands of this Subscription, with all
their versatile motions and endeavors, been able to wriggle, or wrest it out.

2. I judge the greatest part of the other Errors and Heresies produced upon
this theater, to be beneath their cognizance, by reason, partly of the
silliness, contemptiblenesse, and irrationality of them; partly, of the
obscurity and inconsiderablenesse of their Authors. I can hardly believe that
such Eagles would have stooped to catch such flies, such dead flies, as these,
but only to put into my ointment, to cause that to cast forth a stinking savor.

3. The said Testimony produces my Errors and Heresies (so called) by whole
pages, and half pages, as if it were loath to leave any romth for other men's?
Whereas my fellow- heretics and Erratiques, are quickly dispatched; little
being cited out of their books in comparison; I suppose, lest their errors
should seem as great, as large, as dangerous, as mine.

4. Lest I should seem not to abound with errors above the rate and proportion
of other Delinquents in this kind, they cite sayings (almost) of all sorts out
of my writings to make errors of, as Parentheses, similitudes, suppositions,
assertions of a most direct and clear consistency with their own principles,
and what not?

5. This Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, made all the have was possible
after the coming out of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures asserted, to
blast the credit, and way-lay the acceptance of it with the generality of men.
Whereas there are very few, if any, of those other writings, which are
attainted of Error and Heresy, with mine, but have been extant in Print some
considerable time, yea some of them (to my knowledge) several years. But by the
way; is it not very in-harmonious, that these great Professors of enmity and
abhorrency against Errors and Heresies, should persecute the Assertion of the
Divine Authority of the Scriptures?

These, with some other considerations of like nature with them, render the
jealousy very opportune and strong, that my self only was the standing mark,
at which the arrow of the Testimony was shot; and that the rest were made to
stand by only to give aim. They are brought in to partake of my condemnation;
that so I might partake with them in their guilt and shame; or at least with
such of them, who being guilty, deserve shame.

To conclude: whereas the Subscribers, with many others of the same interest,
are still instant upon all occasions, in season, and out of season, to declaim
against me, as a friend to Publicans and sinners (I mean, to Errors avd
Heresies) and cry out that I desire and plead for a toleration of them all; I
here solemnly profess, in the sight of God, Angels, and men, that whoever they
are, that bear the Errors and wicked opinions of the times, as a burden of
sorrow upon their hearts and souls, I bear my share and part with them. Nor do
I believe that any of them all, who seek to render me the hatred of men, by the
imputation of such a delinquency, have run, either faster, or further, in the
way of God, for the pulling up those noisome weeds out of the fields of Christ
amongst us, then I have done. I have professedly engaged my self in the public
court of my Ministry against 4. of those Errors (and am at this day in full
prosecution of this my engagement) which are generally looked upon as the most
predominant amongst us, and unto which, all others whatsoever, may (I conceive)
easily be reduced; Antinomianisme, Anabaptisme, Anti-Scripturisme, Querisme, or
Seeking; unto which I might add a fifth also, called Manicheisme: which, had
it not the countenance, which the other 4. want, would soon be found to be of
as sad and dangerous a consequence to Religion, as they. I am a fool to boast
my self: but wise men bave compelled me: and wise men (I hope) will pardon me.
I have again and again in several of my writings, declared my sense and
judgment to be, that no Error whatsoever ought to be tolerated; but that every
Error sufficiently detected, and evicted, ought to be proceeded against, in
such a method and way, and upon such terms, which are justifiable by the word
of God, or by such principles of equity and good conscience, that are found in
prudent, disingaged, and conscientious men. The height of my interposals in
this kind, has been this; 1. That men be very cautious and wary, lest
intending only to crucify thieves, they crucify Christ also. 2. That they do
not make thieves of all those, who through infirmity or mistake in judgment
only, declare themselves to be men.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 6. l. 34. dele, to. p. 11. l. 22. for yo, r. you. p. 12. l. 35. after,
mouths, r. open. p. 13. l. for consequence, r. consequences, p. 17. l. 1. for
quintiffence, r. quintessence. p. 21. in the margiu, for inexcusabilis, (in
some copies) r. inexcusabiles.


