THE GOSSIPS FEAST OR, MORRALL TALES TAKING A view of things past, discoursing
of things present, and conjecturing of things to come.

By a well known modern Author.

LONDON: Printed Anno Domini, 1647.

To the Reader,
Courteous and mild,
THough this be the last of Ages (in most men's Judgment) yet all men must
conceive that is the first, of Ages, that after so many pens were employed, to
so little purpose, and so many Pamphlets published, to so little Edification, I
have adventured to thrust in among the crowd, and publish my self in Print, as
well as others, lest I should be rebuked of some, who would esteem me proud
and scornful, and an affector of singularity, if I gave not the world cause,
to laugh at me as well as themselves, It Is truth, I have written something
heretofore, very well taken for the general, but never in this kind; and
therefore I have some reason to appollogize for my self. First, I entreat the
Reader not to blame the contecture of my Piece because thou understandest it
not, nor when thou have sound my meaning to be to rash in thy censure, for I
write not of spleen, neither shall thou find any more Sattynck expressions in
this Book, then such as if thou be queasie stomackt thou may easily
digest, for my method I need not I suppose explain my self, I am not alone
Homer, by the mouth of a frog relates his mind, and Virgill will have a Gnat to
tell his story, if my language be not sufficiently refined, I hope the
courteous will conceive that such plain creatures as these by whom I speak are
not studious how to speak queintly, nor one greatly acquainted with eloquent
phrases if thou be a Scholar or Gentleman, I humbly take my leave.

THE GOSSIPS FEAST, OR, MORAL TALES:
MOther Bumbers Daughter, being made acquainted with that blandum mitrerium (as
Tresmegitus terms it) and having shot the star of her virginity, and
furnished the world with another propagator, the good old woman mother Bumbei
one repvted a cunning woman, and to have knowledge in things to come, so
ordered that although Godfathers might not be permitted, to take the charge of
a child (should the Parents decease) it being impious in that Age and Country
wherein she lived, to provide for widows, and Orphans, yet she prevailed to
have Goodman Last-Time, and Goodman Wicked-Time to stand as Godfathers, and
Gammer Divellish Plot, and Gammer Hate-King to be Godmothers, who that they
might not incur the fury of the times, stood mute, and were but dumb
witnesses, and so let the Child who was named Rotundus, to confess its own
Faith, who being demanded by the Minister, who was called (All-shew) whether he
forsook the Devil and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of the world,
with all covetous, desires of the flesh so that he would not follow nor be led
by them, miraculously and contrary to nature spoke, saying. I am borne, and for
this end came I into the world that I might cleave to the Devil and be an
Agent with him in all his works to affect the pomp and glory of the world with
covetous desires of the flesh, for which end I will attempt to extirpe
Monarchy, and set up Anarchy, to pull down all order, and erect the worst of
disorder, to demolish Cities, and destroy Nations, yea even to distur be the
whole world; the witnesses and Gossops much affrighted at this prodegie would
have bin gone, but that mother Bumbey stayed them saying, Trust me my Neighbors
this child is born to great and ample fortune, born to be beloved of Neblemen,
Gentlemen, and Citizent, who shall so hearken to his allurements, that to
shield him securely, they shall forge their own safety, and by his persuasions
shall be stirred up to attempt that which shall prove fatal unto them. Come
my good neighbors, let us home, I have already prepared an hogshead of nappy.
Ale, with a Gammon of Bacon, and other good accowtrements, which to day we will
make merry with: this motion ^iked the whole crew, and now the Godfathers and
Godmothers accompanied with two other old crones mother Coutie Legs, and mother
Crumble tart, and froppish old shrews each of them greatly delighting to tell
old Stories, down in the days of yore, and you know well that it often
happens that those Stories which such relate though the are trve in part, yet
it is their manner, either to add or diminish, according to their own fancy,
and infinitely to falfisie the truth; these Gossips having fated themselves
sufficiently with meat and waxing something warm with ale, Mother Bumbey
motioned that each Gossip should sing a catch, but Gammer Grumble replied, they
in doing so, should lose much time, which they might thriftily employ in
tippling, no, said Gammer Gowty Legs. my gossip Bumbey has made ene a very good
motion mirth is the best spice for Ale in my mind, every one her song, Mother
Bumbey do you begin; Mother Bumbey replied, it is an old Ballad which I have
heard my mother often sing in the winter nights by the fire side; she was a
good old woman, and well beloved of her Neighbors, though I say it that should
not; but this was her Song.

THere was a King ins Cradle crowned,
That ruled Great Britain with his power,
Was for his puissance Renowned,
Who kept Mars prisoner in his Tower;
He had the happy Fate
To live in quiet state
Surrendering of his Crown in peace,
Leaving to his Son
What himself had won
Whose Fame did more and more increase.
But the Fates were angry at his bliss,
And did conspire to work him woe,
The best of all the virtues his,
Which after wrought his overthrow;
What he did for the best,
Did turn to his unrest,
And wrought the fall of many Peers,
Each his Neighbor slew
But the reason no man knew
Why they should thus cause each others fears.
Like a tall Stag the King does fly,
The noblest of them heard him near,
The Hounds pursued him with a cry
Hoping ere long his Hide to tear;
Yet sometimes he made head,
Nor would be worried,
But laid his Foes often on the ground;
Yet at length for want of care,
Was taken in the snare,
And for his faults put in the Pound.
His Train dispierst he left alone,
None suffered nere him to abide,
But such as could add to his moan,
And guilty were of Patricide,
There to himself he wail'd
That sin had so prevailed,
With watery eyes, these words he said
Had I never given consent
To a threefold Parliament
I had not now in hands been laid.
When lo assistance from above,
Even those who erst had sought his ill,
Had their hate converted into love,
And vowed his wishes to fulfill
An Army strong and brave
That before did nothing crave
But ways to pull down Monarchy,
On the sudden altered were,
Resolved his throne to rear
Above his famoas Ancestry.
And now sit still, and blow the fire,
Great Charles, let parties parties quell,
Riding on both gain thy desire,
And then buy those that did thee sell;
The Fates are just,
And Jove I trust
Will state thee as thou were before:
Then will we sing,
Long live the King,
And send him bliss for evermore.
The Gossips were well pleased with the contents of this ancient Ballad and
Gammer Gowty Legs replied, by my faith Martin Parker never got a faster Brat,
no, not when he pend that sweet Ballad, When the King injoyes his own again.

Quoth Gammer Grumble, nay mother Bumbey, lets now have your tale too, each of
us will do the like every one of us shall sing a song and tell a tale, and so
we will drive away the tedious night; but first stir up the fire, and let us
have the other pitcher of Ale Mother Bumbey replied my good neighbor, in my
mind your council is good and seasonable I will rehearse unto you an ancient
tale which I have often heard, Mother Hookenose my Mothers mate, repeat.

There is an Island in the world, which is wholly surrounded with the Sea, at
first inhabited with Giants, afterward certain Outlawes exploring about the
world for shelter, landing there, and finding the Soil fat, and the Climate
temperate, resolved to make their abode there, and in diverse conflicts
discomfited the Giants, and their Prince began to sway with regal power; after
they mightily increased, and became very numerous, and were subject under many
famous Kings, their neighbors the Picts or Scots and unfaithful, or perjured
generation on all occasions took opportunity to invade them, and often made
incursions and inrodes, but it so happened after the death of a Maiden Queen the
daughter of one of their magnificent Kings, they with one consent, chose a King
of the Picts or Scots to be their King, partly for that it was his by
succession, partly in hope to prevent future wars and with an intent to unite
the two Kingdoms; but after his death, his son a virtuous and mild Prince,
began to reign, at what time it happened, that the Almighty wroth with the
people of that Land for their crying sins* called a fury to him (named
Contention) and gave her Commission to use all means and practice all ways,
to dissolve and break the peace of that people, and to make them as thoroughly
wretched and miserable as they were before glorious and potent; the Fury*
according to her command at her arrival so wrought and tempered the minds of
some of the chief of that Ille, that they began to grudge at their own
welfare; and therefore now they would be no longer contentd to continue in the
state they were; but would first after their government; Secondly, limit Kingly
power; Thirdly, have no Uniformity in Gods Worship: the Prince of this People
perceiving what Contention had done, and that his people daily made head
against him, giving out dangerous speeches, and threats, he being then in his
Palace situated in the chief City of his Land called Cleapolas, with some few
of his loyal Subjects, who could not be drawn to take part against him, fled
away to the further part of his Kingdom there to arm his faithful Subjects
against those, who had put on Armor against him erected his Royal Standard,
to which resorted many thousands of his people many noble Peers, valiant
Knights and gallant spirited Gentlemen, so that he had gathered a strong and
resolved Army, with which he often encountted his Enemies, slaying thousands
of them, and oncr brought them so low, that they would have made peace with him
on reasonable conditions; but after, through the negligence of his Commanders
who gave their minds more to enrich themselves with plunder then to do him
service, to serve in the wars of Venus, then those of Mars, he was on a sudden
vanquished and then being plunged in a Sea of misery, he hazarded his Royal
Person, and then with two or three of his most trusty friends took his flight
to the Picts, of whom he was first royally entertained, and his friends had
fair hopes that that Nation would then by preserving his person, have wiped
away the stain wherewith they have from the beginning been branded of being
disloyal and treacherous; but their entertainment was only such as an
Inne-keeper affords his Guest to make the best of him O disloyal traitors,
til they had made their bargain to the utmost, they stood on terms
capittulating about his honor and safety; but when they were assured of their
vast sums, they sold him into their hands, who persecuted him: the
consideration of so vile an act made many hearts ready to break, and moved an
odd fellow to write this Poem, which he called

The Scottish Treachery.
HA! can the Scots be so perfidious found,
(What doubt I it) their best of deeds were crowned,
Even (ab origin) with horrid Treason,
And can they now be loyal out of season;
Nature foresaw the baseness of their stem,
And scorns that they should touch her garments hem:
And that they may as is their merits eat
She feeds them like to Swine, with Oats, not wheat:
Were Judas now alive he sooner might
Lay hold on mercy, be a Convertite,
Then find a tree, bought with his ill bought pelf,
Where he might mock his woe, and hang himself.
Brethren hereafter we will your march fore-stall,
And stop your passage with an Adrian wall:
You have done well; wondrous well I vow,
Your utmost praises I Will to you allow:
You forced Newcastle, which affords this sense,
Desperate Traitors, fight with confidence:
Two hundred thousand pound; why! such a sum,
would make men march, without or Fife or Drum,
Even in the face of death, (it was the Gold)
Made you defend the Cause, (your zeal was cold)
As is your Horizon, what was there none
That you might practice your black Ills upon,
But even your Sovereign (O unhospitable)
Your Lands a Den, like Diomedes stable,
Or like Avernus Lake leading to Hell,
It ruins all approach it; what to sell
Your King for money (O perfidious Act)
Demosthenes could not excuse the Fact,
Could I work your conversion by my rhyme,
Yea great in ills, could that excuse your crime,
All true hearts will the ancient phrase renew,
I hate him, as a Scotchman or a Jew,
Neptune, that he Almighty Jove may please,
Will swallow up your ships, that scour his Seas,
Or if they arrive on any foreign Coast,
Your hungry expectation will be lost.
The Seithians will refuse to have to do
With any men, so treacherous as you,
And for the time to come, ye lousy Elves,
You shall but be a burden to your selves:
And when your bodies, as your names shall rot,
Amongst the damned, you shall have your lot.
These Verses (quoth. she) I learnt by heart, after I had once heard them
repeated, and I dare say Gossip Grumble, I have repeated them word for word,
according to the Authors intention, who had a name amongst those they call
Poets, a merry man he was, and could write the finest Songs of Mercury
Merciful, Jove Jobs Son, and of June Jone his wife, come Gammer Grumble, lets
have your Song and Tale now; then Gammer Grumble having taken a hearty draught
of Ale began to sing,

When as the chiefst of things were in handling,
Order and Discipline pulled to the ground,
And base Hypocrisy Rebellion dandling,
Fools walking at large, wise men in the pound:
When as Toads flew, and Eagles did crawle,
Lo a hand was put forth
For to save those of worth,
Hell skreikt,
Knaves squeikt
Fearing to fall.
When most men heard their meat would but bane them,
And their own hands wound them to death;
When as their Trustees in a net had taken them,
And those sought their ruin to whom they gave breath,
Then at that time when succor was scant,
He that they relide on,
Those they did confide on
And thought to have wrought the ends by,
Faild them
Assaild them
The truth for to try.
And now the Committee merry-arses makes buttons,
And the Excize men began for to hide,
The City Churles and panch bellied gluttons,
Begins for to pause where they may reside,
Free from the Ills are likely to fall,
The Tubists are hoarse
And forget to discourse,
The Sisters are silent, and wished
They near
While year
Had preached at all.
Time-serving Priests that in Pulpits reviled,
And dard to abuse their Sovereign Lord,
Now with themselves to him reconciled,
Altring their Orisons with one accord,
Cheapside Cross was seen
Where before it had been,
Charing-Crosse was in hope
Without leave of the Pope,
For to be new erected,
Most men
Hopt then
To have the old way again.
Ha! ha! quoth mother Gowty Legs, here was a Song indeed, Gammer Scrumble I
thought your memory had not harbored so fine a Song, come, lets hear your Tale
Gammer Scrumble, then began her Tale, and said: In a certain Kingdom, I wot
not well where, there lived a King peaceable and virtuous, I know not how it
was, but so it was, that the King was persecuted by his Subjects, because he
would not alter those laws, which he was sworn to maintain, he was unwilling
to be perjured, and also not altogether willing to sit still and hear himself
reviled, and to behold his friends imprisoned and massacred: he therefore
raised so many as he could of his faithful Subjects, and often resisted his
Enemies: but it so happened, for so providence would have it, that at last he
was overcome by his Enemies, his friends slain and dispersed and himself taken
prisoner, and laid in bonds: but it so fell out, during his imprisonment, that
that Army of his Enemies who had before fought against him, fell at variance
with the chiefest of those that had employed them, their Consciences also
smitten with remorse to behold their Sovereigns desplicable estate, so that
they resolved to set him at liberty, and to call those to an account who had
primarily opposed him, their General a most noble and valiant Knight, liked
well of their intentions, and resolved to countenance them, licensing a chosen
party to march to the place where the King was imprisoned, and as a freed man,
and their Prince to wait on him, from thence to the Army: this was performed
with much celerity and magnanimity, and the King brought into the Army, of whom
he was entertained as the Ark God was by the Israelites, with showting and
rejoicing; with this Army for a time he resided magnificiently waited on, in
the mean time, those that first raised these Troops, with all speed began to
list men, and to raise a second Army to oppose and master their first. Hold
there quoth. Gammer Gowty Legs, you are mistaken in the Story, the major part I
confess to be true, but in the sequel you are apt to err, and therefore I
shall relate it for you; withal my heart quoth. Gammer Grumble, for my memory is
very frail: well quoth Mother Bumbey let it be so; but first Gammer Gowty legs
lets hear your Song, and then the residue of the story afterward. willingly
quoth Gammer Gowty legs, and then began to sing, Sir John Louelesse his Althea.

What madness was it did possess,
Your minds you faithless crew.
That you to far durst to transgress,
From what Gods word does show.
And under Reformations Cloak,
To act the worst of crimes.
While God and Man's Law both were broke,
O dreery doleful times.
A pen made of a Ravens quill,
He must have sing our story.
And publish as good a will,
As you the Directory.
It will the ample theme afford
To write in prose or verse,
To it Grim Pluto will accord
Your Facts for to rehearse.
Where is now all the seeming good
We once thought to attain,
Purchased with our coin and blood
Against our Sovereign.
Where Is the reforming once we hopt,
where is now our glorious King?
These Apples from the bows are dropped,
It Was an untimely Spring.
Where is our goods and plate become
Lent on the public Faith,
Whers now the Freedom we have wene,
It Is as Tom-Telltroth says.
Our goods and plate those do possess,
Whom Fools we did entrust.
To help us who mean nothing less,
Our Punishment is Just.
Our Reformation is no more,
But Deformation plain.
In fighting for the truth before,
We fought for others gain.
And when the Common Prayer went hence,
Or Common Freedoms all.
Were abrogated all with presence,
Of ridding us from thrall.
Freemen inslaved are by those,
Whose Crimes deserve that they.
Should lodge where others obey dispose,
In want to pine away.
Nor Law nor Justice now is Free,
A few do all Ingrosse.
And in this strange Calamity,
Weer forct to live by loss.
By the faith of my body, quoth M. Bumbey this song pleases me well, it shall
cost me a fall but I will learn it, come now let us hear the rest of the tale
which Gammar Grumble left untold, why thus it was says Gammar Gowtie Legs, the
King having his Enemies thus miraculously turned to his friends not a little
rejoiced as did they who suffered for him, and went now in hope to triumph with
him, but the Noble General, with the assent of his chief Officers, and the
soldiery in general, not without mature deliberation considering that he, and
they were obliged in duty to God, and love to their Country ere they disbanded
to see the true worship of God established, and the Peace of their Country
settled, unanimonsly agreed -- there Gammar Gowtie Legs was at a stand at which
M. Bumbey, and the rest laughed, but it being so that none there could supply
the Story, the old wives began to talk less and tipple more, drinking healths
to their old sweethearts, then quoth Gammar Grumble M. Bumbey you can recover
goods that are Stolen, and the loosers, who were the thieves, you are called a
cunning woman, and have skill in things to come what do you conjecture will be
the Ishue of these things now in Agitation in that I Will before we speak of,
then M. Bumbey turning about three times, and writhing her mouth at one
inspired said.

Hearken old Maulkins unto me,
I Will tell you what shall after be.
Set your selves round as in a ring,
In the midst I Will stand and sing.
Where those that have men's faith deluded,
Shall be quite from charge excluded.
When some their error shall perceive,
And that they were deluded grieve.
And strive (the head) with all their force
To join unto the headless corse,
And those whom late they did exile
Cause to return into the I Will;
And after all their Warlike toil
Shall wear no swords without a foil,
Abjuring all they did before
When they paid Bonney Jockeis score.
A peace may chance be then agreed,
And many joyous days succeed.
By that time she had said these lines, the rest of the Gossips were all
asleep, which she perceiving, set her self down in her Chair, and slept for
company, where I leave them.

FINIS.

