THEOAIA; OR THE GRAND IMPRUDENCE of men running the hazard of FIGHTING AGAINST
GOD, In suppressing any Way, Doctrine, or Practice, concerning which they know
not certainly whether it be from God or no.

Being the substance of two Sermons, Preached in Colemanstreet, upon occasion
of the late disaster sustained in the West.

With some necessary Enlargements thereunto.

By JOHN GOODWIN, Pastor of the Church of God there.

HEB. 10. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
MAT. 21. 44. Whosoever shall fall on (or, stumble at) this stone, shall be
broken in pieces. Imprimatur. John Bachiler.

LONDON; Printed for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop entering into
Pope's Head Alley out of Lumbard-street.

1644.

READER;
WE have an English saying, that the burnt child dreads the fire. I have often
been cast into the fire of men's zealous indignations, by an unclean spirit of
calumny and slander; Some have reported, that I deny justification by Christ,
i. that the Sun is up at noone day; Others, that I deny the immortality of the
soul, i. that I murdered my father and my mother; Others, that I have
preached against the Parliament and Assembly, i. that I am out of my wits, and
weary of my present life, and careless of that which is to come. I perceive
there are more Sons of Belial, then those that witnessed against Naboth, that
he blasphemed God and the King. 1 King. 21. 10.
But having no vineyard to accommodate any man, I cannot easily conceive, what
men and their tongues mean to be still up in such unchristian contestations
with me; except this be it; Because I speak the truth, and men are not able to
bear it; therefore they resolve (it seems) to make me speak such untruths,
that I my self shall not be able to bear. I confess, I do not much dread
this fire, made of the tongues of asps and vipers, not because I have not been
sufficiently burnt by it, but partly because I have been a long time accustomed
to such burnings, and have found them rather purifying, then consuming: partly,
because the great Apostle informs me, that the way by which he passed into his
glory, was through honor, and dishonor, through good 2 Cor. ^. 8.
report, and evil report. Yet nevertheless, I had rather give an account of
mine own words, then of other men's pretending to be mine; and so to keep out of
the fire, as far as the peace and safety of my own soul and other men's, will
suffer me. And this is the true account (Reader) of the publishing of these
Sermons, which (happily) had not been an action so necessary otherwise.
Understanding that the soul spirit, which has for several years haunted my
ministry, was beginning to practice upon(...) ^ermons also, I thought it the
safer course of the two, to put my self into the hands of the Truth (which yet
perhaps will not much befirend me neither, in the thoughts and hearts of men,
though with God, I am certain, it will) then to expose both it and my self to
be rent and torn by him. What good, or hurt, they will or are like to do, now
they are gotten abroad, is not easy, either for thee, or me, so much as to
conjecture. Be it in this, as God and men shall agree. When the danger of the
disease runs high, there is little hope but only in that physic, whereof
there is some fear. We are under a bondage of much misery, and it is only the
Truth (as our Savior says) that can make us free: and yet Joh. 8. 32.
such is our condition and misery, that there is cause to fear, lest the
Truth, which only is able to make us free, should increase our bondage and
misery, by being rejected and opposed by us, when it comes in love and mercy to
visit us, and to bless us out of our misery. For this end I was borne (as our
Savior says of himself, Joh. 18. 37.) that I should bear witness to the
truth, not to the opinions or apprehensions of men. In which respect I know I
am like to have the harder quarter and service in the world; but God has made
me a lover of men in such a degree, that I can willingly consecrate my self
unto their service, through any sufferings from them. If this world fail me, I
know God has prepared another for a reserve, which will stand by me, and will
not fail. Reader, take my prayers along with thee, and an honest heart of
thine own; and so pass on to the Sermons before thee; doubtless they will
either strengthen thy hand in the way thou art in, or guide thy feet into a way
thou art not in, or at least qualify thy spirit with christian patience and
respects toward such a way.

From my study in Colemanstreet, October. 2. 1644. Thine with an upright and
single heart in Christ Jesus, JOHN GOODWIN.

theomachia OR The Grand Imprudence of men, running the hazard of Fighting
against God, in suppressing any Way, Doctrine, or Practice, concerning which
they know not certainly whether it be from God, or no.
ACTS 5. 38. And now I say unto you, Refrain your selves from these men, and
let them alone: for if this counsel or work be of men, it will come to naught;
but if it be of God, ye cannot destroy it, lest ye be found even fighters
against God.
WHen the Children of Israel, in the progress of their Wars upon the
Canaanites* wherein God had promised to be with them, and to give them
success, and that a man of their enemies should not be able to stand against
them: notwithstanding they fought under the protection of many such promises as
these, yet met with a disaster and loss, thirty six of them being slain by
the men of Ai, and the rest of the party engaged in that service put to rout,
and chased by their enemies: God himself upon the great dejection and solemn
humiliation of the Elders of Israel, and Joshua their General, was pleased to
make known unto him by special revelation, what root of bitterness it was
that brought forth this fruit of death, what sin by name it was amongst them,
that had separated between him and them in their late sad miscarriage, yea, and
would separate still, to their further and greater misery, except they took a
course to make an atonement for themselves, by purging and clensing themselves
from it. Only the discovery or finding out of the person that had committed
the sin, was put upon Joshua and the people; wherein yet again they were
directed by God to such a method or means for this discovery, that God himself
may be said too to have discovered even the sinner also. For he it was, that by
a special directing hand of his providence, caused the lot to fall upon Achan,
who was the man that in taking the excommunicate thing, had fined that great
and special provocation, which was fallen in this gust of wrath from Heaven
upon the people. These things you shall find related more at large Josh. 7.
From which passages by the way (amongst many other very observable) you may
take knowledge of these three things.

First, That when God is at any time engaged, and his hand in (as we use to
say) showing mercy and doing good to his people, he is seldom or never wont to
change or alter the tenor of his present dispensations, to break off the
course of his grace by suffering evil to come upon them, but upon some
special discontent taken, from some special sin or other, one or more,
committed by them.

Secondly, That sometimes the sin of one or of some few, in a great society or
body of people, in the provocation or guilt of it, redounds and runs over to
the involving and defiling of the whole society, and rendering all the members
thereof obnoxious to the displeasure of God.

Thirdly, That the best, if not the only way for the people of God, being
under the disfavour of God, and stroke of his displeasure, to make atonement
for themselves, and to recover his favor, is to make diligent search and
strict inquiry, what that sin by name should be, which has turned away the
heart of their God from them, and accordingly to remove it.

My Brethren, the case of the Children of Israel upon their loss near unto
the City of Ai, is our condition and case at this day; save only that the
hand of God has been laid heavier upon us, then it was upon them, in that
breach. God had begun to do great and gracious things for us, yea he had gone
on for a good space together, treading and trampling down the strength of our
Enemies under us apace; insomuch, that we began to take our Harps down from
the willow trees, on which we had hung them, to prepare our selves to sing the
song of Moses, the man of God: but lo on the sudden we are smitten back
again into the places of Dragons, and the God of our lives has covered us
with the shadow of Death. That vision of peace and good things which was let
down from heaven unto us, and was come so near us, that we began to arise,
thinking none other but to fall to and eat presently; is now again taken up
from us into the heavens, and we have lost the sight of it. The best art and
wisdom we can use to open the heavens over us, and cause them to deliver down
that treasure again to us, to heal our present wound, if it be not deadly, is
to make as narrow a search, as strict an inquiry, as we can, what that
particular and special sin or provocation amongst us is, the chastisement
whereof is now upon us, and which has brought the rod of this indignation upon
our backs. If God himself would please by special revelation to make known
what this sin is, as he did unto Joshua and the people of Israel, satisfaction
in this point were at hand, nor should we need to abide the various and
conjecturall discourses of men, Ministers or others, about the matter: But
having perfected that standing Revelation of himself, the Scriptures, he
refraines revelations extraordinary, and leaves his people to consult with
these Oracles of his for resolution, in all such cases of Question and
difficulty as this; only promising the gracious assistance and guidance of his
Spirit unto those that shall ask it of him, and not lay stumbling blocks in
their way otherwise, to direct them in such dark and dubious inquiries as
these. And one special end (I conceive) ay^ed at by that Authority, which has
set apart this day for a solemn humiliation of our selves before God, was,
that Ministers and people should join together in fervent prayer* and
supplication unto God, that the one may be directed to make a true and
unpartiall discovery of this ^inne, and the other judge of the discovery being
made accordingly: that so the troubler of Israel being found out, execution may
be done, and God pacified. In consideration whereof it is, that I made choice
of the Scripture read unto you, upon the present occasion; Conceiving that very
sin to be there described, yea, and expressed by name, (though somewhat more
general) which has occasioned the sad interruption of late made in our
hopeful proceedings, yea, and which in all likelihood wrought against us
formerly, both in that blow which was reached us from heaven, in that as
strange, as sorrowful a defeat at Newark, and otherwise; but was not then
known or considered of. The Lord grant that yet at last it may enter into all
our hearts to conceive aright, and to consider of it, lest it brings forth yet
again like bitter fruits, yea, and magnifies it self at last in our utter
ruin and destruction.

But let us address unto the words; and in them consider, first, their
relation and coherence in the Context, and then their sense and meaning. For
the former; the words are part of a speech made by one Gamaliel (as he is
called ver. 34.) a Pharisee, and Doctor of the Law, in an Assembly or Council
at Jerusalem. The Council (as appears ver. 21. etc.) was called, about the
Apostles, their Doctrine and proceedings; the chief design and intendment of
it, was to consider and resolve what course to take with them, how to suppress
both them and their Doctrine, being both looked upon as prejudicial to their
personal and private interests, both of honor and profit, in that State and
Nation; and as likely to carry away the hearts and affections of much people
from them. When they had sent for Peter and the other Apostles by a Captain
with his Officers, to appear before the Council, the Prolocutor or chief
Priest, charged them after this manner: ver. 28. Did not we straightly command
you, that you should not teach in this Name? and ye have filled Jerusalem with
your Doctrine, etc. When Peter and the other Apostles, standing stiff to their
tackling, had made their answer, fully justifying what they had done, and given
a brief account of that Doctrine about which they were questioned, and of their
calling to preach and bear witness of the same unto the world; it is said (
ver. 33.) that the Council, seeing them upon those terms, hearing them speak
at such a rate, burst in sunder for anger (as the former translation) or (as
the latter has it) were cut at the heart, and took counsel how to slay them.
What? would they not submit to the Authority and advice of such a Reverend,
learned, and pious Assembly as that? Did they think themselves wiser then
they? would they preach a Doctrine that should asperse them, and bring them out
of credit and request with the people? Such men as they were not meet to be
tolerated in the State, nor yet to live; and therefore they would fall upon
some course, how to free themselves, the State and Nation of them, and that
must be in no lighter way, with no lower hand, then death it self, they must
die for it. This (it seems) was the sense and resolution of the generality of
the Assembly, until one of them, (that Gamaliel we speak of) a man of a
better temper and deeper reach then his fellows, excited to speak, and
assisted in special manner by God in speaking, by a grave Speech tending to
moderation, qualified their spirits in part, and brought them to accept of
somewhat a lighter atonement from the Apostles, for their supposed sin, then
their lives would have amounted unto. For their spirits were so full of
bitterness and indignation against them, that notwithstanding all that Gamaliel
could say, they were resolved to have their peniworths of them, (as we use to
say) to ease themselves on them so far, as to cause them to be beaten, and
withal, severely to charge them the second time, to give over preaching their
erroneous and dangerous Doctrine, to speak no more in the name of Jesus, ver.
40. What the tenor of Gamaliels Speech was, from the beginning to the end of it,
you may read, beginning at ver. 35. until the end of 39. Men of Israel, take
heed to your selves, what ye do to these men; as if he should have said, ye
will but run a needless hazard of bringing evil, or ruin upon your selves by
attempting any thing for the present, in a way of violence against these men;
implying, that men had need take heed how they engage themselves to suppress,
molest, or destroy any generation or sort of men whatsoever, until they have a
clear and express warrant from heaven for the execution. To persuade them not
to be too precipitate or forward in any course of violence against the
Apostles, he declares to them by a double instance (well known unto themselves)
that if they be seducers and evil men, and so worthy to be destroyed, God
himself would in a short time, reveal his wrath from heaven against them, and
bring them and their work to ruin. For thus he had done both formerly by one
T^e^d^^, and more lately by Judas of Galilee; who projecting great matters for
themselves without any warrant or authority from God, though they went on, and
seemed for a while to prosper in their way, drawing great numbers of people
after them, were yet, both they and all their accomplices and followers, by a
special hand of God scattered and brought to naught. Upon the mention of these
two memorable examples of Divine justice against Seducers and Deceivers, he
infers as follows in the words read unto you.

And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone, etc.

This for the coherence.

For the sense of the words (briefly) Refrain from, (...), that is, stand, or
keep off from them, depart from them, go ye your way, and let them go their
way; (...), let them alone, or suffer them, that is, (as some understand it) do
not only forbear persecuting of them your selves by your authority, but be no
occasion that the Roman power any ways interposeth to molest them: do not
betray them into the hand of violence otherwise; or else the doubling of the
caution, may import the weightinesse of the matter in his apprehension that
speaks. However, by this double Caution or Item he gives unto them, not to
have any thing to do (for the present) with the Apostles, in any way of
molestation, he discovers an utter averseness in him to such proceedings.
Wherefore he gives this reason further.

For if this counsel or work be of men, it will come to nought] i. If the
design which these men drive, with the method, course and means whereby they
carry it on, has no better foundation to bear it up, but either their own
wisdoms, interest, and authority, or some other men's, (...), it will be
dissolved, or come to naught, it will soon discover its original by its end,
if it were taken out of the dust, to dust it will return; and they that are
engaged in it, will fall and sink with it. But if it be from God] i. If it be
countenanced or authorized by God, if he be the Founder of it; Ye cannot
destroy or dissolve it, lest, etc. i. you must not, or you ought not, to
attempt any thing against it to destroy or dissolve it, because by such an
attempt as this, you will do no better then fight against God. Ye cannot] viz.
lawfully, or wisely, or upon any good ground. There is a double impotency, or
impossibility often mentioned in Scripture; the one we may call natural, or
physical, the other moral. With the first kind of impossibility, things are
said to be unpossible, when there wants a natural or executive principle of
strength or power in any kind to do them: with the latter, that is said to be
unpossible for a man to do, for the doing whereof he has no ground or warrant
either in the Word of God, or in reason or equity, though he has never so much
natural strength or power to do it. Of this latter kind, the Apostle Paul
speaks, 2 Cor. 13. 8. where he says, that he could do nothing against the
truth, but for the truth; meaning, that he had no ground or warrant, either
from God, or otherwise, to do any such thing. So again, 1 Cor. 10. 21. Ye
cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of the Devil; i. ye cannot do
it lawfully; or with any congruity either to the principles of Christianity, or
of sound reason. Of this kind of impotency or impossibility, that common saying
in the Civil Law speaks, Id tantum possumus, quod jure possumus. Of the
other kind, we have many instances also; I spoke to thy Disciples to cast him
out, but they could not (Mar. 9. 18.) i. they wanted an executive principle or
power, whereby to do it: otherwise it was lawful enough for them to have done
it. So again, Mar. 6. 19. and Mar. 2. 4. besides many other.

Destroy or dissolve it] i. do or attempt any thing to destroy it. Not only the
endeavors and attempts, but even the purposes and intents of doing things, are
often in Scripture expressed by words, which properly signify the doing or
effecting the things themselves. Many good works (says our Savior, Joh. 10.
32) have I showed you from my Father: for which of these works do you stone me?
i. do you intend, or go about to stone me? for they had not yet actually stoned
him. Thus Heb. 11. 17. Abraham is twice said to have offered up his son Isaac,
because he was fully intended, and had attempted to offer him. Besides many the
like: So here, you cannot destroy it, i. you ought not, you cannot with reason
go about or attempt the destroying of it. -- Lest you be found even fighters
against God; meaning, that in case the Doctrine and way of those men, against
whom they were incensed, should be from God, and they nevertheless seek to
destroy them, they would by such a course dash themselves against such a stone
as would break them to pieces; they would be found even to fight against God.
That causall particle, (...), lest, does not always note a hazard, or
uncertainty of an effect or consequent; but many times signifies as much as
(...), ut non, and is used as well to signify the dependence as well of a
certain and necessary, as of a contingent effect, upon its cause: ^ So ^ See
M^^. ^. 6 a^^ (...) 1^. ^^
here, you cannot destroy it, lest you be found, etc. i. if you attempt to
destroy it, you will be found, etc.

Be found ^ The word (...) to be found, in such a construction as this, often
notes the unexpectedness of somewhat befalling a person, whether in respect of
his own, or other men's expectations. Thus it is said of the Virgin Mary, that
before Joseph and she came together, (...), she was FOUND with child, meaning,
beyond, or contrary to expectation. So Luke 9. 36. whereas Moses and Elias were
immediately before the voice from heaven, taken notice of by the Apostles to
have been present with Christ upon the mount, as soon as ever the voice was
past, it is said of him, (...), he was found alone, to imply that Moses and
Elias were withdrawn before the Apostles were aware, or thought of it. To pass
by other instances for this importance of the word; it is said of Babylon the
Great* ( Rev. 18. 24.) that in her was found ((...)) the blood of the Prophets,
and of the Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth; meaning, that
whereas this City had till now thought her self the most religious City under
heaven, the Mother and Patroness of Prophets and Saints, an enemy only unto
Heretics and persons hateful unto God; now when God came to call her to an
account, and to enter into judgment with her, contrary to her expectation and
opinion of her self, she was discovered and evicted to have been the most
cruel and bloody enemy that ever Prophets or Saints had, yea, and further, a
principal Actress in the slaughter of many millions otherwise. So Gamaliel,
expressing himself thus to the Council, lest you be FOUND even fighters
against God; gives them to understand, that how holy, wise, or just soever they
might seem in their own eyes, yea, and might think themselves the furthest of
any men under heaven from practicing or fighting against God, yet if they went
on with their present intentions and resolutions against the men they had now
before them, they might fall into this heavy guilt and condemnation, when they
thought least of it. The heaviness of which guilt is further employed, in that
emphaticall particle (...), even* even fighters against God; which particle of
speech in such constructions as this, is intensive in an high degree, and still
imports somewhat very remarkable in what is joined with it. In such an
importance as this, you shall find it used, Matthew. 12. 8. for the son of man is
Lord (...), even of the Sabbath; meaning, that this was a very transcendent
Lordship indeed, and such as was incompatible unto any, but unto him who need
count it no robbery to be equal with God. So Mar. 13. 22. and elsewhere. Thus
Gamaliel admonishing his Colleagues, to consider well what they did, lest they
should be found EVEN fighters against God, plainly intimates unto you, that
this is one of the worst stones in the world to stumble at, and that no
improvidence or inconsiderateness whatsoever besides, is like to make any such
breach upon the comfort and peace of the creature, as for men to engage
themselves in any such action or course, wherein they shall be found fighters
against God.

(...), Fighters against God]. Every act of sin, especially with knowledge and
consent of will, is (in a sense) a fighting against God: but that sin which
Gamaliel here intends in his expression of fighting against God, is a sin of an
higher nature then ordinary, as appears by the particle (...), even, joined
with it, and formerly opened. Therefore by fighting against God (in this place)
must needs be meant some high and peremptory action or engagement of the
creature, wherein it opposes God in some special or remarkable design, which
he seeks either to set on foot, or else to carry on in the world, whether the
opposer knows it to be a design of God's or no. And thus the propagating of
that Doctrine, which the Apostles preached, being a design of God, the
opposition of the council against it, especially with so high an hand as the
crushing, or slaying of the Apostles, who were appointed by God to publish it,
would have been, was, and would have been very properly, a fighting against God.

The words explained, are matter ready prepared for Doctrine and observation.
Only one word (by the way) for Answer to that Question; What authority,
weight, or credit, is to be given to that which Gamaliel delivers in this
speech of his to the Council? Whether may we build upon every thing, or any
thing, spoken by him, as authorized by God?

I answer;

1. That there is little question to be made, but that the Spirit of the man,
was in special manner touched and stirred up by the Spirit of God, to
interpose in the behalf of the Apostles, as he did; as the spirit of Nicodemus
(another branch of the same root) formerly had been, to stand up and speak in
the behalf of Christ, Joh. 7. 51. 2. The principal end and scope of what he
spoke, being the rescuing of the Apostles from the bloody Counsels of those
who had concluded their death, and were consulting about the execution; plainly
shows, that there was more of God then ordinary in the thing, especially if
we consider further, that he who thus inexpectedly appeared with shield and
buckler for the Apostles defense, was of that sect or generation of men, who
generally hated and opposed the Doctrine of Christ with more inveterate and
viperous malignitie of spirit, then any other. 3. Evident it is, 1. that the
intent, end, and scope of Gamaliel in this speech to the Council, being the
bringing of the Apostles from the bloody rage and violence of men, was good,
and agreeable to the will and word of God. And 2. as evident likewise it is,
that the speech it self, in the whole carriage, and in all the passages of it,
is duly, and with all exactness of wisdom and prudence, proportioned to the
end, and tends in a direct and regular way to effect it. Now whatsoever
directly and regularly tends to the effecting of that which is good, must needs
be good, and consequently from God. That which is good may occasionally and by
some collateral influence of Providence, be brought to pass, by means that
are evil; but in a regular and direct way, it can only be produced by that
which is good. There is no more friendship or fellowship naturally, between
good ends and ill means, then is between light and darkness, Christ and
Belial. But 4. (and lastly) There being nothing in all this speech (excepting
only the historical instances, the truth of which, it seems, Interim or aculi
instar nobis esse debet, quod Dei co^silia nullis ^omm^ viribus imped reposse,
humana vero sua sp^nte collabi discimus. Gual. Homil. 37. an Act.
was generally known among the Jews, and is attested by Josephus their great
Historian) but what is fully consonant with the word of God, (unquestionably so
acknowledged) elsewhere, the credit and authority of it, for matter of truth,
is one and the same with those other Scriptures corresponding with it. What we
here learn (says Gualter upon the place) should be unto us as an Oracle, viz.
that the counsels of God are not to be defeated or hindered by any strength of
man; but for the counsels of men, they fall, and sink, and come to nothing of
themselves.
In the words, there be these six ensuing Points of Doctrine, fair and large,
besides many others of a more collateral and illative observation.

First, From those words, ver. 38. And now I say unto you, Refrain from these
men, and let them alone: for, etc. Observe, that it is a point of much wisdom
to forbear the oppression, or suppression of such persons, Doctrines, and
ways, which men have any reasonable cause at all to judge or think, that they
are, or may be, from God.

Secondly, From those doubtful expressions of so great a Doctor of the Law,
and one that knew how to measure and estimate the Authority and weight of a
Councell-determination, and besides can no ways be suspected of any
disaffection or prejudicatenesse against such Authority, from those doubtful
expressions (I say) of this man, If this counsel or work be of men, etc. And
again, If it be of God, etc. Observe, That the determination of a Council, or
of the major part of a Council against a way, Doctrine, or practice, is no
demonstrative or sufficient proof for any wise man to rest or build upon, that
such a way, Doctrine, or practice, are not from God. The whole Council, as you
heard, this one man excepted, had peremptorily concluded the Doctrine and
practice of the Apostles, to be, not from God, but from men, and thereupon were
in high consultation to suppress them, and that by death; yet all this did not
satisfy Gamaliel in point of judgment or conscience, he was still but where
he was, doubtful and in suspense with himself about the business.

Thirdly, From that clause, If this counsel or work be from men, it will come
to nought] Observe, that every invention, contrivance, way, or device of man,
especially in things either appertaining or pretending to appertain unto God,
in matters of Religion, will in time wear out into nothing and be dissolved.

Fourthly, From the Connection or dependence between the former and latter parts
of ver. 39. But if it be from God, ye cannot destroy it, lest, etc. Observe,
That for any man, or men, to attempt the suppression of any Doctrine, way, or
practice that is from God, is to fight against God himself.

Fifthly, From that significant phrase or expression, of being FOUND fighters
against God, ver. 39. Observe, that many, who possibly for the present may
conceive and think, and that with much confidence, that they fight for God,
when the truth comes to an unpartiall and perfect scanning, will be found to
have fought against him.

Sixthly, (and lastly) From the importance and weight of that emphaticall
particle, even, in the last clause, Lest ye be found EVEN fighters against
God; Observe, that fighting against God, is a most dangerous posture or
engagement, for a creature to be taken or found in by God at any time. The
dread and terror of such a misprision as this, is the base and groundwork upon
which Gamaliel builds the fabric of that important counsel and advice, which
he gives unto his fellows, thoroughout his discourse or speech made unto them.

We shall for the present (passing by all the rest) pitch upon that Doctrine
mentioned in the fourth place, the tenor and effect whereof was this; That for
any man to endeavor or attempt the suppression of any Doctrine, practice, or
way, which is from God, is to fight against God himself.

For the sense and true import of the Doctrine, I shall need to add little
beyond what was said, in explication of the words; here we briefly showed what
was meant by fighting against God. I now only add this, (which is somewhat
more particular) that it is not every degree or kind of opposing a way,
Doctrine, or design of God, which either the text, or the Doctrine calls a
fighting against God; but only such an opposing which is peremptory, and
carried on with an high hand, so that those Agents or Instruments of God, which
he has anointed to hold forth that way, Doctrine, or Design of his in the
world, are not suffered to execute their Commission, but are countermanded
either by the Authority or over-bearing strength and power of men. It is one
thing to oppose, or contend against a Doctrine or way of God, per modum
Doctoris, as when a Minister through a mistake or weakness of judgment,
pleads for Baal against God, preaches error up, and truth down, which may
befall the best and faithfullest of men: another, to do it per modum Judicis,
as when men will assume an Authoritative power, whether Ecclesiastique or
Civil, to suppress or silence the publishing, practicing, arguing, or
debating of such ways or Doctrines, with the judgments and consciences of
men. It is true, even this kind of opposing them, is sometimes incident to men
otherwise upright in the maine before God: but the children of this contention
and contestation against their Maker, must expect to be taught r^ore wisdom
and reverence toward him, with briars and thorns. If men fight against God
after any such manner as this, upon such terms as if they were Gods too, this
will engage him to take up arms also in his own defense, and provoke him to
fight against those, who fight against him. This for opening the Doctrine.

For the confirmation of the truth of it, we shall not need to cause many
Scriptures to labor: the word will be sufficiently established in the mouth of
two or three of these Witnesses. Why do Psalm. 2. 1, 2* 3.
the Heathen rage, (says David) and the people imagine a vain thing? The
Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together
against the Lord and against his Anointed, saying, Let us break their bands
asunder, and cast away their cords from us, etc. Those expressions, of raging,
setting themselves, taking counsel together against the Lord and his Anointed,
amount every whit as much as to a fighting against the Lord. And what was it,
that the Heathen, people, Kings, and Rulers of the Earth, did, or attempted to
do against the Lord and against his Anointed; (meaning Christ) Was it any
thing else but to quench that fire, which Christ (as himself says) came to
kindle, to suppress the Gospel, to cut off those ways of righteousness and
holiness from the knowledge and practice of men, which are therein recommended
and held forth unto the world? These are the bands, which they set themselves
thus to cut asunder, and the cords, which, if it had been possible, they would
have cast from them. Saul, Saul, (says the Lord Christ from Heaven unto him,
as he was travailing toward Damascus) Why persecutest thou me? And he said,
Who art thou Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest, etc.
Act. 9. 4, 5. To persecute Christ (and consequenly, God himself, who is in
Christ, 2 Cor. 5.) imports every whit as much, as to fight against Christ, and
somewhat more. But why is Saul here charged with persecuting Christ? What
course of hostility did he run or practice against him? It is said ( ver. 2.)
that he desired Letters of the high Priest to Damascus to the Synagogues, that
if he found any of this WAY, whether they were men, or women, he might bring
them bound to Jerusalem. Whereby it appears, that the precise opposition
against Christ, upon which Saul was arrested from Heaven (as we heard) under
the terms of persecuting him, was his attempting with so high and bloody an
hand, to destroy out of the world that WAY of worshipping and serving God,
which Christ in his Gospel recommends unto, and charge upon the world. Men
and women were not the precise and formal object of his hatred and
persecution, but that way of Christ in the Gospel, which they maintained,
practiced, and taught, who were persecuted by him. If he could have told how
otherwise to have gotten this WAY out of their hearts, tongues, and lives, and
consequently out of the world, then by molesting, vexing, and persecuting them,
it is not like that he would have proceeded against them, with so rough and
cruel an hand. It is said ( Revel. 12. 7.) That there was war in Heaven;
Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon; and the Dragon fought, and
his Angels. Whether Michael in this Scripture be Christ himself, (as ancient
Interpreters generally carried it) or some prime Angel appointed by Christ, to
be as a General or Head to his Saints and servants, in those wars and fiery
conflicts, wherein they were for a long time engaged against Satan, and his
bloody Agents in the Roman Empire, (as some later Expositors conceive) is not
much material. But it is here expressly said, that the Dragon and his Angels,
that is, the Devil and his Instruments, ignorant and bloud-thirsty-men,
fought, viz. against Michael and his Angels, i. against Christ himself in
those appointed by him to hold forth the way and Gospel of his Kingdom unto
the world. But why, or how are they said to have fought against Christ? What
was their engagement or attempt against him? Questionless nothing else but the
extirpation and ejection of the Doctrine and Way of his Gospel out of the
world, by the torments, slaughter and ruin of those who professed them, and by
this profession, gave them a special subsistence and being in the world. For
that rule, Doctrine, or way, which is not practiced or professed in the world,
languisheth, and is little better then dead. I add but one Scripture more, and
then I have done with the proof of the Point, in this kind. Then comes the
end (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 24.) when he (i. Christ) shall have
delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father, when he shall have put down
all rule, and all authority and power. Why the end should not be, until
Christ has put down all rule, and all authority and power, i. all kinds of
rule, Authority and power; this reason is rendered, ver. 25. For he must
reign, till he has put all enemies under his feet. I demand, why should all
rule, all Authority and power, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, be looked
upon, as enemies unto Christ? What is the enmity or hostility they exercise
against him? Doubtless no lawful rule, Authority, or power, are enemies to
Christ, either in their nature or institution, but are confederate with him. It
is their degeneration in their exercise and actings, that renders them of an
hostile interpretation to him. There is none of them all but is apt ever and
anon to be fighting against him, and that by some peremptory and stiff
opposing and suppressing some way, Doctrine, or practice of his, where they
have to do. And this is the quarrel which the Lord Christ has to the whole
fraternity or association of them; for this he counts them his enemies.

The reasons of the point, which we shall briefly touch, are three:

First, He that attempts or seeks by an high hand to suppress any Reason 1.
Doctrine, Way or Practice which is from God, may well be conceived and said to
fight against God, because he opposes, and that with vehemence and might, the
will of God, and that in a very considerable act, motion, or desire of it.
There is no Way, Doctrine, or Practice, which is from God, but his will stands
strongly bent for the propagation and spreading of it in the world. I am Luke
1^. 49.
come (says Christ) to send (or, cast) fire on the earth: and what WILL I,
(or, what is my desire, as the former translation had it) if it be already
kindled? meaning, that his desire to see the Gospel on foot, to see it well
taken, and sufficiently rooted in the world, was so great, that when he once
saw it, he cared not how soon he left the world. So Luke 22. 15. And he said
unto them, With desire have I desired to eat this passover with you, before I
suffer: meaning that he even longed to erect and found that great Ordinance of
the Supper, for the use and benefit of the world in after times, before he left
the world. Many other Scriptures there are that speak this over and over, viz.
that the heart and soul of God are firmly and deeply set within him, to have
such Ways, Doctrines and Ordinances as come from him, published, maintained,
preached, and held forth unto the world. Therefore they who engage themselves
with all their strength, and all their might, to resist this will of his in the
accomplishment of it, what do they else but fight against him?

Secondly, He that magnifies himself to suppress, quash, or Reason 2.
keep down any way, Practice or Counsel which is from God, proportionably
opposes the glory of God, and does what in him lies, to keep God from being
magnified in the hearts and lives of men, at least as far as that Way, Practice
or Counsel which he seeks to suppress, tends to such a magnification of him.
And will this, being weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, be found any
whit lighter, then a fighting against God? Certain it is, that God has (as it
were) a stock of glory in the hand of every Way, Doctrine and Practice, which
he recommends unto the world; yea, in all and every of these, he has a
peculiar design for the exaltation of his Name. The beauty of the Lord is said
to be seen, or to be beheld in the Ways and Ordinances of his House, or
Temple. Psalm. 27. 4. There is no way or truth of God, but carries an impression
in it of some lineament or other of the glory and loveliness of his face. So
again, Psalm. 67. The Prophet having ( ver. 1.) petitioned that at the hand of
God, which ( ver. 2.) might make his way to be known on earth, etc. he breaks
out ( ver. 3.) in this prophetical strain, Let the people praise thee, O God,
let all the people praise thee; clearly implying, that the way of God being
published, and made known to the world, is that which increases the Revenues
of the throne of Heaven, raises and procures new contributions of praise and
glory from men unto God. So then he that shall rise up to oppose the God of
Heaven in any of those methods, counsels or projections of his, whereby he
projects the exaltation and advancement of his own great Name and Glory in the
world, may in as proper a sense, as the phrase lightly will bear, be said to
fight against God; especially, if we consider but this one thing further: that
Gods glory is his darling, his unica, his only one, (as David called his life,
Eripe a gladio animam meam, a cane unicam meam, Ps. 22. 21.) it is the only
life which he lives in the world; it is the only apple that his soul cares to
eat of, out of that great Orchard which he has planted (I mean the world.)
Therefore doubtless, he that shall oppose him in his gathering of this fruit,
has the greater sin.

Thirdly, (and lastly) there is in every thing that proceeds or derives Reason
3.
its original or being from another, somewhat of the nature, property, or
spirit of that, from which it takes this rise or spring of its being: there is
somewhat of the father in the child, of the root in the fruit and in the
branches, etc. In like manner, in every Way, Doctrine or Practice which is from
God, there is somewhat of God himself. The very substance, frame and
constitution of them, at least that which is operative, quickening and
spiritual in them, what is it but a kind of heavenly composition, the
ingredients whereof are the holiness, wisdom, mercy, goodness and bounty of
God? and what are these, and every of them, but God himself? Every Ordinance or
Way of God, is (as it were) a benign constellation of these stars unto the
world; out of the midst of which he gives a gracious aspect of himself, and
communicates those sweet and rich influences of himself, light, and life, and
strength, and peace, and joy, unto the world. It is said, (1 King. 19. 11.)
that the Lord neither was in the strong wind that rent the mountains, nor yet
in the earthquake that followed it, nor in the fire that came after that; but
after these there came a still voice, wherein it is implied, that the Lord was.
The meaning is, that God had neither prepared or intended, either the wind,
earthquake or fire, by, or out of which to impart himself unto his Prophet
Elijah; he had only prepared and sanctified the still and soft voice for such a
purpose as this; and therefore he is expressly denied to have been in any other,
and consequently supposed to have been in this. In such a sense or manner as
God was in this still voice, he is in every Way, Doctrine, and Ordinance of
his; in, by, and out of all and every of these, he communicates and imparts
himself graciously unto the world. Therefore whosoever shall fight against any
of these, by seeking to supplant, suppress, or keep them down, that they may
not run and be glorified in the world, what do they else, let this work and
course of theirs be truly interpreted, but fight against God himself?

We have done with the Reasons of the Doctrine; we shall conclude with somewhat
by way of use and application.

First, by way of Instruction: If to attempt the suppression or keeping down,
any Way, Doctrine, or Practice which is from God, be of no less concernment, of
no safer interprepation, then a fighting against God, then certainly it is the
greatest imprudence or improvidence under heaven, for any man, or rank of men
whatsoever, to appear, especially in any hgh-handed opposition or contestation
against any Way, Doctrine, or Practice whatsoever, until they have proof upon
proof, demonstration upon demonstration, evidence upon evidence; yea, all the
security that men in an ordinary way (at least) are capable of, that such Ways
or Doctrines only pretend unto God as the author of them, and that in truth,
they are not at all from him, but either from men, or of a baser parentage. For
what do men by such a practice and engagement of themselves as this, but run an
apparent hazard, of dashing their foot against that stone, at which Paul
stumbled, (when time was) yea, and without the highest hand of mercy that was
ever lift up to save a mortal man, had been utterly broken to pieces by it? It
is a hard thing for thee (says the Lord by a voice from Acts 9.
heaven to him) (...), to kick or dash thy self against sharp goads or nails,
made of steel or iron, (for so the word signifies) meaning that his
undertaking or setting himself with such violence, to suppress that way which
Christ had a purpose to advance and set up in the world, was an enterprise of
the sorest and most grievous consequence and portendance to him, in the nature
of it, that ever he could have lift up either heart, or head, or hand unto. Vho
ever has been fierce against him (says Job, speaking of God) and has
prospered? Job 9. 4. He that is fierce against any Way or Doctrine which is
from God, makes a covenant with sorrow and trouble, which is like to stand. And
(to make the best of such a doubtful and blind engagement) put the case that
that Way or Doctrine, which men shall prosecute with so much violence and
fierceness of spirit, shall in conclusion be found to have been mistaken,
erroneous, and not from God: yet

^. In this case men shall but offer the sacrifice of fools, a kind of
sacrifice, wherewith God is not delighted. The Athenians worshipped the true
God, as appears by those words of the Apostle unto them, Act. 17. 23. Whom ye
then ignorantly worship, him s^ew I unto you; and yet were Idolaters
notwithstanding. The same Apostle bears record unto his Countrymen the Jews,
That they had Romans 10. 2.
the zeal of God; but this zeal of theirs not being according to knowledge,
in the prosecution of it, they neither pleased God, and were contrary to all
men, forbidding the Apostles to preach unto the Gentiles, that they might be
saved, to fulfill their sins always; because wrath was come upon them to the
uttermost, These. 2. 15, 16. The beast under the Law, though it were a
firstborn, yet was not to be sanctified or offered unto the Lord, if it were
either lame, or blind, Deuteronomy. 15. 19. 21. Nor was any man, though of Aarons
seed, admitted to serve at the Altar, that had any blemish or imperfection of
blindness on him, Levit. 21. 17, 18. God regards no man's zeal without
knowledge, though it should pitch and fasten upon things, never so agreeable
unto his will: nor does he care that his enemies themselves should be
destroyed, but upon lawful trial and conviction.

Secondly, Whatsoever Doctrine or way is recommended and tendered unto men in
the Name of God, whether either the one or the other be from God or no, yet he
expects from men (as well he may) that reverence and regard unto that Great
Name of his, wherein such things are brought and tendered unto them, that they
should be diligently considered, and due proof and examination made, whether
they be from him, or no, before they be rejected, and much more before opposed.
And certainly men do but pollute and profane that ever-blessed Name of God,
by making refuse, yea abomination (as many do) of such things as are brought
unto them in that Name, before they know upon any considerable grounds or terms
of knowledge, whether the things be indeed from God, or no; yea, though the
things thus rejected should at last be found worthy of no better entertainment,
as having no agreement with God, or his Word. The event or issue in this case,
though it should fall out to the best for such men, will very little case or
qualify their sin. Shall not that wicked tyrant and enemy of God, Eglon, rise
up in judgment, and condemn that generation of men we now speak of, who, when
Ehud only signified that he had a message from God unto him, did not presently
reject the message before he knew it, or fall foul upon the messenger, but (as
the Text says, Judge. 2. 20.) arose up from his throne, addressing himself in
that deportment of Reverence to receive it?

Thirdly, (and lastly) It is extreme madness in men to run the hazard we
speak of, I mean of fighting against God, in seeking to suppress such ways
or courses as they are not able to demonstrate, but that they are ways of God
indeed, because, in case they be not the ways of God, he himself will give
testimony from Heaven against them in due time, he will suppress and scatter
them, and bring them to naught: and then there will be no danger for men to
reject and abhor them. Dearly beloved (says the Apostle, Romans 12. 19.)
avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath, i. unto the wrath of God,
whose just avenging hand is lift up against those that wrong you, and deal
unjustly with you, and is ready to smite for your sakes; as it follows: For
it is written, Vengeance is mine: I will repay, says the Lord. It were great
folly in any man, to expose himself to the just offense and displeasure of
God, by seeking to right himself in an angry and revengefull manner upon him,
whom he certainly knows has injured him, God himself being ready with his
stroke of justice to do him right, and to avenge him on his adversary, though
he himself should be patient and ^it still. But it would be a point yet of
seven-times greater folly then so, for a man to fall foul in a way of revenge
upon an imaginary adversary, and who (at most) can only be supposed or
suspected to have done him wrong, considering that God who is an infallible
discerner and judge of injuries and wrongs, and withal a just Avenger of all
such things, will shortly appear for his full vindication, in case he has
been wronged indeed. Nor has any man cause in this case to fear, lest whilst
the grass grows, the s^eed should starve, (as the Proverb is) I mean, that
the person injured, whether really or in supposition only, should suffer
loss, by possessing his soul in patience, until the day of divine recompense
and vengeance shall come. For God certainly will give full and ample
consideration for all forbearance and long-suffering of men, wherein and
whereby the rights of his Throne are tendered and maintained. It were no less
then an exaltation of folly in any man, to expose his own life to the stroke of
justice, by assaulting the life of a malefactor whilst he is going to execution.

Again, secondly, (by way of Instruction) If to attempt the destruction or
suppression of any Doctrine, or way, which is from God in so high and
peremptory a manner, as was formerly expressed, be a fighting against God, take
we knowledge from hence also, what ^in by name in all likelihood (at least) and
with highest pregnancy of conjecture, it is, which ever and anon thus separates
between God and us, which still troubles our proceedings, and makes the Sun of
our peace to go so often backwards in the Heavens thereof. Is there not a
fighting against God amongst us, as well as a fighting for him? and do we not
pull down by the one, what we build up by the other? Are not the hearts, and
the heads, and the hands of far the greatest part of men amongst us, engaged,
and that to the highest of all bitterness, hatred, and enmity, against that
Way of ordering the things of God's worship, and of governing his Churches and
Saints, which has been, and still is held forth in his Name unto this Nation,
by some Ambassadors and Messengers of his of a very choice anointing, and
endued with strength from on High, (many of them) as it were on purpose to
stand by some such way or counsel of God, until it had thoroughly taken the
hearts, and judgments, and consciences of men; besides many thousands more,
and those (for the most part) of the best and choicest servants of God amongst
us? Is not this WAY blasphemed and spoken against; yea, is not the destruction
and ruin of it, with the grinding of the faces and breaking of the bones, with
the suppression and crushing of those that hold it forth unto us, consulted,
studied, and attempted by some that would be thought Pillars and prime men in
the House and Temple of God? And have they not a great vote of the generality
of people, who know little of God, or his Ways, concurring with them, to
strengthen their hand herein? May we not say of this WAY, as the Jews sometimes
said unto Paul, concerning the Doctrine of Christ which he preached, with those
that professed it; We know that this Sect is every where spoken against? Act.
28. 22. So Acts 18. 2^
then in case it ever shall appear, or be found to be a WAY of God, we are in
a Praemunire for the present, and have forfeited our peace, help and comfort in
God, as touching deliverance from our present dangers and miseries, by this our
fighting against him. I presume you will all readily acknowledge and confess,
that if there be such a sin ruling and ^aigning amongst us, as fighting against
God, this of all other is like to be the Achan, the Troubler of our Israel;
that betrays our armies, our faithful and valiant men into the hands of their
and our enemies, and that makes us ever and anon, retrograde in our motions and
tendencies toward rest and peace. Whoever has Job 9. 4.
hardened himself against him (says Job, as we heard before) and prospered?
If this be but granted, it is enough to demonstrate our case and condition to
be very dangerous and doubtful* at the best: For whether that WAY we speak of,
which is so generally trodden and trampled upon like clay and mire in the
streets, as well by the foot of ignorance and profaneness, as of learning and
better accomplishment, be the WAY of God, or no; most certain it is, that all
the wit, wisdom, parts, learning, judgment, that have encountered and opposed
it hitherto, have not been able by any demonstrative or concluding proof, to
overthrow that title or claim which it makes unto God as the author and
founder of it. Therefore unto me it is a thing of the saddest consideration
under heaven, and of more grievous portendance unto us, then any thing else,
(as far as I am able to discern) that we should hang the great weight of the
peace and safety of a whole Nation, all our hopes and expectations of help and
assistance from God in our greatest extremities, upon the brittle pin of so
doubtful a disputation, as that which is maintained, and yet depending,
between the one WAY and the other. For in case that way against which the
spirits of men are so generally and fiercely bent, shall at last be found to be
the Way of God, we are all this while looked upon from heaven as fighters
against God, and so have as good as given hostages to our enemies, that we
never mean to prosper, or do any great thing against them. Whereas, if men
would but follow Gamaliels counsel in the Text, and refrain themselves for a
season from laying either violent hands, or tongues upon this way, until God
had either untied or cut the knot, till he had given sentence against it, the
doubtfulnesse of the disputation, need not, would not be prejudicial in the
least, either to our present proceedings, or future peace: and men do but make
themselves wise above that which is written; yea, above that which is either
reason or faith, to think, or speak otherwise.

If it be objected, that Reformation suffers and loses time, because that Way
is not yet hedgd up with thorns, but men are suffered to walk in it.

I answer, First, If the Way be one of those ways which call God Father;
Reformation indeed suffers, and loses time, but not because this Way is not
hedged up with thorns, but because it is not laid more open, because it is not
repaired and made more passable by the favor and countenance of men in place,
whether Ministers or others; that so the people of God, whose hearts are
toward it, may walk therein without fear.

2. That reformation (so called) which is the apple of so many eyes, and the
joy of so many hearts, needs suffer nothing, nor lose an hours time, though the
Way we speak of, be occupied in peace by those, whose feet by the light of Gods
Word and Spirit (at least as they conceive) are guided into it. For what does
the poor Fly sitting on the top of the wheel to hinder the waggoner from
driving on his way? If the residue of the Nation be subjected to this
Reformation, the Nation it self may be said to be reformed (according to such a
denomination, as this Reformation will afford) notwithstanding such a number of
persons (comparatively so inconsiderable, I mean as touching their In several
populous towns in the Low Countries, scarce every 5th, nay, not every 8th
person (as I have been credibly informed) is immembred* into any of their
Churches, and yet the government of the Nation is reputed Presbyteriall. 1 John
5. 19.
number) as adhere to this Way, be not concluded in it. During the regency of
Prelaticall extravagancy, there were many Non-conformists; yea, several
Congregations of people in the land, who openly disclaimed and protested
against that government; and yet the Nation was looked upon as Episcopally
reformed, notwithstanding. The irregularity of the mountains and valleys in the
surface of the earth, troubles no man's opinion concerning the perfect
roundnesse of it, because it is swallowed up into victory by the vastness of
the globe. John says* that this whole world lies in wickedness,
notwithstanding a remnant who were born of God. The gleanings of Independency
(so called) will not hinder the vintage of Presbytery.

3. If a complete National Reformation be indeed the Garland or Crown that is
contended for, let but Presbytery bestir her self, and act her part within her
Jurisdiction, with as much diligence, wisdom and faithfulness, as the
Congregationall Way will undertake to act hers amongst her Proselytes; and
there will not be the least occasion to fear, but that the whole and entire
body of the Nation will shine with the beauty and luster of a perfect
Reformation. If this Way shall be found tardy, or loose, and not to keep pace
with her sister in carrying on the work of Reformation, even her enemies
themselves being Judges, let her suffer; yea, let her with her children be cast
out of doors. Therefore it is but a frivolous and putid slander cast upon her,
when she is charged with enmity to Reformation: But,

4. (And lastly) I would gladly know, what, or what manner of Reformation can
reasonably be expected, or hoped for, without her. Such a Reformation, as that
whereby that Angel of darkness, Satan is reformed, when he is transformed into
an Angel of light (as the Apostle speaks) is no reformation of desires: 2
Cor. ^^. 14.
open looseness and profaneness reformed into Pharasaicall hypocrisy, brings
in little to religion. For what says our Savior of such a Reformation as
this? Verily I say unto you, that Publicans and Harlots go before you into the
Kingdom of God. If then such a reformation Mat 21. 31.
as this should take place, it is much to be feared, that when the Genealogy
of it shall be sought, it will be found to be of the house and lineage of that
Reformation, which the Scribes and Pharisees attempted in the world, when they
compassed Sea and Land to Mat. 23. 15.
make one Proselyte; and when he was made, they made him twofold more a child
of hell, then he was before; yea, then they were themselves; Or, what is the
Reformation, wherein the Way we speak of, cannot be admitted to have either
part or fellowship? Will it take the members of an Harlot, and make them the
members of Christ, whether either Christ or such members themselves, will or
no? Or will it undertake to reconcile darkness with light, to settle a
communion betwixt Christ and Belial, to throw down the partition wall, and make
the wilderness of the world the garden of God, the Church and the world,
enter-commoners? Or what is the glory or greatness of the design of it, that
the Congregationall Way is counted unworthy to be so much as a stander by, and
to behold it? Will it lift up its hand, to quash and crush, to break the hearts
and bones of the one half of the most religiously affected, and best
conscienced people in the Land, for trading in Apes and Peacocks, for holding
some erroneous opinions (perhaps erroneously so called) as if it self were the
Lord of infallibility, and had a non posse errare settled by God, as an
inheritance upon it? I profess ingenuously, that when I put my self into a
posture of the greatest indulgency I am able, to consider of the reformation so
much spoken of, and even conflict with my spirit to form and cast the possible
effects and fruits of it to the greatest advantage, I am not able to apprehend
any thing desirable likely to come of it, either in respect of a civil, or
religious accommodarion unto the Nation, above what might be expected, and that
upon terms of a far more promising hope, from the other Way which indureth so
much contradiction from men. But I apparently foresee many inconveniences, and
those not of a light or contemptible importance likely to attend it, for which
no place would be found in the other Way. Particularly, it is to me instead of
all arguments and demonstrations, that no Reformation is according to the mind
of God and of Jesus Christ, which is destructive to the edification of the
Saints, and directly impeding their growth in grace, and in the knowledge of
the Lord Jesus Christ. And whether such a Reformation (if yet it be lawful so
to call it) which injoynes the Saints to sit under, and hold themselves to such
Pastors, with whom their hearts cannot close in that relation with any
tolerable satisfaction, nor yet are capable of his Ministry, or any
edification by it, be not under that condemnation, I leave to men that have not
sold themselves under partiality, to judge and determine.

If it be said, but men shall have liberty to choose what Pastor they please,
and to sit under what Ministry they desire, if they will but choose their
dwellings accordingly. I answer:

1. There may be (and I believe are) many of a rich anointing from God for the
work of the Ministry, and much desired by a considerable number of godly
persons, in Pastoral relation, who must say their consciences nay, to accept
of a Parochial charge. In this case the change of a man's house will do nothing
toward the blessing of his soul; if such a Reformation, as most men's thoughts
run upon, should be established.

2. All the dwellings within the Parochial line, relating to the Pastor that
is desired, may be filled with Inhabitants already; and so there is no place,
or possibility (at least for the present) for him whose soul longs after that
Pastor, to enjoy him: and when, or whether ever whilst he lives, the door now
shut against him will be open, no man knows.

3. Many times the situation and convenience of a man's present dwelling for
trade, employment, etc. is such, that he cannot remove, but at the peril of
his estate, and ruining himself and his whole family. And how they, who shall
compel men, either to sacrifice their peace, comfort, and subsistenc(...) this
present world, or else run the hazard of losing a subsistence in that which is
to come, will answer it either before the righteous God, or reasonable men, is
above my apprehension.

4. This liberty of choosing Pastors only by choosing houses, is so
conditioned, that it smiles only upon the rich, (and that but somewhat faintly
neither) but frowns upon the poor; and so is partial, and therefore not
Christian. He that has enough of that, which (as Solomon says) answers all
things, may probably be able to accommodate Eccles. 10. 19.
himself within the precincts of what parish he pleases, in point of dwelling;
as either by buying out some Inhabitant, or by purchasing ground, and building
upon it, or the like; but the case of the poor man is many times such, that he
cannot tell where to find another hole in all the world to hide his head in,
besides that wherein it is hid already. So that this liberty of choosing a
Pastor, being nothing else, if plainly interpreted, but only a liberty of
choosing such or such a Parish determinately to dwell in, is little better then
a mere collusion, in respect of those that are poor, and (indeed) rather an
upbraiding of them with their poverty, then any gratification of them with a
liberty.

5. (And lastly) such a liberty as this we now speak of* were it more valueable
then it is, is no gratuity, benefit or blessing of that Reformation so
importunely demanded and pressed for by many, being nothing else, but what was
every man's permission and enjoyment under the iron rod of Episcopal tyranny. I
am more beholding to every man that comes near me, for not taking away my life,
then I am to any Reformation whatsoever, for giving me liberty to choose my
Pastor upon such terms. This for answer in full to that undue charge against
the Congregationall Way, wherein it was attainded of inconsistency with, and
enmity against Reformation.

A second objection levied against it, and all sufferance of it, by those that
are adversaries to it, is, that if it be permitted quietly to walk up and down
amongst us, and not be suppressed, it will soon make the Land unquiet, fill the
Land with troubles, t^mults, divisions, distractions, dissentions, discontents,
confusions, in City, in Country, in relations, in families, and where not? To
this also I answer.

1. That perempt(...)ness and height of confidence in an accuser, is no sign
at all of reality or truth in the accusation. We know (say the Jews,
concerning Christ) that this man is a sinner, Joh. 9. 24. And again, Joh. 8.
48. Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan, John 9. 2^.
and have a Devil? And yet for all their knowledge, and confidence of
well-speaking, the Lord Christ was never the more either a Sinner, or a
Samaritan, or had a Devil. The Way we speak of, is never the nearer the guilt
of those things that are charged upon it, because her accusers bewray so little
tenderness or ^esitancy in drawing up their charge.

2. Nor is the tragical dress or pointed style of an accusation any
demonstrative proof of a guilt commensurable thereunto; no, nor yet of any
proportion or degree of guilt at all. Want of crime and delinquency, either in
things or persons, which are accused* many times makes a greater noise in the
accusation, then a reality or fullness of guilt would do. Innocence ^ath
beg^tten the rankest and fiercest accusations that ever were managed by the
tongues or pens of men. Thou love all devouring words (said David) O tho^
deceitful Psalm. 62. 4.
(or, false) tongue. They that accuse either upon knowledge or fear of little
or no guilt in the accused, still labor to lay on accusation enough, lest
nothing otherwise should be believed by the Judge. That mount of accusation
which is raised so high against the Way we now maintain, does not at all prove
that there is any thing in it that deserves battery.

3. There is no substantial reason at all can be given, why this Way should
occasion troubles, divisions, discontents, or the like, above the rate of that
other Way, which so much magnifies it self against it; except (happily) this,
that it has more of God and Christ in it, then that other: and then it is no
marvel if it be more offensive, and troublesome to the world. But suppose both
equally interessed in this, I affirm and undertake to demonstrate, that in the
nature, frame, and constitution of it otherwise, it is every whit as gentle,
sweet, complying and accommodating, and no whit more threatening or portending
troubles or distractions, then the other; yea, that in all such considerations
as these, it has the pre-eminence: For,

1. It seeks not, it attempteth not the molestation, harm, or disturbance of
any sort of men that are contrary-minded to it; it thinks no evil, it
speaks no evil of such: if it conceives them upright and faithful with God
and Jesus Christ, it imbraceth them with all love, tenderness and honor, as
partakers of like precious faith with it self; and nothing doubts, but that
they serve and worship God with as much sincerity and singleness of heart, and
are accordingly accepted by him in their Way, as it self.

2. If God should please to give it favor in the eyes, and interest in the
hearts of the powers of this world, it thinks it very un-Christian and
unworthy, to arm it self with this interest, to fight against the peace of the
consciences of other men. If any of this Way have miscarried in any of these
particulars, they have done it as men, and not as children of this Way; the
principles of their Way taught them better things. And why, or how a way,
baptized into no worse, or harder spirit then this, should come to be
arraigned, as a troubler of State, or strife-maker, a dissention-breeder
amongst men, except it be by a spirit of contention and strife indeed, is to me
a thing incomprehensible. Nevertheless it is no new thing, that both the ways
and servants of God should be charged with such crimes and demerits, not only
whereof they are wholly innocent and free, but which have a special
contrariety to some such grace or virtue, wherein they have a remarkable and
choice pre-eminence above others. Thus Joseph, the great mirror of chastity,
was accused of Adultery, Genesis 39. Moses, the meekest man upon earth, of
ambition, and self-assuming, Numb. 16. Elijah of being the troubler of Israel,
1 King. 18. who was the Chariot and Horsemen of Israel, to defend it: 2 King.
2. The Lord Christ himself, in whom the Godhead dwelt bodily, of having a
Devil, Joh. 8. and so of being an enemy unto Caesar, when as it was, and is he,
by whom Kings reign; with many the like. Therefore however it may seem strange
that a Way of God, which is eminently set, strongly bent, and (in a manner)
every ways calculated for peace, should suffer in the tongues and thoughts of
men as a disturber of States, and sower of dissentions amongst men, yet is
there nothing in this, but what has been acted, and that over and over upon
the Theater of the world formerly.

If it be here replied and said; Yea, but experience rises up, and confirms
the truth of that accusation and charge against the Way you speak of, which you
would wipe off; this shows and proves against all denial and exception, that
where your Way is entertained, Congregations are torn, families rent, relations
distanced and divided, etc.

I answer, first, that Aristotle long since observed, that (...), was a very
frequent Paralogisme or mistake amongst men, nothing is more ordinary then for
men to range consequents and effects under one and the same notion, especially
where the disproportion of causality is not very notorious and broad. A man in
reason can hardly think, that any man, compos mentis, (as we use to say) should
be so defective or weak in his inellectualls, as to think that the building of
Tenderton Steeple, should be the cause of Godwins Sands, only because these
sands were never known to be before the building of that Steeple; yet old Mr.
Latimer relates the Story in one of his Sermrns, and improves it to very good
purpose: By such a form of arguing as this, Judas his betraying his Master,
should have been the effect of the woman's pouring out that box of ointment upon
his head, mentioned, Mat. 26. 7. For he never betrayed him until this ointment
was powered out upon him; and immediately after, he did. The Way we speak of, is
never the more any cause of troubles, dissentions, or divisions, because
troubles, dissentions and divisions, many times follow upon the embracement and
entertainment of it.

2. If troubles or divisions were the proper effects of this way, then the
more, and more generally it were taken up and practiced in a family, City, or
Country, the more troubles and divisions there would be. Effects are still
found in proportion to their causes, where nothing interposeth to hinder it.
But where it is generally assented and submitted unto, whether in families,
relations, or otherwise, there is as much unity, love, and peace, (as touching
matter of government) as where Presbytery has its highest throne. Therefore
the reason why troubles and divisions sometimes accompany it, is not because it
is entertained, but because it is not entertained sufficiently, or with that
generality of consent, which is desirable.

3. When troubles and divisions are occasioned in relations, families,
Congregations, etc. by the meeting together of two opposite ways, why should
the one way be still burdened and charged with the occasion of such troubles,
and the other acquitted, there being no ground or reason at all, why either
that which is acquitted, should be judged more innocent; or that which is
charged, more obnoxious or peccant, in this kind. Nay,

4. If matters were duly and fairly examined between the two Combatants in
this case, the way we plead for, would be found via lactea, the candid,
harmless, and peaceable way: and her corrivall or competitresse, via
sanguinea, the trouble and strife-making way. Only by pride (says Solomon)
comes contention. Surely that Prove. 13. 10.
way which commands homage and subjection unto her from all her fellows, and
threatens to break them all in pieces like a potters vessel with a rod of
iron, if they will not bow, and deny themselves for her sake, is the way of
pride, and so of contention, (according to Solomon's Logique) not that which is
gentle, and easy to be entreated by all others, claiming no superiority or
jurisdiction over any. If there be any clashing or unkindnesse between the two
ways, Independency (so called) and Presbytery, when they meet together,
either in a relation, family, etc. the very complexion of the latter bewrayes
that to be still the foundresse of the quarrel. To me it is a wonder of the
first magnitude, how men come to have so much ground of hope as to set their
foot upon, of composing differences and distractions, of settling peace and love
throughout the Nation, by exalting one way of Discipline, of Church Government,
for the treading down and trampling under foot all others. If Ephraim be
against Manasseh, is it any ways Esa. 9. 21.
like but that Manasseh will be against Ephraim? And God himself prophesying
of Ishmael, told his mother, that he would be a wild Genesis 16.
man: and that his hand should be against every man; and every man's hand
against him. Undoubtedly that way, whose hand shall be against every way, will
find that the hand of every way will be against it: and then what manner of
peace can reasonably be expected under the predominancy of such a way? That way
which shall be able to out-reason, not that which shall out-clubbe, all other
ways, will at last exalt unity, and be it self exalted by gathering in all
other ways unto it. Solomon tells us, that all that is taken in hunting, is
Prove. 12. 27.
not always roasted; and that an inheritance may be hastily gotten, Prove. 20.
21.
and yet the end thereof not be blessed: and the Prophet Habakk(...) denounces
a woe against him that shall build a town with blood. But, Hab. 2. 12.


5. I would gladly know what the plaintiff in the objection means, by
distractions, rents, divisions, in relations, families, Congregations, etc. If
he means only this, that the father goes to hear one Minister in one place,
and the son another Minister, in another, and that some within the same
parochial line go to this Minister, or are members of this Church, others to
another Minister, and are members of another Church, and the like, etc. I
answer, That in this case, I know no more occasion, (at least no more
necessity) of any distraction, rent, or division, then when the father being
free of one company, as suppose of Merchant-taylors, shall still upon occasion
of the meeting of this company, repair to the hall belonging to it; and the
son being free of another, as perhaps of the company of Grocers, shall upon the
like occasion repair to the hall appertaining to them. Who knows not that the
members of all the several Companies in London, dwell scatteringly and
promiscuously up and down the City, with the greatest irregularitie of
intermixture that lightly can be, and without any observation of their
relations to their respective Companies, sundry members of twenty several
Companies (it may be) inhabiting within one and the same parish; and yet
without any complaint or inconvenience of rents, distractions, or divisions? Or
if by rents, distractions, and divisions, he means distances or alienations in
affections; nor can these with any face of reason be charged upon that way,
whose cause we plead; because it is a maine principle and maxim in this way,
to hold terms of love and Christian correspondence, with all persons of what
judgment soever in point of Government, if they be godly, as well as with her
own children (as has in effect been argued formerly.) But in this case the
Roman proverb (it seems) must be verified; Aemilius fecit, plectitur Rutilius.
Or 3. (and lastly) if by rents, distractions, and^. he means, the shaking or
troubling of men's judgments, raising doubts or scruples in men's consciences
concerning the way they went peaceably in before: I answer, 1. That if they
were built upon sure and clear foundations in their former way, there is not
the least ground or reason why they should be troubled or shaken in their
judgments, because they see another way acted and practiced by others: or 2.
if they were but at peradventure in their former way, and it was not the
knowledge, but the ignorance of the truth, that both put them into it and kept
them in it, they have no cause to complain of being awakened out of so sinful
and dangerous a sleep, though it were never so sweet and pleasing to them. But,

6. (and lastly) S(...)pose that all which the objection charge upon the way
we speak for, be granted for truth, that where this Way comes and is
entertained, Congregations are torn* families rent, relations distanced, etc.
Yet this makes much more for it, then against it; because such figures and
characters as these, are the known impressions of the Gospel upon the world,
where it comes in power, and is entertained in truth. Think ye (says our
Savior) Luke 12. 51. etc.
that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, nay, but rather debate. For
from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against two,
and two against three. The father shall be divided against the son, and the son
against the father: the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against
the mother: the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the daughter in
law against her mother in law. Nor is it to be conceived that these divisions
in relations and families, foretold by Christ as the common and ordinary
effects and consequents of the Gospel (for in different respects they may be
either) are to be limited only to such either relations or families, wherein
the ground or occasion of the division should be, the receiving of the Gospel
in the maine truth and substance of it by the one party, the other party
absolutely rejecting it, as if they were only to take place in such cases as
this; but they are to be extended to such both families and relations also,
where some particular and special points or truths of the Gospel are
entertained by one party, and rejected by another, though both agree as well
in the belief, as in the Profession of the Gospel in the general. Experience
shows that rents and divisions take place in both, as well, yea, and that with
as much heat and distemper of affection, in the latter case and upon the
latter occasion, as in the former. Now if the question in this latter case be,
Whether the occasion of the division be rather to be imputed to the truth held
and practiced by the one party, or to the error held and practiced in
opposition to the truth, by the other: The answer is, that where all were
before bound up in unity and peace, by a common band of error, there the
occasion of the division must needs be imputed unto the truth coming amongst
them. Therefore were it granted, that the way so much contested against, did
indeed occasion, rents, divisions, distractions, in relations, in families, in
Congregations where it comes, this would rather turn unto it for a testimony,
and assert its original from God, then otherwise: The Gospel (...)elfe works
no otherwise then thus, where it is preached and entertained. And as Aristotle
supposes, that in case any piece or fragment were broken off from the maine
body of the Heavens, it would move circularly, according to the natural motion
of the maine body; in like manner any particular opinion or practice which
moves, acts, and works, according to the manner and tenor of that motion,
acting, and working, which are genuine and proper to the Gospel, is so much the
more likely to be a parcel or branch of the Gospel: but however, such a
moving, acting, and working as this, can with no semblance or color of reason,
be drawn into any contrary interpretation, or be made an argument of the
nonconformitie of it unto the truth.

A third objection against that way whose condemnation outruns her trial day
and way, in the world, is; that it opens a door to all errors, heresies, and
unsound opinions, yea to all looseness and profaneness, and consequently it
cannot but be a thing displeasing unto God, and so prejudicial to the peace
and safety of the Nation, if it should be tolerated, or practiced amongst us.
But to these things also full and clear answers are not wanting. For,

First, it being certain that error cannot be healed or suppressed but by the
manifestation of the truth, as darkness cannot be destroyed or removed but by
the shining of the light; that way which affords the greatest advantages and
the best encouragements unto men, both for the searching out* and bringing
forth into light the truth being found, must needs be so far from opening
doors unto errors, heresies, unsound opinions, etc. that it steers the mo^^
advantageous and hopeful course that lightly can be taken, for the evicting,
and consequently for the suppression of them. I need not add, that it is the
congregationall way (and this only amongst all its fellows) that rejoyecth in
the method of this warfare and advance against those enemies of God, and
Religion, errors and heresies. And,

Secondly, for the way sir-named Presbyterian, which conjures all men's gifts,
parts, and industry into a synodicall circle, and suffers* them only to dance
there, as it may possibly shut the doors against some errors and heresies,
which were not like to stay long, in case they should enter under the other
way; so it is in every whit as much possibility and danger, of shutting the
door upon, and compelling such errors and heresies as are already gotten in,
and otherwise have a mind to be gone, to stay it, and so to infest and annoy
the truth, and peace of the Churches of Christ, against their wills. But,

Thirdly, I would gladly learn of the sons of this objection, how, which way,
or in what respect the way so much objected against, commits this folly-deed of
opening a door unto errors and heresies. Certain I am, first, that this way
hates both the one and the other with as perfect an b^tred, as her
competitresse does. Secondly, I fully believe, that this way is as diligent,
faithful, and industrious to slay these enemies of Christ by the sword of the
Spirit, (which is in special manner consecrated for such executions) as the
other way. Thirdly, if the error be dangerous, amounting to, or near an
heresy, after two or three admonitions (that is, according to her warrant from
Heaven) she casts it out of the line of her communication, unto him who cast it
in (I mean, Satan.) If to hate errors and heresies, to preach with all
diligence and faithfulness against errors and heresies, to excommunicate
errors and heresies, be to open a door unto error and heresies, then must the
adversaries of the way whereof we speak, be justified in their accusation of
her: otherwise they speak at the utmost peril of their reputations, when they
lay such things to her charge.

If it be here replied and said; Yea, but all this notwithstanding, the w^y you
plead for, is but feeble-handed, for the suppression of errors and heresies;
because these, though hated, preached against, and cast out of the Church by
excommunication, may yet live and gather head again in the world, except error
and errant be further restrained by a secular hand, and heresy and heretic
put to silence together in the grave. And this, which is the most, if not the
only effectual means to preserve the wheat from those tares, the way of your
desires exercises not, nor yet approves.

I answer: first, we presume that Prisons and Swords are no Church Officers,
nor any appurtenances to any Ecclesiastique authority in what form of
Government soever.

Secondly, we suppose that the Lord Christ so far tendered the spiritual
safety and peace of his Churches, as to leave them sufficiently furnished, and
every ways appointed with internal provision^, for the effectual procurement
and preservation of them, without any concurrence of any heterogeneall or
external power. Especially considering, that he foresaw, that these Churches
of his, for the space of three hundred years together, and somewhat more
(during which term he knew likewise that they would continue in their greatest
purity, and perfection of love and loyalty toward him) were not like to have
any accommodation at all in this kind from any secular or civil power.

Thirdly, though the Churches of Christ, during this period of time wherein
they had no comportance with any secular arm for their preservation either in
this or any other kind, were not wholly free from errors and heresies; yet did
they quit and defend themselves against the danger spreading and
troublesomenesse of them upon better terms, and with far better success,
then they were able to do afterward, when they had an arm of flesh and a
sword in it* to assist them. Note this.

Fourthly, if persons delivered up unto Satan by the Church, whether for Error,
Heresy* or other crime, were presently to be cut off by the secular Sword, all
opportunity for the effectual and saving work of that ordinance of Christ
upon the persons so delivered up, would be cut off also. The Apostle, 1*
Corinth. 5. 5. expressly affirms the end of Excommunication or delivering up
unto Satan, to be the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus. And 1 Timothy 1. 20. he ^aith, that he had delivered
Hymeneus and Alexander unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme. Now
as natural medicines and physical receipts, must have a time to work, before
they can in an ordinary course of providence produce their m^st proper and
desired effects; in like manner the ordinances and means which the Lord Christ
has graciously appointed for the everlasting salvation of the precious souls
of men, must, according to the nature and condition of their respective
workings, and the tenor of Gods providence observed for the time of his falling
in with them to make them effectual, have their full and just allowance of
time given and permitted unto them, to work upon men effectually. And whosoever
shall limit or straiten the providence of God, in this kind, by any hasty or
violent taking away a soul from under the influence and working of any
ordinance of Christ appointed for his salvation, before the blessed work of
Repentance be accomplished in him, will be arraigned before the tribunal of
the living God, as accessarie to the blood of that ^oul, except he can show a
better warrant from God for such an action, then I know any. And God himself
having no where prescribed or limited any determinate or set time, within which
he intends to make the sentence of Excommunication after the passing of it by
the Church, effectual to the saving of the soul, or otherwise never to do it,
I conceive it can be no less then an act of high presumption in any man to
undertake any such prescription or limitation. As God by the voice of the
Gospel calls some at the third and sixth hour; so he calls others Matthew. 20. 6.
at the ninth, and some at the eleventh hour: and why may he not work
savingly, by the sentence of Excommunication with as much liberty, and
difference in respect of time? And this sentence being the last and utmost
means which God is like to afford a poor hardened, impenitent soul for the
eternal peace and salvation of it, how can it but be conceived an act most
unworthy of Christian bowels, to cut him off from this also, whilst God is
pleased to spare him? If it be here objected and said, But if an heretic be
suffered to live, he is in danger of infecting others, and destroying them
eternally. I answer* first, so is a drunkard, a fornicatour, a swearer, a
covetous person, with the like; the lives of all these kinds of sinners are of
as dangerous a consequence in respect of infecting, yea and of destroying the
souls of others, as the life of an heretic is: and yet no man (I presume)
judges this a sufficient ground why such men should be punished with death.
Secondly, as for those that are within the Church, they are not capable of any
communion or commerce with an Heretic that is cast out by Excommunication,
and so are not in danger of being infected by him: and for those that are
without, these are infected already with a disease every whit as mortal, as
any heresy, I mean unbelief. So that infection with heresy, will not much
impair the estates or conditions of these. Thirdly, (and lastly) the truth is,
that an Heretic being dead (especially if punished with death for his opinion
sake) speaks in his surviving heresy with every whit as much authority, and
consequently with every whit as much danger of infecting others therewith, as
he could do if he were alive, if not with more. And so,

Fifthly, (and lastly) concerning other civil means for the suppression and
restraint of those spiritual evils, errors, heresies, etc. as imprisonment,
b^nishment, interdictions, finings, etc. both reason and experience concur in
this demonstration, that such fetters as these put upon the feet of errors and
heresies to secure and keep them under, still have proved (and are like to
prove no other, but) wings whereby they raise themselves the higher in the
thoughts and minds of men, and gain an opportunity of a further and ranker
propagation of themselves in the world. It was an observation of Tacitus long
since, that punitis ingeniis gliscit authoritas; To punish men of parts and
wit, is to cast a spirit of Authority upon them, and to make their reputation
glowe. Men of ordinary capacity, and vulgar apprehension, are and ever will
be inclinable to think, that men of wisdom and worth will never expose
themselves to sufferings, but for that which is weighty, and which has more
in it, then every man sees. And besides, men of better breed, may easily be
swayed by such a principle as this, that wise men, whilst they have the
advantage and odds of their adversaries in reason, will never renounce or
disclaim this so honorable an advantage by calling in the more ignoble
assistance of horn and hoof to their aid. It is true, when Christ was handled
with this rough hand we speak of, that piece of prophecy was verified; I will
smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered; but ordinarily the
smiting of the Shepherd or head of any Sect or error, is the gathering
together, yea the multiplication and increase, of his sheep. But

Fourthly (to the main objection last propounded) whereas the innocent way is
condemned as opening a door to all looseness and profaneness, she may
justly take up David's complaint, and say, Cruel witnesses did rise up: they
laid to my charge things that I knew not. Psalm. 35. 11. The very truth is, that
this way, above all her fellows, is so far from holding any intelligence or
correspondence with looseness and profaneness, that her face is set to
advance righteousness and true holiness in all her quarters. Her heart runs
parallel with David's heart in those his meditations and vows, Psalm. 101. 3, 4.
etc. I will set ^o wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that
turn aside: it shall not cleave to me. I will not know a wicked person. Who so
privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off: him that has an high
look and a proud heart, will I not suffer. Mine eyes shall be upon the
faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me: he that walks in a
perfect way, shall serve me. He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my
house: he that tells lies shall not t^rrie in my sight. I will early destroy
all the wicked of the land: that I may cut off all wicked doers from the City
of the Lord. This is such a draught and copy of Reformation as the Way we
speak of ( mutatis mutandis) emulates, and aspires unto. If David in those
resolutions and practices mentioned, opened a d^ore to looseness and
profaneness, then cannot she excuse her self from part and fellowship with
him, in that sin.

If it be replied and said; but this way takes care for none in point of
holiness, but her own: she suffers all the world about her to lie in
wickedness, and to sleep in death, without looking after them, or taking any
pity or compassion on them. To this also we answer in one word:

That she does as tenderly, as affectionately desire and pray for, yea and with
as much diligence and faithfulness, yea and prudence of endeavor otherwise,
and likelihood of success, attempts and seeks the salvation of those that sit
in darkness and in the shadow of death, as any other way can do. It is true,
she does not judge it any ways conducing toward the quickening of those that
are dead in sins and trespasses, to put them into a conceit that they are
living stones (whilst they are yet dead) by putting them into the building of
the spiritual temple of God: she knows no such method or means of converting
souls unto God, as this. Nor does she willingly suffer any man to ^at and 1
Cor. 11. 29.
drink damnation unto himself, to further him in his salvation. Nor does she
make Faith of apparent unbelief in parents, by baptizing their children, as any
ways accommodating the souls either of the one, or of the other. Therefore if
she declines such things as these, it cannot be argued from hence (except
either ignorance, or a worse Logician, makes the syllogis^e) that therefore she
neglects or casts off all care of seeking the salvation of others; but only
this, that she thinks it no point either of wisdom or charity to expose her
self to the displeasure of God by doing that, which is more like to expose
others also to the same stroke, then any ways to comfort or relieve them. But
whatsoever she can reasonably conceive or judge to be a means any ways likely
to save a soul from death, to translate men from darkness unto life, she girds
her self to minister unto the world both far and near, in every such thing:
She cordially prays for the conversion of the unconverted, she mourns over
them, she causes her light to shine before them, she bears their burdens, she
entreats them gently, she feeds their hungry, and cloatheth their naked (as she
is able) she recompenceth evil for evil unto none of them, with all such
exemplatities of life and conversation, which are sanctified, and appointed by
God for the winning of those without the Word, who refuse to obey it. 1 Pet. 3.
1. And besides all this, (that which is the firstborn means of conversion) she
preaches the Gospel with as much diligence, and faithfulness, and power, and
with as much liberty and freedom unto all to partake with her in this her
ministration, as any other way whatsoever: yea, as ready and forward she is as
any other, to contribute her proportion to the full, whether in counsel,
purse, or otherwise, for the furnishing of all the candlesticks in the land
with burning and shining lights, I mean for the erecting and setting up a
faithful preaching Ministry throughout the Land, yea if it were possible,
throughout the whole world. Therefore

Fifthly, (and lastly, to the main objection) whereas this way with the
permission and sufferance of it, is burdened with this jealousy and fear,
that it is so highly displeasing unto God, that he is not like to turn in
mercy unto the Nation, until it be removed, and all the factors for it taken
away. I answer.

First, that this jealousy and fear is of the same inspiration, with that
wherewith Rabshakeh of old, sought to possess the heart of the good King
Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that so upon the discouragement they
might be the more willing to compound for their City. But if thou say to me, ^^
trust Isa. 36. 7.
in the Lord our God; is it not he whose high places, and whose altars Hezekiah
has taken away, and said to Judah and Jerusalem, ye shall worship before this
altar? That which Hezekiah had done (in destroying Idolatry) with great
acceptance in the sight of God, and which consequently was in it self a pledge
and confirmation unto him and his people that God was and would be with them to
save them and their City out of Rabshakehs hand, this does this deceived
ambitious man contrive into an argument of jealousy and fear unto them, that
God was offended with them; and so represents their hope and confidence, in the
shape of diffidence and deep discouragement unto them. He that persuaded the
woman, that God knew how that in the day wherein they should eat of Genesis 3. 5.
the tree i^ the mid ^^st of the garden, their eyes should be opened, and they
be like gods, etc. has (it seems) possessed many amongst us with this semblable
apprehension, that from the day wherein they shall destroy that way we speak of
out of the Land, and suppre^^e all those that walk in it, God will be gracious
unto them, and remember their iniquities no more; as if to sacrifice the
children in the Fathers sight, were the only means of making atonement with
him. But

Secondly, how does this carry any show or shadow of reason or truth in it,
that God should turn away his face from a State or Nation, for not hating his
people or for refusi^g to persecute his anointed ones? God sometimes said, That
Nation whom they shall serve, I will judge. Genesis 15. 14. Is his mind so far
altered in this point, that now he should say, the Nation who shall give them
liberty, I will judge? The general rule of restraint which God has charged
upon States, Kingdoms, and Nations, is this: Touch not mine a^^i^ted, and do my
Prophets no harm: and has he Psalm. 105. 15.
any where made Independencie (so called) an exception from this rule? or has
he any where made Presbytery a distinguishing character of such of his
anointed ones, who must not be touc^'d, from others of them, who may be
crushed, and whose bon^s may b^ broken? Surely circumcision and unci^cumcision
differed as much, as Presby^erie and Independencie can do: yet the Apostle tells
us, Gal. 6. 15. that in Jesus Christ neither circumcision av^ileth any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. If Independents be new creatures, and
born of God, their Brethren need not fear any displeasure or anger from their
Father, for suffering them to dwell in peace by them in the same Land; but have
cause to rejoice in such their neighborhood and societi^, as being pillars of
the some strength with themselves, to support the State and Nation wherein they
dwell. But

Thirdly, (and lastly) when men's table becomes a snare unto them, Psalm. 69. 2^.
Ver. 25.
and their welfare a trap, it is a sign that God is about to bow down their
backs, if not to make their habitations desolate. When the Jews began to reason
after this manner, (and to act accordingly) If we let him thus alone, all men
will believe on him: and then the Romans shall come, and take away both our
place and nation; it was a Ioh. 11. 48.
presage, that the Romans indeed would come, and take away both: which they
did not many years after. Make the heart of this people fat (says the Lord by
his Prophet, concerning the same people) and make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, lest they see with their Isa. 6. 10.
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert,
and be healed. I say no more in this, but only pray with all mine heart, and
with all my soul, that the people of this Kingdom, may see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, that they may convert,
and be healed. The Heathens were wont to say, Jupiter, quos vult perdere,
dementat.

Another objection leavied against the Way is this: If this way be let alone,
and suffered to take place, it will still undermine the credit and comfort, of
many worthy and conscientious Ministers in the land. For as fast as they,
through the blessing of God upon their faithful labors in the work of the
Ministry, shall convert souls unto God; this Way will allure them away from
them unto it self; whereby their hand must needs be enfeebled and discouraged
to their work. But to this also I answer.

First, that if that way of Government and worship, wherein those good
Ministers shall walk, who are supposed to convert people unto God, be indeed
and in truth the way of God, there is little ground or cause of fear, that any
other way should separate between them and their converted ones. For first, the
very grace of conversion, being dispensed unto these by their hand, is a great
and solemn engagement upon them, to love and honor them above others.
Secondly, the person being dearly loved, and highly honored, gives credit and
interest both in the judgments and affections of those who do so love and
honor, to all his matters, as well of opinion as practice; at least is
complete armor of proof against any prejudice in respect of either. Thirdly,
when men and women are converted unto God, they are endued with a principle of
a nearer and more inward sympathy and compliance with all the ways of God,
then they had before. So that there is more cause for Ministers to fear the
withdrawing of their people from them before their conversion, then after, in
case the way of worship and government which they embrace, be of God. For in
this case and supposition, unconverted ones have no inward sutablenesse of
soul, to incline them to love or delight in this way, and consequently their
hearts must needs sit loose (if they stand not in opposition) ^o it: but those
that are converted, are baptized into such a spirit, which is apt to comport
and correspond with it. Again

Secondly, if the hearts of men and women upon their conversion unto God, are
so generally found (for otherwise there is no place for the jealo^^ie, which is
the ground of the objection) to stand in propension to this way, is not this an
argument, if not demonstrative, yet of a very high importance to evince, that
this way is of a truth, the Way of God? I will wait on thy Name (says David)
for it is good before thy Saints; or, because thy Psalm. 52. 9.
Saints like it well (as another translation reads.) So that this great Prophet
and King thought the general approbation and concurrence of the Saints,
sufficiently assertive of the acceptablenes of a way or practice, in the sight
of God.

Thirdly, those Ministers who have the spirit of this glory cast upon them by
God, to beget sons and daughters unto him by the Gospel, have no cause to envy
the line and measure of those who receive them from their hand, upon such
terms. That which our Savior spoke in another case, is every what as
considerably true in this: viz. that it is a more blessed thing to give, then
Act. 20 35.
to receive: And the Apostle Paul makes no other account, but that his relation
of a spiritual Father unto the Corinths, his begetting of them by the Gospel,
was much more honorable unto him, then the relation of an Instructor, or
builder up, was, or would be unto others. For though you have ten thousand
Instructors 1 Cor. 4. 15.
i^ Christ, (says he) yet have ye not many Fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have
begotten you through the Gospel. And elsewhere he counts it a masterpiece in
the spiritual building, to lay the foundation. According to the grace of God
which is given to me, as a wise 1 Cor. 3. 10.
master builder I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon. So
then, planting being more Apostolical then watering (it was Paul that planted,
and but Apollos that watered, 1 Cor. 3. 6.) and laying the foundations of life
and immortality in men, of a more honorable interpretation, then the building
of them up in their Faith; the Ministers so much tendered in the objection,
have not the least color for any such grievance or complaint, as is there
presented on their behalf, indeed and in realitie of truth no more, then the
Apostles themselves had, for complaining against such Ministers and Pastors,
who feed those flock^ of Christ which they had first converted unto him. And
without all Hebr. 7. 7.
contradiction (says the Apostle) the lesser is blessed, but never envied, of
the greater.

Fourthly (and lastly) the gracious and bountiful God has so laid it in his
counsel and decree, that, though the saying be true, which our Savior takes
notice of, Job. 4. 37. That one sows, and another reapeth; yet both he that
sows, and he that reapeth, should rejoice together. ver. 36. So that as
Abigail told David, 1 Samuel 25. 30, 31.
that when the Lord should have done unto him all the good which he had
promised him, it would be no grief unto him, nor offense of mind, that he had
not shed blood causlesse, or avenged himself; no more will it be the least
occasion of uncomfortablenesse or complaint unto Ministers, who have been
faithful unto God, and brought home souls unto him, when they shall shine like
stars in the firmament of Dan. 12. 3.
Heaven, that some of the children of their labors departed from under their
hand when time was, to seek pasture and soulaccommodations elsewhere.

Another objection seeming to war with an high hand against the way hitherto
protected, is this: Can that in reason be thought to be the way of God, which
seems so only in the eyes of a few inconsiderable, and (for the most part)
illiterate persons* and not rather that, which triumphs in the vote and
suffrage of a Reverend, learned, pious and frequent Assembly; yea and further
has the approbation of many wise and worthy persons Eccles. 9. 11.
in full concurrence with it? Do not wise men see more then those that are
weak, and many, then few? I answer,

First, that Solomon returned, and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to
the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor
yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but that
time and chance happens unto them all; meaning, that God still reserves a
liberty to himself to interpose, and to carry the issues and events of things
against all advantages and likelihoods of second causes, when and where and as
often as he pleases. And therefore as King As^ in his cry unto the Lord his 2
Cor. 14. 11.
God, said, It is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them
that have no power: in like manner it is but of one and the same consideration
with God, to bless the world with the Revelation of truth, whether it be by
few, or by many, by those that are learned, or those that are looked upon as
men of small understanding. Nay,

Secondly, if we consult with the tenor of Gods providence and dispensations in
this kind, our information or answer will be according to the tenor of our
Saviors gratulation (being now in a kind of rapture or exultation of spirit)
unto his Father: I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that th^^
h^st hid Luke 10* 21.
th^se things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes:
even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Though God be at liberty,
to make the first discovery, or communication of the light of his Truth, unto
the world, by greater numbers of men, and those learned and in high esteem for
wisdom, as by Councels, Synods, and Conventions of men eminent in their
qualifications, as well as by one or fewer, and these under no great
observation for either; ^et by the more frequent experience of all ages it
appears, that he takes pleasure in this latter way, rather then in the
former. Doubtless it was not without some very considerable ground and reason,
that that ancient and learned Father (...); Greg. Naz. ep. 5^. ad Procop^um.
Act. 10. 40. 41
Grego ie N^zianzene should say, that he never saw good end, or desirable
success of any Council; or that they procured any decrease, but rather
increase of evi^s. Yea and adds: that the pertinacious contentions, and
inordinate desires of domineering or bearing rule, were such, as words could
not express. Him (says the Apostle) God raised up the third day, and showed
him openly: not unto lith^ people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God,
even unto us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. Mary
a woman, had both the first revelation made unto her of Christ's rising again
from the dead, and also the first enterview and sight of him after he was
risen. Joh. 20. 12. 14. The Scripture takes special notice of Lots departure
from Abraham, before God was pleased to make that excellent discovery of
himself unto him, spoken of, Genesis 13. 14, 15, etc. Yea, most of those
revelations of himself, which he was graciously pleased to impart unto his
ancient Church of the Jews, were not imparted unto them by their Synedrion or
Great Council, but by particular men; who likewise usually (if not always)
received their inspirations from God, in their greatest privacie and
sequestration; yea, and that (if the observation of the Rabbis will hold in
that behalf) whilst they were young. That light of Evangelicall truth, wherein
the Reformed Churches rejoice at this day, yea, and triumph over Antichristian
darkness, did not break out of the clouds of Councels and Synods unto them, but
God caused it to shine upon them, from scattered and single stars, as Luther,
Calvin, Zuinglius, Martyr, etc. God never took any pleasure to cumber his arm
with flesh and blood, when he meant to do any great thing for his Church by
it. We find him once complaining right out, that the people were too many for
him, to give deliverance or victory Judge. 7. 2.
by; but we never heard of any complaint from him that they were too few. And
why may we not think, but that God may as well say within himself, that there
are too many learned and wise men in a great Council, for him to reveal
truth, or to give victory against error by? The reason of this kind of
dispensation is obvious; and therefore I forbear (for the present) to insist
upon it.

3. As a presuming confidence of a man's legs, is a sign of such a time or
chance (in Solomon's phrase) wherein the race shall not be to the swift; and so
the challenging a victory, as it were of course, because we have chariots, and
horses, and vast multitudes of men, expert in war above our enemies, is a
presage seldom failing, that the battle will not be to the strong: in like
manner when Synods and Councels shall bear themselves inordinately upon their
numbers and multitudes, upon their wisdom, learning, and piety, and because
of these, shall (upon the matter) challenge an infallibility (for what do
they less, when they command all men's judgments and consciences to bow down
at the feet of their determinations?) this is little less then an authorized
ground of Divination, that they will miscarry, and that God will not honor
them, with the discovery of any of his Truth unto the world. A Synod or
Council, though of men never so conscientious and learned, though never so
both frequent and fervent in fasting and prayer before God, that shall assemble
and meet together upon such terms, I mean so as either to expect, but
especially peremptorily to conclude, before hand, that all men shall make Faith
and practice of their decisions, or else be censured, and made to suffer like
evil doers; do in this set up their idols in their heart, and put the E^^k.
14. 3.
stumbling block of their iniquity before their face: and consequently divest
themselves of that capacity, wherein they should be meet to enquire of the
Lord. Should I be enquired of at all by them? (says God himself Ezekiel. 14. 3.
of such) Indeed where greater numbers of men, accomplished with grace, and
parts of learning, shall assemble together with humility and meekness, and
for ends proportioned to the line and sphere of men, as viz. heartily and
unpartially to argue and debate, and so to find out the Truth in things
appertaining unto God, only with an intent and desire to be helpers of the
Saints, as by making rough things plain, and things that were hard, easy, and
dark things, lightsome, and not to exercise a dominion over their Faith (as the
Apostle speaks) 2 Cor. 1. 24.
by an authoritative commanding them out of their present judgment, what ever
it be, to do homage to the results of their debates, whether they see light
and truth in them or no; they may expect a special presence of God with them,
and the Churches of God about them, may comfortably wait for somewhat more of
the mind of Christ from them, then they knew. In the multitude Prove. 24. 6.
of such Counselors, there may be safety, as Solomon speaks. I would gladly
believe, if I could find where to set the sole of the foot of such a Faith,
that Councels and Synods are wont to meet upon such terms: which if they do
not, I am (almost) as far out of hope of having the joy of my Faith helped or
increased by them, as I am of gathering grapes from thorns, or figgs of
thistles. And therefore,

4. (and lastly) Whereas the objection urges, that wise men are like to see
more then those that are weak, and many, then few: I answer, That this is not
always found true, no not in natural, civil or artificial things, wherein
notwithstanding there is usually a greater regularitie and uniformitie in the
actings and workings of second causes; much less is it always true in matters
belonging unto God; wherein himself more frequently interposeth by his
prerogative, and orders the tenor and course of occurrences and effects,
besides the proportion of second causes, by the good pleasure of his will. All
the great and rare inventions of the world, which either former, or latter ages
have brought to light, were not the issues or results either of the thoughts or
studies of the wisest or learnedest of men, nor yet of the consultations or
communications of the greatest numbers or multitudes of men: but the wise
Disposer of all things, according to his own good pleasure and will, cast this
honor upon particular and single men, (for the most part) and those not
always of the most learned or profound, as by many instances might readily be
evicted, if it were necessary. And Solomon reports unto us a case, wherein one
poor Eccles. 9. 15.
man by his wisdom delivered a City out of imminent danger; which (it seems)
all the rest of the Inhabitants did not see or apprehend how to do. Yea, in
Councels themselves, or greater assemblies of men, it is usually seen that
some one, or few, either of predominant parts, or authority amongst them, sway
and steer all the proceedings, and act the judgments and affections of the
rest, though conscientious and learned to a degree. So that upon the matter,
and just account, the resolution^ of Councels and Synods themselves, are but
the fruits or putting-forth of the learning, and judgment, of a very few men;
and whether these be always of the most conscientious, I had rather others
should consider, then I determine.

The last objection designed for present examination, is this that the intent
and project of this way, is ambitious, high, and dangerous, that it affects a
Dictatorship Ecclesiastical, a power of Law-giving, that it undermines Civil
or Parliamentary Authority, etc. But to this also we answer (omitting what was
formerly said, concerning extravagant height of accusations and charges, and
the slender probability of truth in them: as likewise concerning the special
disposition of God in ordering the malice or ill will of those that are
enemies, either to his people or ways, still to shoot the arrows of their
accusations against their b^e^s^plate of righteousness, where it is strongest
and least penetrable*

1. That there is not the least color, no, nor the least color of a color,
to charge any ambitious or Dictator-like design upon this Way. The reason is,
because the most essential, int^insecall, and fundamental principles of it,
stand diametrally bent against all dictatoring, and law-giving by men, in the
things of God. The Sun may with as much, or more reason be suspected of
consulting darkness against the world, as this Way of meditating or projecting
any Authoritative greatness unto it self in this kind. Indeed, when it
degenerates from it self, and passes into another kind, there may be some
danger and fear of this Way; as there is that Honey should turn into choler,
when the native property of it is altered by the stomach. A Congregationall man
become a Classique, may as soon as another make a Son of such a design as is
specified in the objection.

2. If the Way we speak of, should be so contradictory to her self, as to
desire or project such a Kingdom, as she stands charged with in the Objection;
yet should not the world have the least cause to fear her prosecutions or
executions in this kind. If the Lamb in the fold should threaten or project
the slaughter and destruction of all the Lions in the Wilderness, had these
ever the more cause to be afraid of her? The kingdoms and powers of this
world, need not fear either the numbers or power of the Saints, for taking away
their crowns, or breaking the scepters of their rule and government, until the
world that now is be translated into that which is to come. And therefore,

3. Whereas this Way is further arrested by the Objection, for a Pioner and
underminer of Magistracy, or Parliamentary Authority; I answer, that there is
no more in this Way to undermine or endanger any Civil Authority or Power
whatsoever, then there was in Daniels heart to prejudice the life and honor of
the King, Dan. 6. 10. 22.
when he prayed three times a day, (contrary to the Kings commandment) or
then was in Paul's Doctrine of Justification by Faith to make void the writings
of Moses, or the Law; whereby indeed he did establish it (as himself affirms,
Romans 3. 31.) though the Jews apprehended, and charged him with the contrary.
And doubtless the learned Gentleman, who undertakes the unmasking of
Independency, (which never wore any) is in an utter mistake, Independency
examined, unmasked, etc.
not only of the intentions of the two Brethren of this Way (who ever they
were) whose words he cites, p. 3. of his late Examination; but also of the
rational and Grammatical construction and import of the words. For whereas
they say, that a man may as well bring a clean thing out of an unclean, as make
a spiritual extraction ^^t of a se(...), the Gentleman will needs interpret,
that they make both Parliament and Assembly secular and unclean; whereas by the
tenor and carriage of the whole passage, it is as clear as the Sun* that in
neither of these expressions they reflect either upon the one, or the other;
no, nor yet in those following words, wherein they affirm, that it will be
demonstratively proved (against their adversary, who makes the Law of the State
the first and most considerable band or tie upon men, for their submission to
his Church Government) that he resolves the government of the Churches of
Christ (in the last resolution of it) into the humors, wills and pleasures of
the world, yea, of the vilest and most unworthy of men. And therefore, whereas
upon his citation of these words, his demand is, Brethren, bona verba quaeso,
the Brethren upon his interpretation of them, have far more reason to make this
request unto him; Brother, bonam glossam quaesum^^. The words are good, if the
interpretation did but answer. For doubtless the Brethren in the mentioned
period and expressions, reflected only upon the generality of the people in the
Land, who according to the Laws of the Land; yea, according to the principles
of all reason and equity, have the right of nominating persons into the places
of Parliamentary trust and power; but have no Authority or power from Christ to
nominate or appoint, who shall be the men that shall order the affairs of
Christ's Kingdom, or institute the government of his Churches. These, and
especially the ignorant and irreligious part of them (which they that know any
thing concerning the generality of the Kingdom for matters of Religion, must
needs know to be far the greater part in every place) are that secular root,
out of which the Brethren conceive an impossibility, that a spiritual
extraction should be made, that is, that a legitimate Ecclesiastique power
should according to the mind of Christ, or any precept or president of
Scripture, be by them conferred upon any man: and this impossibility conceived
by them, they only illustrate and declare by that parallel expression in Job,
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? When they imply, that men
unworthy, and strangers to the power of godliness and matters of Religion,
have the right and power of conferring Parliamentary trust and power, upon
persons chosen by them hereinto, they reflect not the least touch of prejudice
or disparagement upon the persons honored with that choice: First, because
there is no other way, no, nor is there any convenience or lawfulness of any
way whereby to ascend the height of the interest and honor, but such a choice:
And secondly, the votes and voices of such men being carried upon persons of
honor, worth and Religion, demonstrates that there was so much the more of God
in their election; which is so far from diminishing their honor in the least,
that it add^ double and treble unto it. But to hold that the persons so
elected, as has been said, have a power by virtue of such nomination or
election, to enact Laws and Statutes in matters of Religion, and to order under
mulcts and penalties, how men shall worship and serve God; as it is a means to
awaken the eye of jealousy upon them, and so is seven times more destructive
unto, and undermining, not only of their power, but of their honor, peace, and
safety also, then any thing that is found in the Way so ill entreated; so is it
the settling of a power upon the electors of such persons, I mean, upon the
promiscuous multitude of the Land, a greater power then ever Jesus Christ
himself had, at least then ever he exercised. For as dare Regem argues a
greater power then esse Regem, as he that builds an house, has more honor
then the house, Heb. 3. 3. So to nominate and appoint who shall have power to
umpire in matters of conscience and of God, to determine what shall be
preached, and what not, what shall be believed, and what not, is a branch of a
greater root of power, then the exercise of the power that is committed unto
others in this behalf. Now though Jesus Christ had a power, and was authorized
by God to be a Lawgiver himself unto his Churches and Saints, in their
spiritual Republique; yet it is hard to prove that ever he invested any other
with such a power. His Apostles themselves were no Lords over the Faith of the
Saints; nor had they any power or authority to impose any thing upon men, as
necessary, either to be believed or practiced, but what they had in express
commission and charge from Jesus Christ himself to impose upon such terms. So
that notwithstanding that severe and angry contestation of the forementioned
Gentleman against the two Brethren with their fellows, Is this your so much
boasted of preaching, writing, fighting for the rights and privileges of
Parliament? whereby he thinks to dash both them and that their boasting
together out of countenance; though they boast neither little nor much of any
thing; boasting is their charge not their crime; they only say, and that with
modesty yet, blessed be God, they are able to maintain and make good that their
boasting (if it must needs be so called) in the sight of God and Angels, and
men, and Devils, and whatsoever besides is named, not only in this world, but
in that also which is to come. And though he has done like himself, and (I
speak it to his honor) far above the line of many others, in vindicating the
rights and privileges of Parliament; yet ( absit verbo invidia) I am very
confident, that there are thousands of that Way and judgment, against which
his pen rises up with so much indignation, who rateably, and according to
their means and opportunities, have quitted themselves upon equal terms of
honor, love, and faithfulness, toward those honorable Houses, with himself.

4. (And lastly) It were no task of much labor or difficulty, to demonstrate
that the Way, in the defense whereof we have thus far appeared, is so far from
carrying any malignity, or seed of danger in it to the State, or persons
invested with civil power, that it is of a manifest and rich compliance both
with the one and the other. He that commanded Matthew. 22. 21.
to give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that
are Gods: did Caesar as much (if not more) service, in the latter command, as in
the former. Silver and gold, wood and stone, never got any thing by having an
artificial deity bestowed upon them, and being worshipped, but only a mere
proximity to destruction. They that should only have said unto Herod, that he
had spoken like a sober and well advised man, might have showed as much
affection to him, yea, and honored him upon better terms, then they that
shouted, I^s the voice of a Act* 12. 22.
God, and not of a man. There is no foundation so sure and precious to build
the honor, peace and safety of Caesar upon, as a stone duly pitched for a
landmark between God and him. But if there be a question or difficult case
between God and Caesar, whether such and such things belong unto the one, or
unto the other, they will be found the best and faithfullest Counselors unto
Caesar, who shall advise him rather to surrender unto, then to claim a doubtful
right or privilege from God. The Way we speak of is so ingenuous, loyal and
true-hearted to men in place of civil authority and power, that it teaches
her sons to expose themselves unto their displeasure, for the procurement of
their good; which even the heathen themselves have attested for one of the best
and least questionable signs of true friendship and love.

To these answers of objections, I thought to have added some positive
arguments, whereby the Way, now little more then only defended, might have
gained the honor of a more perfect conformity to the Will and Word of God,
then (perhaps) has been discovered or seen hitherto. Yet I cannot but think,
that the vailes of the principal objections which covered the face of it,
being rent and torn, the beauty and brightness of it must needs shine forth in
the eyes of all those who have not sacrificed unto partiality.

To close with a word of exhortation. The premises considered, as we love the
things of our peace, and desire the speedy dispersion and scattering of that
dark and black cloud still hanging and hovering over our heads, and threatening
more fiery storms and tempests of desolation and blood upon us, and to see the
heavens clearing up, and looking like Crystal or Sapphire over us, as we desire
to see those terrible swarms of Locusts and Caterpillars, which now devour and
eat up our good land daily, swept away* and carried by a strong west wind into
the midst of the sea, that so we may be fed again, with the ancient heritage of
our fathers, I mean plenty, safety, and peace; if there be any bowels, any
compassions in us toward our nation, (so far spent and wasted with misery)
toward our cities and habitations, toward our friends, toward our selves,
toward any thing which is dear either to the one, or to the other; let us be
exhorted to take heed of fighting against God; let it be the firstborn of
religious advisements and cautions to us, not to be fierce, no, nor so much as
to lift up an hard thought against Doctrine or Way claiming origination and
descent from God, till we have security upon security, conditions as clear as
the noonday, that they are but counterfeits and pretenders only, and stand in
no relation at all, but that of enmity and opposition unto God. Particularly,
let us be tender above all tenderness, to act to the value of the least hair of
our heads in any way of bitterness or blood, against that Way of governing the
Churches of Christ, which has by so many good hands been presented unto us as
most agreeable unto the Word and Will of God, until we see the condemnation of
it written with a beam of the Sun, by the finger of God himself; until he has
disclaimed or renounced it from heaven, either by giving such wisdom unto men
whereby to detect the error and vanity of it, or else has quite rased it out
of the fleshly tables of the hearts of his Saints, and distressed servants. The
motion and matter is of a most serious and formidable importance; therefore let
me exhort you yet once more, to beware of men, (as our Savior advises, in a
case of less consequence) to take heed, that no man, either through passionate
exclamations and outcries, or through any fair or flourishing pretenses
whatsoever, draw your foot into this snare, engage you in any such warfare,
wherein, for ought you know, you shall fight against God. If your judgments
stand off from the cause we speak of, for the present, and you can see nothing
of God in it; you may please to consider, that this was the case of many
thousands amongst you, in whom there is much of God, and in whose heart is this
Way, as a Way of his. If they be deceived in embracing it, God Phil. 3. 15.
will show mercy unto them in revealing the truth unto them in due time. But if
you shall be deceived in the violence and fury of your fighting against it, is
it not much to be feared, that you will be entangled with the guilt of such a
sin, which shall not be purged from Isa. 22. 14.
you till ye die?

FINIS.

