Twelve considerable serious CAUTIONS, VERY NECESSARY to be observed, in, and
about a REFORMATION according to the Word of God. Wherein diverse particular
inconsistences with the word of God, very incident to Reformations (so called)
are briefly insisted upon, and argued from the Word of God. By JOHN GOODWIN,
an unworthy servant of God in the Gospel of his dear Son.

Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, etc. Mat. 7.
15. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Joh.
7. 24. Beware of men; for they will deliver you up to the Counsels, and
scourge you in their Synagogues. Mat. 10. 17. Adulterum est, impium est,
sacrilegum est, quicquid humano furore insutuitur, ut dispositio divina
violetur. Cypr. ep. l. 1. ep. 8. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton,
and are to be sold at his Shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1646.

Cautions necessary to be observed in and about a Reformation according to the
word of God.
IN the Name of God begins all that is bad, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum.
was the complaint of many, in the days of Popery. And if men be carnal and
unworthy in their end, the Machiavillian directs them, Agant sua vota sub illo;
let them take the Name of God, and of Religion, to make a covering for their
nakedness. There is none like to this. Esa. 36. 10.
Am I now come up (says Rabshakeb) without the Lord against this land to
destroy it! The Lord said unto me, Go up against this land and destroy it. The
Jews pretended they had a law (meaning from God himself) for the putting his
own Son Jesus Christ (God blessed for ever) to death. John 19. 7.
We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die: even as some men now have a
Reformation, and that from God, or according to the word of God, by which the
faithfullest servants of God ought to be molested, and the light of the purest
worship of God put out.

But if the hot-pressers of Reformation in these days, have not an heart and
an heart, but are regular, single, and sincere-ended in their motions, and
really intend and desire to make all things according to the pattern in the
Mount, I mean according to the word of God (the most unquestionable and
least-ensnaring clause in all that solemn covenant, which they adore as if it
were (...), the contrivement of God, and not of man) they shall consult this
honor, and a name of Integrity to themselves for ever in this noble
enterprise, if they will be careful to advance by the way of these Cautions
following: but if they shall (especially willingly and knowingly, and most of
all, if consultedly) digress and sin against them, as the Lord lives, the
soul and spirit of their design is no Reformation according to the word of
God, no nor yet according to the example of the best reformed Churches; but
accorcording to the exigency of secular interests, and the inspiration of the
accommodations and good things of this world.

according to the word of God, must take heed of admitting human passions into
their consultations: For (as in James his Divinity) the wrath of man works
not the righteousness of God, James 1 20.
i subjects a man to an incapacity of doing that which is truly agreeable unto
his will; so is it as true of other distempers also, as of envy,
covetousness, ambition, etc. neither do any of these (much less all them in
conjunction) work the righteousness of God, in this sense: but are as hostages
given to Satan, to secure him, that they mean no ill to him or his kingdom.
The tenor, nature, and frame of the word of God, are of a pregnant antipathy
against all these, and such like inordinacies in the hearts of men; and are
bent with an high hand, to oppose and contradict all their motions, actings and
proceedings whatsoever. Therefore most certain it is, that such a Reformation
which is calculated for the meridian of these, or any of them, and the face of
it set, either for the molestation of such persons with whom we are offended,
or whose honor or peace we envy, or for the enriching or exalting our selves
in the world, is not, cannot be according to the word of God. No man ever made
hoops or bows of timber that was straight, according to the natural growth or
straightness of it; but were fain to use art, or force, or both, to destroy
these, to make those commodities.

according to the word of God, must not be obstructive, much less destructive
to the comfort and peace of the children and servants of God, who worship him
in Spirit and Truth. Do not my words (says God himself by his Prophet Mica 2.
7.
) do good to him that walks uprightly? Therefore what Reformation soever
grieveth the soul, and makes sad the Spirit of the generality of those in a
land, who walk uprightly in the sight of God, it is a certain sign and
evidence against it, that it is quite besides, and not according to the word of
God. And if the inward and essential frame or constitution of the word of God,
be such, as to make it the joy and rejoicing of the heart of godly ones Jer.
15. 16.
; doubtless whatsoever is either acted or projected in conformity to it, must
needs hold the like correspondence with them. Never was it heard to this day,
that a Reformation according to the word of God, was ever burdensome or
grievous to the most considerable part of religious persons, amongst whom it
was advanced, or set up.

according to the word of God, must beware of putting any such ingredie^t into
their reformation, which is (or is like to be) obstructive to the course of the
Gospel, or to the propagation of the truth amongst men. We can do nothing
(says the Apostle) against the truth, but for the truth; 2 Cor. 13. 8
meaning, that neither he, nor any of his fellow-Apostles, had any power or
authority from God, to act any thing in prejudice to the truth, or to the
suppression or hindering the outgoings of that into the world. And (2 These. 3.
1.) he desires the Thessalonians to pray for him, that the Word of the Lord may
run, or, have free course, and be glorified, even as it was with them.
Therefore, certo certius, such Reformers, who say unto men excellently gifted
by God, and affectuously inclined by God, and ardently desired of men, for the
work of the Ministry, Preach not in that Name Act. 5. 28. 40.
except you will preach in our name also, except you will acknowledge in us a
power to give you leave to preach, and a power to restrain you from preaching,
and be willing to receive neither you nor we can tell what, by our imposition
of hands upon you; such Reformers (I say, the second time) that calculate and
model their reformation upon such terms, that either the precious souls of
thousands must starve, or else the precious consciences of those that should
feed them, be brought into a snare, and so defiled, well may they reform by
some other rule, but their according to the Word of God, they leave for others.

according to the Word of God, must not call that common or unclean, which God
has sanctified or cleansed: What God has cleansed (says the voice from
heaven unto Peter) call not thou common Acts 10. 15.
. And the Apostle Paul by commission from heaven; I will therefore (says he)
that men pray every where, lifting up, etc. So then, God having sanctified the
whole world, and every corner and place of it for his Saints to worship him in
they that by a strong hand seek to bring them back again, either to this
mountain, or to Jerusalem to worship Joh. 4. 21.
, that will allow the Saints no other places as lawful to worship God in (at
least publicly) but those only, concerning which, the greatest Question is,
whether they of all others, be sanctified or no; and which the judgments and
consciences of many thousand of the Saints look upon, as exceptions from Gods
general rule of sanctification in this kind; these without all controversy
or question, shape their Reformation, rather secundum usum Sarum, then
according to the Word of God.

Fifthly, they who would have this golden Motto, According to the Word of God,
written as well in the heart, as in the face of their Reformation, must be free
from all collateral engagements unto other patterns besides this Word of God;
they must not suffer themselves to incline, no, not so much as a dust in the
balance amounts unto, to any Reformation of any other Church or churches
whatsoever, further then they are reformed according to the same word. Be ye
followers of me (says the Apostle) even as I also am of Christ. 1 Cor. 11. 1.
The best patterns and examples under heaven, are but seducers, in what they
fall short of, or besides, the Word of God. The injunction from heaven is very
particular and express: See that thou make all things according to the pattern
showed unto thee in the mount Heb. 8. 5.
. And Ezekiel. 43. 10. Thou son of man, show the house to the house of Israel,
that they may be ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the pattern,
etc. viz. to build with all possible exactness of conformity to it. Now then,
when Reformers shall look partly upon the Word of God, partly upon other
Reformations, wherein it is a thousand to one, but there is some flesh, as well
as spirit, they must needs (upon the supposition) bring forth a party-colored
Reformation, as Labans sheep brought forth speckled and spotted lambs, by
looking upon the pilled rods which Jacob presented them with, at the time of
their conception Genesis 30. 38, 39.
.

But what if we be bound by covenant and oath, to reform, as well according to
the examples of the best reformed Churches, as according to the Word of God? I
answer:

Doubtless, no man ever covenanted, or swear, to reform according to the
example of any Church, or churches whatsoever, in opposition to the Word of
God: To violate an abominable and accursed oath, out of conscience unto God, is
an holy and blessed perjury.
or if they did either, they have cause to abhor themseves in dust and ashes
for it. And to reform with them, or according to their example, in concurrence
with the Word of God, is nothing but what every man stood bound in conscience
unto, whether he had covenanted or sworn it, or no. So that covenanting or
swearing to reform according to the examples of the best reformed Churches, as
well as according to the Word of God, does no ways bind any man to regard or
mind their reformation for matter of example or imitation further then this
comports with the Word of God; and thus far, they who reform according to the
Word of God, must necessarily follow their example, at least materially, and so
cannot falsify in the least with their covenant and oath.

Sixthly, the sons of such a Reformation as has been often named, must beware of
separating between men's spiritual and temporal conveniences, when God by his
providence has graciously joined them together. What therefore God has joined
together, let no man put asunder, Mar. 19. 5.
(says our Savior.) The rule or precept is general, (though given upon a
special occasion) and ought to take place (especially) in all things which
concern the comfort and peace of men. If so, how can that Reformation be
according to the Word of God, which shall either force men from their
dwellings, the conveniencie whereof affords them, and theirs, the best of their
subsistence in the world; or else from their relation unto such a Minister or
Pastor, by whom God is pleased to bless them in their spiritual estate,
incomparably beyond what they have any ground to expect from that Pastor they
must in such a case subject themselves unto? Yea, or which shall interdict the
precious souls of men their spiritual accommodation from the hand of such
Pastors, who want the eyes, and tongues, and hands of other men, and so can
neither see, nor say, nor do many things, which they can; and yet may be
eminently serviceable in the work of Jesus Christ, and peculiarly gifted for
the edification of such and such men? A Reformation according to the Word of
God, must not sacrifice the comforts of the people of God, upon the service of
the credits or advantages of their Ministers. The people were not made for
Ministers, but Ministers for the people.

according to the word of God, must be like a Bishop or Minister according to
the Word of God; that is, no striker, no brawler 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3.
, must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient; In
meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure, will
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth 2 Timothy 2, 24, 25.
. Therefore certainly that Reformation which is froward, rough, peremptory,
impatient, imperious, and will gather where it has not strewed, and reap where
it has not sown, exact obedience and subjection from those, to whom it has
not effectually taught or persuaded obedience and subjection, nor ever gave any
tolerable account unto truly conscientious and considering, and disinteressed
men, of any worthiness in it, why it should be submitted unto; but shall
rather obstruct its access to the judgments and consciences of such men, by
advancing it self by ways, and methods, and practices that savor more of the
subtilty of the Serpent, then the simplicity of Christ; doubtless (I say) such
a Reformation, which commends it self unto the world upon no better terms then
these, cannot be judged a Reformation according to the Word of God by any,
except those, who either suppose gain to be godliness, or the resolutions of
Synods the word of God.

named a Reformation according to Word of God, must take heed of eating flesh,
to the offense of a weak Brother; I mean, of pleasing, humoring gratifying,
enriching the strong, and those that think they know all things, to the
grieving, anguishing, afflicting of those that are weak, and not able to see
this Name of Mystery, written in the forehead of it, according to the Word of
God. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby
thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. Have thou Faith? have
it to thy self before God, etc. Romans 14. 21, 22.
But when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye
sin against Christ. Wherefore if meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no
flesh whilst the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend 1 Cor. 8.
12, 13.
Therefore that Reformation, which shall tread and trample under foot the weak
and tender consciences of the Brethren, for whom Christ dyed, like clay and
mire in the streets, taking no pity nor compassion on them, that it may
recompense the contrivers of it with flesh to eat, and wine to drink, and make
their faces to shine in the world, is (doubtless) no Reformation according to
the Word of God, except it be the word of the God of this world.

the Word of God will own, as conform to it, must take heed, either of
gathering or scattering with Satan, and be careful to do both the one and the
other, both to gather and to scatter with Christ: must be a tender and
nursing-mother unto all, not a bloody cruel stepmother to any the Churches of
Christ. He that is not with me, (says Christ) is against me: and he that
gathers not with me, scatters abroad Mat. 12, 30.
And the Apostle Paul: Besides those things that are without, that which comes
upon me daily, the care of ALL the Churches. Therefore that Reformation, which
is so far from taking care for all the Churches of Christ, that it cannot
subsist (with any tolerable contentment) without the dissolution and ruin of
many of these Churches, and those of the most Apostolical and Christian
building, is no Reformation according to the Word of God, except the Word of
God be divided against it self, and destroys that, which it builds up. Some
impeach that Reformation which gathers Churches out of Churches, as a
Reformation, over which the Scripture rejoices not, nor yet countenanceth. And
do these men think, that yet it will rejoice over, or countenance such a
Reformation, which scatters and ruins Churches of Christ into no-churches at
all; and that says to the Saints sweetly combined in Church Fellowship, and
walking together with love and peace in the ways and worship of the true God,
Be ye scattered into the four winds of the heavens, 1 Samuel 26. 19.
and go and serve other Gods?

according to the word of God, must not be partial, or a respecter of persons:
must not absolve the less, and condemn the more innocent. I charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe
these things without preferring one before another, (...), doing nothing by
partiality Tim. 5. 24.
My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory,
with respect of persons Iam. 2. 1.
. Therefore that Reformation which justifies those, who profess they know God,
but deny him (and that most notoriously) in works; but falls heavy upon those
who make no such hypocritical profession, but rather ingenuously profess and
acknowledge their doubts and scruples in things appertaining to the knowledge
of God, and withal are far more regular and Christian-like in their
conversation, holds no other then a diametral correspondence with the word of
God. For doubtless, he that says he believes that there are three persons and
one God, and yet gives demonstrative testimonies (or be it but strong
presumptions) against himself, that he indeed and in truth neither believes
the one nor the other, is a far greater offender, and consequently deserves a
far greater punishment then he who believing neither, professes accordingly.
Therefore that Reformation which shall punish men, and that with greater
severity, not for not believing, but for not professing to believe, or for
professing not to believe that which indeed they do not believe, and shall
connive at, or pass over with some light censure, those that shall abuse
heaven and earth with their dissimulation in this kind, and shall only say or
profess, that they believe so or so, though it be as clear at the Sun, that
they indeed and in truth believe no such thing: Such a Reformation (I say) that
shall be thus importunely and unconscionably partial, holds no good quarter
with the word of God.

according to the word of God, must not seek to advance and lift up it self in
the world by unrighteousnes, by speaking evil, especially untruly, and against
its own conscience, of the Saints and servants of the most high God Put them in
mind (says the Apostle) to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but
gentle, showing all meekness unto all men Tit. 3. 2.
The Cretians are always liers, evil beasts, flow bellies Tit. 1. 12.
, etc. Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor lie one to another Lev. 6.
11.
. For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie Esa. 63.
8. 8.
. Lie not one to another Coloss. 3. 9.
, etc. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and
lie not against the truth Iam. 3. 14.
But the fearful and unbeleeving, -- and all liers, shall have their part in
the take which burns with fire and brimstone, etc Rev. 21. 8.
. Therefore if any thing be vero verius, more true then truth it self, true it
is in this degree, that that Reformation which shall take Satan's office out of
his hand, and turn accuser of the brethren, and love all devouring words 1
Psalm. 52. 4.
, that shall not spare the names or reputations of those who are as the Apple of
Gods own eye, and whom he seeks to commend unto the world as glorious in their
generation, and more excellent then their neighbors, and witnesses of the
truth, but shall consult with the powers of darkness, and oracles of hell, by
what calumnies, reproaches, slanders, untruths, to set the world on fire with
hatred and indignation against them, yea and shall still, oleum addere camino,
write book upon book, book upon book, now a Treatise and then a Treatise, to
grind all the credit and interest that such men have in the world, to powder;
and all this to make it self a footstool, whereby to ascend into its throne; a
Reformation (I say) that seeks to build it self an house with such polluted
stones as these, certainly does not build with God, nor God with it: The word
of God knows no such art of building as this.

according to the word of God, must give leave to the wind to blow where it
lists; and give liberty to the Spirit of God to do with his own what he
pleases; to make what discovery of truth he pleases, and to what persons,
and when, and where he pleases; and must not confine him to his market, or
compel him to traffic only with Councels and Synods for his heavenly
commodities. The wind blows where it lusts etc John 3. 8.
Friend, I do thee no wrong, -- take that which is time own, and go thy way, I
will give unto this last as much as to thee. Is it not lawful for me to do as
I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil because I am good Matthew. 20. 13, 14.
? And after six days, Jesus takes unto him Peter, and James, and John (so
that the major part of the twelve were passed by in this dispensation) and
carries the up into an high mountain alone, and his shape was changed before
them, and his raiment did shine, etc. Mark 9. 2. 3.
Therefore that Reformation which asserts the authority of Councels, Synods,
Assemblies, major parts of men, as infallible, against the light, judgment,
apprehensions, either of particular Churches, or men, or that restrains the
Ministers of the Gospel from declaring unto men the whole counsel of God, and
in some things the truth of the counsel of God concerning their salvation, that
condemns as heretical, the works, writings; tenets, of sober, learned, pious,
and conscientious men, only because an inconsiderable number of men, (for so
is the number of 100, 200, 300, in comparison of those that are judicious,
learned, and pious in a great and flourishing Kingdom) imagines (it may be,
only dreams) them to be inconsistent with the Scriptures; or that shall subject
the world (and indeed the glory of God himself) to such hard and miserable
terms, as that men shall not publicly reap or taste of the precious fruit of
the gifts, parts, knowledge, wisdom, learning, which God has liberally
bestowed upon many thousands in a nation, but only according to discretion, and
at the allowance of a very small parcel of men; (and those it may be, not of
the greatest abilities neither, for discerning) when either the Alcoran of the
Turks, or the Missall of the Papists shall appear to be according to the word
of God, then may such a Reformation as this hope to partake of the same honor
also.

FINIS.

