AMERICA. Painted to the Life.

A True History of the original undertakings of the advancement of Plantations
into those parts, with a perfect relation of our ENGLISH Discoveries, showing
their beginning, progress, and continuance, from the year, 1628. to 1658.
declaring the forms of their Government, Policies, Religions, Manners,
Customs, Military Discipline, Wars with the INDIANS, the Commodities of
their Countries, a Description of their Towns, and Havens, the increase of
their trading with the names of their Governors and Magistrates.

More Especially an absolute Narrative of the North parts of AMERICA, and of
the discoveries and plantations of our English in NEW ENGLAND.

Written by Sir FERDINANDO GORGES Knight and Governor of the Fort and Island
of Plymouth in DEVONSHIRE, one of the first and chiefest promoters of those
Plantations.

Published since his decease, by his Grandchild Ferdinando Gorges Esquire, who
has much enlarged it and added several accurate Descriptions of his own.

A work now at last exposed for the public good, to stir up the heroic and
active spirits of these times, to benefit their Country, and Eternize their
names by such honorable attempts.

For the Readers clearer understanding of the Country's they are lively
described in a complete and exquisite Map.

Vivit post funera virtus.

LONDON; Printed by E. Brudenell, for Nathaniel Brook dwelling at the Angel in
Cornhill. 1658.

To the READER.
I Thought it a part of my duty in this my brief Narration of our Plantations
to remember the Original Undertaking of those designs in the parts of
America, by such Noble Spirits of our Nation that first attempted it, as well
for the justification of the right thereof, properly belonging to Kings of our
Nation, before any other Prince or State, as also the better to clear the
claim made thereunto by the Ambassador of France, in the behalf of his
Master, in the year 1624. whereto I was required to make answer (as more at
large it appears in the discourse it self, withal to leave to posterity the
particular ways by which it has been brought to the height it is come unte,
wherein the providence of our Great GOD is especially to be observed, who by
the least and weakest means, oftentimes effects great and wonderful things;
all which I have endeavored to contract in as short a compass, as the length
of the ^ime and the variety of the accidents would give leave, as for the truth
thereof, I p^esume it is so publicly known, as malice i^ self dares not
only question it, though I know none, I thank my God to whom I have given any
just cause mali^iously to attempt it u^lesse it be for the desire I had to do
good to all without wronging of any, as by the course of my life to this
present it may appear.

If in the conclusion of my undertaking and expense of my fortunes to advance
the honor and happiness of my Nation, I have settled a portion thereof to
those that in nature must succeed me; you may be pleased to remember that the
Labourer is worthy of his hire.

That I have not exceeded others not better deserving that I go hand in hand
with the meanest in this great work, to whom the charge thereof was committed
by royal Authority.

That I have opened the way to greater employments and shall be (as a hand set up
in a cross way) in a desert Country to point all travelers in such like kind,
how they may come safe to finish their journeys and leaving an example to
others best affected to designs of such like nature to prosecute their intents
for further in largement of those began Plantations, without trenching or
intruding upon the rights and labors of others already possessed, of what is
justly granted them.

Especially of such, who in some sort may be termed Benefactours a^ Seconda^y
donors of what (by Gods favor) is had, or to be had from those springs they
first found and left to posterity to bath themselves in, but if there be any,
otherwise affected, as better delighted to reap what they have not sown, or to
possess the fruit another has labored for, let such be assured, so great
injustice will never want a woeful attendance to follow close at the heels, if
not stayed behind to bring after a more terrible revenge; But my trust is such,
impiety will not be suddenly harbored where the whole work is I hope still
continued for the enlargement of the Christian faith, the supportation of
justice, and love of peace, in assurance whereof, I will conclude and tell you
(as I have lived long) so I have done what I could, let those that come after
me do for their parts what they may, and I doubt not but the God that governes
all, will reward their labors that continue in his service, to whom be Glory
for ever, Amen.

FERDINANDO GORGES.

VVonder-working PROVIDENCE OF SIONS SAVIOVR.
Being a Relation of the first planting in New England, in the Year, 1628.
CHAP. I. The sad Condition of England, when this People removed.
WHen England began to decline in Religion, like lukewarm Laodicea, and
instead of purging out Popery, a farther compliance was sought not only in
vain Idolatrous Ceremonies, but also in profaning the Sabbath, and by
Proclamation throughout their Parish churches, exasperating lewd and profane
persons to celebrate a S^bbath like the Heathen to Venus, Baccus and Ceres; in
so much that the multitude of irreligious lascivious and pop^sh affected
persons spread the whole land like Grasshoppers, in this very time Christ the
glorious King of his Churches, raises an Army out of our English Nation, for
freeing his people from their long servitude under usurp^ng Prelacy; and
because every corner of England was filled with the fury of malignant
adversaries, Christ creates a New England to muster up the first of his Forces
in; Whose (...) condition, little number, and remoteness of place made these
adversaries triumph, despising this day of small things, but in this hight of
their pride the Lord Christ brought sudden, and unexpected destruction upon
them. Thus have you a touch of the time when this work began.

Christ Jesus intending to manifest his Kingly Office toward his Churches more
fully then ever yet the Sons of men saw, even to the uniting of Jew and Gentile
Churches in one Faith, begins with our English Nation (whose former Reformation
being vere imperfect) does now resolve to cast down their false foundation of
Prelacy, even in the hight of their domineering dignity. And therefore in the
year 1628. he stirs up his servants as the Heralds of a King to make this
Proclamation for Volunteers as follows.

Oh yes! oh yes! oh yes! All you the people of Christ that are here Oppressed,
Imprisoned and scurrilously derided, gather your selves together, your Wifes
and little ones, and answer to your several Names as you shall be shipped for
his service, in the Westere^ World, and more especially for planting the united
Collonies of new England; Where you are to attend the service of the King of
Kings, upon the divulging of this Proclamation by his Herralds at Arms. Many
(although otherwise willing for this service) began to object as follows:

Can it possible be the mind of Christ, (who formerly enabled so many Soldiers
of his to keep their station unto the death here) that now so many brave
Soldiers disciplined by Christ himself the Captain of our salvation, should
turn their backs to the disheartning of their Fellow Soldiers, and loss of
further opportunity in gaining a greater number of Subjects to Christ's Kingdom?

Notwithstanding this Objection, It was further proclaimed as follows: What
Creature, wilt not know that Christ thy King crusheth with a rod of Iron, the
Pomp and Price of man, and must he like man cast and contrive to take his
enemies at advantage? No, of purpose he causes such instruments to retreat
as he has made strong for himself: that so his adversaries glorying in the
pride of their power, insulting over the little remnan^ remaining, Christ
causes them to be cast down suddenly forever, and we find in stories
reported, Earths Princes have passion their Armies at need over Seas and deep
Torrents. Could Caesar so suddenly fetch over fresh forces from Europe to Asia
Pompy to foil? How much more shall Christ who creates all power, c^ll over
this 900. league Ocean at his pleasure, such instruments as he thinks meet to
make use of in this place, from whence you are now to depart, but further that
you may not delay the Voyage intended, for your full satisfaction, know this is
the place where the Lord will create a new Heaven, and a new Earth in, new
Churches, and a new Commonwealth together; Wherefore,

CHAP. II. The Commission of the People of Christ shipped for New England, and
first of their gathering into Churches.
ATtend to your Commission, all you that are or shall hereafter be shipped for
this service, ye are with all possible speed to imbarque your selves, and as
for all such Worthies who are hunted after as David was by Saul and his
Courtiers, you may change your habit and ship you with what secrecy you can,
carrying all things most needful for the Voyage and service you are to be
employed in after your landing. But as soon as you shall be exposed to danger
of tempestious Seas, you shall forthwith show whose servants you are by calling
on the Name of your God, sometimes by extraordinary seeking his pleasing Face
in times of deep distress, and publishing your Masters will, and pleasure to
all that Voyage with you, and that is his mind to have purity in Religion
preferred above all dignity in the world; your Christ has commanded the Seas
they shall not swallow you, nor Pirates imprison your persons, or possess your
goods. At your landing see you observe the Rule of his Word, for neither larger
nor stricter Commission can he give by any, and therefore at first filling the
Land whither you are sent, with diligence, search out the mind of God both in
planting and continuing Church and civil Government, but be sure they be
distinct, yet agreeing and helping the one to the other; Let the matter and
form of your Churches be such as were in the Primitive Times (before
Antichrists Kingdom prevailed) plainly poynted out by Christ and his Apostles,
in most of their Epistles to be neither National nor Provincial, but gathered
together in Covenant of such a number as might ordinarily meet together in one
place, and built of such living stones as outwardly appear Saints by calling.
You are also to ordain Elders in every Church, make you use of such as Christ
has endued with the best gifts for that end, their call to Office shall be
mediate from you, but their authority and commission shall be immediate from
Christ revealed in his word; which if you shall slight, d^spise or contemn,
he will soon frustrate your call by taking the most able among you to honor
with an everlasting Crown; whom you neglected to honor on Earth double as
their due, or he will carry them remote from you to more infant Churches. You
are not to put them upon anxious Cares for their daily Bread for assuredly
(although it may now seem strange) you shall be fed in this Wilderness,
whither you are to go, with the flower of Wheat and Wine shall be plentiful
among you (but be sure you abuse it not) these Doctrines delivered from the
Word of God embrace, and let not Satan delude you by persuading their learned
skill is unnecessary, soon then will the Word of God be fl^ghted as translated
by such, and you shall be left wildred with strange Revelations of every
fantastic brain; which to prevent here are to be shipped among you many both
Godly. Juditious and Learned, who

CHAP. III. Of the Demeanor of their Church Officers.
BEing called to Office are in all humility to feed the flock of Christ, and
not for lucre to admit mostly of such sheep, whose fair fleeces allure much:
nor yet for filling the flocks to crowd in infections sheep, or rather wolves
in sheep clothing, assuredly it will prove bitterness in the end: neither
shall you for fear your allowance will fall short, hinder the increase of
Churches, that so your fellow brethren endued with like gifts fa^l short of
all; But above all beware of any love selfeconceited Opinion, stopping your
ears from hearing the Counsel of an Orthodox Synod, but by daily
communication one with another impart Christ's mind each to other, that you may
all speak one and the same things; heal not lightly the wounds that Wolves
make, lest from their festering Teeth a Gangrin grow, and further for
completing the Churches of Christ as well in matters as in Doctrine, there are
ancient experienced godly Christians shipped among you (but be sure you make
choice of such, for fear they be despised) and let them not be led by favor or
affection (as naturally men are) to Administer in your Office partially, for
unworthy the name of a Ruling Elder is he, who loses his Lyon-like courage,
when the sound and wholesome Doctrines delivered by Pastor or Teacher are
spoken against by any; unseemly behavior and sleepy hearing by private
exhortation prevent (if possible) lest public example in open professors
stumb^e some and hinder the operation of his word, especially in the hearts of
those who have bin long time led away with the inventions of man in the worship
of God. Be sure you contradict not but confirm with trienall love the
Doctrines of Christ, delivered by your Teaching Elders, which will be a great
means to make it prevail, for a threefold cord is not easily broken, trust
not to your own gifts for preventing error, but use all helps that Christ may
bless his own means, cast not away as incorrigible such as at first receive
not the word in all points, but wait with patience if at any time the Lord will
be pleased to give them a heart to turn unto him. Beware of a proud censorious
spirit, and should Christ be pleased to place in his building more pollished
stones then thy self, make it matter of rejoicing and not of envy. And
further, because the Preaching of the word is to be continued with all
diligence, here are likewise inbarked with you faithful servants of Christ to
attend on the Tables of the Churches, plaine-dealing men, yea, endued with
wisdom from above, by which they are enabled to manage and improve the
Churches Treasury, not greedily given to hoord up for themselves, but by their
own example leading others to liberality, and hospitality, having the Earth in
low esteem, and Faith in exercise when Cattle and Corn fail, not given to
magnify their own gifts, but boldly ma^^^ayning such sound truths as their
Teaching Elders have cleared up from the word of God. And,

CHAP. IV. How the People in Christ's Churches are to behave themselves.
NOw you his People, who are picked out by his, provide to pass this Western
Ocean for this honorable service, beware you call not weak ones to Office in
this honorable Army, nor Novices, lest they be lifted up with pride. You see
how full you are furnished for the work, give no ear to any Braggadociaes,
who to extol themselves will weaken the hands of those whom Christ has made
strong for himself. Yea, such will be the fantastical madness of some (if
you take not heed) that silly Women laden with diverse lusts, will be had in
higher esteem with them, then those honored of Christ, endued with power and
authority from him to Preach; Abuse not the free and full liberty Christ has
given you in making choice of your own Officers, and consent in admitting into
his Churches, and casting out such Members as walk disorderly; you are to
walk in all humility, lest in enjoyment of such freedoms as you formerly have
not exercised, you exceed the bounds of modesty, and instead of having your
moderation known to all, your imbecility, and selfe-exaltation be discovered
by many, in admission of others into Church society. Remember your selves were
once Aliens from the Covenant of Grace, and in Excommunication, consider how
your selves have been also tempted: in sincerity and singleness of heart, let
your words be few, do nothing be had in high esteem among men; And think it
no imputation of a weak dicserning to be follows of those are set over you in
the Lord as they follow Christ; Let your Profession outstrip your Confession,
for seeing you are to be set as lights upon a Hill more obvious then the
highest Mountain in the World, keep close to Christ that you may shine full
of his glory, who imployes you, and grub not continually in the Earth, like
blind Moles, but by your amiable Conversation seek the winning of many to your
Masters service. Beware of a proud censorious spirit, make it no part of your
Christian communication to be in continual discourse of others faults; Let all
things be done in love, and look not for more smoothness in stones as yet
unplaced in Christ's building then is in thy self, who have been long laid
therein: wait with patience and cast not off as Reprobates such as cannot
presently join with you in every point of Discipline, and yet hold fast to
sound and wholesome Doctrine, if you will be a people to his praise, who has
called you, seek the turning of many to Righteousness, purge out all the
sour Leven of unsound Doctrine, for the mind of Christ is to build up his
Churches, and break them down no more; And therefore be sure there be none to
hurt or destroy in all his holy Mountain, and as he has pressed you for his
service, that by passing through the Floods of Persecution you should be set at
liberty, and have power put into your hands. Then let none wrest it from you
under pretense of liberty of Conscience, men of perverse judgments will draw
Disciples after them, but let your consciences be pure, and Christ's Churches
free from all Doctrines that deceive. And all you, who are or shall be shipped
for this work, think it not enough that you enjoy the truth, but you must
hate every false way and know you are called to be faithful Soldiers of
Christ, not only to assist in building up his Churches, but also in pulling
down the Kingdom of Antichrist, then sure you are not set up for tollerating
times, nor shall any of you be content with this that you are set at liberty,
but take up your Arms, and march manfully on till all opposers of Christ's
Kingly power be abolished: and as for you who are called to sound forth his
silver Trumpets, blow loud and shrill, to this chiefest treble tune; For the
Armies of the great Jehovah are at hand. See you not his Enemies stretched out
on tiptoe, proudly daring on their thresholds, a certain sign of their sudden
overthrow; be not danted at your small number, for every common Soldier in
Christ's Camp shall be as David, who slew the great Goliath, and his David's
shall be as the Angels of the Lord who slew. 185000. in the Assyrian Army.

Finally, all you who are now sent forth by Christ your Jehovah to enter upon a
Blessed Reformation, if ever you will have the honors to be provokers of his
ancient People Israel (who are again suddenly to be honored by him in
believing) kindle the fire of jealousy in their breasts by your Holy, Heavenly
and humble walking, have you not the most blessedest opertunity put into your
hands that ever people had? then

CHAP. V. What Civil Government the People of Christ ought to set up, and
submit unto in New England.
Fail not in prosecution of the Work, for your Lord Christ has furnished you
with able Pilots, to steer the Helm in a godly peaceable, Civil Government
also, then see you make choice of such as are sound both in Profession and
Confession, men fearing God and hating bribes; whose Commission is not only
limited with the commands of the second Table, but they are to look to the
Rules of the first also, and let them be sure to put on Joshuas resolution, and
courage, never to make League with any of these seven Sectaries.

First, the Gortonists, who deny the Humanity of Christ, and most blasphemously
and proudly profess themselves to be personally Christ.

Secondly, the Papist, who with (almost) equal blasphemy and pride prefer
their own Merits and Works of Supererogation as equal with Christ's unvaluable
Death, and Sufferings.

Thirdly, the Familist, who depend upon rare Revelations, and forsake the sure
revealed Word of Christ.

Fourthly, Seekers, who deny the Churches and Ordinances of Christ.

Fifthly, Antinomians, who deny the Morrall Law to be the Rule of Christ.

Sixthly, Anabaptists, who deny Civil Government to be proved of Christ.

Seventhly, The Prelacy, who will have their own Injunctions submitted unto in
the Churches of Christ. These and the like your Civil Censors shall reach unto
that the people of, and under your Government, may live a qulet and peaceable
life in all godliness and honesty, and to the end that you may provoke Kings,
Princes, and all that are in authority to cast down their Crowns at the Feet
of Christ, and take them up again at his command to serve under his Standard
as nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers to the Churches and people of Christ;
when your feet are once safely set on the shores of America, you shall set up
and establish civil Government, and pray for the prosperity thereof, as you
love the peace of his Churches, who has called you to this service, he has
for that end shipped among you, some learned in the Law of God, and practiced
in rules of good reason or common Laws proper to our English Nation. Be sure
you make choice of the right, that all people, Nations and Languages, who are
soonly to submit to Christ's Kingdom, may be followers of you herein, as you
follow the Rule of Christ; your Magistrates shall not but open the Gates for
all sorts. But know, they are Eyes of Restraint set up for Walls and Bulworks,
to surround the Sion of God; Oh for Jerusalem her peace, see that you mind it
altogether, you know right well that the Churches of Christ have not thrived
under the tolerating Government of Holland, from whence the Lord has
translated one Church already to the place whither you are now to go; The
Church of Christ at Plimoth was planted in New England, 8. Years before any
others.
and further it is well known, loose liberty cannot endure to look Majesticall
authority in the face. And also you shall find erroneous persons will contend
with authority for upholding truth irrationally, denying it any power to
condemn deceiveable Doctrines, and that upon this very ground, because Tyranny
has enforced error heretofore; be not borne down with a multitude, neither
let any flatter for preferment, which to prevent, honor shall be very
chargeable among you; yet let not any deny to bear the burden and cumber of
governing this people of Christ; for assuredly, although their recompense fall
short from man, it shall not be forgotten with the Lord. Lastly,

CHAP. VI. How the People of Christ ought to behave themselves in Warlike
Discipline.
YOu shall with all diligence provide against the Malignant adversaries of the
truth, for assure your selves the time is at hand wherein Antichrist will
muster up all his Forces, and make war with the People of God: but it shall be
to his utter overthrow. See then you store your selves with all sorts of
weapons for war, furbrish up your Swords, Rapiers, and all other piercing
weapons. As for great Artillery, seeing present means falls short, wait on
the Lord Christ, and he will stir up friends to provide for you: and in the
mean time spare not to lay out your coin for Powder, Bullets, Match, Arms of
all sorts, and all kind Doctor Wilson gave 1000 l. to New England, with which
they stored them with great Guns.
of Instruments for War: and although it may now seem a thing incredible, you
shall see in that Wilderness, whither you are going, Troops of stout Horsemen
marshalled, and therefore fail not to ship lusty Mares along with you, and see
that withal diligence you encourage every Souldier-like Spirit among you, for
the Lord Christ intends to archieve greater matters by this little handful
then the World is aware of; wherefore you shall seek and set up men of valor
to lead and direct every Soulder among you, and with all diligence to instruct
them from time to time.

Fear not the miss of men to fill your Towns, and complete your companies;
for although at first struglings for truths advance there may but a small
number appear of sound judgment: yet shall you not prefer any to Office,
whose zeal is not strong for the truth, for now the mind of Christ is to put
out the Name of Ammaleck from under Heaven (I mean such at have persecuted the
Churches and People of Christ in their low condition) and assuredly unsound
Saules will spare such as should not be saved from destruction. Then be strong
and of a good courage (all you that are to fight the Lords Battle) that your
Faith fail not at sight of the great Armies of Gog and Magog: and as for you,
who shall be preferred to highest places in his New England Regiments, cause
your Captain and other inferior Officers to be diligent in their several
places, that you may lend help to your Countrymen, that ere long be will see
a necessity of contending for the truth, as well as your selves in choice of
Military Officers; Let faithfulness to the cause in hand, courage, activity
and skill have the prehemency of honors; for although it may seem a mean
thing to be a New England Soldier, yet some of you shall have the battering
and bearing down, sealing, winning and wasting the over-topping Towers of the
Hierarchy; Lieutenants, Ensign and Sergeants, exceed not your places, till
Experience, Skill and true Valor promote you to higher honor, to which you
shall be daily aspiring. As the worthy encouragement of a Soldiers labor, let
Militay discipline be had in high esteem among you. Gentlemen, Corporalls and
Fellow Soldiers, keep your weapons in a continual readiness, seeing you are
called to fight the Battails of your Lord Christ; who must reign till he has
put all his enemies under his Feet, his glorious Victories over Antichrist are
at hand, never yet did any Soldier rejoice in dividing the spoil after
Victory, as all the Soldiers of Christ shall, to see his judgment executed
upon the great Whore, and withal the Lambs bride prepared for him, who comes
Skipping over and trampling down the great Mountains of the Earth, whose
universal Government will then appear glorious, when not only the Assyrian,
Babilonian, Persian, Grecian and Roman Monarchies shall subject themselves unto
him, but also all other new upstart Kingdoms, Dukedomes, or what else can be
named, shall fall before him; Not that he shall come personally to Reign upon
Earth (as some vainly imagine) but his powerful Presence and Glorious
brightness of his Gospel both to Jew and Gentile, shall not only spiritually
cause the Churches of Christ to grow beyond number, but also the whole civil
Government of people upon Earth shall become his, so that there shall not be
any to move the hand, not dog his tongue against his chosen, And then shall the
time be of breaking Spears into Mattocks, and Swords into Sithes; and this to
remain to his last coming, which will be personally to overcome the last
enemies of his Saints, even death, which he will do by the word of his Mouth,
audibly spoken the World throughout.

Then all you, who are now, or shall hereafter be shipped for this Voyage,
mind the work of Christ, and not some following reign, titles of honor,
others eying the best Grasse-platts and best Situation for Farms and large
Accommodations, crouding our Gods people from sitting down among you. Wherefore
above all beware of covetousness; all you that will be admitted into these
sel^ct Bands of Christ Jesus, remember Achan, whereas Rams Horns could
overthrow the high and strong walls of Jericho, before his theft committed,
after it the little number of the men of Ai could put the Host of the living
God to flight, see then you stand upon your watch continually in the strength
of Christ, for assuredly instead of casting down the enemies of Christ,
thissin will cast down you utterly, disinable you for striking one stroke in
the cause of Christ; and whereas he has purposely picked ou^ this People for a
pattern of purity and soundness of Doctrine, as well as Discipline, that all
such may find a refuge among you, and let not any Merchants, Inkeepers,
Taverners and men of Trade in hope of gain, fling open the gates so wide, as
that by letting in all sorts you mar the work of Christ intended: neither
shall such laborers as he has picked out to be Pyoneers in this Camp of his,
drink up like Spunges such means as he has sent to maintain both Officers,
and private Soldiers. Lastly, let not such as fight, set foot on Land to
compose Towns for Habitations, take up large accommodations for sale, to
enrich themselves with others goods, who are to follow them, but freely as you
have received, so give out to others: for so soon as you shall seek to
ingrosse the Lords wast into your hands, he will ease you of your burden by
making stay of any farther resort unto you, and then be sure you shall have
wast Land enough.

To this Commission was added a strong motive to this work as follows:
Namely, the great enmity between that on^ truth as it is in Jesus, and all
other unsound and undeceiveable Doctrines, together with the persons that hold
them; insomuch, that they cannot stand in one Commonwealth long together, as
sixteen hundred years experience will testify, the which Moses lays down as
one maine reason, why he might not admit of a toleration to worship God in
Egypt. And therefore all you that believe the Scripture, which so plainly
prophecy the destruction of Antichrist and all Antichristian Doctrines; Pray,
pray, pray, pray continually with that valiant worthy Joshua that the Sun may
stand still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Aijalon, for assuredly
although some small battles may be fought against the enemies of Christ, yet
the great day of their final overthrow shall not come till the bright Son of
that one clear truth of Christ, stand still in the Gentile Churches, that
those who fight the Lords Battles may plainly discern his enemies in all
places, where they find them, as also such as will continue fighting must have
the World kept low in their eyes, as the Moon in the valley of Aijalon.

CHAP. VII. Of the goodness of God in helping his People to a large liberty in
Spiritual things, under the hopes of gain in Earthly things.
THis Proclamation being audibly published through the I Will of Great Britain
by sundry Herraulds, which Christ had prepared for that end: the rumor ran
through Cities, Towns and Villages; when those that were opposites heard it,
some cried one thing, and some another, much like the ^umult in the Town. hall
at Ephesus, some said let them go, others cried, swear them first, others
said let no Subsidy men pass, others would have strict search made for
non-conformants, and that none of the late silenced Ministers might pass into
the Ships; Amidst this great hurry the sincere servants of Christ humbly seek
the Lords assistance in days of Humiliation, taking up some serious
cogitations, how to begin this worthy work, upon which it was thought meet a
pattern should be procured, comprised after the manner of a
Corporation-company or Brotherhood, with as large liberty for government of
this Association, as could be got under the Broad Seal of England, which
accordingly was done by advise of one Mr. White an honest Counselor at Law, as
also furthered by the honored Mr. Richard Belinham, and under the name of many
worthy personages, as Governor, Dep. Gov. Assistant and Freemen etc. Granted,
Engrossed and Sealed as holding of the manner of East Greenwitch, yielding by
way of homage the sixth part of all such Ore of Gold or Silver, as might for
after time be found within the Limits of the said Grant bounded on the North,
with the most Northerly part of the pleasant River of Merimech, one mile
beyond, and on the South with the most Southern part of that often frequented
River commonly called Charles, one mile beyond with power to rule and govern in
all those parts both by Sea and Land; To ^lect and set up all sorts of
Officers, as well Superior as In^erior; to point out their power and places, to
defend and maintain the said Land, and Inhabitants thereof with all their
lawful liberties (against all such as at any time should Invade, Molest or
Disturb the same) as well by offensive as defensive War, as also to constitute
and ordain Laws, etc. Thus these Soldiers of Jesus Christ prepared to
advance his Kingly Government, much like Samuel, when he went to annoint David,
took up another errant, withal that the Malignant spirit of Saul might not
hinder the work, so those Worthies of Christ joining themselves with Merchants
and others, who had an eye at a profitable Plantation, who had not herein been
deceived would they have stayed their time, but surely such mist not their
mark, whose aim was at the durable interest, unless the fault were their
own, neither let any man think Christ will not recompense those one way or
other, who have been any way helpful to his people in this his work; amongst
whom the Author will not miss that good Gentleman, Matthew Craddock by the way
of thankfulness to him, Mr. Goff and others this Verse is tendered:

For richest Jems and gainful things most Merchants wisely venture:
Deride not then New England men, this Corporation ^nter;
Christ calls for Trade shall never fade, come Craddock factors send:
Let May^ew go and other more, spare not thy coin to spend;
Suck Trades advance did never chance, in all thy Trading yet:
Though some deride thy loss, abide, here is gain beyond man's wit.
CHAP. VIII. Of the wonderful Preparation the Lord Christ by his Providence,
wrought for his peoples abode in this Western world.
NOw let all men know the admirable Acts of Christ for his Churches, and
chosen, are universally over the whole Earth at one and the same time, but
sorry man cannot so discourse of them; And therefore let us leave our English
Nation in way of preparation for this Voyage intended, and tell of the
marvelous doings of Christ preparing for his peoples arrival in the Western
World, whereas the Indians report they beheld to their great wonderment that
perspicuous bright bl^zing Comet (which was so famously noted in Europe) anon
after Sun set it appeared as they say in the South-west, about three hours
continuing in their Horizon, for the space of thirty sleeps (for so they
reckon their days) after which uncouth sight they expected some strange things
to follow, and the rather, because not long before the whole Nation of the
Mattachusets were so affrighted with a Ship that arrived in their Bay, having
never seen any before, thus they report some persons among them discerning a
great thing to move toward them upon the Waters, wondering what Creature it
should be, they run with their light cannowes, (which are a kind of Beats
made of Birch Rindes, and sowed together with the roots of white Cedar-Trees)
from place to place, stiring up all their Countrymen to come forth, and behold
this monstrous thing; at this sudden news the shores for many miles were filled
with this naked Nation, gazing at this wonder, till some of the stoutest among
them manned ou^ these Cannowes, being armed with Bow and Arrows, they
approached within shot of the Ship, being becalmed they let fly their long
sh^f^s at her, which being headed with bone some stuck fast, and others dropped
into the water, they wondering it did not cry, but kept quietly on toward them,
till all of a sudden the Master caused a piece of Ordnance to be fired, which
stroke such fear into the poor Indians, that they hasted to shore, having
their wonders exceedingly increased; but being gotten among their great
multitude, they waited to see the sequel with much amazement, till the Seamen
fi^ling up their salies came to an Anchor, mannedout their long bote, and went
on shore, at whose approach, the Indians sled, although now they saw they were
men, who made signs to stay their flight, that they may have Trade with them,
and to that end they brought certain Copper-Kettles; the Indians by degrees
made their approach nearer and nearer till they came to them, when beholding
their Vessels, which they had set forth before them, the Indian knocking them
were much delighted with the sound, and much more astonished to see they would
not break, being so thin, for attaining those Vessels they brought them much
Bever, fraughting them richly away according to their desires, this was the
first working providence of Christ to stir up our English Nation, to plant
these parts in hope of a rich Trade for Bever-skins, and this made some of our
Countrymen make their abode in these parts, whom this Army of Christ at their
coming over found as fit helps to further their design in planting the
Churches of Christ; Who by a more admirable act of his Providence not long
after prepared for his peoples arrival as follows.

The Summer after the blazing Star (whose motion in the Heavens was from East
to West, poynting out to the sons of men the progress of the glorious Gospel
of Christ, the glorious King of his Churches) even about the year 1618. a
little before the removeall of that Church of Christ from Holland to Plimoth in
New England, as the ancient Indians report, there befell a great mortality
among them, the greatest that ever the memory of Father to Son took notice
of, chiefly desolating those places, where the English afterward planted the
Country of Po^kanoky, Ag^ssawamg, it was almost wholly deserted, insomuch that
the Neighbor Indians did abandon those places for fear of death, fleeing more
West and by South, observing the East and by Northern parts were most smitten
with this contagion, the Abarginny* men consisting of Mattachusets, Wippanaps
and Tarratines were greatly weakened, and more especially the three Kingdoms,
or Saggamore ships of the Mattachusets, who were before this mortality most
populous, having under them seven Dukedomes or petty Saggamores, and the
Nianticks and Narrowganssits, who before this came were but of little note, yet
were they now not much increased by such as fled thither for fear of death,
the Pecods (who retained the Name of a warlike people, till afterward
conquered by the English) were also smitten at this time. Their Disease being a
sore Consumption, sweeping away whole Families, but chiefly young Men and
Children, the very seeds of increase, their Powwowes, which are their Doctors,
working partly by Charms, and partly by Medicine, were much amazed to see
their Wigwams lie full of dea^ Corpse, and that now neither Squantam nor
Abbamocho could help, which are their good and bad God and also their Powwows
themselves were often smitten with deaths stroke, howling and much lamentation
was heard among the living, who being possessed with great fear, oftimes left
their dead unburied, their manner being such, that they remove their
habitations at death of any, this great mortality being an un vonted thing,
fear them the more, because naturally the Country is very healthy. But by this
means Christ (whose great and glorious works the Earth throughout are
altogether for the benefit of his Churches and chosen) not only made room for
his people to plant; but also tamed the hard and cruel hearts of these
barbarous Indians, insomuch that half a handful of his people landing not
long after in Plimoth-Plantation, found little resistance, of whom the Author
purposes not to speak particularly, being prevented by the honored Mr.
Winslow, who was an eyewitness of the work: only thus much by the way, they
were sent to keep possession for their Brethren and fellow Soldiers, who
arrived eight years after them, as in process of this story will God-willing
appear: and verily herein they quit themselves like men, or rather Christ for
and by them, maintaining the place notwithstanding the multitude of
difficulties they met withal at their first landing, being in doubtful
suspense what intertainment these Barbarians would give them, having with
prayer supplicated the Lord in the Name of Christ their King and guide in this
their undertaking, they manned out a Boat to discover what store of the
Inhabitants were there. Now these men, whose courage exceeded the number, being
guided by the provident hand of the most high, landed in some several places;
and by making fires gave signs of their approach, now the Indians, whose
dwellings are most near the water side, appeared with their Bows bent and
Arrows one the string, let fly their long shifts among this little company,
whom they might soon have enclosed, but the Lord otherwise disposed of it, for
one Captain Miles Standish having his fowling-peece in a reddinesse, presented
full at them, his shot being directed by the provident Hand of the most high
God, struck the stourest Sachem among them one the right Arm, it being bent
over his shoulder to reach an Arrow forth his Q^iver, as their manner is to
draw them forth in fight, at this stroke they all fled with great swiftness
through the Woods and Thickets, then the English, who more thirsted after their
conversion than destruction, returned to their Bote without receiving any
damage, and soon after arrived where they left their Brethren, to whom they
declared the good hand of God toward them, with thankful acknowledgement of
this great work of his in preserving them; Yet did they all remain full of
encumbered thoughts, the Indians, of whose multitudes they had now some
intelligence, together with experience of spirits, and also knew well without
commerce with them they were not like long to subsist.

But he, whose work they went about, wrought so rare a Providence for them,
which cannot but be admired of all that hear it. Thus it befell as they were
discoursing in the Boat they had built for shelter, all of a sudden an Indian
came in among them, at whose speech they were all aghast, he speaking in the
English Language, Much welcome Englishmen, their wonder was the greater,
because upon those Costs they supposed no English had so much as set foot,
and verily Christ had prepared him on purpose to give his people intertainment,
the Indian having lived in England two year or thereabout, after which he
returned home, and at this time had wandered into those parts in company of
other Indians, all this, and the condition of the near adjoining Indians, he
soon discovered unto them, at which they were transported beyond themselves
very much, what with joy and the mixture of their former fear and affection
intervening with the other, surprised all their senses of a sudden, that long
it was ere each party could take its proper place, yea, and beyond all this
Christ Jesus, by the power of his blessed Spirit, did now work upon all their
faculties both of Soul and Body, the great impression of his present
Providence might not soon be washed off with the following encumbered cares of a
Defart Wilderness; but to contract, they made use of the present opprotunity,
and by the isntrumental means of this Indian, became acquainted and
reconciled with most of the Neighboring Indians. And afterward planted a
Church of Christ there, and set up civil Government, calling the Name of the
place Plimoth: under this jurisdiction there are ten Churches at this very day,
this being the first place any English resorted unto for the advancement of the
Kingly Government of Christ in this Western World.

CHAP. IX. Of the first preparation of the Merchant Adventurers, in the
Mattachusets.
NOw it will be time to return again to England, to speak further of the
people that we left in way of preparation; who in the year 1628. sent forth
some store of servants to provide against the wants of a Desert Wilderness,
amongst whom came over a mixed multitude, insomuch that very little appeared of
the following work, only the much honored Mr. John Indicat, came over with
them to govern, a fit instrument to begin this Wildernesse-worke, of courage
bold undanted, yet sociable, and of a cheerful spirit, loving and austere,
applying himself to either as occasion served. And now let no man be offended
at the Authors rude Verse, penned of purpose to keep in memory the Names of
such worthies as Christ made strong for himself, in this unwonted work of his.

John Endicat twice Governor of the English, inhabiting the Mattachusets Bay
in N. England.
STrong valiant John will thou march on, and take up station first,
Christ called has thee, his Soldier be, and fail not of thy trust;
Wilderness-wants Christ's grace supplants, the^ plant his Churches pure,
With Tongues gifted, and graces led, help thou to his procure;
Undaunted thou will not allow, Malignant men to wast:
Christ's Vineyard here, whose grace should cheer, his well-beloved's taste.
Then honored be thy Christ has thee their General promoted:
To show their love, in place above, his people have thee voted.
Yet must thou fall, to grave with all the Nobles of the Earth,
Thou rotting Worm to dust must turn, and worse but for new birth.
The place picked out by this People to settle themselves in, was in the bosom
of the outstretched arm of Cape Anne, now called Gloucester, but at the place of
their abode they began to build a Town, which is called Salem, after some
little space of time having made trial of the Sordid spirits of the
Neighboring Indians, the most bold among them began to gather to diverse
places, which they began to take up for their own, those that were sent over
servants, having itching desires after novelties, found a reddier way to make
an end of their Masters provision, then they could find means to get more;
They that came over their own men had but little left to feed on, and most
began to repent when their strong Beers and full cups ran as small as water in
a large Land, but little Corn, and the poor Indians so far from relieving
them, that they were forced to lengthen out their own food with Acorns, and
that which added to their present distracted thoughts, the Ditch between
England and their now place of abode was so wide, that they could not leap over
with a lope-staffe, yet some delighting their Eye with the rarity of things
present, and feeding their fancies with new discoveries at the Springs
approach, they made shift to rub out the Winters cold by the Fireside, having
fuel enough growing at their very doors, turning down many a drop of the
Bottell, and burning Tobacco with all the ease they could, discoursing between
one while and another, of the great progress they would make after the
Summers-Sun had changed the Earths white furred Gown into a green Mantell.
Now the vernall of thirty nine being come, they addressed themselves to cost it
as far as they durst for fear of loosing themselves, or falling into the hands
of unknown Indians, being kept in awe by a report of a cruel people, not far
of called the Tarratines. All this while little like-lihood there was building
the Temple for Gods worship, there being only two that began to hew stones in
the Mountains, the one named Mr. Bright, and the other Mr. Blaxton, and one of
them began to build, but when they saw all sorts of stones would not fit in the
building, as they supposed, the one betook him to the Seas again, and the
other to till the Land, retaining no simbole of his former profession, but a
Canonical Coat.

CHAP. X.
Of the first Church of Christ, gathered at Salem in the Mattachusets
Government.
THis year 1629. came over three godly Ministers of Christ Jesus, intending to
show his power in his peoples lowest condition as his manner is, thereby to
strengthen their Faith in following difficulties, and now although the number
of the faithful people of Christ were but few, yet their longing desires to
gather into a Church was very great; And therefore addressed themselves to
find out the blessed Rules of Christ for preserving herein, who through the
assistance of his Blessed Spirit, found that the Word of God, penned by the
Apostles in many Epistles, written to particular Churches, consisting of such
as are beloved. Saints, by calling appearing so in the judgment of Charity,
being tried by the rule of the word, not scandalous in their Lives, for the
society of such they sought, and in these beginnings found very few, seven
being the lest number a Church can be gathered, or conceived by just
consequence from the Word of God. Having fasted and prayed with humble
acknowledgement of their own unworthiness to be called of Christ to so worthy
a work, they joined together in a holy Covenant with the Lord, and one with
another promising by the Lords Assistance to walk together in Exhorting,
Admonishing, and Rebuking one another, and to cleave to the Lord with a full
purpose of heart, according to the blessed Rules of his Word made known unto
them, and further they seeing by light of Scripture the Lord Christ ascended up
on high to give gifts unto men, not only extraordinary as Apostles, etc.
before the Canon of the Scripture was perfected but also ordinary as Pastors
and Teachers, and that such are to be fitted with gifts according, for so
mighty a work, as is the Feeding and Ruling the Flock of Christ. Wherefore
they Elected and Ordained one Mr. Higgingson to be Tracher of this first Church
of Christ, set up in those parts, a man endued with grace apt to teach, and
mighty in the Scriptures, Learned in the Tongues, able to convince gainsayers,
aptly applying the word to his hearers, who departed this life not long after,
of whom it may be said.

The Reverend Mr. Higgingson, first Pastor of the Church of Christ at Salem in
New England.
WHat Golden gain made Higginson remove,
From fertile Soil to Wilderness of Rocks;
'Twas Christ's rich Pearl stirred up thee toil to love,
For him to feed in Wilderness his flocks.
First Teacher, he here Sheep and Lambs together,
First crowned shall be, he in the Heavens of all,
Christ's Pastors here, but yet Christ folk had rather,
Him here retain, blessed he whom Christ has called.
They also called to the Office of an Exhorting Elder Mr. Scelton, a man of a
gracious Speech, full of Faith and furnished by the Lord with gifts from above,
to begin this great work of his, that makes the whole Earth to ring again at
this present day.

The Reverend Mr. Scelton first Pastor of the Church of Christ, at Salem in New
England, 1630.
SCelton for Christ did leave his Native soil,
Christ Grace first wrought for him, or he had never
A Pastor been in Wilderness to toil,
Where Christ his Flock does into Churches gather;
For five years space to end thy war-faire thou,
Must meet with wantes, what wants can be to him?
Whose Shepheard's Christ Earths fulness has for you;
And Heavens rich Crown for thee, with his conquest win.
This Church of Christ, being thus begun, the Lord with the Water spouts of his
tender Mercy caused to increase and fructify. And now let every Ear listen,
and every heart admire, and enlarge it self to the astonishment of the whole
man at this wondrous work of the great Jehovah; That in thrice seven years
(after the beginning of this Work) wrought such fearful Desolations, and
wonderful Alterations among our English Nation, and also in this dismal
Desert, wasting the natural Inhabitant with deaths stroke, and that as is
former touched, the Mattachusets, who were a populous Nation, consisting of
30000 able men, now brought to less then 300. and in their room and place of
abode this poor Church of Christ consisting at their beginning, but of seven
persons, increased to forty three Churches in join Communion one with the
other, professing One God, One Christ, and one Gospel, and in those Churches
about 7750. Souls in one profession of the Rules of Christ, and that which
makes the work more admirable in the Eyes of all beholders, men's habitations
are cut out of the Woods and Bushes, neither can this place be entered by our
English Nation, but by passing through a dreadful and terrible Ocean of nine
hundred Leagues in length.

CHAP. XI. Of the Glorious beginnings of a thorough Reformation in the
Churclses of Clorist.
FUrther know these are but the beginnings of Christ's glorious Reformation, and
Restoration of his Churches to a more glorious splendour than ever. He has
therefore caused their dazeling brightness of his presence to be contracted in
the burning Glass of these his peoples zeal, from whence it begins to be left
upon many parts of the World with such hot reflection of that burning fight,
which has fired many places already, the which shall never be quenched till it
has burnt up Babylon Root and Branch, and now let the Reader look one the
102. Psalm, the Prophet Isaia 66. Chapter, take this sharp Sword of Christ's
Word, and all other Scriptures of like nature, and follow on ye valiant of the
Lord; And behold the worthies of Christ, as they are boldly leading forth his
Troops into these Western Fields, mark them well Man by Man as they march,
terrible as an Army with Banners, crowd in all ye that long to see this
glorious sight, see there is their glorious King Christ one that white Horse,
whose hooses like flint cast not only sparks, but flames of fire in his
pat^es. Behold his Crown beset with Carbunkles, wherein the names of his whole
Army are written. Can there be ever night in his Presence, whose eyes are ten
thousand times higher than the Sun? Behold his swiftnes all you that have said,
where is the promise of his coming? Listen a while, hear what his herald
proclaims, Babylon is sallen, is fallen, both her Doctrine and Lordly rabble
of Popes, Cardinals, Lordly-B^shops, Friars, Monks, Nuns, Seminary-Priests,
Jesuits, Ermites, Pilgrims, Deans, Prebends, Archdeacons, Commissaries,
Officialls, Proctors, Somners, Singing-men, Choristers, Organist,
Bellows-blowers, Vergers, Porters, Sextons, Beads-men, and Bel-ringers and all
others who never had name in the Word of God; together with all her false
Doctrines, although they may seem otherwise never so contradictory as Arians,
who deny the Godhead of Christ, and Gortenists, who deny the Humanity of
Christ: Papists, who think to merit Heaven by the Works of the Law,
Antinomians, who deny the Law of God altogether as a rule to walk by in the
obedience of Faith, and deny good works to be the Frutit of Faith, Arminians,
who attribute Gods Election, or Reprobation to the will of Man, and Familists,
who forsake the revealed Will of God, and make men depend upon strong
Revelations, for the knowledge of Gods Electing Love toward them.
Conformitants o^ Formalists, who bring in a form of worship of their own, and
join it with the worship God has appointed in his Word Seekers, that deny all
manner of worship or Ordinances of Christ Jesus, affirming them to be quite
lost, and not to be attained till new Apostles come.

CHAP. XII. Of the voluntary banishment, chosen by this People of Christ, and
their last farewell taken of their Country and Friends.
ANd now behold the several Regiments of these Soldiers of Christ, as they
are shipped for his service in the Western World, part thereof being come to
the Town and Port of Southamptan in England, where they were to be shipped,
that they might prosecute this design to the full, one Ship called the Eagle,
they wholly purchase, and many more they hire, filling them with the seeds of
man and beast to sow this yet untilled Wilderness withal, making sale of such
Land as they possess, to the great admiration of their Friends and
Acquaintance, who thus expostulate with them, What, will not the large income
of your yearly revenue content you, which in all reason cannot choose but be
more advantageous both to you and yours, then all that Rocky Wilderness,
whither you are going, to run the hazard of your life? Have you not here your
Tables filled with great variety of Food, your Coffers filled with Coin, your
Houses beautifully built and filled with all rich Furniture? (or otherwise)
have you not such a gainful Trade as none the like in the Town where you
live? Are you not enriched daily? Are not your Children very well provided for
as they come to years? (nay) may you not here as pithily practice the two
chief Duties of a Christian (if Christ give strength) namely Mortification and
Sanct fication as in any place of the World? What helps can you have there that
you must not carry from hence? With bold resolvednesse these stout Soldiers of
Christ reply; as Death, the King of terror with all his dreadful attendance
inhumane and barbarous, tortures doubled and trebled by all the infernal
furies have appeared but light and momentany to the Soldiers of Christ Jesus,
so also the Pleasure, Profits and Honors of this World set forth in their most
glorious splend or, and magnitude by the alluring Lady of Delight, proffering
pleasant embraces, cannot entice with her Siren Songs, such Soldiers of
Christ, whose aims are elevated by him, many Millions above that brave Warrier
Ulysses.

Now seeing all can be said will but barely set forth the immovable
Resolutions that Christ continued in these men; Pass on and attend with
tears, if thou have any, the following discourse, while these Men, Women and
Children are taking their last farewell of their Native Country, Kindred,
Friends and Acquaintance, while the Ships attend them; Many make choice of some
solitary place to echo out their bowell-breaking affections in bidding their
Friends farewell, dear friends (says one) as near as my own soul does thy
love lodge in my breast, with thought of the heart burning Ravishments, that thy
Heavenly speeches have wrought: my melting soul is poured out at present with
these words, both of them had their farther speech strangled from the depth of
their inward dolor, with breast-breaking sobs, till leaning their heads each on
others shoulders, they let fall the salt-dropping dews of vehement affection,
striving to exceed one another, much like the departure of David and Jonathan:
having a little eased their hearts with the still streams of Tears, they
recovered speech again. Ah! my much honored friend, has Christ given thee so
great a charge as to be Leader of his People into that far remote, and vast
Wilderness, I, oh, and alas thou must die there and never shall I see thy Face
in the flesh again, were thou called to so great a task as to pass the
precious Ocean, and hazard thy person in Battle against thousands of Malignant
Enemies there? there were hopes of thy return with triumph, but now after two
three, or four months spent with daily expectation of swallowing Waves, and
cruel Pirates, you are to be Landed among barbarous Indians, famous for
nothing but cruelty, where you are like to spend your days in a famishing
condition for a long space; Scarce had he uttered this, but presently he
locks his friend fast in his arms, holding each other thus for some space of
time, they weep again, But as Paul to his beloved flock: the other replies
what do you weeping and breaking my heart? I am now pressed for the service of
our Lord Christ, to re-build the most glorious Edifice of Mount Sion in a
Wilderness, and as John Baptist, I must cry prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make his paths strait, for behold he is coming again, he is coming to
destroy Antichrist, and give the whore double to drink the very dregs of his
wrath.

Then my dear friend unfold thy hands, for thou and I have much work to do,
I and all Christian Soldiers the World throughout* then hand in hand they
lead each other to the Sandy-banks of the brinish Ocean, when clenching their
hands fast, they unloose not til enforced to wipe their watery-eyes, whose
constant streams forced a watery-path upon their Cheeks, which to hide from
the eyes of others they shun society for a time, but being called by occasion,
whose bauld back-part none can lay hold one; They thrust in among the throng
now ready to take Ship, where they beheld the like affections with their own
among diverse Relations, Husbands and Wives with mutual consent are now
purposed to part for a time 900 Leagues asunder, since some providence at
present will not suffer them to go together, they resolve their tender
affections shall not hinder this work of Christ, the new Married and betrothed
man, exempt by the Law of God from war, now will not claim their privilege,
but being constrained by the Love of Christ, lock up their natural affections
for a time, till the Lord shall be pleased to give them a meeting in this
Western World, sweetly mixing it with spiritual love, in the mean time many
Fathers now take their young Samuells, and give them to this service of Christ
all their Lives. Brethren, Sisters, Unkles, Nephews, Neeces, together with all
Kindred of blood that binds the bowels of affection in a true Lovers knot, can
now take their last farewell, each of other, although natural affection will
still claim her right, and manifest her self to be in the body by looking
out at the Windows in a mournful manner among this company, thus disposed
does many Reverend and godly Pastors of Christ present themselves, some in a
Seamans Habit, and their scattered sheep coming as a poor Convoy loftily
take their leave of them as follows, what doleful days are these, when the
best choice our Orthodox Ministers can make is to take up a perpetual
banishment from their native soil, together with their Waves and Children, we
their poor sheep they may not feed, but by stoledred should they abide here.
Lord Christ, here they are at thy command, they go, this is the door thou have
opened upon our earnest request, and we hope it shall never be shut: for
Englands sake they are going from England to pray without ceasing for England,
O England! thou shall find New England prayers prevailing with their God for
thee, but now woe alas, what great hardship must these our indeared Pastors
endure for a long season, with these words they life up their voices and wept,
adding many drops of sale liquor to the ebbing Ocean; Then shaking hands they
bid adue with much cordial affection to all their Brethren, and Sisters in
Christ, yet now the Scorn and Derifion of those times, and for this their
great enterprise counted as so many cracked. brains, but Christ will make all
the Earth know the wisdom he has endued them with, shall overtop all the
humane policy in the World, as the sequel we hope will show; Thus much shall
suffice in general to speak of their peoples farewell they took from time to
time of their Country and Friends.

CHAP. XIII. Of the charges expended by this poor People, to enjoy Christ in
his purity of his Ordinances.
ANd now they enter the Ships, should they have cast up what it would have cost
to people New England before hand, the most strongest of Faith among them would
certainly have staggered much, and very hardly have set sail. But behold and
wonder at the admirable Acts of Christ, here it is cast up to thy hand, the
passage of the persons that peopled New England cost ninety five thousand
pounds, the Swine, Goats, Sheep, Neat and Horse, cost to transport twelve
thousand pound, besides the price they cost, getting food for all persons for
the time till they could bring the Woods to tillage amounted unto forty five
thousand pounds; Nails, Glass and other Ironworke for their meeting houses,
and other dwelling houses before they could raise any means in the Country to
purchase them, Eighteen thousand pounds. Arms, Powder, Bullet and Match,
together with their great Artillery, twenty two thousand pounds: the whose sum
amounts unto one hundred ninety two thousand pound, beside that which the
Adventurers laid out in England, which was a small pittance compared with this,
and indeed most of those that cast into this Bank were the chief Adventurers.
Neither let any man think the sum above expressed did defray the whole ch^rge
of this Army, which amounts to above as much more, only this sum lies still in
bank, and the other they have had the income agains; This therefore is chiefly
presented to satisfy such as think New England men have been bad husbands in
mannaging their Estates, assuredly here it lies in bank, put out to the
greatest advantage that ever any has been for many hundred of years before,
and verily although in casting it up some hundreds may be miscounted (for the
Author would not willingly exceed in any respect) but to be sure Christ stands
by and beholds every mite that (in the obedience of Faith) is cast into this
Treasury: but what do we answering men? the money is all Christ's, and
certainly he will take it well that (his) have so disposed of it to his
advantage; by this means he has had a great income in England of late,
Prayers, Tears and Praise, and some Reformation; Scotland and Ireland have met
with much of the profit of this Bank, Virginia, Bermodas and Barbados have had
a taste, and France may suddenly meet with the like. Therefore repent you not,
you that have cast in your Coin, but tremble all you that with a penurious
haud have not only cast, in such as are taking out to hord it up in your
Napkins, remember Ananias and Saphirah, how dare thou do it in these dayet,
when the Lord has need of it? Gentle Reader make use of this memorable
Providence of Christ for his New England Churches, where had this poor people
this great sum of money? the mighty Princes of the Earth never opened their
Coffers for them, and the generality of these men were mean and poor in the
things of this life, but sure it is the work is done, let God have the glory,
who has now given them food to the full, and some to spare for other Churches.

CHAP. XIV. Of the wonderful preservation of Christ, in carrying his People.
Men, Women, Children, through the largest Ocean in the World.
ANd now you have had a short survay of the charges of their New England
Vayages, see their progress being safe aboard weighing Anchor, and hoysting
sail they betook them to the protection of the Lord on the wide Ocean, no
sooner were they dispersed by reason of the wideness of the Sea, but the
Arrabella (for so they called the Eagle, which the company purchased in honor
of the Lady Arrabella, Wife to that godly Esquire, Izack Johnson) espied four
Ships, as they supposed, in pursuit of them, their suspicion being the more
augmented by reason of a report (when they lay in harbor) of four Dunkerk-men
of war, who were said to lie wating for their coming forth, at this sight they
make preparation, according to their present condition, comforting one another
in the sweet mercies of Christ: the weaker sex betook them to the Ships hold,
but the men one Decks wait in a readiness for the enemies approach. At whose
courage many of the Seamen wonder, not knowing under whose command these their
passengers were, even he who makes all his Soldiers bold as Lions, Yet was he
not minded to make trial of his peoples valiantey in fight at this time, for
the ships coming up with them proved to be their own Countrymen and friends,
at which they greatly rejoiced, seeing the good hand of their God was upon
them, and are further strengthened in Faith to rely one Christ, for the future
time against all Leakes, Storms, Rocks, Sands, and all other wants a long
Sea-voyage procures, sustaining them with a I meekness and patience, yet
sensible of the Lords frowns, humbling their souls before him, and also
rejoyeing in his deliverauces in taking the cup of Salvation, and paying the
tribute of thankfulness to the most high, whose provident hand was diversely
directed toward them, purposely to point out the great hardships they must
undergo in this their Christian warfare, and withal to tell them, although
their difficulties were many and moumfull, yet their victories should be much
more glorious and joyful, eminently eyed of the whole World, but now keeping
their course so near as the winds will suffer them, the billows begin to grow
lofty and rageing, and suddenly bringing them into the vale of death, covering
them with the formidable floods, and dashing their bodies from side to side,
hurling their unfixed goods from place to place at these unwonted works. Many
of these people amazed find such opposition in nature, that her principles
grow feeble, and cannot digest her food, loathing all manner of meat, so that
the vital parts are hindered from cooperating with the Soul in spiritual
duties, insomuch that both Men, Women and Children are in a helpless condition
for present, and now is the time if ever of recounting this service they have,
and are about to undertake for Christ; but he, who is very sensible of his
peoples infirmities, rebukes the winds, and Seas for their sakes, and then the
reverend and godly among them begin to exhort them in the name of the Lord, and
from the Lord, being fitted with such words as much incourrages the work they
are going about, many of their horses and other Cattle are cast overboard by
the way, to the great disheartning of some, but Christ knew well how for his
peoples hearts would be taken off the maine work with these things. And
therefore although he be very tender in providing outward necessaries for his,
yet rather than this great work (he intends) should be hindered, their Tables
shall be spread but thinly in this wilderness for a time. After the Lord had
exercised them thus several ways, he sent Diseases to visit their Ships, that
the desert Land they were now drawing near unto might not be deserted by them
at first entrance, which sure it would have been by many, had not the Lord
prevented by a troublesome passage: At forty days end, or thereabout, they cast
to sound the Seas depth, and find them sixty fadom, by which they deem the
banks of New sound Land are near, where they being provided with Cod-line and
Hook hale up some store of fish to their no small refreshing, and within some
space of time after they approach the Cost of New England, where they are
again provided with Mackarell, and that which was their greater rejoicing,
they discover Land, at sight thereof they blessed the Lord.

But before the Author proceed any further in this Discourse, take here a short
survay of all the Voyages by Sea, in the transportation of these Armies of the
great Jehova, for fifteen years space to the year 1643. about which time
England began to endeavor after Reformation, and the Soldiers of Christ were
set at liberty to bide his battles at home, for whose assistance some of the
chief worthies of Christ returned back: the number of Ships that transported
passengers in this space of time, as is supposed is 298. Men, Women and
Children passing over this wide Ocean, as near as at present can be gathered,
is also supposed to be 21200. or thereabout.

CHAP. XV. An Exhortation to all People, Nations and Languages, to endeavor
the advancing of the Kingdom of Christ in the purity of his Ordinances, seeing
he has done, such admirable Acts for these poor shrubs.
ANd now all you whose affections are taken with wonderful matters (Attend)
and you that think Christ has forgotten his poor despised people (Behold)
and all you that hopefully long for Christ's appearing to confound Antichrist
(Consider) and rejoice all ye his Churches the World throughout, for the Lamb
is preparing his Bride, and oh ^ ye the ancient Beloved of Christ, whom he of
old led by the hand from Egypt to Canaan, through that great and terrible.
Wilderness, look here, behold him whom you have peirced, preparing to pierce
your hearts with his Wonder-working Providence, and to provoke you by this
little handful of his people to look on him, and mourn. Yet let no man think
these few weak Worms would restrain the wnoderfull Works of Christ, as
only to themselves, but the quite contrary, these but the Porch of his
glorious building in hand, and if he have showed such admirable acts of his
providence toward these, what will he do when the whole Nation of English
shall set upon like Reformation according to the direct Rule of his Word?
Assured confidence there is also for all Nations, from the undoubted promise of
Christ himself.

The Winter is past, the Rain is changed and gone, come out of the holes of
the secret places, fear not because your number is but small, gather into
Churches, and let Christ be your King, ye Presbytery, Lord it not over them or
any Churches, but feed every one, that one flock over which Christ has made
you overseers, and ye people of Christ give your Presbytery double honors,
that they with you may keep the watch of the Lord over his Churches. Ye Dutch
come out of your hods-podge, the great mingle mangle of Religion among you has
caused the Churches of Christ to increase so little with you, standing at ^
stay like Corn among Weeds, Oh, ye French! fear not the great swarms of
Locusts, nor the croking Frogs in your Land, Christ is reaching out the hand to
you, look what he has done for these English, and sure he is no Respecter of
Persons, etc. ye Germans that have had such a bloody bickering, Christ is now
coming to your aid, then cast off your loose, and careless kind of
Reformation, gather into Churches, and keep them pure, that Christ may delight
to dwell among you: oh Italy! The Seat and Center of the Beast, Christ will now
pick out a People from among you for himself, see here what wonders he works
in little time. Oh! ye Spaniards and Portugalls, Christ will show you the
abominarions of that beastly Whore, who has made your Nations drunk with the
Wine of her Fornication. Dread not that cruel murtherous Inquisition, for
Christ is now making Inquisicion for them, and behold, here how he has
rewarded them, who deal cruelly with these his people.

Finally, oh all ye Nations of the World, behold great is the work the
glorious King of Heaven and Earth has in hand; beware of neglecting the call
of Christ: and you the Seed of Israel both less and more, the rattling of your
dead bones together i^ at hand, Sinews, Flesh and Life: at the Word of Christ
it comes Counselors and Judges, you shall have as at the beginning to fight for
you, as Gidion, Bareck, Jeptha, Samson etc. then sure your deliverance shall be
sudden and wonderful, if Christ have done such great things for these low
Shrubs, what will his most Admirable, Excellent and wonderful Work for you
be, but as the Resurrection from the dead, when all the miraculous acts of his
wonderful power showed upon Pharaoh? for your Forefathers deliverance shall
be swallowed up with those far greater works that Christ shall show for your
deliverance upon the whole World, by Fires and Blood destroying both Pope and
Turk, when you shall see great smoke and flames ascending up on high, of that
great Whore, Revel. 14 and 11. verse, and the 17. and 16. verse, and the 18.
the 8. and 18. verse. Then oh! you People of Israel gather together as one Man,
and grow together as one Tree. Ezekiel. 37. and 23. For Christ the great King of
all the Earth is now going forth in his great Wrath and terrible Indignation to
avenge the blood of his Saints, Ezekiel 38 and 19. verse. and now for the great and
bloody Battle of Gog and Magog, Rivers of blood, and up to the Horse-bridles,
even the blood of those have drunk blood so long, oh I dreadful day, when the
patience and long-suffering of Christ, that has lasted so many hundreds of
years shall end, what wondrous works are now suddenly to be wrought for the
accomplishment of these things* Then judge all you (whom the Lord Christ has
given a discerning spirit) whether these poor New England People be not the
fore runners of Christ's Army, and the marvelous providence which you shall now
hear, be not the very Finger of God, and whether the Lord has not sent this
people to Preach in this Wilderness, and to proclaim to all Nations, the
near approach of the most wonderful works that ever the Sons of men saw.
Will not you believe that a Nation can be borne in a day? here is a work come
very near it; but if you will believe you shall see far greater things than
these, and that in very little time, and in the mean time look on the
following Discourse.

CHAP. XVI. Of the admirable Acts of Christ's Providence, in delivering this his
people in their Voyages by Sea, from many foul dangers.
YOu have heard of about 198. Ships passing the perilous Ocean, of all which I
hear of but one that ever miscarried; yet shall you here see some of the great
dangers they were in the Ship, this Author came in a foggy morning, anon by
break of day was ready to be steamed by a Pirate, but being unready for sight
they passed by; others by a fog, have been delivered from farther chase of
them, so that of this great number never did any Pirate make one shot at them,
according to best intelligence. Their deliverance from leakes also has been no
less wonderful, some so near sinking, that the loving affection between
Husband and Wife, has caused them to fould each other in their Arms, with
Resolution to die together, and make the Sea their Grave, yet not ceasing to
call on the Lord, their present help in time of need, who is minded to
manifest his great care for this his people to all that shall come to hear
thereof. And therefore directs to means for freeing their ships, being now
ready to founder in the depthlesse Ocean. And further, as if these deliverances
were too little to express the tender care Christ has of his, to free them
from all dangers, those that occupy their business in the deep, and see the
Wonders of God upon the waters, are taken with great astonishment to behold the
extraordinary hand of the most High, in transportation of this people, in that
their Ships all of a sudden are brought so near the ground, and yet strike not
their Pilots, missing ofttimes of their skill on those unwandered. Coasts, but
their Jehovah he misses not to be an exact Pilot in the most thickest foggs
and darkest nights, for thus it befell.

The night newly breaking off her darkness, and the daylight being clouded
with a gross vapor, as if nights Curtains remained half shut, the Seamen
and Passengers standing on the Decks, suddenly fixed their eyes one a great
Boat (as they deemed) and anon after they spied another, and after that
another; but musing on the matter, they perceived themselves to be in great
danger of many great Rocks, with much terror and affrightment, they turned the
Ship about, expecting every moment to be dashed in pieces against the Rocks. But
he whose providence brought them in, Piloted them out again, without any
danger, to their great Rejoicing. And assuredly) so extraordinarily eminent and
admirable to the eyes of many beholders, was the wonderful works in
magnifying the Rich grace toward this his people in prefering them) that many
Masters of Ships left their See employment for a time, and chose rather to
suffer the want of a Wilderness with the people of God, than to increase
their Estates in a full-fed Land, and verily so taken they were, that they fell
down at Christ's Feet, and were placed by him as living stones, Elect and
Precious in his Churches; also many other Seamen were brought to seek after
Christ in his Ordinances, by which it appears some great work, by some far
surpassing all this, has Christ ere long to do, that he thus fitteth
Instruments. Then all you that occupy shipping prepare for his service, who
will assuredly prove the best owner that ever you went to Sea for.

Furthermore, the condition of those persons passed the Seas, in this long and
restless Voyage (if rightly considered) will more magnify the grace of Christ
in this great Work. First, such were many of them that never before had made
any path through the Waters, no not by boat, neither so much as seen a Ship,
others so tenderly brought up that they had little hope of their Lives
continuance under such hardships, as so long a Voyage must needs enforce them
to endure, others there were, whose Age did rather call for a quiet Couch to
rest them on, than a pinching Cabin in a Reeling Ship, others whose weak
natures were so borne down with Disease, that they could hardly craule up the
Ships-side, yet ventured their weak Vessels to this Westurne World. Here also
might you see weakly Women, whose hearts have trembled to set foot in Boat,
but now imboldened to venture through these tempestuous Seas with their young
B^bes, whom they nurture up with their Breasts, while their bodies are tossed
on the tumbling Waves; also others whose Wombes could not contain their fru^t,
being ready for the Worlds-light, travailed and brought forth upon this
depthlesse Ocean in this long Voyage, lively and strong Children yet living,
and like to prove succeeding Instruments in the Hands of Christ, for furthering
this work; among other Sea-borne Cotton, now a young student in a College in
Cambridge, being Son to that Famous and Renowned Teacher of Christ, M. John
Cotton; by all this and much more that might be said, for almost every one you
discourse withal will tell you of some Remarkable Providence of God showed
toward them in this their Voyage, by which you may see the Work of Christ is
not to be laid aside because of difficulties.

CHAP. XVII. Of the first leading of these People of Christ, when the Civil
Government was Established.
BUt to go on with the Story, the 12 of July or thereabout 1630. these
Soldiers of Christ first set foot one this Western end of the World; where
arriveing in safety, both Men, Women and Children. On the North side of Charles
River, they landed near a small Island, called Noddells Island, where one Mr.
Samuel Mavereck then living, a man of a very loving and courteous behavior,
very ready to entertain strangers, yet an enemy to the Reformation in hand,
being strong for the Lordly Prelaticall power one this Island, he had built a
small Fort with the help of one Mr. David Tompson, placing therein four
Murderers to protect him from the Indians. About one mile distant upon the
River ran a small creek, taking its Name from Major Genesis Edward Gibbons, who
dwelt there for some years after; One the South side of the River one a point
of Land called Blaxtons point, planted Mr. William Blaxton, of whom we have
formerly spoken: to the South East of him, near an Island called Tompsons
Island lived some few Planters more, these persons were the first Planters of
those parts, having some small Trading with the Indians for Beaver-Skins, which
moved them to make their aboade in those parts, whom these first Troops of
Christ's Army, found as fit helps to further their work. At their arrival
those small number of Christians gathered at Salem, greatly rejoicing and the
more, because they saw so many that came chiefly for promoting the great Work
of Christ in hand, the Lady Arrabella and some other godly Women abode at
Salem, but their Husbands continued at Charles Town, both for the settling the
civil Government, and gathering another Church of Christ. The first Court was
holden aboard the Arrabella the 23. of August. When the much honored John
Wintrope Esquire. was chosen Governor for the remainder of that year, 1630. Also
the worthy Thomus Dudly Esquire. was chosen Deputy Governor, and Mr. Simon
Brodestreet Secretary, the people after their long Voyage were many of them
troubled with the Scurvy, and some of them died: the first station they took
up was at Charles Town, where they pitched some Tents of Cloth, other built
them small Huts, in which they lodged their Wifes and Children. The first
beginning of this work seemed very dolorous; First for the death of that
worthy personage Izaac Johnson Esquire. whom the Lord had endued with many precious
gifts, insomuch that he was had in high esteem among all the people of God,
and as a chief Pillar to support this new erected building, He very much
rejoiced at his death, that the Lord had been pleased to keep his eyes open so
long, as to see one Church of Christ gathered before his death, at whose
departure there was not only many weeping eyes, but some fainting hearts,
fearing the fall of the present work. For future Remembrance of him mind this
Meeter.

Izaac Johnson Esquire, beloved of Christ and his people, and one of the
Magistrates of New England.
WHat moved thee on the Seas upon such toil with Lady. taking;
Christ's drawing love all strength's above, when way for his he is making.
Christ will have thee example be, honored with his graces, yiedling
His Churches aid, foundation laid, now new one Christ a building.
Thy Faith, Hope, Love, Joy, Meekness prove improved for thy Lord,
As he to thee, to people be, in Government accord.
Oh! people why, does Christ deny this worthies life to lengthen?
Christ only trust, Johnsons turned dust, and yet he is crowned and strengthend.
The grief of this people was further increased by the sore sickness which
befell among them, so that almost in every Family Lamentation, Mourning, and
woe was heard, and no fresh food to be had to cherish them, it would assuredly
have moved the most locked up affections to Tears no doubt, had they past from
one Hut to another, and beheld the p^teous case these people were in, and that
which added to their present distress was the want of fresh water, for
although the place did afford plenty, yet for present they could find but one
Spring, and that not to be come at, but when the tide was down, which caused
many to pass over to the South Side of the River, where they afterward erected
some other Towns, yet most admirable it was to see with what Christian courage
many of these Soldiers of Christ carried it amidst all these calamities, and
in October, the Governor Deputy and Assistants, held their second Court on the
South Side of the River; Where they then began to build, holding correspondency
with Charles Town, as one and the same.

At this Court many of the first Planters came, and were made free, yet
afterward none were admitted to this fellowship, or freedom, but such as were
first joined in fellowship with some one of the Churches of Christ, their
chiefest aim being bent to promote his work altogether. The number of Freemen
this year was 110. or thereabout.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the second Church of Christ, gathered at Charles Town in the
Mattacusets Bay, 1631.
AND now the new-come Soldiers of Christ strengthen themselves in him, and
gather a Church at Charles Town, whose extent at present did reach to both
sides of the River, and in very little time after was divided into two
Churches, the Reverend and judicious Mr. John Wilson was called to be Pastor
thereof, a Man full of Faith, Courage and Zeal, for the truth of Christ
persecuted, and hunted after by the usurping Prelates (and forced for present
to part from his indeared Wife) ye honored by Christ, and made a powerful
instrument in his hands for the cutting down of Error, and Schism, as in the
sequel of this History will appear, in whose weakness Christ's power has
appeared.

The Grave and Reverend Mr. John Wilson, now Pastor of the Church of Christ at
Soston, in New England.
JOhn Wilson will to Christ's will submit,
In Wilderness, where thou have Trialls found,
Christ in new making did compose thee fit,
And made thy Love zeal, for his truth abound.
Then it is not Wilson, but Christ by him has,
Error cut down when it o'retopping stood,
Thou then Against it did show an holy wrath;
Saving men's souls from this o're-flowing flood.
They thee deprave, thy Ministrey despise,
By thy thick utterance seek to call Men back,
From hearing thee, but Christ for thee did rise.
And turned the wheel-right over them to crack.
Yea, caused thee with length of days to stand,
Steadfast in's house in old Age fruit to bring,
I and thy seed raise up by his comman^*
His Flock to feed, rejoice my Muse and sing.
That Christ does, dust regard so plentiously,
Rich gifts to give, and heart to give him his,
Estate and person thou spends liberally;
Christ thee, and thine will Crown with lasting Bliss.
This, as the other Churches of Christ, began with a small number in a desolate
and barren Wilderness, which the Lord in his wonderful mercy has turned to
fruitful Fields. Wherefore behold the present condition of these Churches
compared with their beginnings; as they sowed in tears, so also have they
Reaped in joy, and shall still so go on if plenty and liberty mar not their
prosperity. This Town of Charles is situated one the North-side of Charles
River, from whence it took its Name, the River being about five or six fathom
deep; Over against the Town many small Islands lieing to the Seaward of it,
and Hills one either side. By which means it proves a very good harbor for
Ships, which has caused many Seamen and Merchants to sit down there, the
form of this Town in the frontice piece thereof, is like the Head, Neck and
Shoulders of a Men, only the pleasant, and Navigable River of Mistick runs
through the right shoulder thereof, and by its near approach to Charles River
in one place makes a very narrow neck, by which means the chief part of the
Town, whereon the most building stands, becomes a Peninsula: it has a large
Marketplace near the water side built round with Houses, comely and fair,
forth of which there issues two streets orderly built with some very fair
Houses, beautified with pleasant Gardens and Orchards, the whole Town consists
in its extent of about 150. dwelling Houses. Their meeting house for Sabbath
assembly stands in the Marketplace, very comely built and large, the Officers
of this Church are at this day one Pastor, and one Teacher, one Ruling Elder,
and three Deacons, the number of Souls are about 160. wonderful it is to see
that in so short a time such great alterations Christ should work for these
poor people of his: their Corn Land in Tillage in this Town is about 1200.
Acres, their great Cattle are about 400. head, Sheep near upon 400. as for
their horse you shall hear of them, God willing, when we come to speak of their
Military Discipline.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Third Church of Christ gathered at Dorchester, 1631.
THe third Church of Christ gathered under this Government was at Dorchester, a
frontire Town situated very pleasantly both for facing the Sea, and also its
large extent into the main Land, well watered with two small Rivers; near
about this Town inhabited some few ancient Traders, who were not of this
select band, but came for other ends, as Morton of Merrymount, who would feign
have resisted this work, but the provident hand of Christ prevented. The form
of this Town is almost like a Serpent turning her head to the North ward; over
against Tompsons Island, and the Castle, her body and wings being chiefly built
on, are filled somewhat thick of Houses, only that one of her Wings is clipped,
her Tail being of such a large extent that she can hardly draw it after her;
Her Houses for dwelling are about one hundred and forty, Orchards and Gardens
full of Fruit Trees, plenty of Corne-Land, although much of it has been long
in tillage, yet has it ordinarily good corpse, the number or Trees are near
upon 1500. Cowes, and other Cattle of that kind about 450. Thus has the Lord
been pleased to increase his poor dispersed people, whose number in this Flock
are near about 150. their first Pastor called to feed them was the Reverend,
and godly Mr. Maveruck.

MAveruck thou must put period to thy days, Mr. Wareham and other of their
Teaching Elders, you shall read of when the Can^^k^^^o is planted.

In Wilderness thy Kindred thee provoke
To come, but Christ does thee for high ends Raise;
Amongst his worthies to strike many a stroke.
Thy godly Life, and Doctrine speak, though thou
In dust art laid, yet Christ by thee did feed
His scattered Lambs, they gathered are by you;
Christ calls thee home, but flock he leaves to seed.
CAHP. XX. Of the Fourth Church of Christ gathered at Bosten, 1631.
AFter some little space of time the Church of Christ at Charles Town, having
their Sabbath assemblies oftenest o^ the South side of the River, agreed to
leave the people on that side to themselves, and to provide another Pastor for
Charles Town, which accordingly they did. So that the fourth Church of Christ
issued out of Charles Town, and was seated at Boston, being the Center Town
and Metropolis of this Wilderness work (but you must not imagine it to be a
Metropolitan Church) environed it is with the Brinish floods, saving one small
Istmos, which gives free access to the Neighbor Towns; by Land on the South
side, on the North-west, and North East, two constant Faires are kept for daily
traffic thereunto, the form of this Town is like a heart, naturally
situated for Fortifications, having two Hills on the frontice part thereof
next the Sea, the one well fortified on the superfices thereof, with store of
great Artillery well mounted, the other has a very strong battery built of
whole Timber, and filled with Earth, at the descent of the Hill in the extreme
point thereof betwixt these two strong arms lies a large Gave or Bay, on which
the chiefest part of this Town is built, over-topped with a third Hill, all
three like over-topping Towers keep a constant watch to foresee the approach
of foreign dangers, being furnished with a Beacon and loud babbling Guns, to
give notice by their redoubled echo to all their Sister towns, the chief
Edifice of this City-like Town i^ crowded on the Sea-b^^kes, and wharfed out
with great industry and cost, the buildings beautiful and large, some fairly
see forth with Brick, Tile, Stone and Slate, and orderly placed with comely
streets, whose continual enlargement presages some sump^uous City. The wonder
of this modern Age, that a few years should bring forth such great matters by
so means a handful, and they so far from being enriched by the spoils of
other Nations, that the states of many of them have been spoiled by the Lordly
Prelacy, whose Lands must assuredly make Restitutions. But now behold the
admirable Acts of Christ, at this his peoples landing, the hideous Thickets in
this place were such, that Wolfes and Bears nursed up their young from the eyes
of all beholders, in those very places where the streets are full of Girls and
Boys sporting up and down, with a continued concourse of people. Good store of
Shipping is here yearly built, and some very fair ones: both Ta^ and Mastes
the Country affords from its own soil; also store of Victual both for their
own and Forreinersships, who resort hither for that end: this Town is the very
Mart of the Land, French, Portugalls and Dutch, come hither for Traffic.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Fifth Church of Christ, gathered at Roxbury, 1631.
THe fifth Church of Christ was gathered at Roxbury, situated between Boston
and Dorchester, being well watered with cool and pleasant Springs issuing
forth the Rocky-hills, and with small Freshets, watering the Valleys of this
fertile Town, whose form is somewhat like a wedge double pointed, entering
between the two foure-named Towns, filled with a very laborious people, whose
labors the Lord has so blessed, that in the room of dismal Swampes and
tearing Bushes, they have very goodly Fruit Trees, fruitful Fields and
Gardens, their Heard of Cowes, Oxen and other young Cattle of that kind about
350. and dwelling-houses near upon 120. Their streets are large, and some
fair Houses, yet have they built their House for Church-assembly, destitute
and unbeautified with other buildings. The Church of Christ here is increased
to about 120. persons, their first Teaching Elder called to Office is Mr. Eliot
a young man, at his coming thither of a cheerful spirie, walking unblameable,
of a godly conversation, apt to teach, as by his indefatigable pains both with
his own flock, and the poor Indians does appear, whose Language he learned
purposely to help them to the knowledge of God in Christ, frequently Preaching
in their Wigwams, and Catechizing their Children.

Mr. Eliot Pastor of the Church of Christ at Roxbury, in New England, much
honored for his labors in the Lord.
GReat is thy work in Wilderness, Oh man,
Young Eliot near twenty years thou bast,
In Western world with miccle toil thy span
Spent well-neere out, and now thy gray hayrs gracest,
Are by thy Landlord Christ, who makes use of thee
To feed his flock, and heathen people teach
In their own Language, God and Christ to see;
A Savior their blind hearts could not reach,
Poor naked Children come to learn Gods Mind
Before thy face with reverend regard;
Bless God for thee may these poor heathen blind,
That from thy mouth Christ's Gospel sweet have heard.
Eliot thy Name is, through the wild woods spread,
In Indians mouths frequent's thy fame, for why?
In sundry shapes the Devils made them dread;
And now the Lord makes them their Wigwams fly,
Rejoice in this, nay rather joy that thou,
Amongst Christ's Soldiers bast thy name sure set.
Although small gain on Earth accrue to you,
Yet Christ to Crown will thee to Heaven soon fet.
CHAP. XXII.
Of the Sixth Church of Christ, gathered at Linn. 1631.
THe Sixth Church of Christ was gathered at Linn, between Salem and Charles
Town, her scitnation is near to a River, whose strong freshe^ at breaking up
of Winter fills all her Banks, and with a furious Torrent ventes it self
into the Sea; This Town is furnished with Mineralls of diverse kinds,
especially Iron and Lead, the form of it is almost square, only it takes two
large a run into the Land ward (as most Towns do) it is filled with about one
hundred Houses for dwelling; Here is also an Iron Mill in constant use, but as
for Lead they have tried but little yet. Their meeting house being on a level
Land undefended from the cold North west-wind; And therefore made with steps
descending into the Earth, their streets are strait and comely, yet but thin
of Houses, the people mostly inclining to Husbandry, have built many Farms
Remote there, Cattle exceedingly multiplied, Goats which were in great
esteem at their first coming, are now almost quite banished, and now Horse,
Kine and Sheep are most in request with them, the first feeder of this flock of
Christ was Mr. Stephen Bachelor, gray and aged, of whom as follows:

THrough Ocean large Christ brought thee for to feed,
His wandering flock with his word thou have often taught,
Then teach thy self with others thou have need;
Thy flowing fame unto low ebb is brought*
Faith and Obedience Christ full near has joined,
Then trust on Christ, and thou again may be
Brought on thy race though now far cast behind,
Run to the end, and crowned thou shall be.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the seventh Church of Christ gathered at Water-Towne, 1631.
THe Seventh Church of Christ gathered out of this wandering Race of
Jaccobites was at Water-Towne, situate upon one of the Branches of Charles
River, a fruitful plat, and of large extent, watered with many pleasant
Springs, and small Rivulets, running like veins throughout her Body, which
has caused her inhabitants to scatter in such manner, that their
Sabbath-Assemblies prove very thin, if the season favor not, and has made
this great Town (consisting of 160. Families) to show nothing delightful to
the eye in any place; this Town began by occasion of Sir Richard Saltingstall,
who at his arrival, having some store of Cattle and servants, they wintered
in those parts: this Town aboundes in several sorts of Fish at their seasons,
Basse, Shad, Alewifes, Frost fish, and Smelts: their herd of Kine, and Cattle
of that kind are about 450. with some store of Sheep and Goats, their Land
in tillage is near upon 1800. Acres, this Church is increased to near about
250. souls in Church Fellowship, their first Pastor was Mr. Phillips, a man
mighty in the Scriptures, and very dilligent to search out the mind of Christ
therein contained, of whom as follows:

THe pennury of Wilderness shall not
Daunt Phillips, and diswade his undertaking
This Voyage long: for Christ has made him hot
With zeal for's truth, thy native soil forsaken
To follow Christ his bannisht flock to feed,
With restless toil thus honored Christ has thee,
Then it maintain though thou thy people need;
Christ would thou should of them aye honored be,
Till death thou have been soldier in this War,
Dark types the shadows of good things now come,
By thee have been unfoulded very far;
Cleared baptimes light from error broch'd by some.
As by thy work in Print appears this day,
Though thou thy days have ended on this Earth,
Yet still thou live in Name and Fame always;
Christ thee poor dust does crown with lasting Mirth.
CHAP. XXIV. Of the great cheerfulness of their Soldiers of Christ, in and
under the penuries of a Wilderness.
THese were the beginnings of these resolute Soldiers of Christ Jesus in the
year, 1631. Even to lay the Foundation of their several Churches of Christ,
built only on him as their chief Corner Stone. But as his chosen Israel met
with many difficulties after their return from Captivity, in building the
Temple and City, which they valiantly waded through; So these weak worms (Oh
Christ to thy praise be it spoken) were most wonderfully helped in such
distresses, as to appearance of man seemed to be both hopeless, and helpless,
threatening destruction to the whole building and far from accomplishing such
great things as you have in part seen already, and shall in the following
discourse (God willing) see more abundantly, adding a strong testimony to the
work, that as it was begun by Christ, so has it been carried on by him, and
shall to the admiration of the whole World be perfected in his time, and
unless men will be wilfully blind, they must needs see and confess the same,
and that the influence thereof has already run from one end of the Earth unto
the other.

This year 1631. John Winthrop Esquire. was chosen Governor, picked out for the
work, by the provident hand of the most high, and enabled with gifts
accordingly, then all the folk of Christ, who have seen his face and been
partaker of the same, remember him in this following Matter.

John Winthrope Esquire. Eleven times Governor of the English Nation, inhabiting
the Mattacusets Bay in New England.
WHy leavest thou John, thy station, in Suffolk, thy own soil,
Christ will have thee a pillar be, for's people thors must toil,
He changed thy heart, the^ take his part,' against prelates proud invading
(His Kingly throne) set up alone, in wilderness their shading.
His little flocks from Prelates knocks, twice ten years rut'd thou have,
With civil sword at Christ's word, and eleven times been trast.
By Name and Note, with peoples vote, their Governor to be,
Thy means have spent, 'twas therefore lent, to raise this work by thee.
Well armed and strong with sword among, Christ armies warcheth he.
Does valiant praise, and weak one raise, with kind benignity.
To lead the Van,' against Babylon, does worthy Winthrop call,
Thy Progeny, shall Battle try, When Prelacy shall fall.
With fluent Tongue thy Pen does run, in learned Latin phrase,
To Sweads, French, Dutch, thy Neighbors, which thy lady rhetoric praise,
Thy bounty feeds, Christ's servants needs, in wilderness of wants
To Indians thou Christ's Gospel now, amongst heathen people plants.
Yet thou poor dust, now dead and must, to rottenness be brought,
T'ill Christ restore thee glorious, more then can of dust be thought.
The much honored Thomas Dudly Esquire was chosen Deputy Governor, and the
number of Freemen added was about 83. Those honored persons who were now in
place of Government, having the propagation of the Churches of Christ, in their
eye labored by all means to make room for Inhabitants, knowing well that
where the dead carcass is, thither will the Eagles resort. But herein they were
much opposed by certain persons, whose greedy desire for land much hindered
the work for a time, as indeed all such persons do at this very day, and let
such take notice how these were cured of this distemper, some were taken away
by death, and then to be sure they had Land enough, others fearing poverty, and
famishment, supposing the present scarcity would never be turned into plenty,
removed themselves away, and so never beheld the great good the Lord has done
for his people, but the valiant of the Lord waited with pagience, and in the
miss of beer supp^led themselves with water, even the most honored as well
as others, contentedly rejoyeing in a Cup of cold water, blessing the Lord that
had given them the taste of that living water, and that they had not the water
that sl^ckes the thrist of their natural bodies, given them by measure, but
might drink to the full; as also in the absence of Bread they feasted
themselves with fish, the Women once a day, as the eide gave way, resorted to
the Mussells, and Clambankes, which are a Fish as big as Horse-mussells, where
they dai'y gathered their Families food with much heavenly discourse of the
provisions Christ had formerly made for many thousands of his followers in the
wilderness. Quoth one, my Husband has travailed as far as Plimoth (which is
near 40 miles,) and has with great toil brought a little Corn home with
him, and before that is spent the Lord will assuredly provide: quoth the other,
our last peck of Meaie it now in the Oven at home a baking, and many of our
godly Neighbors have quite spent all, and we owe one Loaf of that little we
have; Then spoke a third, my husband has veatured himself among the Indians
for Corn, and can get none, as also our honored Governor has distributed
his so far, that a day or two more will put an end to his store, and all the
rest, and yet methinks our Children are as cheerful, fat, and lusty with
feeding upon those Mussells, Clambanks and other Fish as they were in England,
with their fill of Bread, which makes me cheerful in the Lords providing for
us, being further confirmed by the exhoreation of our Pastor to trust the Lord
with providing for us; whose is the Earth and the fullness thereof. And as they
were encouraging one another in Christ's careful providing for them, they lift
up their eyes and saw two Ships coming in, and presently this news came to
their Ears, that they were come from Jacland full of Victuals, now their
poor hears were not so much refreshed in regard of the food they saw they
were like to have, as their souls rejoiced in that Christ would now manifest
himself to be the Commissary General of this his Army, and that he should
honor them so far as to be poor Sutlers for his Camp, they soon up with
their Mussells, and hie them home to stay their hungry stomachs. After this
manner did Christ many times graciously provide for this his people, even at
the last cast.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Lords gracious protection of his people, from the barbarous
cruelties of the Heathen.
ABout this time the Indians that were most conversant smong them, came quaking
and complaining of a barbarous and cruel people called the Tarratines, who
they said would eat such Men as they caught alive, tying them to a Tree, and
gnawing their flesh by peece-meales off their Bones, as also that they were a
strong and numerous people, and now coming, which made them flee to the
English, who were but very few in number at this time, and could make but
little resistance, being much dispersed, yet did they keep a constant watch,
neglecting no means Christ had put into their hands for their own safety, in
so much that they were exceedingly weaked with continued labor, watching and
hard diet, but the Lord graciously upheld them in all, for thus it befell near
the Town of Linn, then called Saugust, in the very dead of the night (being
upon their watch, because of the report that went of the Indians approach to
those parts) one Lieurenant Walker, a man endued with faith, and of a
courageous spirit, coming to relieve the Centinell being come up with him, all
of a sudden they heard the Sticks crack hard by them, and with all he felt
something b^ush hard upon his shoulder, which was an Indian arrow shot through
his Coat, and the wing of his buffe-Jacket. Upon this he discharged his
Culliver directly toward the place, where they heard the noise, which being
deep'y laden brake in pieces, then they returned to the Court of Guard, and
raised such small forces as they had; coming to the light they perceived he
had an other Arrow shot through his Coat betwixt his Legs. Seeing this great
presertation they stood upon their Guard till Morning, expecting the Indians to
come upon them every moment, but when daylight appeared, they soon sent word
to other parts, who gathered together, and took counsel how to quit
themselves of these Indians, whose approach they demed would be sudden, they
ugreed to discharge their great Guns, the redoubling echo rattling in the
Rocks caused the Indians to betake themselves to slight (being a terrible
unwonted sound unto them) or rather he who put such trembling fear in the
Assyrians Army, struck the like in these cruel Canniballs. In the Autumn
following, the Indians, who had all this time held good correspondency with the
English, began to quarrel with them about their bounds of Land,
notwithstanding they purchased all they had of them, but the Lord put an end to
this quarrel also, by smiting the Indians with a sore D^sease, even the smll
Pox; of the which great numbers of them died, yet these servants of Christ
minding their Masters business, were much moved in affection toward them to
see them depart this life without the knowledge of God in Christ. And therefore
were very frequent among them for all the noisomeness of their Disease,
entering their Wigwams, and exhorting them in the Name of the Lord. Among others
one of the chief Saggamores of the Mattachusets, whom the English named
Saggemore John, gave some good hopes, being always very courteous to them,
whom the godly, and much honored among the English, visiting a little before
his death, they instructing him in the knowledge of God. Qaoth he by and by
me Mattamoy may be my two Sons live, you take them to teach much to know God.

Accordingly the honored Mr. John Winthrop, and the Reverend Mr. John Wilson
took them home, notwithstanding the infectiousnesse of the Disease their
Father died of. The mortality among them was very great, and increased among
them daily more and more, insomuch that the poor Creatures being very timorous
of death, would feign have fled from it, but could not tell how, unless they
could have gone from themselves; Relations were little regarded among them at
this time, so that many, who were s^^it^en with the Disease died helpless,
unless they were near, and known to the English: their Powwowes, Wizards, and
Charmers, Athamochas Factors were possessed with greatest fear of any. The
Winters piercing cold stayed not the strength of this hot Disease, yet the
English endeavoring to visit their sick Wigwams, help them all they could,
but as they entered one of their matted Houses, they beheld a most sad
spectacle, death having smitten them all save one poor Infant, which lay on
the ground sucking the Breast of its dead Mother, seeking to draw living
nourishment from her dead breast. Their dead they left oft-times unburied,
wherefore the English were forced to dig holes, and drag their stinking corpse
into them. Thus did the Lord allay their quarrelsome spirits, and made room
for the following part of his Army. This year came over more supplies to
forward the work of Christ.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the gracious provisions the Lord made for his people.
THe year 1632. John Winthrope Esquire, was chosen Governor again, and the
ancient Thomas Dudly Esquire, was Deputy Governor, a man of a sound judgment
in matters of Religion and well read, bestowing much labor that way, of whom
as follows:

The honored, aged, stable and sincere servant of Christ, zealous for his
truth Thomas Dudly, Esquire. four times Governor of the English Nation, in the
Mattacusets, and first Major General of the Millitary Forces.
WHat Thomas now believe do thou that riches men may gain,
In this poor Plot Christ does allot his people to sustain;
Rich Truth thou wilt buy and sell not, why no richer Jem can be,
Truths Champion in campion, Christ's grace has placed thee,
With civil Sword, at Christ's Word early cut off will thou,
Those Wolvish sheep, amongst flocks do creep, and damned doctrine low*
To trembling age, thou valiant sage, one foot wilt not give ground,
Christ's Enemies from thy face flies, his truth thou savest sound.
Thy lengthened days, to Christ's praise, continued are by him:
To set by thee his people free, from foes that raging bin.
Wearied with years, it plain appears, Dudly not long can last,
It matters not, Christ Crown thee got, its now at hand, hold fast.
This year was the first choice of Migistrates by freemen, whose number was
now increased, fifty three or thereabout, to declare the manner of their
Government is by the Author deferred till the year. 1637. where the Reader may
behold Government both in Churches and Commonwealth, to be an institution of
the Lord, and much availeable through his blessing for the accomplshment of his
promises to his people.

This year these forerunners of the following Army of Christ, after the sight
of many of the admirable Acts of his providence for them, begun to take up
steady resolution through the help of him to wade through the Ocean, they were
farther like to meet withal, and therefore began to plant the yet untilled
Earth, having as yet no other means to tear up the bushy lands, but their
hands and howes, their bodies being in very ill temper by reason of the Scurvy
(a Disease in those days very frequent) to undergo such extremity, but being
pricked on with hungers sharp good, they keep doing according to their weak
abilities, and yet produce but little food for a long season, but being
persuaded that Christ will rather rain bread from Heaven, then his people
should want, being fully persuaded, they were set on the work at his command.
Wherefore they followed on with all hands, and the Lord (who has the Cattle
of thousand Hills, and the Corn of ten thousand Valleys, the whole Earth, and
fullness of it) did now raise up fresh supplies to be added to these both of
men and provision of food, men no less valiane in Faith then them, the former
amongst whom was the Reverend Mr. Welds and Mr. James, who was welcomed by the
people of Christ at Charles Town, and by them called to the Office of a
Pastor, where he continued for some years, and from thence removed to New
haven, upon some seed of prejudice sown by the enemies of this work. But good
Reader do thou behold, and remember him farther in the following Lives;

THy Native soil, Oh James did thee approve,
Gods people there in Lincolnesh^^e commend;
Thy courteous speech and work of Christian love,
Till Christ through Seas did thee on Message send.
With learned skill his mind for to unsold,
His people in New England thou must feed,
But one sad breach did cut that band should hold;
Then part will thou least farther jars should breed.
Yet part thou will not with Christ's Truth, thy crown
But my Muse wail that any soldier should,
In fighting slip, why James thou fallest not down,
Back thou retreats their valiant fighting, hold
Fast on thy Christ, who thine may raise with thee,
His bands increase, when leaders he provides,
Thy Son young student may such blessing be;
Thy loss repair, and Christ thee crown besides.
Although the great straites this Wilderness people were in for want of food,
was heard of among the godly people in England, yet would they not decline the
work, but men of Estates sold their possessions, and bought plenty of food for
the Voyage, which some of them sent before hand, by which means they were
provided for, as also the Lord put it into the hearts of such as were Masters,
and Undertakers of Ships to store their Vessels so well that they had to spare
for this peoples need, and further Christ caused abundance of very good Fish to
come to their Nots and Hooks, and as for such as were unprovided with these
means, they caught them with their hands, and so with F^sh, wild Onions and
other Herbs were sweetly satisfied till other provisions, came in, here must
laboring men a little be minded, how ill they recompensed those persons, whose
estates help them to food before they could reap any from the Earth, that
forgetting those courtesies they soon by excessive prises took for their work,
made many File-leaders fall back to the next Rank, advancing themselves in the
mean time. About this time the Church of Christ at Roxbury, being a diligent
people, early prevented their Brethren in other Churches by calling the
Reverend Mr. Welds to be their Pastor, of whom you may see somewhat farther in
the following lines:

TO work oh Welds! in wilderness betime
Christ thee commands, that thou his folk should's follow:
And feed his flock in Covenant bandcombine,
With them through him his glorious name to hallow;
Seven years thou stoutly did wade through with toil,
These desare caros, back by advice again,
Thou did return unto thy native soil,
There to advance Christ's Kingdom now remeine.
In Pulpit, and with Pen thou have the truth
Maintained, and cleared from scandalous reproach
Christ's churches here, and showed their lasting Ruth,
That dare against Christ their own inventions broach;
Then sage, in age, continue such to be,
Till Christ thee crown, his gifts to thee are free.
This year of sad distresses was ended with a terrible cold Winter, with
weekly Snowes, and fierce Frosts between while congealing Charles River, as
well from the Town to Sea ward, as above, insomuch that men might frequently
pass from one Island to another upon the Ice. Here Reader thou must be minded
of an other admirable Act of Christ for this year, in changing the very nature
of the seasons, moderating the Winters cold of late very much, which some
impute to the cutting down the woods, and breaking up the Land; But Christ
have the praise of all his glorious Acts. About this time did the valiant in
faith, and Reverend Pastor Mr. John Wilson return to England, and surely the
power of Christ has notably appeared in this weak sorry man. You must needs
see the Author will flatter no man, yet will he not be wanting to tell the
noble Acts of Christ Jesus, in making men strong for himself, here is one
borne up in the arms of his mercy, often through the perilous Seas night and
days, yea: weeks and months upon the great deep, and now having with his own
eyes beheld the manifold troubles these poor were in, yet at this very time
hies him back to his Native soil, where his indeared Wife did yet remain,
purposely to persuade her to east her cares upon the Lord, as he himself had
already done, and then assuredly the wants of a Wilderness would never hurt
her: at the departure of this holy Man of God, many of his peoples hearts waxed
very sad, and having looked long for his return; Their eyes now began to fail
in missing of their expectation, they according to their common course in time
of great straites, set and appointed a day wholly to be spent in seeking the
pleasing Face of God in Christ, purposing the Lord assisting to afflict their
souls, and give him the honor of his All-seeingness, by a down right
acknowledgement of their sins, but the Lord, whose Grace is always
undeserved, heard them before they cried, and the afternoon before the day
appointed brought him, whom they so much desired, in safety to shore, with
diverse other faithful servants of Christ ready armed for the Battle, the day
was turned to a day of rejoicing and blessing the Lord, even the mighty God of
Jacob, the God of Armies is for us a refuge high Shela.

The year 1633. the honored John Winthrope Esquire, was chosen Governor
again, and Thomas Dudly Esquire. Deputy Governor, the number of Freemen added, or
Soldiers listed was 46. the Winters Frost being extracted forth the Earth,
they fall to tearing up the Roots, and Bushes with their Howes; even such men
as scarce ever set hand to labor before, men of good birth and breeding, but
coming through the strength of Christ to war their warfare, readily rush
through all difficulties, cutting down of the Woods, they enclose Corn fields,
the Lord having mitigated their labors by the Indians frequent fiering of the
woods, (that they may not be hindered in hunting Venson, and Bears in the
Winter season) which makes them thin of Timber in many places, like our Parkes
in England, the chiefest Corn they planted before they had Plowes was Indian
Grain, whose increase is very much beyond all other, to the great refreshing
of the poor servants of Christ, in their low beginings, all kind of Gardens
Fruits grew very well, and let no man make a j^st at Pumpkins, for with this
fruit the Lord was pleased to feed his people to their good content, till Corn
and Cattle were increased.

And here the Lords mercy appeared much in that those, who had been formerly
brought up tender, could now contentedly feed on bare and mean Diet, amongst
whom the Honored and upright hearted in this work of Christ, Mr. Increase
Nowell, shall not be forgotten, having a diligent hand therein from the first
beginning.

INcrease shall thou, with honor now, in this thy undertaking,
Thou have remained, as yet unstained, all errors foul forsaking;
To poor and rich, thy Justice much has manifested bin:
Like Samuel Nathanaell, Christ has thee framed within;
Thy faithfulness, people express, and Secretary they
Chose thee each year, by which appear, their love with thee does stay.
Now Nowell see Christ called has thee, and work thou must for him,
In beating down the triple Crown, and all that his foes ben.
Thus do thou stand by Christ frail man, to tell his might can make
Dust do his will, with graces fill, till dust to him he take.
CHAP. XXVII. Of the gracious goodness of God, in hearing his peoples prayers
in times of need, and of the Ship-loades of goods the Lord sent them in.
HEre again the admirable Providence of the Lord is to be noted, That whereas
the Country is naturally subject to drought, even to the withering of their
summers Fruits, the Lord was pleased, during these years of scarcity, to
bless that small quantity of Land they planted with seasonable showers, and
that many times to the great admiration of the Heathen, for thus it befell: the
extreme parching hear of the Sun (by reason of a more constant clearness of
the Air then usually is in England) began to scorch the Herbs and Fruits,
which was the chiefest means of their livelihood, they beholding the Hand of
the Lord stretched out against them, like tender hearted Children, they fell
down on their knees, begging mercy of the Lord, for their Saviors sake, urging
this as a chief argument, that the malignant adversary would rejoice in their
destruction, and blaspheme the pure Ordinances of CHRIST, trampling down his
Kingly Commands with their own inventions, and in uttering these words, their
eyes dropped down many tears, their affections prevailing so strong, that they
could not refrain in the Church-Assembly. Here admire and be strong in the
Grace of Christ, all you that hopefully belong unto him, for as they powered out
water before the Lord, so at that very instant, the Lord showred down water on
their Gardens and Fields, which with great industry they had planted, and now
had not the Lord caused it to rain speedily, their hope of food had been
lost: but at this these poor worms were so exceedingly taken, that the Lord
should show himself so near unto their Prayers, that as the drops from Heaven
fell thicker, and faster, so the tears from their eyes by reason of the sudden
mixture of joy and sorrow, and verily they were exceedingly stirred in their
affections, being unable to resolve themselves, which mercy was greatest, to
have a humble begging heart given them of God, or to have their request so
suddenly answered.

The Indians hearing hereof, and seeing the sweet rain that fell, were much
taken with Englishmens God, but the Lord seeing his poor peoples hearts were
to narrow to beg, his bounties exceeds toward them at this time, as indeed he
ever hitherto has done for this Wildernesse-People, not only giving the full
of their requests, but beyond all their thoughts, as witness his great work
in England of late, in which the prayers of Gods people in New England have had
a great stroke; These people now rising from their knees to receive the rich
mercies of Christ, in the refreshed fruits of the Earth; Behold the Sea also
bringing in whole Ship-loades of mercies, more being filled with fresh forces,
for furthering this wonderful work of Christ, and indeed this year came in
many precious ones, whom Christ in his grace has made much use of in these his
Churches, and Commonwealth, insomuch that these people were even almost
over-ballanced with the great income of their present possessed mercies, yet
they address themselves to the Sea shore, where they courteously welcome the
famous servant of Christ, grave godly and judicious Hooker, and the honored
servant of Christ, M John Haynes, as also the Reverend and much desired Mr.
John Cotton, and the Retoricall, Mr. Stone, with diverse others of the sincere
servants of Christ, coming with their young, and with their old, and with
their whole substance, to do him service in this Desert wilderness. Thus this
poor people having now tasted liberally of the salvation of the Lord every
way, they deem it high time to take up the Cup of thankfulness, and pay their
vows to the most high God, by whom they were helped to this purpose of heart,
and accordingly set apart the 16. day of October (which they call the eighth
Month, not out of any pevish humor of singularity, as some are ready to censor
them with, but of purpose to prevent the Heathenish and Popish observation of
Days, Months and Years, that they may be forgotten among the people of the
Lord) this day was solemnly kept by all the seven Churches, rejoicing in the
Lord, and rendering thanks for all their benefits.

Here must not be omitted the indeared affections Mr. John Wilson had to the
work in hand, exceedingly setting forth (in his Sermon this day) the Grace of
Christ in providing such meet helps for furthering thereof, really esteeming
them beyond so many Ship-loading of Gold; manifesting the great humility Christ
had wrought in him (not complementing, but in very deed prefering the Reverend
Mr. John Cotton, many hundreds before himself, whom they within a very little
time after called to the Office of a Teaching Elder of the Church of Christ at
Boston, where he now remains, of whom at follows:

WHen Christ intends his glorious Kingdom shall
Exalted be on Earth, he Earth does take,
Evon sinful Man to make his worthies all;
Then praise I Man, no Christ this Man does make,
Sage, sober, grave and learned Cotton thou:
Mighty in Scripture, without Book repeat it,
Annatomise the sense, and show Man how
Great mysteries in sentence short are seated.
Gods Word with his word comparing often unfould:
The secret truths John's Revelations has
By thee been opened, as nere was of old;
Shows clear, and near against Romes whore is Gods wrath.
Then Churches of Christ, rejoice and sing,
John Cotton has Gods mind, I dare believe,
Since he from Gods Word does his witness bring;
Saints cries are heard they shall no longer grieve.
That song of songs, 'twixt Christ and's Church thou have
Twice taught to all, and sweetly showed the way,
Christ would his Churches should, in truth stand fast;
And cast off man's inventions even for aye.
Thy labors great have met with catching cheats,
Mixing their Brass with thy bright Gold, for why?
Thy great esteem must cover their ill feats,
Some soil thou gett'st, by coming them so nie.
But i'ts wipt off, and thou Christ's Champion left,
The Faith to fight for Christ has armed thee well,
His worthies would not, thou shoulds be bereft,
Of honors here thy Crown shall soon excel.
These people of God having received these farther helps, to instruct, and
build them up in the holy things of Christ, being now greatly encouraged,
seeing the Lord was pleased to set such a broad Seal to their Commission for
the work in hand, not only by his Word and Spirit moving thereunto, but also
by his Providence in adding such able instruments for furthering this great
work of Reformation, and advancing the Kingdom of Christ, for which they
spent this day of rejoicing, and sure the Lord would have all that hear of it
know, their joy lay not in the increase of Corn, or Wine, or Oil, for of all
these they had but very little at this time, yet did they not spare to lend
such a^ they had unto the poor, who could not provide, and verily the joy
ended not with the day, for these active instruments of Christ, Preaching with
all instancy the glad Tidings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, rejoiced the
Heart of this People much.

CHAP. XX VIII. Of the Eighth Church of Christ, gathered at Cambridge, 1633.
AT this time those who were in place of civil Government, having some
addition Pillars to under-prop the building, begun to think of a place of more
safety in the eyes of Man. then the two frontire Towns of Charles Town, and
Boston were for the habitation of such as the Lord had prepared to Govern this
Pilgrim People. Wherefore they rather made choice to enter farther among the
Indians, then hazard the fury of malignant adversaries, who in a rage might
pursue them, and therefore chose a place situate on Charles River, between
Charles Town, and Water-Towne, where they erected a Town called New-Towne,
now named Cambridge, being in form like a list cut off from the Broad-cloath
of the two forenamed Towns, where this wandering Race of Jacobits gathered the
eighth Church of Christ. This Town is compact closely within it self, till of
late years some few straggling houses have been built, the Liberties of this
Town have been enlarged of late in length, reaching from the most Northerly
part of Charles River, to the most Southerly part of Merrimeck River, it has
well ordered streets and comely pompleated with the fair building of Harver
College, their first Pastor was the faithful and laborious Mr. Hooker, whose
Books are of great request among the faithful people of Christ; Ye shall not
miss of a few lines in remembrance of him.

COme, Hooker, come forth of thy native soil:
Christ, I will run, says Hooker, thou have set
My feet at large, here spend thy last days toil;
Thy Rhetoric shall peoples affections whet.
Thy Golden Tongue, and Pen Christ caused to be
The blazing of his golden truths profound,
Thou sorry worm its Christ wrought this in thee;
What Christ has wrought must needs be very sound*
Then look one Hookers works, they follow him
To Grave, this worthy rests there a while:
Die shall he not that has Christ's warrier bin;
Much less Christ's Truth, cleared by his peoples toil.
Thou Angel bright, by Christ for light now made,
Throughout the World as seasoning salt to be,
Although in dust thy body mouldering fade;
Thy Head's in Heaven, and has a crown for thee.
The people of this Church and Town have hitherto had the chiefest share in
spitituall blessings, the Ministry of the Word, by more then ordinary
instruments as in due time and place (God willing) you shall farther hear, yet
are they at this day in ^ thriving condition in outward things, also both Corn
and Cattle, N^ate and Sheep, of which they have a good flock, which the Lord
has caused to thrive much in these latter days then formerly.

This Town was appointed to be the seat of Government, but it continued not
long, this year a small gleane of Rye was brought to the Court as the first
fruits of English grain at which this poor people greatly rejoiced to see the
Land would bear it, but now the Lords blessing that way has exceeded all
peoples expectation, clothing the Earth with plenty of all kind of grain.
Here mind I must the Reader of the admirable acts of Christ's Providence toward
this people, that although they were in such great straites for food, that
many of them eat their Bread by weight, and had little hopes of the Earths
fruitfullnesse, yet the Lord Christ was pleased to refresh their spirits with
such quickening grace, and lively affections to this Temple-worke, that they did
not desert the place; and that which was more remarkable, when they had scarce
houses to shelter themselves, and no doors to hinder the Indians access to
all they had in them, yet did the Lord so awe their hearts, that although they
frequented the Englishmens places of aboade, where their whole substance, weak
Wives and little ones lay open to their plunder; during their absence being
whole days at Sabbath. Assemblies, yet had they none of their food or stuff
diminished, neither Children nor Wives hurt in the least measure, although the
Indians came commonly to them at those times, much hungry belly (as they use to
say) and were then in number and strength beyond the English by far.

Yet further see the great and noble Acts of Christ toward this his wandering
people, feeling again the scarcity of food, and being constrained to come to
a small pittance daily, the Lord to provide for them, causes the Deputy of
Ireland to set forth a great Ship unknown to this people, and indeed small
reason in his own apprehensions why he should so do (but Christ will have it
so.) This Ship ariving, being filled with food, the godly Governors did so
order it that each Town sent two men aboard of her, who took up their Towns
allowance, it being appointed before hand, what their portion should be, to
this end that some might not by all, and others be left destitute of food. In
the vernall of the year 1634. This people being increased, and having among
them many precious esteemed instruments for furthering this wondrous work of
Christ, they began to think of fortifying a small Island about two miles
distant from Boston to Sea-ward, to which all the Vessels come in usually and
pass. To this end the honored Mr. John Winthrope with some 8. or 10. persons
of no^e, took boat and arrived on the said Island in a warm Sun shineday,
just at the breaking up of Winter as they deemed, but being they were sulden
surprised with a cold North-west storm (which is the sharpest wind in this
Country) freezing very vehemently for a day and a night, that they could not
get off the Island, but were forced to lodge there, and lie in a heap one upon
another (on the ground) to keep themselves from freezing.

This year 1634. the much honored Thomas Dudly Esquire, 1634.
was chosen Governor, and Mr. Roger Ludlow Deputy Governor, the Freemen added
to this little Commonwealth this year were about two hundred and four, about
this time a sincere servant of Christ Mr. Stone was added to the Chureh of
Christ at New-towne, as a meet help to instruct the People of Christ there,
with the above named Mr. Hooker, and as he has hitherto bin (through the
blessing of God) an able instrument in his hands to further the work. So let
him be incourraged with the Word of the Lord in the spirit of his might to go
on.

THou well smoth'd Stone Christ's Work-manship to be:
In's Church new laid his weak ones to support,
With His word of might his foes are foild by thee;
Thou daily do to godliness exhort.
The Lordly Prelates people do deny
Christ's Kingly power Hosanna to proclaim,
Men's mouths are stopped, but Stone poor dust does try,
Throughout his Churches none but Christ must raignt.
Mourn not Oh Man, thy youth and learning's spent:
In desert Land, my Muse is bold to say,
For glorious works Christ his has hither sent;
Like that great work of Resurrection day.
CHAP. XX IX. Of the Lords remarkable providence toward his indeared servants
M. Norton and Mr. Shepherd.
NOw my loving Reader, let me lead thee by the hand to our Native Land,
although it was not intended to speak in particulars of any of these peoples
departure from thence, purposing a general relation should serve the turn,
yet come with me and behold the wondrous work of Christ in preserving two of
his most valiant Sou'diers, namely Mr. John Norton; and that soul ravishing
Minister Mr. Thomas Shepherd, who came this year to Yarmouth to ship
themselves for New England, where the people of God resorted privately unto
them to hear them Preach, during the time of their aboade the Enemies of
Christ's Kingdom were not wanting to use all means possible to entrap them, in
which perilous condition they remained about two months, waiting for the Ships
readiness, in which time some persons eagerly hunting for Mr. Thomas
Shepherd, began to plot (for apprehending of him) with a Boy of sixteen or
seventeene years of Age, who lived in the House where he Lodged to open the
door for them at a certain hour in the night; But the Lord Christ, who is
the Shepherd of Israel kept a most sure watch over his indeared servants, for
thus it befell, the sweet words of grace falling from the of lips of this
Reverend and godly Mr. Thomas Shepherd in the hearing of the Boy (the Lords
working withal) he was persuaded this was an holy man of God, and therefore
with many troubled thoughts, began to relate his former practice, although he
had a great some of money promised him, only to let them in at the hour and
time appointed; but the Boy, the more near the time came, grew more pensive
and sad, insomuch that his Master taking notice thereof began to question him
about the cause of his heaviness, who being unwilling to reveal the matter,
held of from confessing a long time, till by urgent and insinuating search of
his godly Master, with tears he tells that on such a night he had agreed to
let in Men to apprehend the godly Preacher. The good Man of the house forthwith
gave notice thereof unto them, who with the help of some well-affected persons
was convay'd away by boat through a back Lane, the men at the time appointed
came to the house, where finding not the door open (when they lifted up the
Latch) as they expected, they thrust their staves under it to lift it from the
hooks, but being followed by some persons, whom the good man of the house had
appointed for that end: yet were they boulstred out in this their wicked act by
those who set them one work. Notwithstanding they were greatly ashamed when
they mist of their end.

But the Lord Christ intending to make his New England Soldiers the very
wounder of this Age, brought them into greater straites, that this Wonder
Working Providence might the more appear in their deliverance, for coming a
shipboard, and hoiseing sail to accomplish their Voyage, in little time after
they were tossed and sore beaten with a contrary wind, to the loss of the
Ships upper work, with which loss and great pe^ill they were driven back
again, the Lord Christ intending to confirm their Faith in showing them, that
although they were brought back, as it were into the mouth of their enemies,
yet he could hide them from the hand of the Hunter, for the space of six
months longer or thereabout, even till the Spring of the year following, at
which time (God willing) you shall hear of them again, in the mean time the
Master, and other Sea men made a strange construction of the sore storm they
met withal, saying, their Ship was bewitched, and therefore made use of the
common Charm ignorant people use, nailing two red hot horse-shoos to their
maine mast. But assuredly it was the Lord Christ, who has command both of
Winds and Seas, and now would have his people know he has delivered, and will
deliver from so great a death.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Ninth Church of Christ, gathered at Ipswitch.
THis year came over a farther supply of Eminent instruments for furthering
this admirable Work of his, amongst whom the Reverend and judicious servant of
Christ Mr. Nathaniel Ward, who took up his station at the Town of Ipswich,
where the saithfull servants of Christ gathered the Ninth Church of his. This
Town is situated on a fair and delightful River, whose first rise or spring
begins about five and twenty Miles farther up in the Country, issuing forth a
very pleasant pond. But soon after it betakes its course through a most
hideous swamp of large extent, even for many Miles, being a great Harbor for
Bears: after its coming forth this place, it grows larger by the income of
many small Rivers, and issues forth in the Sea, due East over against the
Island of Sholes, a great place of fishing for out English Nation, the peopling
of this Town is by men of good rank and quality, many of them having the
yearly Revenue of large Lands in England before they came to this Wilderness,
but their Estates being employed for Christ, and left in bank, as you have
formerly heard, they are well content till Christ shall be pleased to-restore
it again to them or theirs, which in all reason should be out of the Prelates
Lands in England. Let all those, whom it concerns (to judge) consider it well,
and do Justice herein.

This Town lies in the Saggamooreship, or Earldome of Aggawam, now by our
English Nation called Essex. It is a very good Haven Town, yet a little barred
up at the Mouth of the River, some Merchants here are, (but Boston, being the
chiefest place of resort of Shipping, carries away all the Trade) they have
very good Land for Husbandry, where Rocks hinder not the course of the Plow:
the Lord has been pleased to increase them in Corn and Cattle of late;
Insomuch that they have many hundred quarters to spare yearly, and feed, at the
latter end of Summer, the Town of Boston with good Beef a their Houses are
many of them very fair built with pleasant Gardens and Orchards, consisting of
about one hundred and forty Families. Their meeting house is a very good
prospect to a great part of the Town, and beautifully built, the Church of
Christ here consists of about one hundred and sixty souls, being exact in
their conversation, and free from the Epidemicall Disease of all Reforming
Churches, which under Christ is procured by their pious Learned and Orthodox
Ministry, as in due place (God willing) shall be declared, in the mean time,
look on the following Meeters concerning that Soldier of Christ Master
Nathaniel Ward.

THou ancient Sage, come Ward among
Christ's folfe, take part in this great work of his,
Why do thou stand and gaze about so long;
Do war in jest, why, Christ in earnest is,
And has thee armed with weapons for that end,
To Wound and heal his enemies submitting,
Not carnally, then to this Work attend;
Thou have prevailed the hearts of many hitting.
Although the Presbytery unpleasant jar,
And errors daily in their brains new coin:
Despayer not, Christ's truth they shall not mar;
But with his help such dross from Gold refins.
What Man do mean to lay thy Trumpet down?
Because thy son like Warrier is become,
Hold out or sure less bright will be thy crown;
Till death Christ's servants labor is not done.
At this time came over the much honored Mr. Richard Bellingham whose Estate
and person did much further the civil Government of this wandering people, he
being learned in the Laws of England, and experimentally fitted for the work,
of whom I am bold to say as follows:

RIchardus now arise must thou, Christ seed has thee to plead,
His peoples cause, with equal Laws, in wilderness them lead;
Though slow of speech, thy counsel reach, shall each occation well,
Sure thy stern look it cannot brook those wickedly rebel.
With labors might thy pen indite does Laws for peoples learning:
That judge with skill, and not with will, unarbitrate discerning;
Bellingham thou on valiant now, stop not in discontent,
Eor Christ with crown, will thee renown, then spend for him, be spent;
As thou have done, thy race still run till death, no death shall stay,
Christ's work of might, till Scripture light, bring Resurection day.
As also about this time for further encouragement in this work of Christ, he
sent over the Reverend servant of his Mr. Lothrop to help on with the planting
of Plimoth, which increased but little all this time, although she be the
elder sister of all the united Colonies; Some reasons in due place may be
rendered. This Reverend Minister was soon called to Office by the Church of
Christ at Scicuate.

CHAP XXXI. Of the Church of Christ gathered at Newberry.
IN the latter end of this year, two sincere servants of Christ, enabled by
him with gifts to declare his mind unto his people, came over this broad
Ocean, and began to build the Tenth Church of Christ at a Town called
Newberry, their names being Mr. James Noise, and Mr. Thomas Parker, somewhat
differing from all the former, and after mentioned Churches in the pre-eminence
of their Presbytery, and it were to be wished that all persons, who have had
any hand in those hot contentions, which have fallen out since about
Presbyterian and Independent Government in Churches, would have looked on this
Example, comparing it with the Word of God, and assuredly it would have stayed
(all the godly at lest) of either part from such unworthy expressions as have
passed to the grief of many of Gods people; And I doubt not but this History
will take of that unjust accusation, and standerous imputation of the rise of
that flood of errors and false Doctrines sprung up of late, as flowing from the
Independent or rather congregationall Churches. But to follow on, this Town is
situate about twelve miles from Ipswitch, near upon the wide venting streams
of Merrimeck River, whose strong current is such, that it has forced its
passage through the mighty Rocks, which causes some sudden falls, and hinders
Shipping from having any access far into the Land, her banks are in many
places stored with Oken Timber of all sorts, of which, that which they commonly
called white Oak, is not inferiou^ to our English Timber; in this River lie
some few Islands of fertile Land, this Town is stored with Meddow and upland,
which has caused some Gentlemen, (who brought over good Estates, and finding
then no better way to improve them) to see upon husbandry, amongst whom that
Religious and sincere hearted servant of Christ Mr. Richard Dummer, sometime a
Magistrate in this little Commonwealth, hathholpen on this Town, their houses
are built very scattering, which has caused some contending about removal of
their place for Sabbath-Assemblies, their Cattle are about four hundred head,
with store of Corne-land in tillage, it consists of about seventy Families, the
sou'es in Church fellowship are about an hundred, the teaching Elders of this
Congregation have carried it very lovingly toward their people, permitting of
them to assist in admitting of persons into Church-society, and in Church
censures, so long as they Act regularly, but in case of their
maladministration, they assume the power wholly to themselves, their godly
life and conversation has hitherto been very amiable, and their pains and
care over their flock not inferior to many others, and being bound together in
a more stricter band of love then ordinary with promise to spend their days
together (if the Lord please) and therefore shall not be disuaited in the
following Verse:

Lo here Loves twins by Christ are sent to Preach
In wilderness his little flock among,
Though Christ's Church Way you fully cannot reach;
So far hold fast as you in's word are strong.
Parker thy pains with Pen, and Preaching has
Rooms buildings left in Prelacy cast down,
Though' against her thou defer Gods final wrath;
Keep warring still, and sure thou shall have crown.
Thy Brother thou oh Noise have help to guide:
Christ tender Lambs within his fold to gather,
From East to West thou do Christ's Warrier bide;
Faint not at last, increase thy fighting rather.
CAHP. XXXII. Of good supply, and seasonable helps the Lord Christ was pleased
to send to further his Wilderness work, and particular for his Churches of
Charles Town, and Ipswich, and Dorchester.
YEt farther for the encouragement of the people of Christ in these their weak
beginnings, he daily brings them in fresh supplies, adding this year also the
reverend and painful Minister of his Gospel Mr. Zachary Simmes, who was
invited soon after his coming over to assist in planting of another Church of
Christ, but the place being remote from the precious servants of Christ already
settled, be chose rather to join with some Church among them, and in a short
space after he was called to the Office of a Teaching Elder in the Church of
Christ at Charles Town, together with Mr. James, who was then their Pastor, as
you have formerly heard. Among all the godly Women that came through the
perilous Seas to war their warfare, the wife of this zealous Teacher, Mrs.
Sarah Simmes shall not be omitted, nor any other, but to avoid tediousness the
virtuous Woman, endued by Christ with graces fit for a Wilderness condition,
her courage exceeding her stature, with much cheerfulness did undergo all the
difficulties of these times of straites, her God through Faith in Christ
supplying all her wants with great industry, nurturing up her young Children in
the fear of the Lord, their number being ten both Sons and Daughters, a
certain sign of the Lords intent to people this vast Wilderness: God grant
they may be valiant in Faith against Sin, Satan and all the enemies of Christ's
Kingdom, following the example of their Father, and Grandfather, who have both
suffered for the same, in remembrance of whom these following lines are placed.

COme Zachary, thou must reed^fie,
Christ Churches in this Desert Land of his,
With Moses zeal stamped unto dust defy
All crooked ways that Christ true worship miss.
With spirits sword and armor girt about:
Thou lay'st on load proud Prelates crown to crack,
And wilt not suffer Wolfes thy flock to rout;
Though close they creep, with sheep skins on their back.
Thy Fathers spirit doubled is upon
Thee Simmes, then war, thy Father fighting died,
In prayer then prove thou like Champion;
Hold ou^ till death, and Christ will crown provide.
After these poor people had welcomed with great joy their newcome Guests, all
of a sudden they spy two tall Ships, whose colors showed them to be some
foreign Nation, at which time this little handful of people began to be much
troubled, deeming them to be Rovers, they gathered together such forces as
their present condition would afford, very ill fitted as then to rescue an
enemy, but their Lord and Master Christ Jesus would not suffer any such to
come, and instead of enemies brought in friends, even Dutchmen to furnish them
with farther necessary Provision.

For the year 1635, the honored Mr. John Haines was chosen Governor, and the
honored Mr. Richard Bellingham Deputy Governor, the number of Freemen added
to this little Common wealth, were about one hundred forty and five. The time
now approaching, wherein the Lord Christ would have his people come from the
Flaile to the Fan, threshing out much this year, increasing the number of his
Troops, and valiant Leaders, the Ships came thicker and faster filled with
many worthy parsonages; Insomuch that the former people began to forget their
Poverty, and verily Cold, Purity, Peace and Plenty run all in one channel,
Gods people here should sure have met with none other, but the still waters of
Peace and Plenty for back and belly soon contract much mudde, as you shall he
are (God willing) in the following History: this year came in the honored Sir
Henry Vain, who abode not long in this worthy work, yet mind him I will in
the following Lines.

Sir Henry Vain once Governor of the English People in New England.
THy Parents Vain, of worthy fame, in Christ and thou for him:
Through Ocean wide in new World trid a while his warrier bin,
With small defeat thou did retreat to Britain ground again,
There stand thou stout, for Christ hold out, Christ's Champion a^ remain^.
Also at this time Christ sent over the much honored and upright hearted
servant of his Richard Saltingstall Esquire, Son to the before-named Sir
Richard Saltingstall, who being weary of this Wilderness work, returned home
again not long before, and now his Son being chose to the Office of a
Magistrate, continued for some good space of time, helping on the affairs of
this little Common wealth, to the honor of Christ, who has called him: both
Father and Son are here remembered.

THou worthy Knight, Saltingstall hight, here is gain does gold exceed
Then trifle not, its to be got, if thou can see thy need.
Why wilt thhu back, and leave as wreck, this worthy work begun,
Art thou back-bore, Christ will send more, and raise instead thy son.
His Fathers gone, young Richard on here valiantly does War,
For Christ his truth, to their great Ruth, Heathens opposers are:
To study thou, thy mind do how, and daily good promote,
Saltingstall why, then do thou fly, let all Gods people note.
That thou will stand, in thy own Land, Christ there the^ strengthen thee
With grace thee heat, that thy retreat, may for his glory be:
At ending day, he thee array, with Glory will not fail,
Breaking graves bands, with his strong hands, and free dust from death's
goal.
Among these Troops of Christ's Soldiers, came at this time, the godly
servant, of Christ Mr. Roger Harlackenden, a young Gentleman valiant in Faith,
and appointed by Christ to assist his people in this Desert, he was chose to
the Office of a Magistrate, as also to be a choice Leader of their Military
Forces, which as yet were but in a strange posture; And therefore till the
year 1644. (at which time the Country wis really placed in a posture of War,
to be in a readiness at all times) there shall not be any thing spoken
concerning their Military Discipline, the continuance of this Soldier of
Christ was but short, the Lord taking him to rest with himself.

HArlackenden, among these men of nose Christ has thie seated:
In warlike way Christ thee array, with zeal and love well he ated.
As general beloved of all, Christ Soldiers honor thee:
In thy young years, courage appears, and kind benignity.
Short are thy days, spent to his praise, whose Church work thou must aid,
His work shall bide, silver tried, but thine by death is staid.
The number of Ministers that came over this year was about eleaven, and many
other like faithful servants of Christ, among whom arrived those two Reverend
and laborious servants of his Mr. Norton, and Mr. Shepherd, of whose narrow
escape you have heard the last year: Mr. Norton, was called to the Office of a
Teaching Elder at the Town of Ipswich to the Church of Christ there, where Mr.
Ward as yet remained in Office. Also the learned labors of this Soldier of
Christ are obvious to our Countrymen, he Preaching there, the blessing of God
has not only built up many in the Knowledge of Christ, but also been the
means of converting diverse souls, turning them from the power of Satan to
Faith in Christ, whom the Lord long continue; you shall further hear of Christ's
gracious assisting of him in the first and last Synod holden here at Cambridge,
and in the mean time let no man be offended that the Author quickens up his
own dull effections, in telling how largely the Lord has bestowed his Graces
upon these Instruments of his, although sinful dust and ashes.

THou Noble Norton, who art honored by
Thy Christ, with learned Arguments does fill
Thy mouth with might new errors to destroy;
And force deceivers silently to yield.
Weak dust wait on thy Christ for further strength:
Who does his David's make as Angels bright,
To trample down his enemies at length;
All break or bow unto his Kingdoms might.
Illettered Men and Women that do love,
Pre-eminence, condemn thy learned skill,
But Christ has given his blessing from above
Unto thy works the World with light to fill.
Christ's faithful servants met in Synod, take
Thee for their Penmen Scriptures light to clear,
With Scripture show what Government Christ gave;
To's Churches till himself again appear.
Here my indeared Reader, I must mind thee of the industrious servant of Christ
Mr. John Wilson, who this year landed the third time upon this American shore
from his Native Country, where now again by the Divine Providence of Christ,
he narrowly escaped the Hunters hands, being clothed in a Country-mans habit,
passing from places to place, declared to the people of God what great Works
Christ had already done for his people in New England, which made many
Christian souls long to see these admirable Acts of Christ, although it were
not to be enjoyed, but by passing through an Ocean of troubles, Voyaging night
and day upon the great deep, which this zealous servant of Christ had now five
times passed over: at this time came over the Sage, grave, reverend and
faithful servant of Christ M. Richard Mather, endued by the Lord with many
Heavenly gifts, of a plain and upright spirit, apt to teach, full of gracious
expressions, and Resolvedly bent to follow the truth, as it is in Jesus, he
was anon after his coming called to Office in the Church of Christ at the
Town of Dorchester, to assist in the Work of the Lord, with Mr. Marareck,
whose work not long after was ended by death, leaving Mr. Mather alone to
continue the same.

WIth cheerful face Mather does toil endure
In wilderness, spending the prime of's age,
To build Christ's Churches, and souls health procure;
In battle thou do deep thy self engage.
Marvel not Man that Mather through an host
Of enemies does break, and fighting stands,
It Is Christ him keeps, of him is all his boast;
Who power gives to do, and then commands.
With gracious speech thy Masters Message thou
Declarest to all, and all would have submit,
That to his Kingdom every knee might bow;
But those resisthis sword shall surely hit,
Till age does crown thy head with hoary hairs:
Well have thou warred, till Mathers young again,
Thy son in fight his Fathers strength repairs;
Father and Son beat down Christ's foes amain.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of the beginning of the Churches of Christ, to be planted at
Canectico, and first of the Church of Christ removal to Hartford, 1635.
THis year the servants of Christ, who peopled the Town of Cambridge, were
put upon thoughts of removing, hearing of a very fertile place upon the River
of Canectico low Land, and well stored with Meddow, which is greatly in esteem
with the people of New England, by reason the Winters are very long: This
people seeing that Tillage went but little on, Resolved to remove, and breed up
store of Cattle, which were then at eight and twenty pound a Cow, or near
upon, but assuredly the Lord intended far greater matters than man purposes,
but God disposes these men, having their hearts gone from the Lord, on which
they were seated, soon took dislike at every little matter, the Plowable
plains were too dry and sandy for them, and the Rocky places, although more
fruitful, yet to eat their bread with toil of hand, and how they deemed it
unsupportable; And therefore they only waited now for a people of stronger
Faith than themselves were to purchase their Houses and Land, which in conceit
they could no longer live upon, and accordingly they met with Chapmen, a people
new come, who having ^^^ught their possessions, they highed them away to their
new P^a^t^tion With whom went the Grave and Reverend servant of Christ Mr.
Hooker, and Mr. Stone, for indeed the whole Church removed, as also the much
honored Mr. Haynes and diverse other men of note for the place, being out of
the Mattacusets Patten; they erected another Government, called by the Indian
name, Canectico, being farther encouraged by two honorable personages, the
Lord Say, and Lord Brooks, who built a Forest at the mouth of the River, and
called it Say-brook Forest: passing up the River they began to build a Town,
which they called Hartford, where this Church of Christ sat down their station,
there went to these parts also the Reverend Mr. Wareham, and diverse from the
Town of Dorchester. The place of settling themselves, and erecting a Town was
far upon the River, the part next the Sea being very Rocky, but on the bank of
this River they planted the good Town of Hartford, and established civil
Government: of their gathering into a Church, you have formerly heard. Only
here mind the gracious servant of Christ, Mr. Wareham, whose long labors in
this work are expressed.

WIth length of days Christ crowned has thy head.
In Wilderness to manage his great War,
Against Antichrist by strength of him art lead;
With steady hand to sling thy stone from far.
That grovelling in his gore may lie smit down
This mighty Monster, that the Earth has taken,
With His poisons sweet in cup of Gold drunk down;
Dead drunk those lie whom Christ does not awaken.
But Wareham thou by him art sent to save,
With His word of truth Christ to their souls apply,
That deadly sin has laid in rotting Grave
Dead, live in Christ here, and Eternally.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of Cambridge second Church, being the 11. of Christ gathered in
the Mattacusets, and of further supply for Salem Church.
THese people and Church of Christ being thus departed from New-towne, the
godly people, who came in their rooms, gathered the eleaventh Church of
Christ, and called to the Office of a Pastor, that gracious sweet Heavenly
minded, and soule-ravishing Minister, Mr. Thomas Shepherd, in whose soul the
Lord shed abroad his love so abundantly, that thousands of souls have cause to
bless God for him, even at this very day, who are the Seal of his Ministrey,
and he a man of a thousand, endued with abundance of true saving knowledge for
himself and others, yet his natural Parts were weak, but spent to the full
as solloweth:

NO loungr Hawke poor Patridge to devour
More eager is then Prelates Nimrod power
Thomas to hunt, my Shephard sweet pursue
To seas brinke, but Christ saves his soul for you;
Sending thee Shepherd, safe through Seas away,
To feed his stock unto thy ending day,
Where sheep seek Wolves) thy bosom lambs would catch;
But night and day thou ceasest not to watch.
And Warn with tears thy flock of cheaters vile,
Who in sheep clothing would the weak beguile,
With dropping dewes from thy lips Christ has made
Thy hearers eyes often water springing blade.
With pierced hearts they cry aloud and say,
Show us sweet Shepherd our salvations way,
Thy lovely speech such ravishment does bring;
Christ gives thee power to heal as well as sting.
Thou gates sets open for Christ thy King to enter,
In hearts of many spirits joy to center,
But mourn my Muse, hang down thy head with woe,
With tears, sighs, sobs lament thy Shepherd so.
(Why?) he is in Heaven, but I one Earth am left:
More Earthly, 'cause of him I am bereft.
Oh Christ why do thou Shepherd take away,
In erring times when sheep most apt to stray.
The many Soldiers and Officers of Christ that came over this year, moved
some wonder in the minds of those, whom he had been pleased to give a great
measure of discerning, yet here they fell abundantly short, deeming almost an
impossibility of improving their Talents in this Wilderness, the Indian-people
being incapable of understanding their Language, the English* congregations
that were already set down, being fully furnished with Teaching Elders, and
that which was most strange they were persuaded they should meet with no
enemies to oppose them, as if Christ would lead them forth into the Field in
vain. But Christ Jesus, having the hearts of all Men opened before him, soon
showed them, their work, and withal made room for them to set down, I and
many more beside, yea, and beyond expectation made this poor barren
Wilderness become a fruitful Land unto them that waited on him for the
accompl^shing thereof, feeding them with the flower of Wheat, as in its time
and place (God willing) shall be showed, although it pleased him this year to
visit them, and try them again with a great scarcity of Bread, by reason of
the multitude that came brought somewhat shorter Provisions then ordinary,
which caused them to be in some straites. But their Lord Christ gives cut a
Word of command to those, who occupy their business in the great deep, to
furnish from Ireland some Ships laden with food for his people.

Also he commands the Winds and the Seas to bear up these Ships, and blow
them forth on their way, till they arrive among his people in New England,
whose appetities were now sharpeset for Bread. One poor man among others
deeming he had found out some forsaken Barnes of the Indians (whose manner it
to lay up their Corn in the Earth, lighteh one a grave, where finding bones of
the dead instead of Corn, he was taken with fear of this, as a sad omen that
he should then die for want of food, but in this he proved no true Prophet,
for the Lord was pleased to bring in seasonable supply, and the man is living
at this very day. This year came over the Famous servant of Christ M. Hugh
Peter's, whose courage was not inferior to any of these transported servants of
Christ, but because his native Soil has had the greatest share of his
labors, the less will be said of him here, he was called to Office by the
Church of Christ, at Salem, their former Pastor, the Reverend M. Higging son,
having cnded his labors resting with the Lord.

WIth courage bold Peter's a Soldier stout
In Wilderness for Christ begins to war,
Much work he finds among people, yet hold out;
With fluent tongue he stops phantastickjar.
Swife Torrent stays of liberties large vent:
Through crooked ways of error daily flowing,
Shiloes soft streams to bath in would all bent;
Should he while they in Christian freedom growing.
But back thou must, thy Talents Christ's will have
Improved for him, his glory is thy crown,
And thou base dust till he thee honor gave;
It matters not though the world on thee do frown.
CHAP. XXXV. Of the Twelfth Church of Christ gathered at Concord.
YEt further at this time entered the Field two more valiant Leaders of Christ's
Soldiers, holy men of God, Mr. Buckly and M. Jones, penetrating further into
this Wilderness then any formerly had done, with diverse other servants of
Christ: they build an Inland Town, which they called Concord, named from the
occasion of the present time, as you shall after hear: this Town is seated
upon a fair fresh River, whose Rivulets are filled with fresh Marsh, and her
streams with Fish, it being a branch of that large River of Morrimeck
Allwifes, and Shad in their season come up to this Town, but Salmon and Daice
cannot come up, by reason of the Rocky salles, which causes their Meddowes to
lie much covered with water, the which these people together with their
Neigbour Town, have several times assayed to cut through but cannot, yet it
may be turned another way with an hundred pound charge as it appeared, this
Town was more populated once then now it is (some faint-hearted Soldiers
among them fearing the Land would prove barren, sold their possessions for
little, and removed to a new Plantation, (which have most commonly a great
prize set on them) the number of Families at present are about 50. their
buildings are conveniently placed chiefly in one strait stream under a
sunny-banke in a low level, their heard of great Cattle are about 300. the
Church of Christ here consists of about seventy souls, their teaching Concord
the 12. Church.
Elders were Mr. Buckly, and Mr. Jones, who removed from them with that part of
the people, who went away, so that only the reverend grave and godly Mr.
Buckly remains.

RIches and honors Buckly lays aside
To please his Christ, for whom he now does war,
Why Buckly thou have Riches that will bide,
And honors that exceeds Earths honor far.
Thy bodies worn, and days in Desert spent
To feed a few of Christ's poor scattered sheep,
Like Christ's bright body, thy poor body rent;
With Saints and Angels company shall keep.
Thy Tongue, and Pen does to the World declare:
Christ's covenant with his flock shall firmly stand,
When Heavens and Earth by him dissolved are;
Then who can hold from this his work at hand.
Two Bucklies more Christ by his grace has taken,
And sent abroad to manage his great wars.
I'ts Buklies joy that Christ his sons new making,
Has placest in's churches for to shine as Stare.
This holy and sincere servant of Christ was put upon the greater trial, by
reason he and his were tenderly brought up, and now by the provident hand of
Christ were carried far into this desart-land, where they met with some
hardships for a long time, till the place was well peopled, they lived barely.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the laborious work Chrsts people have in planting this
wilderness set, forth in the building the Town of Concord, being the first
inland Town.
NOw because it is one of the admirable acts of Christ Providence in leading
his people forth into these Western Fields, in his providing of Huts for them,
to desend them from the bitter storms this place is subject unto, therefore
here is a short Epitome of the manner how they placed down their dwellings in
this Desert Wilderness, the Lord being pleased to hide from the Eyes of his
people the difficulties they are to encounter withal in a new Plantation, that
they might not thereby be hindered from taking the work in hand; upon some
inquiry of the Indians, who lived to the North-west of the Bay, one Captain
Simon Willard being acquainted with them, by reason of his Trade, became a
chief instrument in erecting this Town, the land they purchase of the Indians,
and with much difficulties traveling through unknown woods, and through watery
scrampes, they discover the fitness of the place, sometimes passing through
the Thickets, where their hands are forced to make way for their bodies
passage, and their feet clambering over the crossed Trees, which when they
missed they sunk into an uncertain bottom in water, and wade up to the
knees, tumbling sometimes higher and sometimes lower, wearied with this toil,
they at end of this meet with a scorching plain, yet not so plain, but that
the ragged Bushes scratch their legs foully, even to wearing their stockings to
their bare skin in two or three hours; if they be not otherwise well defended
with Boots, or Bu^kings, their flesh will be torn: (that some being forced to
pass on without further provision) have had the blood trickle down at every
step, and in the time of Summer the Sun casts such a reflecting heat from the
sweet Fern, whose scent is very strong so that some herewith have been very
nere fainting, although very able bodies to undergo much travel, and this not
to be endured for one day, but for many, and verily did not the Lord encourage
their natural parts (with hopes of a new and strange discovery, expecting
every hour to see some rare sight never seen before) they were never able to
hold out, and break through: but above all, the thirsting desires these
servants of Christ have had to Plant his Churches, among whom the forenamed Mr.
Jones shall not be forgotten.

IN Desart's depth where Wolves and Bears abide,
There Jones sits down a wary watch to keep,
Over Christ's dear flock. who now are wandered wide;
But not from him, whose eyes never close with sleep.
Surely it suits thy melancholy mind,
Thus solitary for to spend thy days,
Much mo^e thy soul in Christ content does find,
To work for him, who thee to joy will raise.
Leading thy son to Land, yet more remote,
To feed his flock upon this Western wast:
Exhort him then Christ's Kingdom to promote;
That he with thee of lasting joys may taste.
Yet farther to tell of the hard labors this people found in Planting this
Wilderness, after some days spent in search, toyling in the day time as
formerly is said; like true Jacob, its they rest them one the Rocks where the
night takes them, their short repast is some small pittance of Bread, if it
hold out, but as for Drink they have plenty, the Country being well watered
in all places that yet are found out, their farther hardship is to travel,
sometimes they know not whether, bewildred indeed without sight of Sun, their
compass miscarrying in crouding through the Bushes, they sadly search up and
down for a known way, the Indians paths being not above one foot broad, so that
a man may travel many days and never find one. But to be sure the directing
Providence of Christ has been better unto them than many paths, as might here
be inserted, did not have call my Pen away to more weighty matters; yet by the
way a touch thus, it befell with a servant maid, who was traveling about
three or four miles from one Town to another, loosing her self in the Woods,
had very diligent search made after her for the space of three days, and could
not possible be found, then being given over as quite lost, after three days
and nights, the Lord was pleased to bring her feeble body to her own home in
safety, to the great admiration of all that heard of it. This intricate work
no whit daunted these resolved servants of Christ to go on with the work in
hand, but lying in the open air, while the watery Clouds pour down all the
night season, and sometimes the driving Snow dissolving on their backs, they
keep their we clothes warm with a continued fire, till the renewed morning
give fresh opportunity of further travel; after they have thus found out a
place of abode, they burrow themselves in the Earth for their first shelter
under some Hill-side, casting the Earth aloft upon Timber; they make a smoaky
fire against the Earth at the highest side, and thus these poor servants of
Christ provide shelter for themselves, their Wives and little ones, keeping off
the short showers from their Lodgings, but the long raines penetrate through,
to their great disturbance in the night season: yet in these poor Wigwames
(they sing Psalms, pray and praise their God) till they can provide them
houses, which ordinarily was not wont to be with many till the Earth, by the
Lord blessing, brought forth Bread to feed them, their Wives and little ones,
which with sore labors they attain every one that can lift a hawe to strike
it into the Earth, standing stoutly to their labors, and tear up the Roots
and Bushes, which the first year bears them a very thin crop, till the soard
of the Earth be rotten, and therefore they have been forced to cut their bread
very thin for a long season. But the Lord is pleased to provide for them great
store of Fish in the spring time, and especially Alewives about the bigness of
a Herring, many thousands of these, they used to put under their Indian Corn,
which they plant in Hills five foot asunder, and assuredly when the Lord
created this Corn, he had a special eye to supply these his peoples wants
with it, for ordinarily five or six grains does produce six hundred.

As for flesh they looked not for any in those times (although now they have
plenty) unless they could barter with the Indians for Venison or Rockoons,
whose flesh is not much inferior unto Lamb, the toil of a new Plantation
being like the labors of Hercules never at an end, yet are none so barbarously
been (under the Mattacusets especially) but with a new Plantation they
ordinarily gather into Church Fellowship, so that Pastor^ and people suffer the
inconveniences together, which is a great means to season the sore labors
they undergo, and verily the edge of their appetite was greater to spiritual
duties at their first coming in time of wants, than afterward: many in new
Plantations have been forced to go barefoot, and bareleg, till these latter
days, and some in time of Frost and Snow: Yet were they then very healthy more
then now they are: in this Wildernesse-worke men of Estates speed no better
than others, and some much worse for want of being inured to such hard labor,
having laid out their estate upon cattle at five and twenty pound a Cow, when
they came to winter them with inland Hay, and seed upon such wild Fother as
was never cut before, they could not hold out the Winter, but ordinarily the
first or second year after their coming up to a new Plantation, many of their
Cattle died, especially if they wanted Salt-marshes: and also those, who
supposed they should feed upon Swines flesh were cut short, the Wolves commonly
feasting themselves before them, who never leave neither flesh nor bones, if
they be not seared away before they have made an end of their meal, as for
those who laid out their Estate upon Sheep, they speed worst of any at the
beginning (although some have sped the best of any now) for until the Land be
often fed with other Cattle Sheep cannot live; And therefore they never
thrived till these latter days: Horse had then no better success, which made
many an honest Gentleman travel a foot for a long time, and some have even
perished with extreme heat in their travells: as also the want of English
grain, Wheat, Barley and Rye proved a sore affliction to some stomachs, who
could not live upon Indian Bread and water, yet were they compelled to it till
Cattle increased, and the Plowes could but go: instead of Apples and Pears,
they had Pomkins and Squashes of diverse kinds, their lonesome condition was
very grievous to some, which was much aggravated by continual fear of the
Indians approach, whose cruelties were much spoken of, and more especially
during the time of the Peqot wars.

Thus this poor people populate this howling Desert, marching manfully on (the
Lord assisting) through the greatest difficulties, and sorest labors that ever
any with such weak means have done.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Thirteenth Church of Christ gathered at Hingham, 1636.
AT this time also came to shore the servant of Christ Master Peter Hubbord,
whom the Lord was pleased to make use of for feeding his people in this
Wilderness, being called to Office by the Church of Christ at the Town of
Hingham, which is situate upon the Sea coasts South-east of Charles River,
being a place nothing inferior to their Neighbors for situation, and the
people have much profited themselves by transporting Timber, Planke and Mast
for Shipping to the Town of Boston, as also Ceder and Pine-board to supply the
wants of other Towns, and also to remote parts, even as far as Barbados. They
want not for Fish for themselves and others also.

This Town consisted of about sixty Families, the form is somewhat intricate
to describe, by reason of the Seas wasting crookes, where it beats upon a
mouldering shore, yet have they complete streets in some places, the people
joined in Church covenant in this place, were much about an hundred souls, but
have been lessened by a sad unbrotherly contention, which fell out among them,
wasting them every way, continued already for seven years space, to the great
grief of all other Churches, who held out the right hand of fellowship unto
them in Brotherly communion, which may (the Lord helping) demonstate to all the
true Churches of Christ the World throughout, although they be distanced by
place or Nation, yet ought they never to take up such an Independent way, as to
reject the advice and counsel of each other, for although the Lord Christ have
completed his commission in giving full power to every particular Church to
exercise all his Ordinances in and toward their own body, yet has the Lord so
dispensed his gifts, that when the one want, the other shall abound both in
spiritual and temporal, that by giving and receiving mutual love may be
maintained, the entire truths of Christ continued, the Churches of Christ
supported, superiority of any may be avoided, and all such as raise discord
among Brethren may be retarded, the downfall of Antichrist, and restoration of
that ancient people of the Lord furthered, through the Unity of Christ's
Churches the World throughout: this Church I hope will give signal to others
(the Lord assisting) that they split not upon the Rock. Of their Pastors I
shall say no more, but this at present.

OH Hubbard! why do leave thy native soil?
Is It not to war amongst Christ's true worthies here,
What wilt give out, thou wilt loose thy former toil?
And starve Christ's flock, which he has purchased dear.
What would's thou have, speak plain, truth bides the light:
To Gods word go, it is that must trial be,
Has cruel sword, not het one thy side right,
Increase in love, and thou will Justice see.
With humble, holy, learned men converse,
Thee and thy flock they would in one unite,
And all the fogs of self conceit disperse;
Thee and thy sons the Lord Christ guide aright.
Some other of the Ministers of Christ arrived this year 1635. As Mr. Flint,
Mr. Carter, and Mr. Walton and some others, of whom we shall speak (by the
Lord assistance) in due time and place, in the mean time here is to be
remembered Mr. Thomas Flint a sincere servant of Christ, who had a fair yearly
Revenue in England, but having improved it for Christ, by casting it in the
common Treasury, as it appears in the former part of this History, he waits
on the Lord for doubling his Talent, if it shall seem good unto him so to do,
and the mean time spending his person for the good of his people in the Office
of a Magistrate.

AT Christ's commands, thou leave thy lands, and native habitation:
His folk to aid, in Desert straid, for Gospells Exaltation,
Flint Hardy thou, wilt not allow, the underminding Fox,
With subtle skill, Christsvines to spill, thy sword shall give the^ knocks.
Yet thou base dust, and all thou have is Christ's, and by him thou:
Art made to be, such as we see, hold fast for ever now.
CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the placing down of many Soldiers of Christ, and gathering
the Church of Christ at Sanowitch in Plymouth patten, and further supply for
the Churches of Ipswich and Linne.
THis year 1636. Sir Henry Vain, was chosen Governor, and John Winthrope
Esquire Deputy Governor, the number of Freemen added were about eighty three.
This year came over the much honored Mr. Fenwick a godly and able instrument
to assist in helping to uphold the civil Government of the second, and third
Colonies here planted, by the Divine Providence of the most high God, he
having purchased the Plantation of Saybrooke. Fore, became a good incourager to
the Church of Christ at Hartford, where the reverend Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Stone
were Officers. In remembrance of whom a few lines take here.

FEnwick among this Christian throng, to wilderness does fiee:
There learned have thou, yet further how, Christ should advanced be,
Who for that end, does back thee send, their Senator to sit;
In native soil, for him still toil, while thou have season fit,
His Churches peace, do thou not cease, with their increase to bring,
That they and thee, in lasting Glee may Hallelujaeh sing.
The beginning of this year was spent in accommodating these new come Guests
in the former year, whose numbers was near about three thousand, and now they
began to be persuaded they should be a settled people, not minding the present
dangers they were in, as you shall hear anon, only in the mean time take
notice of further supply the Lord Christ was pleased to send before the cattle
increased to its strength, among whom the aged, and long continned Soldiers of
Christ Jesus Mr. Partrich, as also Mr. Nathaniel Rogers an able disputant,
whose mouth the Lord was pleased to fill with many arguments for the defense of
his truth, Mr. Samuel Whiting, who has also, with keeping to the pattern of
sound and wholesome Doctrine, much stopped the spreading Leaven of the
Pharisees, Mr. Partrich was called to Office at a Town then named Dukes Berry
in Plimoth Government, situated upon the Seacoast, where the people of Christ
being gathered into a Church, Ordained him to be their Pastor.

IN thine own soil well rooted in the truth,
Thou did stand fast by Prelates power unbow'd,
But Laud lays load on Gods solke to his Ruth,
By whom thou may, no longer, be alow'd.
Then Partrich thou thy wings begins to spread
Of Faith and Love to fly these long Seas over,
To wilderness where thou Christ's Lambs have fed;
With His sincere Milk this fourteen year and more.
But now with age thy Almon Tree does flourish,
Yet spreading like the Palm Tree do thou stand,
In The house of God Christ Root thy Boughs do nourish;
And for thy head he has a Crown in's hand.
Mr. Nathaniel Rogers being landed, after a long and tedious Voyage at Sea, was
welcomed by the Church of Christ at Ipswitch, where the Reverened and Judicious
Mr. Nathaniel Ward, although a very able Preacher, and much desired, yet for
some natural infirmity (himself being best privy unto) desired to be unbound
of his engagement with his people in point of Office: that being left to his
liberty, he might Preach more seldom, in whose stead the Church called to
Office this Reverend and Holy Man of God Mr. Nathaniel Rogers, whose labors in
this Western World, have been very much: a very sweet heavenly minded man, of
whom the Author is bold to say as follows:

THrough boystrous Seas thy brittle frame of Man
It safely is in Christ's sweet arms infold,
No wonder then thou weak dust stotly can
Preach Christ's in's truths, why he does thee uphold?
Why Rogers lee thee over-Sea has fett
Against the day of Battle, now at hand,
No sooner are thy feet one those shores set,
But Leaders do Christ truth withstand.
Undaunted thou these Western Fields do enter,
Filld with the spirits ready sword at hand,
Engage thou will thy self, amongst hardships venture;
Valiant thou foughtst under thy Christ's command.
And yet with all men would have peace thy aim,
If deep to wound, and sweetly then to say,
Come to my Christ, he will heal your wounds again;
Can but submit he will never say thee nay.
With learned Method thou Gods Word divides:
Long laboring that each soul may take his part,
Thy gracious speech with grave impression bides;
Thus Christ by thee is pleased to win the heart.
My Muse lament, Nathaniel is decaying:
Why do thou grutch him Heaven, such toil has had,
In Christ his Vineyard rather be thou praying;
That in Christ's arms he resting may be glad.
Mr. Samuel Whiting was well welcomed by the Church of Christ at Cawgust, which
Town, being now of age to receive an English name, was called Linne, where
this Reverend man now has his aboade.

THy ardent Love, the countlesse Oceans measure
Quench cannot, for thy love on him is set,
Who of true love has aie the depthlesse Treasure,
Does thine increase, least thou should, his forget.
Love Christ in's truths my Whiting thou have done:
Thou will not suffer with their leaven sower,
False Doctrines amongst thy tender flock to run;
Timely cut off will thou all those devour.
Samuel mourn not thy strength in Desart's spent:
Rather rejoice thy Christ makes use of thee
Souls to convert, his Kingdoms large extent
From East to West shall shortly settled be.
Thine Eyes and Ears have seen and heard great things
Done by thy Christ, shows he thy toil accepts,
Though thy weak flesh weaker to dust he will bring;
Thy quickened spirit increast in his joy leaps.
CHAP. XXXIX. Of the first appearing in the Field, of the enemies of Christ's
people in point of-Reformation.
ANd now to follow our first simile of a Soldier, the Lord Christ having
safely landed many a valiant Soldier of his on these Western shores, draws
hither also the common enemies to Reformation, both in Doctrine and Discipline;
But it was for like end, as the Lord sometime drew Sisera the Captain of
Jabins army to the River Kishon for their destruction, only herein was a wide
difference; there Sisera was delivered into the hands of a Woman, and here
Sisera was a woman; their weapons and war was carnal, these spiritual;
there Jabin was but a man, here Jabin was the common enemy of man's salvation.

In the year 1636. the Angels of the several Churches of Christ in N. England
sounding forth their silver Trumpets, heard ever and anon the jarring sound of
rattling Drums in their ears, striking up an alarm to the battle, it being a
frequent thing publicly to oppose the pure and perfect truths of Christ
(delivered by the mouth of his Ministers) and that by way of question as the
Pharisees, Sadduces and Herodians did Christ. But to bring this disorderly work
of theirs into some order, for assuredly could the Author come up to relate the
full of the matter in hand, it would through the mercy of Christ make much for
the good of Gods people the World throughout, and help to discover the last (I
hope) but most subtle practices of Satan to hinder the Restoration of the
purity of Christ's Ordinances in his Churches in all places; As also used by him
and his instruments to divert the hands of those, to whom it belongs, from
pulling down Antichrist, to which end he stirs up some of his instruments
(well educated in the Masking school of Hippocrisy) to take upon them this
long Voyage, giving them in charge by all means to carry it more close, then
his Jesuits had done, and for their pains they should have the honors to be
counted such, as were of a sharper fight, and deeper discerning then any
others. Satan, knowing right well that at the fall of Antichrist he must be
chained up for a thousand years, strives with all the wicked craft his long
experienced maliciousness could possibly invent, to uphold the same, having
already persuaded many that his Kingdom was wholly ruinated with our English
Nation, and so diswaded them a long time from further prosecuting against him.
But Antichrists Kingdom, as it plainly appears by Scripture, consists chiefly
in two parts, his deceaveible Doctrines, and his Kingly power. The first of
these being in measure abolished, the latter was still retained by the Prelacy,
and some Lording Presbytery in greater or lesser measure, as they could attain
unto it.

Now Satan, who is daily walking to and fro compassing the Earth, seeing how
these resolved Soldiers of Christ in New England with indefatigable pains
labored, not only the final ruin of Antichrist, in both, but also the
advance of Christ's Kingdom, in seting up daily Churches according to his first
institution. Wherefore he sets upon a new way to stop (if it were possible)
this work of Reformation, and seeing no other way will serve, he stirs up
instruments to cry down Antichrist as much as the most, I and more too, but by
this project they should lead people as much out of the way on the other hand,
and in the Doctrinall part of Antichrists Kingdom, fall to more horrid
Blasphemies then the Papist (as God willing) you shall hear some of them did,
namely the Gortenist, who most blasphemously profess themselves to be
personally the Christ: and as for the other part of his Kingdom, namely the
power or Dominion of the beast, this they should with all violence batter down
also, but it must be none other then to make way for their own exaltation, and
pay them their wages in the former page promised them, as also withal to
overthow the authority Christ has ordained to be continued in his Churches, in
and under him, and furthermore to lock up the Sword of Civil Government for
ever, especially in matters that concern the four first Commands of God, a
cunning way to save the beasts head whole.

You have now heard of the intention, you shall now see their actions. The Lord
Christ in his boundless mercy give all his people eyes to see, and hearts to
believe, that after they have in measure escaped the filthy pollutions of the
beast, they may not again be entangled with these damnabled Doctrines,
stealing away their hearts by degrees, under a seeming show of pulling down
Antichrist. The Ambassadors of Christ Jesus, having full liberty to deliver
their masters mind, Preach unto all the Doctrine of Free grace, beseeching
them to be reconciled unto God in Christ, and that the revealed will of God is,
that all should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, and that God
has given his only begotten Son, That whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting Life. Yet withal minding them that Faith is the
gift of God, and none can come unto Christ, but such as the Father draws, and
withal that the whole will not see any need of the Phisicians, but the sick,
adding also that none can come to the sight of his sickness or dead condition
but by the Law of God, unless they be quicker sighted then the Apostle; They
endeavor also to build up others in their holy Faith, that they might come to
see the Love of God in Christ, which passes knowledge, and to this end they
show them the fruits of Faith which works by love, and that love will be
obedient to all the commands of Christ, who says, if you love me keep my
Commandments; And further that Faith purifies the heart, and that a constant
supply must be had from Christ. With these and the like sound and wholesome
truths the Ministers of Christ feeds their several flocks in New England,
drawing their Doctrines plainly from their Text, and substantially backing them
with store of Scripture, and undeniable reason, and then delivering to every
Man his portion.

But this good old way would not serve the turn with certain Sectaries that
were hither come, who like cunning Sophisters, seeing the bent of the peoples
hearts (after so many mercies received) was to magnify the rich Grace of God
in Christ; they began to tell the people (yet very privately) that the most, if
not all the Ministers among them Preached a Covenant of works, either course
or fine, and with a what do you say to this. They begin to spread their Errors
and Herefies, laying the foundation of them as nere the truth as possible they
can, the easier to deceive, but in the prosecution, to be sure they ran far
enough from it, but to begin; First, they quarrel with the Doctrine of Faith
in Christ, and say, a Soul is justified without it.

CHAP. XL. Of the cunning policy of Satan in that machevillian Principle,
divide and overcome, and of the two first dividing Principles, by which many
errors were brought in.
ANd verily Satane policy here (as in all places where the Lord Christ is
acknowledged) was to keep men from that one right way, by the which he
applies himself to the soul, no marvel then if so many Errors arise, like
those fained heads of Hidra, as fast as one is cut off two stand up in the
room, and chiefly about the uniting of a soul to Christ by Faith. Their
Errors in this point they reported to be the judgment of the Reverend and
Judicious Mr. John Cotton; But he having spoken for himself in his answer to
Mr. Baily, I forbear, only this by the way, take notice of these subtle
Projectors, the Erronist I mean, who perceiving this holy man of God Mr.
Cotton was, and yet is in great esteem with the people of God, for the great
grace Christ has bestowed upon him in his deep discerning the mysteries of
godliness, as also discerning some little difference b^tweene him, and the
other Elders about this point, commene upon it, and in large at their pleasure,
and then in daily venting their deceivable Doctrines, like subtle Logicians,
bring in this as their strongest argument in the last place. I Will tell you
Friend, Neighbor, Brother, if you will forbear to speak of it till you hear
farther, this is the judgment of M^. Cotton, when he, it may be had never
heard of it, or at least wise, when they brought this their bastardly brat to
him, they put another vizard on the face of it: but that you may understand
their way of broaching their abominable errors, it was in dividing those things
the Lord has united in his work of conversion continued, carrying on a Soul
to Heaven in these four Particulars.

First, in dividing between the word and the word, under pretense 1. Dividing
between the Word, and the Word.
of a legal Gospel, persuading the people their Ministers were legal
Preachers, teaching them little better then Popery, and unfit for Gospel
Churches, denying them to be any Ministers of Christ that Preach any
preparation work, by showing men what the Law requires. Here Is nothing says
one of them, but Preaching out of the Law and the Prophets, truly says another
of them I have not heard a pure Gospel Sermon from any of them, but sure they
were both troubled with the Lethargy, or read not the Gospel themselves, for
they may find the Apostles, yea, and Christ himself Preached good Gospel
sure, out of the Law and the Prophets.

Secondly, in separating Christ and his Graces, in manifesting himself to be
in the Soul, and this they say makes much for the 2. Christ and his Graces.
magnifying of Free Grace, and indeed they made it so free, that the soul that
receives it shall never taste any of it by their consent, but remain still a
dry branch as before; these legal Pharisees, says one of them, tell us of a
thing they call inherent grace, and of a man being made a new creature, but I
am sure the best of them go on in their legal duties and performances still,
sorrowing for sin hearing of Sermons, observing duty Morning and Evening, and
many such like matters. Tush man says another of them, you shall hear more
then this, I was discoursing with one of their Scholasticall Preachers
Disciples, a professed convert, and yet when he came to pray, he begged for
forgiveness of his sins, I asked him why he used that vain repetition, since
he did believe he was justified by Christ already, and he made me an answer
not worth repeating, but when I told him God could see no sin in his people,
no more then I could see that which was covered close from my eye sight; he
told me I spoke little less then blasphemy, so ignorant are these men, and
their learned guides also; who persuade them the more they have of the
in-dwelling of the Spirit of Christ, the better they shall be enabled to these
legal duties. Nay, quoth the other, I can tell you more then all this, they
make it an evidence of their good estate, even their sanctification, and yet
these men would make people believe they are against Popery.

By this discourse of theirs, you may see the manner how these Erroneous, and
Heretical persons batter off the fruit from the goodly branches of Christ's
vines and make bare the flourishing trees planted in the house of the Lord, and
yet profess themselves to be Scholars of the upper form, that have learned as
far as their Masters can teach them, but let me tell you friends you will prove
but trewants if you fall thus to Robbing of Orchards, and its an offense far
beyond petty Larceny to rob Christ's Garden, let your pretenees be what they
will: can it possible be for the magnifying of Christ's Grace that the branches
growing upon his root should remain fruitless? no assuredly, herein God is
glorified that his people bring forth much fruit, yet many of these new
Gospellers had another plea, hypocrites have a seeming show of Saints graces by
which they deceive themselves and others; And therefore because Felons and
Traitors coin counterfeit Gold, therefore true Gold should not pass for
current, but the intent of the Author is to prosecute the History, these
errors being consuted already by the able servants of Christ, whom the Lord in
his mercy brought hither for that purpose.

CHAP. XLI. Of the two latter dividing Principles under which these Erronists
fought.
THe third dividing tenent by which these persons prosecuted their errors at
this time, was between the Word of God, 3. The Word, and the spirit.
and the Spirit of God, and here these Sectaries had many pretty knacks to
delude withal, and especially to please the Femall Sex, they told of rare
Revelations of things to come from the spirit (as they say) it was only
devised to weaken the Word of the Lord in the mouth of his Ministers, and
withal to put both ignorant and unlettered Men and Women, in a posture of
Preaching to a multitude, that they might be praised for their able Tongue.
Come along with me says one of them, i will bring you to a Woman that Preaches
batter Gospel then any of your black-coates that have been at the
Ninneversity, a Woman of another kind of spirit, who has had many Revelations
of things to come, and for my part, says he, I had rather hear such a one
that speaks from the mere motion of the spirit, without any study at all,
then any of your learned Scollers, although they may be fuller of Scripture (I)
and admit they may speak by the help of the spirit, yet the other goes beyond
them. G^ntle Reader, think not these things fained, because I name not the
parties, or that here is no witness to prove them, should I so do: neither of
both is the cause I assure you, but being somewhat acquainted with my own
weakness, should the Lord withdraw the light of his word, and also I verily
believe some of them are truly turned again to the truth, the which I wish to
all, yet by relating the story all men may see what a spirit of giddiness they
were given up to, and some of them to strong delusions, even to most horrid and
damnable blasphemies, having itching ears, or rather proud desires to become
Teachers of others, when they grossly erred in the first Principles of Religion
themselves. There was a man in one of the farthest Towns of the Mattacusets
Government, where they had no Ministers for the present, he being much desirous
to show himfelfe some body in talking to as many as he could get to hear him
one the Sabbath day, missing some of his Auditors, he meets with one of them
some few days after, they passing over the water together, where were you
quoth he on the Sabbath day that you were not at the meeting? we had a notable
piece of Prophecy, quoth the man that was missing, who was it that Preached?
The other replying not: his Wife being in presence, answered; it was my
husband, nay wife, quoth he thou shoulds not have told him, teach him to stay
at home another time.

By this and diverse other such like matters, which might be here inserted, you
may see how these Sectaries love the pre-eminence, and for this end seek to
deprive the Ministers of Christ inv^igling as many as they can in the head,
that they take to much upon them (just like the rebellious Korath, Dathan, and
Abiram) scoffing at their Scholler-like way of Preaching, wherein the gross
dissimulation of these erroneous persons has appeared exceedingly, as for
instance first of a Woman, even the grand M^st^is of all the rest, who denied
the Resurrection from the dead she and her consorts mightily railing against
learning, persuading all they could to take heed of being spoiled by it, and in
the mean time, she her self would dispute (forsooth) and to show her skill
that way, here is a falacy quoth she in this syliogisme: as also one of the
Gortonists, as shallow a pated Scholar as my self, far from understanding
Latin, much less any other Language the Scriptures were writ in, yet when he
would hold out some of the best of his false Doctrines, as namely, that there
were no other Devils but wicked men, nor no such thing as sin, Quoth he that
place in the fourth Psalm, where men commonly read, stand in awe and sin not,
in the original it is read stand in awe and miss not. But to go on, at this
time there were many strange Revelations told both of Men and Women, as true
some of them said as the Scripture, so that surely had this Sect gone on
awhile, they would have made a new Bible, and their chief Mistress when she was
shipped for N. England, what will you say quoth she, and it has been revealed
to me that we shall be there in six weeks, and one of the femall Gortonists
said, she was a Proph^tesse, and it was revealed unto her, that she must
prophecy unto the People in the same words the Prophet Ezekiel did, as also a
lusty big man to defend this tenent held forth to his Pastor before the whole
Congregation, that the spirit of Revelation came to him as he was drinking a
pipe of Tobacco.

The fourth dividing way to bring in their Heresies, was to 4. Christ, and his
Ordinances.
devide between Christ and his Ordinances, and here they played their game to
purpose, even to casting down of all Ordinances as carnal, and that because
they were polluted by the Ordinance of man, as some of these Sectaries have
said to the Minister of Christ, you have cast off the cross in Baptism, but
you should do well to cast off Baptism it self; as also for the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, for to make use of Bread, or the juce of a silly Grape to
represent the Body and Blood of Christ, they accounted it as bad as Negromancy
in the Ministers of Christ to pe^forme it. But seeing there will be occasion to
bring in a bedroule of these Blasphemies in the year (43) and (44) take the
less here; only mind that these persons being first bewildred in the denial
of Infants being Baptized, could neither find right faith to be Baptized into,
nor yet any person rightly constituted to Baptize remaining. Seekers they came
to this, but yet here must not be omitted the slights these Erronists had to
shoulder out the Officers Christ has ordained, and set up in his Churches; and
verily in this point they sided directly with the Papist and Prelates, although
in most of the other they went directly out of the way on the other hand.
Ignorance say the Papist is the Mother of devotion, its better say the
Protestant Prelates to have (a blind si^ John) one that cannot tell how to
Preach, provided he will conform to our Ceremonies, than to have one that will
Presch constantly, and not conform also: these Erronist, showing themselves to
be whelps of the same litter, Cry out against a learned Presbitery, as the
only way to captivate liberty, and herein the transformed Devil came to show
his Horns for why, his errors would not take where the people were followers
of their seeing guids, and if it be well noted, here is the Masterpiece of all
their knavery, the which comes in after this manner, The Lording Prelacy,
Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Deanes, etc. Were ordinarily brought up at the
University to learning, and have most tyrannically abused it: usurping over the
People of Christ, and exercised most inhumane and barbarous cruelty upon them;
as also the Presbyterian Kirk by these Provincial Classes, men of learning
having robbed the particular Congregations of their just and lawful
privileges, which Christ has purchased for them. Each Congregation of his
being invested with full power to Administer all the Ordinances he has
ordained, in and toward their own Members; and further learned men in some
places, feeding the people for their Tith-sake in a Parishioniall way, desire
the upholding thereof, lest their fat Benefices should grow lean.

Now the Redemption of the people of Christ out of all these bondages, being
full of difficulty to attain, as is abundantly witnessed in the great hardship
Gods people have undergon in this Wildernesse-worke; as also much more by that
bloody war so long continved in our Native Country, and the two adjacent
Kingdoms. This makes a very fair bottom for those to build upon, who would
have the sluice of authority in the Officers of Christ's Churches plucked up,
that so their errors might flow in like a flood; And therefore they impannell a
Jury of their own Sectaries to pass upon all such as put a higher esteem upon
their Pastors and Teachers (in point of discerning the holy things of God) then
upon other men, who return in their Verdit as finding them guilty of the crime
above expressed, either as party, or privy abetters unto them, upon this the
Vote goes for advancing such men as will let them out line enough for such as
will work without wages, and give to every man liberty to exercise a large
conscience, provided it be his own, and as for authority they would have none
used, as being a thing two opposite to liberty. My friend cast off as much of
thy own power as thou can, and beware of Lording it over Gods Heritage, but
I pray thee let Christ alone with his, which he has given to his Pastors and
Teachers in administering the holy things of God, peculiar to their Office, and
tremble all you Presbyterians, who to please the people prostrate the authority
Christ has put upon the Eldrs of his Churches as Officers, to the resolute
liberty of man: the people may and ought to call them to Office, to the which
Christ has united double honor and authority, and appointed them to be had in
high esteem for their worke-sake, being Ambassadors of Christ Jesus. This may
no man take from them, nor yet they themselves cast off, and yet all this makes
nothing for the Papal, Prelaticall, Classical or Parishionall authority of
the Presb^tery, for it holds only in their ruling well, while they rule for
Christ, they must and shall have the power he has put Four score Errors
derived from these four heads, and spread abroad in N. England*
upon their Office. From these four dividing Tenants by the cunning art of
these deceivers, were forescore gross errors broached secretly, sliding in
the dark like the Plague, proving very infectious to some of the Churches of
CHRIST in their Members.

CHAP. LXII. Of sad effects of the pitiful and erroneous Doctrines broached by
the Sectuaries.
THe number of these infectious persons increasing now, having drawn a great
party on their side, and some considerable persons they grow bold, and dare
question the sound and whole some truths delivered in public by the Ministers
of Christ. Their Church-meetings are full of Disputes in points of difference,
and their love. Feasts are not free from spots, in their Courts of civil
Justice some men utter their Speeches in matters of Religion very ambiguously,
and among all sorts of persons a great talk of new light, but verily it proved
but old darkness, such as sometime over-shadowed the City of Munster; But
blessed be the Lord Christ, who now declared himself to be a help at hand for
his poor New England Churches, being now in their infancy, whose condition at
present was very dolorous, and full of difficulties, insomuch that the better
part of this new transported people stood still many of them gazing one upon
another, like Sheep let loose to feed on fresh pasture, being stopped and
startled in their course by a Kennell of devouring Wolves. The weaker sort
wavered much, and such as were more grown Christians hardly durst discover the
truth they held one unto another, the fogs of error increasing the bright
beams of the glorious Gospel of our Lord Christ in the Mouth of his Ministers
could not be discerned through this thick mist by many, and that sweet
refreshing warmth that was formerly felt from the spirits influence, was now
turned (in these Erronists) to a hot inflammation of their own conceited
Revelations, ulcerating and bringing little less then frenzy or madness to
the patient, the Congregation of the people of God began to be forsaken, and
the weaker Sex prevailed so far, that they set up a Priest of their own
Profession and Sex, who was much thronged after, abominably wresting the
Scriptures to their own destruction: this Master*piece of Women's wit, drew many
Disciples after her, and to that end boldly insinuated her self into the
favor of none of the meanest, being also backed with the Sorcery of a second,
who had much converse with the Devil by her own confession, and did, to the
admiration of those that heard her, utter many speeches in the Latin Tongue,
as it were in a trance, this Woman was wonted to give drinks to other Women to
cause them to conceive, how they wrought I know not, but sure there were
Monsters borne not long after, as you shall hear in the following History.

Oh ye New England Men and Women, who has bewitched you that you should not
obey the truth? And indeed Satan, to make sure work with semblance of
Preaching the Doctrine of Free-grce by his instruments, makes show of
our-bidding all the Orthodox, and godly Ministers in the Country, pretending
their Preaching to be but a Covenant of works, supposing by this means to
silence them without a Bishop, and lest the civil power should stand up for
their aid, they threaten them with the high displeasure of Christ for
persecuting his people, which as they said these erroneous persons with their
new light, were the only Men and Women that were pure Gospel Preachers. Thus
the poor people of Christ, who kept close to his ancient truths environed with
many straites, having expended their Estates to voyage far through the
perilous Seas, that their eyes might behold their Teachers, and that they
might enjoy the protection of a godly civil Government, began to deem
themselves in a more dolorous condition then when they were in the Commissaries
Court, and Prelates Prisons, the hideous waves in which their brittle Barques
were sometimes covered, as they passed hither, were nothing so terrible in the
apprehension of some as was this flood of errors violently beating against the
banks of Church and civil Government, the wants of this Wilderness, and
pinching penury in miss of Bread, put them to no such pain by gnawing on
their empty stomachs, with fear of famishing, as did the miss of the
Administration of Christ in his Word and Ordinances, leaving the soul in a
languishing condition for want of a continual supply of Christ in his Graces.

CHAP. LXIII. Of the sorrowful condition of the people of Christ, when they
were incountred with these erronists at their first landing.
BUt to end this dismal year of sixteen hundred thirty six, take here the
sorrowful complaint of a poor Soul in miss of its expectation at landing,
who being incountered with some of these Erronists at his first landing, when
he saw that good old way of Christ rejected by them, and he could not skill in
that new light, which was the common theme of every man's Discourse, he
berooke him to a narrow Indian path, in which his serious Meditations soon led
him, where none but senseless Trees and eccohing Rocks make answer to his
heart-easeing moan. Oh quoth he where am I become, is this the place where
these Reverend Preachers are fled, that Christ was pleased to make use of to
rouse up his rich graces in many a drooping soul; here have I met with some
that tell me, I must take a naked Christ. Oh, woe is me if Christ be naked to
me, wherewith shall I be clothed, but me thinks I most wonder they tell me of
casting of all godly sorrow for sin as unbeseeming a Soul, that is united to
Christ by Faith, and there was a little nimbled tongued Woman among them, who
said she could bring me acquainted with one of her own Sex that would show me a
way, if I could attain it, even Revelations, full of such ravishing joy that I
should never have cause to be sorry for sin, so long as I live, and as for
her part she had attained it already: a company of legal Professors, quoth
she lie poring on the Law which Christ has abolished, and when you break it
then you break your joy, and now no way will serve your turn, but a deep
sorrow. These and diverse other expressions intimate unto men, that here I shall
find little increase in the Graces of Christ, through the hearing of his word
Preached, and other of his blessed Ordinances. Oh cunning Devil, the Lord
Christ rebuke thee, that under pretense of a free and ample Gospel shuts out
the Soul from partaking with the Divine Nature of Christ, in that mystical
Union of his Blessed Spirit creating, and continuing his Graces in the Soul:
my dear Christ, it was thy work that moved me hither to come, hoping to find
thy powerful presence in the Preaching of the Word, although administered by
sorry men, subject to like infirmities with others of Gods people, and also by
the glass of the Law, to have my sinful corrupt nature discovered daily more
and more, and my utter inabillity of any thing that is good, magnifying hereby
the free grace of Christ; who of his good will and pleasure works in us to
will, and to do working all our works in us, and for us.

But here they tell me of a naked Christ, what is the whole life of a Christian
upon this Earth? But through the power of Christ to die to sin, and live to
holiness and righteousness, and for that end to be diligent in the use of
means: at the uttering of this word he starts up from the green bed of his
complaint, with resolution to hear some one of these able Ministers Preach
(whom report had so valued) before his will should make choice of any one
principle, though of crossing the broad Seas back again, then turning his
face to the Sun, he steered his course toward the next Town, and after some
small travel ^^ee came to a large plain, no sooner was he entered thereon, but
hearing the found of a Drum he was directed toward it by a broad b^aten way,
following this rode he demands of the next man he met what the signal of the
Drum meant, the reply was made they had as yet no Bell to call men to meeting;
and therefore made use of a Drum, who is it, quoth he, Lectures at this Town.
The other replies, I see you are a stranger, new come over, seeing you know not
the man, it is one Mr. Shepherd, verily quoth the other you hit the right, I
am new come over indeed, and have been told since I came most of your Ministers
are legal Preachers, only if I mistake not they told me this man Preached a
finer covenant of works then the other, but however, I shall make what have I
can to hear him. Fare you well, then hasting thither he croudeth through the
thickest, where having stayed while the glass was turned up twice, the man was
metamorphosed, and was feign to hang down the head often, least his watery eyes
should blab abroad the secret conjunction of his affections, his heart crying
loud to the Lords ecchoing answer, to his blessed spirit, that caused the
Speech of a poor weak pale complectioned man to take such impression in his
soul at present, by applying the word so aptly, as if he had been his Privy
Counselor, clearing Christ's work of grace in the soul from all those false
Doctrines, which the erroneous party had afrighted him withal, and now he
resolves (the Lord willing) to live and die with the Ministers of New England:
whom he now saw the Lord had not only made zealous to stand for the truth of
his Discipline, but also of the Doctrine, and not to give ground one inch.

CHAP. XLIIII. The Congregationall Churches of Christ are neither favorers of
sinful opinions* nor the Lords over any, or many Churches, or men's Consciences.
ANd here Christian Reader the Author according to his former practice, must
mind thee of the admirable providence of Christ toward his New England
Churches, in preserving them from these erroneous spirits, that have hitherto
in all places dogged the sincere servants of Christ, when ever they have set
upon a through Reformation, as stories do abundantly testify, which thing the
reverend Calvine and diverse others, have declared. But seeing the boasting
Prelates in these times are ready to say their Lordly power kept these errors
under, its plain otherwise: for Satan saw while people were under their yoke
of humane inventions, they were far enough from exalting the Kingdom of
Christ; And therefore he reserved these errors, for his last shifts, and
further you shall see in the following story that the Lord Christ reserved this
honor for those, whose love he had enlarged to follow him in a dezart
wilderness, even with the sharp sword of the Word, timely to cut off the
heads of this Hidra; but yet there are two sorts of persons in our Native
Country, whom the Elders and Brethren here do highly honor in Christ, and
prefer before themselves, namely the godly Prebyterian party, and the
Congregationall sincere servants of Christ, both which the Author could wish,
(that with bowels of compassion, sweet simpathising affection of Brethren knit
together in that transcendent love of Christ, which couples all his distanced
flocks together) they would seriously ponder this History, which through the
Authors weakness wants much of measure, but nothing of the truth of things,
so far as a shallow capacity can reach. Of the first sort named, I could wish
the Reverend Mr. Ruterford, Mr. Bail, Mr. Rathbone, Mr. Paget, Mr. Ball, etc.
would but inform themselves further by the truth of this History, supposing
they cannot choose but in a good measure be satisfied already with the
pacificatory and meek answers of as many Reverend and godly Elders of ours.

Now that I would they should take notice of is, that the Churches of Christ in
New England, and their Officers have hitherto been so far from embracing the
erroneous Doctrines of these times, that through the powers of Christ they have
valiantly defended the truth, and cut down all deceiveable Doctrine; the like
has not been done for many ages heretofore. Reverend and beloved in Christ,
could your eyes but behold the efficacy of loving counsel in the Communion of
congregationall Churches, and the reverend respect, honor and love, given to
all Teaching Elders, charity commands me to think you would never stand for
Classical injunctions any more, neither Diocesan, nor Provincial authority
can possible reach so far as this royal Law of love in communion of Churches:
verily its more universal then the Papal power, and assuredly the days are
at hand, wherein both Jew and Gentile Churches shall exercise this old Model
of Church Government, and send their Church salutations and admonitions from
one end of the World unto another, when the Kingdoms of the Earth are become
our Lord Christ's; Then shall the exhortation of one Church to another prevail
more to Reformation, then all the thundering Bulls, excomunicating Lordly
censures, and shameful penalties of all the Lording Churches in the World, and
such shall be, and is the efficacy of this entire love one to another, that the
withdrawing of any one Church of Christ, according to the Rule of the word from
those that walk inordinatly, will be more terrible to the Church or Churches
so forsaken, then an Army with Banners: yea, and it may be added, because
civil Government is like to turn nurse in more places then one, this royal
Law of love shall become the Law of Nations, and none will suffer their
subjects to rebel against it; but to our beloved brethren in England on the
other hand, the Reverend Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Goodwin etc.

This seems you have apprehended our Churches and civil Government, to be
too strict in dealing with persons for their sinful opinions, I wish the
offenders be none of your intelligencers, who to be sure will make the worst of
things, I know you are in charity with us; And therefore a few words will
satisfy, which I hope you want not from your good friends our Reverend Elders,
who could wish you as much happiness as our selves to expel error before it
grew to that height to cry down the sound and wholesome truths: casting dirt
on our Orthodox and godly Ministry, I wish you open your mouths wide enough to
be filled with this blessing, the Lord has done great, and unexpected things
for you, and why not this? one and twenty years experience has taught us that
Errors and Heresies are not broached, and held out here by tender consciences,
such as are weak in the Faith, but by such as think them Scholars of the upper
form, such as would teach the most ablest Christian among us another Gospel,
and further we find our Erronist wanting a common enemy to contend withal, as
you have fallen foul of our godly Magistrates and Ministers, and will not
suffer us quietly to enjoy the Ordinance of Christ, for which we hither cam^,
buzzing our people in the ear with a thing they call liberty, which when any
have tasted a smack of, they can no more endure to hear of a Synod or gathering
together of able, and Orthodox Christians, nor yet of communion of Churches,
but would be independent to purpose, and as for civil Government they deem
Religion to be a thing beyond their Sphere.

CHAP. XLV. Of the civil Government in N. England, and their nurture of the
people upon their tender knees.
THe vernall of the year 1637. being now in his prime, and as the season of
the year grew hotter, so the minds of many were hot in the eager pursuit of
their self conceited opinions, and verily had not authority stepped in, it was
much to be doubted they would have proceeded from words to blows, great hold
and keep there was about choice of Magistrates this year, the choice being
retarded by a paper called a Petition, but indeed a mere device to hinder the
election, till the erroneous party were strengthened, their number increasing
daily, but the Lord Christ graciously providing for the peace of his people
toward the end of the day the honored John Winthrope Esquire, was chosen
Governor, and Thomas Dudly Esquire. Deputy Governor: the number of freemen added
this year was about. 1 25.

Here according to promise the Reader shall have an accoumpt of the civil
Government of this little Commonwealth, as their whole aim in their removal
from their Native Country, was to enjoy the liberties of the Gospel of Christ,
so in serving up civil Government, they daily direct their choice to make use
of such men as mostly endeavor to keep the truths of Christ pure and
unpsotted, and assuredly they can digest any wrongs or injuries done them in
their estates, or trade, better then the wresting of their right in the
freedom of the Gospel, out of their hands, and this the Erronist knowing
right well (to save their heads whole) persuade men it is not for civil
Government to meddle with matters of Religion; and also to help out with their
damnable Doctrines, they report it in all places, where they be come, that New
England Government does persecute the people and Churches of Christ; which to
speak truth they have hitherto been so far from, that they have endeavored
to expel all such beasts of prey, (who will not be reclaimed) that here might
be none left to hurt or destroy in all Gods holy Mountain, and therefore are
ready to put the Churches of Christ in mind of their duty herein; yea, and
sometimes going before them in their civil censures that they may not only
profess the truth, but also hate every false way, not that they would compel
men to believe by the power of the Sword, but to endeavor all may answer their
profession; whether in Courch Covenant or otherwise, by knowing they bear not
the Sword in vain. Neither do they exercise civil power to bring all under
their obedience to a uniformity in every poyne of Religion, but to keep them
in the unity of the spirit, and the bond of peace, nor yet have they ever mixed
their civil powers with the authority peculiarly given by Christ to his
Churches and Officers of them, but from time to time have labored to uphold
their privileges, and only communion one with another.

The chief Court or supreme power of this little Commonwealth, consists of a
mixed company, part Aristocracy, and part Democracy of Magistrates, that are
yearly chosen by the major Vote of the whole body of the Freemen throughout
the Country; and Deputies chosen by the several Towns, they have hitherto had
about 12. or 13. Magistrates in the Colony of the Mattacusets, the other
Colonies have not above five or six, they have hitherto been Volunteers,
governing without pay from the people, only the Governor of the Mattacusets
has some years 100 l. allowed him, and some years less, many of the
Magistrates are already remembered, yet with some of the first came hither Mr.
Simon Brodestreet, in this short Meeter is he remembered.

NOw Simon young, step in among, these worthies take thy place:
All day to toil in vinyard, while Christ thee upholds with grace;
Thee wisdom grave betime he gave, and tongue to utter it,
That thou might be a blessing free, and for this calling fit.
Thy counsel well, advised do tell, with words ordered complete,
Thy memory, does amplify, meeting with matters great.
Broad liberty, do thou deny, Brodstreet Christ would thee have,
For's truth contend, strong reason spend, it from aspersion save.
He furnished thee, with these gifts free, to last he must them make,
Still adding more, to thy old store, till he thee to him take.
The Lord was pleased to furnish these his people with some able instruments in
most of their Towns, that were skilled in Commonwealth work, out of which
they chose their Deputies, whose number was ordinarily between 30. and 40. some
of them there will be occasion to speak of among their Military Men, but see
here the Wonder-working Providence of Sions Savior, appears much in gathering
together stones to build up the walls of Jerusalem (that his Sion may be
surrounded with Bulworkes and Towers) with a whispering word in the ears of
his servants, he crosses the Angles of England from Cornwall to Kent, from
Dover to Barwick, not leaving out Scotland and Wales; Wise men are persuaded to
the work without arguing like Elisba, when Elias cast his mantle on him, so
these men make no stop, but say suffer me only to sell my inheritance, and I
will away for New England. And now I could wish our Brethren in England would
not be angry with us for making such have. Brethren you know how the case stood
with our Ministers, as it was with Gideon, who could thresh out no Corn, but
he must do it secretly, to hide it from the Midianites, who spread the Land
like Grasshoppers, no more could they thresh and clean up any Wheat for the
Lords Garner, but the Prelates would presently be upon their backs, and plow
long furrows there, and you may believe it, if you will (for it is certain)
many, had not this little number gone forth to blow their Trumpets, and break
their Pitchers, making the brightness of their Lamps appear, surely the host
of the Midianites had never been put to flight, and if still any of our
Brethren shall contend with us, we answer with Gideon, the Lord has delivered
into your hands the chief Princes of Midian, and what were we able to do in
comparison of you; yet shall we not cease to follow on the work of
Reformation, although weak and faint, till the Lord be pleased to free his
Israel from all their enemies; and verily England has not wanted the Prayers
of the poor people of Christ here. And also some of our chief helps both for
Church-worke, Military and common-wealth-worke; yet through the Lords mercy, we
still retain among our Democracy the godly Captain William Hathorn, whom the
Lord has endued with a quick apprehension, strong memory, and rhetoric,
volubillity of speech, which has caused the people to make use of him often in
public service, especially when they have had to do with any foreign
Government, Mr. Nathaniel Duncan learned in the Latin and French tongue, a
very good accountant. Wherefore he is called to the place of Auditor General
for the County. Mr. John Glovar a man strong for the truth, a plain sincere
godly man, and of good abilities. Captain Daniel Gogkin, who was drawn hither
from Virginia, by having his affection strongly set on the truths of Christ,
and his pure Ordinances; being endued by the Lord with good understanding
Captain William Tinge, sometime Treasurour for the County, but being absent
for some space of time in England, Mr. Richard Russell was chosen in his room,
Mr. Edward Rawson a young man, yet employed in Commonwealth affairs a long
time, being well beloved of the inhabitants of Newbery, having had a large hand
in her Foundation; but of late he being of a ripe capacity, a good yeoman and
eloquent inditer, has been chosen Secretary for the Country, Mr. William
Hubbard of Iphshwich, a learned man, being well read in state matters: of a
very affable and humble behavior; who has expended much of his Estate to
help on this work; although he be slow of speech, yet is he down right for
the business, Captain Vmphry Atherton, one of a cheerful spirit, and entire
for the County Mr. Edward Jackson, one who cannot endure to s^e the truths of
Christ trampled under foot by the erroneous party, Eleazar Lusher one of the
right stamp, and pure mettle, a gracious, humble and heavenly minded man Mr.
Joseph Hill, a man active for to bring the Laws of the County in order, Mr.
Whipple, one whose godly sincerity is much approved, Mr. Francis Norton, one of
a cheerful spirit, and full of love to the truth, Mr. Robert Pain, a right
godly man, and one whose estate has help on well with the work of this
little Commonwealth, Mr. William Torry a good penman and skild in the Latin
tongue, usually Clarke of the Deputies, the Survayor General of the Armies of
the Country, John Johnson, of an undanted spirit, Mr. William Parker, a man of
a pregnant understanding, and very useful in his place. Many more would be
named, but for tediousness, neither will it please the men more to be named,
then not, for all are very willing to acknowledge their inability for the
work, and the best are not without many imperfections.

The Authors end in naming some few is for none other end, but to make good the
title of this Book and to encourage all the servants of Christ for time to come
wholely to rely upon him, when they go about any difficult work, which may tend
to the glory of his Name. Who could have told these men, being scattered abroad
throughout the Island of Great Britain, they should meet on a Wilderness
nine hundred Leagues remote, and there keep Court together to study the
preservation of Christ's poor scattered flocks? nay brethren, when you first
took book in hand to learn your Letters, you would have been very dull pates,
but for this work; assuredly, how you came by large inheritances, some of you,
and estates of hundreds, and thousands, your selves best know, but believe it,
the Lord intended it for this very work, The Earth is the Lords, and the
fullness of it, then let none of the people of Christ mourn that they have
spent their wealth in this Wilderness, if it have help on the work, rather
rejoice that Christ has betrusted thee to be Steward for the King of Kings,
and that in so noble an achievement the worthiest work that the memory of our
selves, and our forefathers can reach unto.

And brethren, as for the good parts and gifts the Author has commended you
for, but for the edifying of the body of Christ, and assisting his people in
this work you had been empty of all good.

And now seeing it is the opinion of many in these days of Reformation, that
all sorts of Sectaries (that acknowledge a Christ) should be tolerated by
civil Government, except Papist, and this Government has hitherto, and is for
future time resolved to practice otherwise (the Lord assisting) having met
already with more blasphemous Sectaries, then are Papists; wherefore it will
not be amiss if our Countrymen be acquainted with the one and twenty years
experience of this Wilderness work, in point of Government. First, it is
their judgment, and that from Scripture taught them, that those, who are chose
to place of government, must be men truly fearing God, wise and learned in the
truths of Christ, (if so) as hitherto it has been New Englands practice, then
surely such will be utterly unfit to tolerate all sorts of Sectaries, as
because they have taken up Joshuas resolution, to serve the Lord, and a man
cannot serve two Masters, much less many Masters; Then surely such as would
have all sorts of sinful opinions upheld by the civil government, must be
sure to make choice of the most Atheistical persons they can find to govern,
such as are right Gallios: for N. E. has found by experience that every man
will most favor his own way of Profession, and labor tooth and nail to
maintain it, and if any have complied with other that have been of a contrary
sinful opinion to their own, it has been, because they would have their own
escape scot free, but assuredly the Lord Christ will allow of no such ways for
the favoring the professors of his truths, nor may any Magistrate do evil
that good may come of it, in favoring dangerous and deceiveable doctrines,
that others may favor the true servants of Christ, neither is there any such
need, for it is their honors (if the will of God be so) to suffer, nor can the
people of N. England (I mean the better part) be persuaded to set up any other
to govern, but such as are zealous for the maintenance of the truths of
Christ; yet of late there is a buzzing noise, as if it were injury to the
Churches for civil power to meddle in matters of Religion, but to be sure there
are many that strive for a Toleration, yet the people of Christ, who are the
natural Mothers of this Government, resolve never to see their living child so
divided, looking at such a government to be no better to them, a living child
divided in twain; and therefore desires their loving Countrymen to bear with
them in this point, and if any notwithstanding shall force it to be so, we
shall show our natural affection, and leave all to them, choosing rather to
dwell on the backside of this Desert (a place as yet unaccessible) knowing
assuredly our God will appear for our deliverance. Yet let them also know the
Soldiers of Christ in N E. are not of such a pusillanimous spirit, but resolve
as that valiant Jeptha did to keep in possession, the Towns his God had given
them, so we are resolved (the Lord willing) to keep the government our God
has given us, and for witness he has so done, let this History manifest:
for we chose not the place for the Land, but for the government, that our Lord
Christ might reign over us, both in Churches and Commonwealth, and although
the Lord have been pleased by an extraordinary blessing upon his peoples
industry to make the place fruitful (as at this day indeed it is) yet all may
know the land in it self is very sterrill, but the upholding of the truths of
Christ, is chief cause why many have hitherto come: and further if the
servants of Christ be not much mistaken, the downfall of Antichrist is at hand,
and then the Kingdom of the Earth shall become the Kingdom of our Lord Christ
in a more peculiar manner, then now they are, and surely godly civil
government shall have a great share in that work, for they are exhorted to
fill her double of the Cup, she has given to them; and also know our
Magistrates, being conscious of ruling for Christ, dare not admit of any
bastardly brood to be nursed up upon their tender knees, neither will any
Christian of a sound judgment vote for any, but such as earnesty contend for
the Faith, although the increase of Trade, and traffic may be a great
inducement to some.

VVonder-working PROVIDENCE OF SIONS SAVIOVR, IN NEW ENGLAND.
CHAP. I. The beginning of the relation of the Pequot war, and the great
straites these wandering Jacobites were in.
THe great Jehovah, minding to manifest the multitude of his Mercies to the
wendering Jacobites, and make an introduction to his following wonders, causes
the dark clouds of calamities to gather about them, pres^ging some terrible
tempest to follow, with eyes full of anguish, they face to the right, upon the
damnable Doctrines, as so many dreadful Engines set by Satan to entrap their
poor souls; Then casting forth a left hand look, the labor and wants
accompaning a Desert, and terrible Wilderness affright them, their memories
minding them of their former plenty; It much aggravated the present misery,
when with thoughts of retreating, they turn their backs about the experienced
encumbrances, and deep distresses of a dangerous Ocean hinders their thoughts
of flight, besides the stern look of the Lordly Prelates: which would give
them a welcome home in a famishing prison. Then purposing to put on more
stronger resolution, facing to the Front, behold a Messenger with sorrowful
tidings from their fellow brethren, that inhabited the banks of the River
Canectico, who having audience, informs them of the great insolency, and
cruel murders committed by a barbarous and bloody people called Peaquods,
upon the bodies of their indeared friends, these savage Indians lying to the
South-west of the Mattacusets, were more warlike then their Neighboring
Nations, the Narrowganzet or Niantick Indians; although they exceeded them in
number, also Mawhiggins (who were the best friends of the English, and a chief
isntrumental means of their sitting down there) stood much in fear of these
Peaquods, which were big, swollen with pride at this time; facing the English
Fort built on the mouth of the River in their large Cannowes, with their Bows
and long Shafts, the English being then but weak in number and provision, were
unable to manage the war against so numerous a company, being above thirty to
one, yet their desires being beyond their means, they made some shot at them,
forcing them to have away faster then they willingly would. These Indians
trusting in their great Troops, having feasted their corpse in a ravening
manner, and leaving their fragments for their Sqawes, they sound an alarm with
a sull mouth, and lumbring voice, and soon gather together without press or
pay, their quarrel being as ancient as Adams time, propagated from that old
enmity between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, who was
the grand signor of this war in hand, and would very gladly have given them a
large Commission, had not his own power been limited, neither could he
animate them so much as to take off the ghastly look of that King of terror,
yet however at his command they arm themselves: casting their qu^ver at their
backs with Bows ready bent, they troop up some of them, being extraordinarily
armed with Guns, which they purchased from the Dutch (who had assuredly paid
dear for this their courteous humor, not long since, had not some English
Volunteers rescued them from the Indians hands) the most of them were armed
also with a small Hatchet on a long handle, they had a small number of
Mawhawkes, Hammers, which are made of stone, having a long pike on the one
side, and a hole in the handle, which they tie about their wrists, they need
not provisions follow their Camp; because they are continually at home, but for
their mats to shelter them from Ruin or Snow, the Woods are as welcome to
them as their Wigwams, sire they can make in all places by chafing two sticks
together. Their food is ready dressed at all times parching Indian Come in their
fire they pound it to meal, and with four or five spoonful of it cast into
their mouths, and a sup or two of water, which they take up with a leaf of a
Tree, this is their common repast, and indeed their chief viaticum. Thus
furnished for the war they troop away without any goodly equ^page to effect, as
they suppose, some great design, but within some few Miles of the Town of
Hartford, they were discovered by one of the English, who having with him a
good Horse, hastens away to give intelligence of their approach, and by the way
meeting with four or five persons, he advises them to haste away with all
speed, for the Peaquods were at hand, the weaker Se^ among them, being at this
time not so credulous as they should have been, began to dispute the case with
him, demanding what Peaquods they were, and questioning how they should come
there; The horseman deeming it now no time for words, when the battle followed
him so hard at the heels, rod on his way, and soon after the sudden approach
of the Indians forced them with fear to Seal to the truth of this evil
tidings, and some of them with their dearest blood; three Woemen-kinde they
caught, and carried away, but one of them being more fearful of their cruel
usage, afterward then of the loss of he^ life at present, being borne away to
the thickest of the company, resisted so stoutly with scratching and biting,
that the Indian, exasperated therewith, cast her down on the Earth, and beat
out her brains with his Hatchet, the other two maids they led away and
returned, their Commission reaching no farther at present, having taken these
two prisoners they did not offer to abuse their persons, as was verily deemed
they would, questioned them with such broken English, as some of them could
speak, to know whether they could make Gunpowder. Which when they understood
they could not do, their prize proved nothing so precious a Pearl in their
eyes as before; for seeing they exceeded not their own Squawes in Art, their
own thoughts informed them they would fall abundantly short in industry, and
as for beauty they esteem black beyond any color.

Wherefore their Sqawes use that sinful art of painting their Faces in the
hollow of their Eyes and Nose, with a shining black, out of which their tip of
their Nose appears very deformed, and their cheek bone, being of a lighter
swart black, on which they have a blew cross died very deep.

This is the beauty esteemed by them, but yet their pride was much increased by
this hostile Act of theirs, and the English were more and more contemned of
them, notwithstanding the Dutch, who traded with these Indians, procured the
Maids liberty again.

CHAP. II. Of the courageous resolutions, the Lord endued these his People
withal being environed with many deep distresses.
AFter this Message delivered, these brood of Travilers being almost Non-plus't
in their grave and sollid Counsels; deem it now high time to follow their old
way, of making their complaint to the supreme judge of all the World, by way
of Petition, who they knew right well, stood not as an idle spectator beholding
his peoples Ruth, and their Enemies rage; But as an Actor in all actions to
bring to naught the desires of the wicked, but period to their power, divert
their strokes from his, to their own heads, bring glory to his Name, and good
to his people from their most wicked malignity, having also the ordering of
every weapon in its first produce, guiding every shaft that flies, leading each
bullet to his place of settling, and Weapon to the wound it makes; yet he most
righteous and holy in all his actions to this great Lord Peramount, had these
poor afflicted people access through the intercession of their Lord Christ,
whose work (though very weak to perform) they were now about, wherefore
casting themselves down at his feet in the sense of their own unworthiness,
that desire him to do his own work in them, and for them, that the
Mountains in the way of Zerubbabil may become a plain, and then laying open
the great straites they were in to him, who knew them far better then
themselves, they had this answer returned them, which if men dare deny, the
Lord from Heaven has, and shall further witness it; But before it be
declared, let all men lay down their interest they suppose they may have in
procuring it, both English and others, that the glory of our Lord Christ may
appear in its splendour, to the danting of every proud hear, and for the
perpetual encouragement of all the Soldiers of Christ, even the meanest in
his Armies: for the day of his high Power is come, yea; his appointed time to
have mercy upon Sion is at hand, all you whose eyes of pity so see her in the
dust, stream down with pear like drops of compassion, a little mixture of the
unconceive^ble joy for the glorious work of Christ.

Now, now; I now in hand for the exalting of his glorious Kingdom, in
preparing his Churches for himself, and with his own blessed hands wiping away
the tears that trickel down her cheeks, drying her dankish eyes, and hushing
her sorrowful sobs in his sweet bosom. This rightly believed, and meeting in
the soul of any poor Christian, will make the narrow affections of his body
too little to contain the present apprehensions of the Soul; And therefore
wanting a vacuum to contain the strength of this new Wine, wonder not if it
vent if it self with swift thrilling tears from the most tender part of the
vessel. And here the Author must needs entreat the charitable Reader to
enlarge in the Closset of his own heart, for his folly he confesses in meddling
so meanly with such weighty matters, being blinded by eager affection, he lost
the fight of his great inability to the work. When he first set Pen to Paper,
as the Lord surrounded his chosen Israel with dangers deep to make his
miraculous deliverance famous throughout, and to the end of the World, so here
behold the Lord Christ, having egged a small handful of his people forth in a
forlorn Wilderness, stripping them naked from all humane helps, plunging them
in a gulf of miseries, that they may swim for their lives through the Ocean of
his Mercies, and land themselves safe in the arms of his compassion.

CHAP. III. Of the Lords great deliverance of his New England People, from the
floods of Errors that were bursting in among them.
AS for the great Mountain of proud erroneous judgment on your right hand,
the prayer of Faith shall remove them, and cast them into the depth of the Sea,
and for the strengthening of your faith herein; because the Lord will have you
depend on him in the use of his means, not miracle, he has purposely pitched
out for this very work, some of his most orthodox servants, and chief
Champions of his truth, able through his mercy to weld that bright Weapon of
his Word prepared by the spirit for this purpose, to bring to the block these
Traitors to his truths one by one, and behead them before your eyes, and for
this very end they are to gather together as one Man in a Synodicall way, with
a decisive power to undo all the cunning twisted knots of Satan's Malignity to
the truths of Christ, opening the Scriptures by the power of his spirit,
clearing Scripture by Scripture, that nothing but the pure Word of God may take
place, and that you may assuredly believe the Lord has purposely called his
Servants, and Soldiers to this place by his Providence to cut off this cursed
spirit of Errors and Heresies, which has but at first dogged all Reformed
Churches of Christ. There are for your further aid herein many more of these
sincere Soldiers floating upon the great Ocean toward you, who will be with
you before this Synod is set, that you may declare it in the Ears of all
posterity, to be the very Finger of God in catching the proud in their own
craftiness, who had hatched their devices, thus to cast all the Ministers of
Christ, except some one or two, under this censure of being prejudiced against
their persons, and for the little remnant to labor with flattery to blind
their eyes, that at least they might not be against them; Seeing they could not
procure them to take their part, (to be sure when the grossness of their
Errors were made known, they would not) by this means having their hopes
exalted (in their own apprehensions at least) to gain the most of the people
on their side.

The Lord casts them down from the proud Pinnacle of their Machiavilian Plot,
by bringing in more men of courage uninterested: yea, unknown to most of their
persons, but for their errors, as strong to confute them as any, and more fit
to wipe off the fi^me from the eyes of some of their brethren, which these
Erronists by their Syccophancy had clouded.

The time for the meeting of this Synod was to be in the seventh month
following, commonly called September, the civil government well approving of
their desires herein, were very willing to further them all they could, and in
the (...) time it was the work of these valiant of the Lord, to search out,
not for men and Women's persons, but their errors, which they gathered up from
all parts, willing all that would or could defend them to use their best
means, like as John when he was to execute the judgments of the Lord upon
Ahabs bloody household, would have had his servants defend their Masters
Children if they could, only you must understand there was but 70. Sons, and
here was 80. Errors, of which you shall further hear when the time comes.

CHAP. IV. Of the abundant mercies of Christ in providing liberal supply for
his New England People, in regard of their outward man, Food, Raiment and all
other necessaries and conveniences.
NOw for the hardships on the left hand, they had as good an answer as in the
former; their Christ had not saved their lives from the raging Seas to slay
them in the Wilderness with Famine; your life is much more precious in the
eyes of the Lord then food, and your bodies then raiment: yea, the Lord of
Heaven, who has honored you so far as to employ you in this glorious work of
his, knows you must have these things, and it was not you, dear hearts, that
chose this place, but the Lord, as seeing it most fit to do his work in,
knowing that had you met with a Rich Land filled with all plenty, your heart
would have been taken off this work, which he must have done. But to
strengthen your Faith in this point also, you shall see he who commanded the
Fruits to spring out of the Earth, when none were, can much more cause this
corner of the Earth to be fruitful to you, and this you shall attain by
means, although he have caused the Fowls of the Air, and Grass of the
Field to depend upon him in a more immediate manner, yet you has he taught to
Sow, Reap, carry into Barnes, and Spin, and indeed herein the Lord has
answered his people abundantly to the wonder of all that see or hear of it; And
that whereas at their (...) coming it was a rare matter for a man to have
four or five Acres of Corn, now many have four or five score, and to prevent
men from Sacrificing to their Nets, the Lord has taught them to labor with
more ease: to great admiration also enlarged it, for it was with sore labor
that on man could Plane, and tend four Acres of Indians Grain, and now with
two Oxen he can Plant and tend 30. B sides the Lord has of late altered the
very course of the Heavens in the season of the weather, that all kind of
grain grows much better then heretofore; Insomuch that Marchandizing being
stopped at present, they begin question, what to do with their Corn.

CHAP. V. Of the wonderful deliverance wrought by the Lord Christ, for his
poor New England Churches, in freing them from the fear of their Malignant
adversaries, who forced, them to this Wilderness.
ANd now to the third and great distress, which lay behind them by reason of
their back friends, the Lording Bishops, and other Malignant adversaries, being
daily exasperated against them, and in especial at this time by one Merton,
who named himself the Host of Merrimount, who wanted not malice, could he
possible have attained means to effect it; But the Lord Christ prevented both
him and his Masters, whom with slattery he sought to please with scurrillous
deriding the servants of Christ, to bring them into contempt, yet the Lord
prevented all, and delivered this wretched fellow into his peoples hands again
after all this, who dealt as favorably with him as David did with Shimmei.
Besides this, the evil usage that many of the beloved servants of Christ had
from the hands of those in office at their departure, declared plainly, that
there were some, who would willingly have pursued them to bring them under
bondage again, herein their answer was that they should stand still, and see
the salvation of the Lord, who was now resolved to fight for them against his
and their implacable enemies; although more mighty than they: and indeed all
means of resistance in the hand of man being so small, that it could not
possible be discerned by any morcall eye; yet will the Lord work by means and
not by miracle; when the Lord called forth Joshua to fight with Amaleck, his
Moses must be in the Mount at Prayers; seeing this answer deeply concerns the
dearly beloved of our Lord Christ remaining in England, let them listen to the
answer.

Also how came it to pass that the Lord put it into your hearts to set upon a
Reformation, was it not by prayer attained? You are not excluded, although the
Churches of Christ here are for the present in the Mount, and you in the Valley
fighting, yet surely they had need of help to hold up their hands, whereas
the nerenesse of the danger to you in the enemies overcoming, is a great motive
to keep up yours stedy, yet may you say rightly to the Churches of Christ
here, as Mordachy to Hester the Queen, if you hold your peace deliverance
shall come another way, and think not to escape, because you are in New
England; Assuredly the Lord is doing great things, and waits for the prayers
of his people that he may be gracious unto them, and ve^ily the poor Churches
of Christ here cannot but take notice of the great works the Lord has done
for you of late, which are famous throughout the whole World; And should they
not take them as an answer of these weak prayers, they fear they should
neglect to magnify his mercy toward you, and them: the noble acts of the Lord
Christ, for the freedom of his people from that into lerable Prelaticall
bondage, are almost miraculously committed to memory by the able servants of
Christ, whom he has stirred up for that very end, yet must you not shut out
the valiant soldiers of Christ (disciplined in this unwonted Wilderness) from
having share with you in the work, yet no farther but that Christ may be all
in all: who has caused the Midianites to fight against Midian, till the true
Israelites had gathered themselves together, he it is that has brought the
counsels of the wicked to naught, he it is that has discovered the secret
plo^tings of the King of Assyria, even in his Bedchamber; He it is that has
declared himself to be with your mighty men of valor, and assuredly all you
valiant Soldiers of Christ, both in one England and the other, the Lord has
showed you as great signs and wonders for the strengthening of your faith, as
was the wetting and drying of the fl^ece to Gedeon, only beware of setting up
an Ephod in the latter end; Let the Churches of Christ be set up according to
his first institution, or you will make double work, for all may see by what
is done already, there is nothing too hard for him, he will down with all
again and again, till his Kingdom alone be exalted, for the which all the
Israel of God fight, wrestle, pray, and here you may see the servants of Christ
fighting at 900 leagues distant.

Oh you proud Bishops, that would have all the World stoop to your Lordly
power, the heathen Romans your predecessors, after they had banished John to
the Isle of Pathmos, suffered him quietly to enjoy the Revelation of Jesus
Christ there; here is a people that have betaken themselves to a newfound
World, distanced from you with the widest Ocean the World affords, and yet you
grudge them the purity of Christ's Ordinances there. No wonder then, nay wonder
all the World at the sudden and unexpected downfall of these domineering Lords,
who had Princes to protect them, arms to defend them, and almost three whole
Kingdoms at their command; and no enemy of theirs in sight only, there
appears a little cloud about the bigness of a man's hand out of the Western
Ocean, I but the Lord Christ is in it, out of Sion the perfection of beauty
has God shined. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence, a Fire shall
devour before him, and mighty tempests shall be moved round about him. Now
gather together you King-like Bishops, and make use of all the Kingly power you
can, for the cloud is suddenly come up, he rode upon Cherub and did fly. And
now let the Children of Sion rejoice in their King, for the Lord has pleasure
in his people, he will make the meek glorious by deliverance; And that the
whole Earth may know it is the Lords own work, the Arch-prelate and his
accomplices must begin to war with the Scots, and that implacably, the Prelates
desire a Parliament thinking to establish iniquity by a Law, but the iniquity
of the Ammorites is already full, and all your cunning counsels shall but
contrive your own destruction; They remonstrant against all Acts of Parliament
that pass without their Vote, and by this means wind out themselves for ever
voting more, they devise how they may have such persons committed to prison at
favor not their proceeding.

But the Lord turned their mischief they had conceived upon their own pates,
and they themselves were sent to prison by half a score at a time; And such
was the unsavourynesse of this seeming salt, that it was good for nothing, but
to Lord it over others, their tyranny being taken out of their hands, they
could not endure to be commanded by any; And therefore unfit for the war which
they stirred up, to recover the people again under their bondage, yet such was
the madness of some, that they loved their servitude so well as to fight for
it; but surely such had never rightly known the service of the Lord Christ,
which is perfect freedom, from all such tyrannous yo^ks, and verily just it is
with the Lord to cause such to be servants unto Shishak, that they may know the
service of the Lord, and the service of the Kingdoms of the Country. But
however an Army is raised to defend their Lordly dignity; Let the Saints be
joyful with glory, let the high Acts of God be in their mouths, and a two
edged Sword in their hands, to bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in
setters of Iron, the Charets of the Lord are twenty thousand thousands of
Angels, the Lord is among them as in Sinai, Kings of Armies did flee apace;
and now you that have borne such a wicked spirit of malignity against the
people of Christ, can your hearts endure, and your hands wax strong in the day
that he shall have to do with you? Oh you proud Prelates that boast so much of
your taking the Kings part, miserable partakers are you; in stead of obeying
him, you have caused him to obey you, its writ in such great capital letters
that a child may read it: what was the cause of the first raising war against
the Scots which occasioned the Parliament, when you saw they would not further
the war as you would have them, they were soon traitors in your account, and
prosecuted against with Army after army, and was not all this to make the Scots
receive your Injunctions, a very fayer bottom to build a bloody war upon, that
the Prelatticall power might Lord it in Scotland, as they of a long time had
done in England: it was your Pithagorian Philosophy that caused the King to
loose his Life, by persuading him his Kingly power lived in your Lordly
dignity, as a thing subordinate unto it, and he so deeply taken with this
conceit, that it cost the lives of many thousands more then ever he, or his
Father would do for saving or recovering the Pa^latine Country.

Experience has taught the savage Indians, among whom we live, that they may
and do daily bring Wolves to be came, but they cannot break them of their
ravening nature, and I would your Royalist would learn of them to know, that
as your Lord Bishops, Deanes, Prebends, etc. be right whelps of the Roman
litter, so let them be never so well cam'd, they will retain their nature
still, to Lord it over all kind of Civil Government; But woe and alas that
ever any of our Countrymen should be so blind, that after they are delivered
from so great a bondage by such Wonder Working Providence of the Lord Christ;
Ever and anon to endeavor to make a Captain over them, that they may return
again into Egypt, as appears by the plots which have been discovered, and
broken in pieces by the right hand of the most high, and yet for all this
their's such a hankering after somewhat of the Prelaticall greatness; by the
English Clergy, and the Scottish Classis, that many of them could afford to
raise arother war for it. But brethren I beseech you be more wiser, lest when
you are grown hot in your quarrel, the Malignant party come and set you
agreed stablish peace in righteousness, and let the word be your rule, hear
one another with meekness, and the Lord will clear up the whole truth unto
you in his due time; And now to declare plainly how far the Lord has been
pleased to make use of any of his people in these Western pares, about this
Work, for to say truth they have done nothing in holes and corners, but their
works are obvious to all the World: if he sufferings of the Saints be precious
in the eyes of Christ, so as to provoke him in displeasure to cut off the
occasioners thereof, then thus his poor unworthy people here have had a great
stroke in the downfall of their adversaries to the present possessed truths of
Christ, for this wilderness work, has not been carried on without
sighthings that have come before him, and Groans that have entered his ears,
and Tears treasured up in his bottles (again) if the ardent and strong
affections of the people of God, for his glorious coming to advance his
Kingdom in the splendour, and purity of his Gospel, as co cry with the holy
Prophet, Oh that he would broake the Heavens and come down; be regarded of the
Lord Christ, so as to remove with his mighty power the very Mountains out of
the way, and hurl them into the deep; Then has these weak worms
instrumentally had a share in the great desolation the Lord Christ has
wrought. For this History will plainly declare with what zeal and deep
affection, and unresistable resolutions these Pilgrim people have endeavored
the gathering together his Saints, for the edifying the Body of Christ, that he
may reign both Lord and King for ever.

Yet again, if the prayers of the faithful people of God avail any thing for
the accomplishment of his promises, in the destruction of Antichrist, for the
subduing of Armies without striking one stroke; Then assuredly these Jacobites
have wrestled with the Lord, not only (with that good King Je^oshaphat)
proclaiming one Fast, but many Fasts, they, their Wives and little ones
standing before the Lord; Oh our God wile thou not judge them for we have no
might, etc. Lastly, if the Lord himself have roared from Sion, (as in the
days of the Prophet Amos) so from his Churches in New England, by a great and
terrible Earth quake (which happened much about the time the Lordly Prelates
were preparing their injunctions for Scotland) taking rise from the West, it
made its progress to the Eastward, causing the Earth to rise up and down like
the waves of the Sea; having the same effect on the Sea also, causing the Ships
that lay in the Harbor to quake, the which, at that very time was said to be a
sign from the Lord to his Churches, that he was purposed to shake the
Kingdoms of Europes Earth, and now by his providence brought to pass, all
men may read as much and more* as if he should have said to these his
scattered people (yet now again united in Church Covenant) the Lord is now
gathering together his Armies, and that your faith may be strengthened, you
shall feel and hear the shakings of the Earth by the might of his power: yea,
the Sea also, to show he will ordain Armies both by Sea and Land to make
Babylon desolate; Things thus concurring as an immediate answer of the Lord to
his peoples prayers and endeavors, caused some of this little handful with
resolute courage and boldness to return again to their native Land, that
they might (the Lord accepting and assisting them in their endeavors) be
helpful in advancing the Kingdom of Christ, and casting down every strong
house of sin and Satan. It matters not indeed who be the instruments, if with
the eye of faith these that go forth to fight the Lords Battles, can but see
and hear the Lord going out before them against their enemies, with a sound in
the tops of the Mulbery Trees. Here are assuredly evident signs that the Lord
Christ is gone forth for his peoples deliverance, and now Frogs, Flies, Lice or
Dust, shall serve to destroy those will yet hold his people in bondage,
notwithstanding the Lord will honor such as he has made strong for himself;
And therefore he causes the worthies in David's time to be recorded, and it is
the duty of Gods people to encourage one another in the work of the Lord, then
let all whose hearts are upright for the Lord, ponder well his goings in his
Sanctuary, that their hands may be strengthened in the work they go about,
only be strong and of a good courage.

CHAP. VI. Of the gracious goodness of the Lord Christ, in saving his
New England people, from the hand of the barbarous Indians.
LAstly, for the frontispiece of their present distress, namely the Indian
war, they with much meekness and great deliberation, wisely contrived how they
might best help their fellow brethren; hereupon they resolved to send a
solemn Embassage to old Cannonicus, chief Sachem of the narrow Ganset
Indians, who being then well stricken in years had caused his Nephew
Miantinemo to take the Government upon him, who was a very stern man, and of a
great stature, of a cruel nature, causing all his Nobility and such as were
his attendance to tremble at his speech, the people under his Government were
very numerous, besides the Niantick Indians, whose Prince was of near aliance
unto him; They were able to set forth, as was then supposed 30000. fighting
men, the English sought by all means to keep these at least from
confederating with the Pequods, and understanding by intelligence, that the
Pequots would send to them for that end, endeavored to prevent them. Fit and
able men being chosen by the English, they have them to Cannonicus Court, which
was about fourscore miles from Boston.

The Indian King hearing of their coming, gathered together his chief
Counselors, and a great number of his Subjects to give them entertainment,
resolving as then that the young King should receive their message, yet in his
hearing, they arriving, were entertained royally, with respect to the Indian
manner. Boiled Chestnuts is their White-bread, which are very sweet, as if they
were mixed with Sugar; and because they would be extraordinary in their
feasting, they strive for variety after the English manner, boiling Puddings
made of beaten corn, putting therein great store of black berryes, somewhat
like Currants. They having thus nobly feasted them, afterward give them
Audience, in a State-house, round, about fifty foot wide, made of long poles
stuck in the ground, like your Summer-houses in England, and covered round
about, and on the top with Mats, save a small place in the middle of the Roof,
to give light, and let out the smoke.

In this place sat their Sachim, with very great attendance; the English
coming to deliver their Message, to manifest the greater state, the Indian
Sachim lay along upon the ground, on a Mat, and his Nobility sat on the
ground, with their legs doubled up, their knees touching their chin: with much
sober gravity they attend the Interpreters speech. It was matter of much
wonderment to the English, to see how solidly and wisely these savage people
did consider of the weighty undertaking of a War; especially old Canonicus, who
was very discreet in his answers. The young Sachem was indeed of a more lofty
spirit, which wrought his ruin, as you may hear, after the decease of the old
King. But at this time his answer was, that he did willingly embrace peace with
the English, considering right well, that although their number was but small
in comparison of his people, and that they were but strangers to the Woods,
Swamps, and advantageous places of this Wilderness, yet withal he knew the
English were advantaged by their weapons of War, and especially their Guns,
which were of great terror to his people, and also he had heard they came of a
more populous Nation by far than all the Indians were, could they be joined
together. Also on the other hand, with mature deliberation, he was well advised
of the Peaquods cruel disposition and aptness to make War, as also their
near neighborhood to his people, who though they were more numerous, yet were
they withal more effeminate, and less able to defend themselves from the
sudden incursions of the Peaquods, should they fall out with them. Hereupon he
demes it most conducing to his own, and his peoples safety to direct his
course in a middle way, holding amity with both. The English return home,
having gained the old Kings favor so far, as rather to favor them then the
Pequods, who perceiving their Neighboring English had sent forth aid to the
Mattacusets government, thought it high time to seek the winning all the
Indians they could on their side, and among others they make their address to
old Cannonicus, who, instead of taking part with them, labors all he can to
hush the War in hand, laying before them the sad effects of War; sometimes
proving sad and mournful to the very Victors themselves, but always to the
vanquished, and withal tells them what potent enemies they had to contend
with, whose very weapons and Armor were matter of terror, setting their persons
a side; as also that English man was no much hoggery yet, and therefore they
might soon appease them, by delivering into their hands those persons that had
been the death of any of them, which were much better than that the whole
Nation should perish.

For the present the Pequods seemed to be inclinable to the old Sachims
counsel, but being returned home again among their rude multitude (the chief
place of cowardly boasting) they soon change their mind; yet the old Sachim
sends the English word he had wrought with them, and in very deed, the English
had rather make choice of Peace then War, provided it may stand with Truth
and Righteousness: and therefore send forth a band of Soldiers, who arriving
in the Peaquod Country, address themselves to have a Treaty with them about
delivering up the murderers; they making show of willingness so to do, bade
them abide awhile and they would bring them, and in the mean time they were
conversant among the Soldiers, and viewing their Army, pointed to diverse
places where they could hit them with their Arrows for all their Corslets. But
their greatest number lying the while at the other side of a great hill, and
anon appearing on the top of the hill, in sight of the English: those Indians
that were among the English withdrawing toward them; no sooner were they come
to their Companions, but all of a sudden they gave a great shout, and showed
the English a fair pair of heels, who seeing it, would not avail any thing to
follow them (they being far swifter of foot than the English) made their
return home again.

This bootlesse voyage encouraged the Indians very much, who insulted over them
at the fort, boasting of this their deluding them, and withal, they blasphemed
the Lord, saying, English-mans God was all one Fly, and that English man was
all one Sqawe, and themselves all one Moor-hawks. Thus by their horrible pride
they fitted themselves for destruction. The English hearing this report, were
now full assured that the Lord would deliver them into their hands to execute
his righteous judgment upon these blasphemous murderers; and therefore raised
fresh Soldiers for the war, to the number of fourscore, or thereabout, out
of the several towns in the Matachusets, and although they were but in their
beginnings, yet the Lord, who fore-intended their work, provided for all their
wants, and indeed it was much that they had any biscuit to carry with them in
these times of scarcity, or any vessels to transport their men and ammunition:
yet all was provided by the gracious hand of the most high; and the Soldiers,
many of them, not only armed with outward weapons, and armor of defense, but
filled with a spirit of courage and magnanimity to resist, not only men, but
Devils; for surely he was more then ordinaryly present with this Indian army,
as the sequel will show: as also for their further encouragement, the reverend
and zealously affected servant of Christ, Mr. John Wilson, went with the army,
who had treasured up heaps of the experimental goodness of God toward his
people. Having formerly passed through perils by Sea, perils by Land, perils
among false brethren, etc. he followed the war purposely to sound an alarm
before the Lord with his silver trumpet, that his people might be remembered
before him: the Soldiers ariving in safety at the town of Hartford, where
they were encouraged by the reverend Ministers there, with some such speech as
follows.

Fellow Soldiers, Countrymen, and Companions in this wildernesse-worke, who
are gathered together this day by the inevitable providence of the great
Jehovah, not in a tumultuous manner hurried on by the floating fancy of every
high hot headed brain, whose actions prove abortive, or if any fruit brought
forth, it has been rape, thief, and murder, things inconsisting with natures
light, then much less with a Soldiers valor; but you, my dear hearts,
purposely picked out by the godly grave Fathers of this government, that your
prowess may carry on the work, where there Justice in her righteous course is
obstructed, you need not question your authority to execute those whom God, the
righteous Judge of all the world, has condemned for blaspheming his sacred
Majesty, and murdering his Servants: every common Soldier among you is now
installed a Magistrate; then show your selves men of courage: I would not draw
low the height of your enemies hatred against you, and so debase your valor.
This you may expect, their swelling pride has laid the foundation of large
conceptions against you, and all the people of Christ in this mildernesse, even
as wide as Babels bottom. But, my brave Soldiers, it has mounted already to
the clouds, and therefore it is ripe for confusion; also their cruelty is
famously known, yet all true-bred Soldiers reserve this as a common maxim,
cruelty and cowardice are unseparable companions; and in brief, there is
nothing wanting on your enemies part, that may deprive you of a complete
victory, only their nimbleness of foot, and the unaccessible swamps and
nut-tree woods, forth of which your small numbers may entice, and industry
compel them. And now to you I put the question, who would not fight in such a
cause with an agile spirit, and undaunted boldness? yet if you look for
further encouragement, I have it for you; riches and honor are the next to a
good cause eyed by every Soldier, to maintain your own, and spoil your
enemies of theirs; although gold and silver be wanting to either of you, yet
have you that to maintain which is far more precious, the lives, libertyes,
and new purchased freedoms, privileges, and immunities of the indeared
servants of our Lord Christ Jesus, and of your second selves, even your
affectionated bosom mates, together with the thief pledges of your love, the
comforting contents of harmless prattling and smiling babes: and in a word, all
the riches of that goodness and mercy that attends the people of God in the
enjoyment of Christ, in his Ordinances, even in this life; and as for honor,
David was net to be blamed for enquiring after it, as a due recompense of that
true valor the Lord had bestowed on him: aad now the Lord has prepared this
honor for you, oh you courageous Soldiers of his, to execute vengeance upon
the heathen, and correction among the people, to bind their Kings in chains,
and Nobles in fetters of Iron, that they may execute upon them the judgments
that are written! this honor shall be to all his Saints, but some of you may
suppose deaths stroke may cut you short of this: let every faithful Soldier
of Christ Jesus know, that the cause why some of his indeared Servants are
taken away by death in a just war (as this assuredly is) it is not because
they should fall short of the honors accompanying, such noble designs, but
rather because earths honors are two scant for them, and therefore the
everlasting Crown must be set upon their heads forthwith, then march on with a
cheerful Christian courage in the strength of the Lord, and the power of his
might, who will forthwith enclose your enemies in your hands, make their
multitudes fall under your warlike weapons, and your feet shall soon be set on
their proud necks. After the Ministers of Christ had, through the grace that
was given them, exhorted and encouraged these Soldiers appointed for the work,
they being provided with certain Indian guides, who with the close of the day
brought them to a small river, where they could perceive many persons had been
dressing of fish; upon the sight thereof, the Indian guides concluded they were
now a feasting it at their fort, which was hard at hand; the English calling a
Council of war, being directed by the speciallest providence of the most
high God, they concluded to storm the fort a little before break of day; at
whith time they supposed the Indians being up late in their jolly feasting,
would be in their deepest sleep; and surely so it was, for they now slept
their last: the English keeping themselves as covertly as they could,
approached the fort at the time appointed, which was builded of whole Trees set
in the ground fast, and standing up an end about twelve foot high, very large,
having pitched their Wigwams within it, the entrance being on two sides, with
intricate Meanders to enter. The chief Leaders of the English made some little
stand before they offered to enter, but yet boldly they rushed on, and found
the passages guarded at each place with an Indian Bow-man, ready on the string,
they soon let fly, and wounded the for* most of the English in the shoulder,
yet having dispatched the Porters, they found the winding way in without a
Guide, where they soon placed themselves round the Wigwams, and according to
direction they made their first shot with the muzzle of their Muskets down to
the ground, knowing the Indian manner is to lie on the ground to sleep, from
which they being in this terrible manner awakened, unless is were such as were
slain with the shot.

After this some of the English entered the Wigwams, where they received some
shot with their Arrows, yet catching up the fire brands, they began to fire
them, and others of the English Soulders with powder, did the same: the day now
began to break; the Lord intending to have these murderers know he would look
out of the cloudy pillar upon them: and now these women and children set up a
terrible outcry; the men were smitten down, and flaine, as they came forth
with a great slaughter, the Sqawes crying out, oh much winn it Englishman, who
moved with pity toward them, saved their lives: and hereupon some young youth
cried, I squaw, I squaw, thinking to find the like mercy. There were some of
these Indians, as is reported, whose bodies were not to be pierced by their
sharp rapiers of swords of a long time, which made some of the Soldiers think
the Devil was in them, for there were some Powwowes among them, which work
strange things, with the help of Satan. But this was very remarkable, one of
them being wounded to death, and thrust through the neck with a halbert; vet
after all, lying groaning upon the ground, he caught the halberts spear in his
hand, and wound it quite round. After the English were thus possessed of this
first victory, they sent their prisoners to the pinnaces, and prosecute the
war in hand, to the next Battalia of the Indians, which lay on a hill about
two miles distant, and indeed their stoutest Soldiers were at this place, and
not yet come to the fort; the English being weary with their night work, and
wanting such refreshing as the present work required, began to grow faint, yet
having obtained one victory, they were very desirous of another: and further,
they knew right-well, till this cursed crew were utterly rooted out, they
should never be at peace; therefore they marched on toward them. Now assuredly,
had the Indians known how much weakened our Soldiers were at present, they
might have born them down with their multitude, they being very strong and
agile of body, had they come to handy-gripes; but the Lord (who would have his
people know their work was his, and he only must order their Counsels, and war
like work for them) did bring them timely supply from the vessels, and also
gave them a second victory, wherein they sl^ew many more of their enemies, the
residue flying into a very thick swamp, being unaccessible, by reason of the
boggy holes of water, and thick bushes; the English drawing up their company
beleagered the swamp, and the Indians in the mean time skulking up and down,
and as they saw opportunity they made shot with their Arrows at the English,
and then suddenly they would fall flat along in the water to defend themselves
from the retalliation of the Soldiers Muskets. This lasted not long, for our
English being but a small number, had parted themselves far asunder, but by the
providence of the most high God, some of them spyed an Indian with a kettle at
his back going more inwardly into the swamp, by which they perceived there was
some place of firm land in the midst thereof, which caused them to make way for
the passage of their Soldiers, which brought this war to a period: For
although many got away, yet were they no such considerable number as ever to
raise war any more; the slain or wounded of the English were (through the
mercy of Christ) but a few: One of them being shot through the body, near
about the breast, regarding it not till of a long time after, which caused the
blood to dry and thicken on eitheir end of the arrow so that it could not be
drawn forth his body without great difficulty and much pain, yet did he escape
his life, and the wound healed. Thus the Lord was pleased to assist his people
in this war, and deliver them out of the Indians hands, who were very lusty
proper men of their hands, most of them, as may appear by one passage which I
shall here relate: thus it came to pass, As the Soldiers were upon their
march, close by a great thicket, where no eye could penetrate far, as it
often falls out in such wearisom ways, where neither men nor beast have beaten
out a path; some Soldiers lingering behind their fellows, two Indians
watching their opportunity, much like a hungry hawk, when they supposed the
last man was come up, who kept a double double double distance in his march,
they sudden and swiftly snatched him up in their tallens, hoising him upon
their shoulders, ran into the swamp with him; the Soldier unwilling to be made
a Pope by being borne on men's shoulders, strove with them all he could to free
himself from their hands; but, like a careful Commander, one Captain
Davenport, then Lieutenant of this company, being diligent in his place to
bring up the rear, coming up with them, followed with speed into the swamp
after him, having a very severe cutlace tied to his wrist, and being well able
to make it bite sore when he set it on, resolving to make it fall foul on the
Indians bones, he soon overtook them, but was prevented by the buckler they
held up from hitting them, which was the man they had taken: It was matter of
much wonder to see with what dexterity they hurled the poor Soldier about, as
if they had been handling a Lacedaemonian shield, so that the nimble Captain
Davenport could not, of a long time, fasten one stroke upon them; yet, at last,
dying their tawny skin into a crimson color, they cast down their prey, and
hasted through the thickets for their lives. The Soldier thus redeemed, had no
such hard usage, but that he is alive, as I suppose, at this very day: The Lord
in mercy toward his poor Churches having thus destroyed these bloody barbarous
Indians, he returns his people in safety to their vessels, where they take
account of their prisoners: the Squawes and some young youths they brought home
with them, and finding the men to be deeply guilty of the crimes they
undertook the war for, they brought away only their heads as a token of
their victory. By this means the Lord struck a trembling terror into all the
Indians round about, even to this very day.

CHAP. VII. Of the first Syrod holden in New England, whereby the Lord in his
mercy did more plainly discover his ancient truths, and confute those cursed
errors that ordinarily dog the reforming Churches of CHRIST.
THe Lord Christ deeming it most expedient for his people to add some farther
help to assist them in cutting down those cursed errors (that were the next
dangerous difficulty they were to meet with) sends in the Reverend and bright
shining light Mr. Davenport, and the cheerful, grave, and gracious Soldier of
his, Mr. Allen, as also Mr. Thompson, Mr. Brown, Mr. Fish, with diverse other
of the faithful servants of Christ, the much honored Mr. Eaton and Mr.
Hopkins: and now the time being come, the Synod sat at Cambridge, where was
present about 25. Reverend and godly Ministers of Christ, besides many other
graciously-eminent servants of his. A Catalogue of the several Errors
scattered about the Country was there produced, to the number of 80. and
liberty given to any man to dispute pro or con, and none to be charged to be of
that opinion he disputed for, unless he should declare himself so to be. The
Weapons these Soldiers of Christ warred with, was the Sword of the Spirit,
even the Word of God, together with earnest prayer to the God of all Truth,
that he would open his truths unto them. The clearing of the true sense and
meaning of any place of Scripture, it was done by Scripture, for they so
discerned by the grace of God that was given them, that the whole Scripture
must be attended unto. Four sorts of persons I could with a good will have
paid their passage out, and home again to England, that they might have been
present at this Synod, so that they would have reported the truth of all the
passages thereof to their own Colleges at their return. The first is the
Prelates, who both in Theorie and Practice might have made their own Eyes
Judges in the case, Whether would prevail most, (to the suppressing of Error,
and advancing of Unity in the true worship of God) either their commanding
power backed with the subordinate sword of Princes, or the Word of God cleared
up by the faithful labor and indefatigable pains of the sincere servants of
the Lord Christ, and mightily declared through the demonstration of his blessed
Spirit. This well waighed, may (through the Lords blessing) stop the yet
running fancy in the brains of many, that their Lordly power is the only
means of suppressing Error.

Secondly, the Godly and Reverend Presbyterian Party, who, had they made their
eyewitnesses of this work, they had assuredly saved themselves much labor,
which I dare presume they would have spent worthily otherwise, then in writing
so many books to prove the Congregationall or Independent Churches to be the
sluice, through which so many floods of Error flow in: nay, my dear and
reverend brethren, might not so much work of yours in writing, and ours in
answering, have been a means to have stopped the height of this overflowing
flood? and through the Lords assisting have settled Peace and Truth in a great
measure throughout the three Nations.

Thirdly, those who with their new stratagems have brought in so much old
error; for although they had a party here, yet verily they durst not bring
their New Light to the Old Word, for fear it would prove but Old Darkness, (as
indeed they do.) But here might they have seen the Ministers of Christ (who
were so experienced in the Scripture, that some of them could tell you the
place, both Chapter and Verse, of most sentences of Scripture could be named
unto them) with Scriptures light, clearing up the truths of Christ clouded by
any of these Errors and Heresies, as had not been done for many Ages before:
and verily this great work of Christ must not be lightly over-past, the Author
of this History passes not for the shrewd censures of men: nor, can it be any
matter of disparagement to the reverend and highly honored in Christ,
remaining in England, that their fellow brethren have done so worthily here? it
is well known to all our English Nation, that the most able-preaching
Ministers of Christ were most pursued by the lording Clergy, and those that
have spent all their days, even from a child, in searching the Scriptures, the
Lord Christ preparing them by his blessed spirit for this very work. Besides,
their continued practice in studying and preaching the ways of truth; and
lastly, their meeting with the opposition of so many crafty, close couched
errors, whose first foundation was laid cheke by joule with the most glorious,
heavenly, and blessed truths, to dazzle the eyes of the beholders, and strike
terror into the hearts of those should lift up their hands against them, for
fear they should miss them, and hit their stroke upon the blessed truth; and
also to bring up a slanderous and evil report on all the able Orthodox
Min^st^rs of Christ that withstand them, persuading men they withstand the
holy, heavenly, and blessed truth, which they have lodged there, which this
Synod did with strong and undeniable arguments fetch from Scripture, to
overthrow and pluck up by the roots, all those Errors, which you have heard
mentioned in the former Book, the which they divided for the more full
answering of them. Among all those valiant Champions of the Truth whom you have
heard named, to some six, some five, some four, etc. it had assuredly been
worth the work to have related the particular manner of putting to the sword
every one of them: but besides the length of the discourse, there must have
been a more able Penman: but however they were so put to death, that they never
have stood up in a living manner among us since, but sometimes like Wizards to
peep and mutter out of ground, fit for such people to resort unto, as will go
from the living to the dead. But blessed be the Lord Christ, who girded his
people with strength against this day of battle, and caused the Heavens to
clear up again in New England, after these foggy days:

The fourth and last sort of persons, whose presence I could most of all the
other three former have desired, was those whose disease lay as chiefly in
despising all Physicians, and that upon this ground for one, because some for
filthy lucre sake have nourish^ Diseases rather then cured them. Many pamphlets
have come from our Countrymen of late, to this purpose, namely, scurrillously
to deride all kind of Scholarship, Presbytery, and Synods. Experience has
taught Gods people here, that such are troubled with some sinful opinion of
their own, that they would not have touched; but had they been at this Synod,
they must, per force, have learned better language, or their speech and their
knowledge would fall foul one of the other; here might they have beheld the
humility of the most learned of these servants of Christ, condemning the high
conceitednesse of their ignorance, and then also the framing of Arguments in a
Scholar like way, did (the Lord assisting) clear up the truths of Christ more
to the me^nest capacity in one hour, then could be clouded again in s^aven
year by the new notion of any such as boast so much of their unlettered
knowledge, diversity of languages, although a correcting hand of God upon the
whole world, when they joined together in that proud Edifice: yet now is it
blessed of God, to retain the purity of the Scriptures; if any man should go
about to corrupt them in one language, they should remain pure in another; and
assuredly, the Lord intending to have the ways of the Gospel of Christ to be
made more manifest at this time, then formerly, not by tradition of our
forefathers, or by man's reason, but by the revealed will of God in the holy
Scripture, did accordingly prepare Instruments for this work, earthen vessels,
men subject to like infirmities with our selves; sorry men, and carrying about
with them a body of sin and death, men subject to err: yet these did the
Lord Christ cause to be trained up in Learning, and tutored at the
Universities, and that very young, some of them, as the revererend Mr. John
Cotton at 13. years of age. The mighty power of God sanctified and ordained
them for this work, and made them a defenced city, an iron pillar, a wall of
brass against all the opposers of his truth; and now coupled them together in
this Synod, to draw in Christ's yoke, and war with the weapons he had
furnished them withal, and cause the blessed truths of Christ to shine forth
in their splendor and glory, far more after the dispersing of this smoke,
which of a long time has filled the Temple, and hindered the entering in of
those great number of Converts, which shall flow in at the fall of all
antichristian Errors; and verily as the Lord Christ had called forth this
little handfu^l to be a model of his glorious work, intended thoughout the
whole world, so chiefly in this suppressing of Errors, Sects, and Heresies, by
the blessed word of his truth, causing his servants in this Synod, mu^^ally to
agree; and by his gracious providence, break in pieces a contrived plot of
some, who, by mis-reports, insinuating jealousies, and crafty carriage of
matters to the wrong mark, with a writing of thrice twenty strong, would have
drawn away one of the valiant Soldiers of Christ from this worthy work, who
both then, and since, has been very helpful to cast down many a strong fort
erected by the Sectaries; but the Lord Christ would not suffer this blow to be
given, intending all people (by way of restitution) for their slanderous
reports, cast upon his New England Churches (as being the inlet to Errors)
shall honor them with this victorious conquest, given them by Christ herein;
yet willing they would, their brethren in England might win the prize by
out-stripping them, more abundantly in length, breadth and height, which the
same God is able to perform, that has been thus abundantly good to us.

About this time the Churches of Christ began to be diligent in their duty, and
the civil government in looking after such as were like to disturb the peace of
this new erected government; some persons being so hot headed for maintaining
of these sinful opinions, that they feared breach of peace, even among the
Members of the superior Court, but the Lord blessing them with agreement to
prevent the woeful effects of civil broils; those in place of government
caused certain persons to be disarmed in the several Towns, as in the Town
of Boston, to the number of 58. in the Town of Salem 6. in the Town of
Newbery 3. in the Town of Roxbury 5. in the Town of Ipswitch 2. and Charles
Town 2. others there were, that through the help of the faithful servants of
Christ, came to see how they had been m^sled, and by the power of Christ in
his Word, returned again with an acknowledgement of their sin; but others
there were, who remained obstinate, to the disturbing of the civil power, and
were banished, of whom you shall hear farther hereafter. Some of the Churches
of Christ being more indulgent, waited long ere they fell upon the work: and
here you must tak notice, that the Synod, Civil Government, and the Churches of
Christ, kept their proper place, each moving in their own sphere, and acting by
their own light, or rather by the revelation of Jesus Christ, witnessed by his
Word and Spirit, yet not refusing the help of eacg other (as some would
willingly have it) some of the Churches prosecuting the Rule of Christ against
their heretical Members, were forced to proceed to excommunication of them,
who when they saw whereto it would come, they would have prevented it with
lying, but the Lord discovered it; and so they were justly separated from the
Churches of Christ for lying: which being done, they fell to their old trade
again.

CHAP. VIII. Of the planting the fourth Colonie of New Englands godly
Government, called New Haven.
THe Lord Christ having now in his great mercy taken out of the way these
mountains that seemed in the eye of Man to block up his Churches further
proceedings, they had now leisure to welcome the living stones that the Lord
was pleased to add unto this building, and with thankful acknowledgment to
give him of his own for his mercyes multitude, whose was the work in planting,
not only more Churches, but another Colony also; for the honored Mr, Eaton
being accompanied with many worthy persons of note, whom the Lord had furnished
with store of substance for this wildernesse-work, although they would
willingly have made their abode under the government of the Mattachusets; yet
could they find no place upon the Seacoasts for their settling: the Lord
intending to enlarge his peoples border, caused them, after much search, to
take up a place somewhat more southwardly, near the shalles of Cape-cod, where
they had very flatt water; yet being entered in, they found: commodious harbor
for shipping, and a fit place to erect a Town, which they built in very little
time, with very fair houses, and complete streets; but in a little time they
overstockt it with Chattell, although many of them did follow merchandising,
and Maritime affairs, but their remoteness from the Mattachusets Bay, where
the chief traffic lay, hindered them much. Here did these godly and sincere
servants of Christ, according to the rule of the Word, gather into Church
Estate, and called to the office of a Pastor the reverend, judicious, and godly
Mr, John Davenport, of whom the Author is bold to say as follows:

WHen Men and Devils against Christ's flock conspire,
For them prepared a deadly trapping net;
Then Christ to make all men his work admire,
Davenport, he does thee from thy Country fet
To sit in Synod, and his folk assist:
The filthy vomit of Hels Dragon, deep
In earths womb drawn, blessed they this poison mist,
And blessed the means does us from error keep,
Thy grave advice and arguments of strength
Did much prevail, the Erronist confound.
Well have thou warred, Christ draws thy days in length,
That thou in learned experience may abound:
What though thou leave a city stored with pleasure,
Spend thy prime days in heathen desert land,
Thy joy's in Christ, and not in earthly treasure,
Davenport rejoice, Christ's Kngdome is at hand;
Did ever deem to see such glorious days?
Though thou decrease with age and earths content,
Thou live'st in Christ, needs then must thy joy raise;
His Kingdome's thine, and that can never be spent.
This Church and Town soon procured some Sisters to take part with her, and
among them they erected a godly and peaceable Government, and called their
frontier town New haven, of which the Government is denominated, being
inhabited by many men eminent in gifts for the populating thereof, and managing
of affairs both by Sea and Land; they have had some shipping built there, but
by the sad loss of Mr. Lambertons ship and goods also, they were much
disheartened, but the much honored Mr. Eaton remains with them to this very
day.

THou noble thus, Theophilus, before great Kings to stand,
More noble far, for Christ his war thou leave thy native land;
With thy rich store thou came on shore Christ's Churches to assist;
What if it wast? thou purchased have that Pearl that most have mist,
Nay rather he has purchased thee, and whatsoever thou have,
With graces store to govern over his people, he thee placed.
Our State affairs thy will repaires, assistant thou have bin
Firm league to make, for Gospels sake, four Colonyes within;
With Sweads French, Dutch, and Indians much, Gods peoples peace this bred,
Then Eaton aye, remember may the Child that is yet unfed.
This government of New Haven, although the younger Sister of the four yet was
she as beautiful as any of this brood of travelers, and most minding the end
of her coming hither, to keep close to the rule of Christ both in Doctrine and
Discipline; and it were to be wished her elder Sister would follow her example,
to nurture up all her children accordingly: here is not to be forgotten the
honored Mr Hopkins, who came over about this time a man of zeal and courage
for the truths of Christ, assisting this blessed work, both in person and
estate; for the which the Author cannot forget him, being often in commission for
the good of all the united Colonyes.

HOpkins thou must, although weak dust, for this great work prepare,
Through Ocean large Christ gives thee charge to govern his with care;
What earthen man, in thy short span throughout the world to run
From East to West at Christ's behest, thy worthy work is done:
Unworthy thou acknowledge now, not unto thee at all,
But to his name be lasting fame, thou to his work does call.
CHAP. IX. Of the planting the fourteenth Church of Christ under the governmen
of the Mattachusets Bay, called Dedham.
THe latter end of this year 'twas the Town of Dedham began, an inland Town,
situate, about ten miles from Boston, in the County of Suffolk, well watered
with many pleasant streams, abounding with Garden fruits fitly to supply the
Markets of the most populous Town, whose coin and commodities allures the
Inhabitants of this Town to make many a long walk; they consist of about a
hundred Families, being generally given to husbandry, and, through the blessing
of God, are much increased, ready to swarm and settle on the building of
another Town more to the Inland; they gather into a Church at their first
settling, for indeed, as this was their chief errand, so was it the first
thing they ordinarily minded; to pitch their Tabernacles near the Lords Tent:
To this end they called to the office of a Pastor, the reverend, humble, and
heavenly-minded, Mr. John Allen, a man of a very courteous behavior, full of
sweet Christian love toward all, and with much meekness of spirit, contending
earnestly for the faith and peace of Christ's Churches.

ALL you so sl^te Christ's sanctifying grace,
As legal works, what Gospel-work can be
But sin cast out, and spirits work in place,
They justified that Christ thus reigning see:
Allen, thou art by Christ's free spirit led M. Allen a great help against the
Errors of the time.

To war for him in wilderness awhile;
What, do for Christ, I man thou art in's stead,
Sent to beseech, in's Vineyard thou must toil.
John Allen joy, thou sinful dust art taken
To spend thy days in exile, so remote,
Christ's Church to build, of him that is never forsaken,
Nor thou, for now his truths thou must promote.
He guides thy tongue, thy paper, pen and hands,
Thy hearts swift motion, and affections choice;
Needs thou thus lead, must do what he commands,
And cry aloud when he lifts up thy voice:
Seven years complete twice told, thy work has bin,
To feed Christ's flock, in desert land them keep,
Both thou and they each day are kept by him;
Safe may thou watch, being watched by him never sleeps.
This Church of Christ has in its bosom near about 70. souls joined in
Covenant together, and being well seasoned with this savoury salt, have
continued in much love and unity from their first foundation, hitherto
tanslating the close, clouded woods into goodly cornfieldsd, and adding much
comfort to the lonesome travelers, in their solitary journey to Canectico, by
eying the habitation of Gods people in their way, ready to administer
refreshing to the weary.

CHAP. X. Of the planting of the fifteenth Church of Christ at the Town of
Waymoth.
THe Twone and Church of Christ at Waymoth had come in among the other Towns
before this, as being an elder Sister, but only for her somewhat more then
ordinary instability; it is battered with the brinish billows on the East;
Rocks and Swamps to the Southwest, makes it delightful to the nimble tripping
Dear, as the plowable places of Meadow land is to the Inhabitants. This Town
was first founded by some persons that were not so forward to promote the
Ordinances of Christ, as many others have been: they desired the reverend
Minister of Christ Mr. Gennors, to be helpful in preaching the Word unto them;
who after some little space of time, not liking the place, repaired to the
Eastern English: but the people of this place, after his departure, being
gathered into a Church, they called to office the reverend and godly Mr Newman;
but many of them unwilling to continue in this Town, as supposing they had
found a fitter place for habitation, removed into the next Government, carrying
with them their Pastor; by which means, the people that were left behind, were
now destitute, and having some godly Christians among them, who much desired
the sincere milk of the Word that they might grow thereby: upon diligent use of
means they found out a young man able gifted for the work, brought up with the
reverend and judicious Mr. Chancie, called Mr. Thomas Thatcher. Yet again,
after some few years, for want of sufficient maintenance, with mutual consent
they parted with him, and are forced to borrow help of their Neighbors,
wherein all of them to the Author is bold to say as follows:

OH people, reason swayes man's actions here,
You sanctified, over these long seas does look,
With heavenly things your earthly toil to cheer;
Will lose the end for which this toil you took.
Christ comes in's Word, let their bright feet abide
Your Town, among whose grace and gifts excel
In preaching Christ, it is he your hearts has tried,
They want no store that all for him do sell.
Gennors, do love thy Christ? I hope he is dear
Beloved of thee, he honored would thee have
To feed his flock, while thou remainest here;
With His Word of truth thy soul and others save.
With little flock does Newman pack away;
The righteous lips sure might a many feed;
Remov'st for gain? it is most where most men stay,
Men part for land why land least helps at need.
Thatcher, what mean to leaves thy little flock?
Sure their increase might thee much profit bring:
What, leave Christ's Church? it is founded on a rock;
If rock not left, their ebb may sudden spring;
Pastor and People, have you both forgot
What parting Paul and Christ's dear people had?
Their loves melt tears, it is ve'mently so hot,
His heart strings break to see his folk so sad.
This year came over, besides the former, for the furthering of this blessed
work of Christ, Mr. William Tompson, Mr. Edm: Brown, and Mr. David Frisk, who
were called to office in several Churches, as you shall after hear. And now to
end this year, that abounded in the wonder-working Providence of Christ, for
his Churches, in the exaltation of his truths, that all may take notice the
Lord cast in by the by, as it were, a very fruitful crop, insomuch that from
this day forward, their increase was every year more and more, till the
Country came to feed its own Inhabitants; and the people who formerly were
somewhat pincht with hunger, eat bread to the full, having not only for their
necessity but also for their convenience and delight.

CHAP. XI. Of the increase of the people of Christ. Printing brought over, and
the sixteenth Church of Christ planted at Rouly.
FOr the year 1638. John Winthrope Esquire. was chosen Governor, and Tho: Dudly
Esquire. Deputy Governor; the number of Freemen added were about 130. The peace of
this little Commonwealth being now in great measure settled, by the Lords
mercy, in overthrowing the Indians, and banishing of certain turbulent
spirits. The Churches of Christ were much edified in their holy faith by their
indefatigable pains of their Ministers, in their weekly Lectures extraordinary
as well as by their Sabboth-Assemblies, and continual visiting of their people
from house to house, endeavoring to heal the hurts these false deceivers had
made, with double diligence showring down the sweet dews of the blessed Gospel
of Jesus Christ, to the converting of many a poor soul. and indeed, now were
the glorious days of New England; the Churches of Christ increase daily, and
his eminent Ambassadors resort unto them from our native Country, which as
then lay under the tyranny of the Monarchall Arch-prelates, which caused the
servants of Christ to wander from their home. This year the reverend and
judicious M. Jos. Glover undertook this long voyage, being able both in person
and estate for the work he provided, for further completing the Colonies in
Church and Common-wealth-work, a Printer, which has been very useful in many
respects; the Lord seeing it meet that this reverend and holy servant of his
should fall short of the shores of New England: but yet at this time he brought
over the zealous aff^cted and judicious servant of his, Master Ezekiel Rogers,
who with a holy and humble people, made his progress to the North-Eastward, and
erected a Town about 6. miles from Ipswich, called Rowly, wanting room, they
purehased some addition of the Town of Newbery; yet had they a large length of
land, only for the near convenience to the Town of Ipswich, by the which
means they partake of the continued Lectures of either Town: these people
being very industrious every way, soon built many houses, to the number of
about threescore families, and were the first people that set upon making of
Cloth in this Western World; for which end they built a sulling-mill, and
caused their little-ones to be very diligent in spinning cotton wool, many of
them having been clothiers in England, till their zeal to promote the Gospel
of Christ caused them to wander; and therefore they were no less industrious,
in gathering into Church-society, there being scrace a man among them, but such
as were meet to be living stones in this building, according to the judgment
of man; they called to the office of a Pastor this holy man of God, Mr. Ezekiel
Rogers, o^ whom this may be said:

Christ for this work Rogers does riches give,
Rich graces fit his people for to feed,
Wealth to supply his wants whilst here he live,
Free thou receiv'st to serve his peoples need.
England may mourn they thee no longer keep,
English rejoice, Christ does such worthyes raise,
His Gospel preach, unfold his mysteries deep;
Weak dust made strong sets forth his makers praise:
With fervent zeal, and courage thou have fought
Against that transformed Dragon and his bands,
Snatched forth the burning thou poor souls have caught,
And freed thy flock from wolves devouring hands.
Ezekiel mourn not, thou art severed far,
From thy dear Country, to a desert land;
Christ called has thee unto this worthy war;
By him o'rcome, he holds thy Crown in's hand.
For the further assisting of this tender flock of Chrst, the reverend Mr. John
Miller did abide among them for some space of time, preaching the Word of God
unto them also, till it pleased the Lord to call him to be Pastor of the Church
of Christ at Yarmouth, in Plimoth patten, where he remains at this very day.

With courage bold Miller through Seas does venture,
To toil it out in this great Western wast,
Thy stature low one object high does center;
Higher then Heaven thy faith on Christ is placed:
Allarum thou with silver trumpet sound,
And t^ll the World Christ's Armies are at hand,
With Scripture truths thou Errors do confound,
And overthrow all Antichristian bands:
It matters not for th'worlds high reputation;
The World must fall and Christ alone must stand;
Thy Crown's prepared in him, then keep thy station,
Joy that Christ's Kingdom is so near at hand.
CHAP. XII. Of the great Earthquake in New England, and of the woeful end of
some erroneous persons, with the first foundation of Harverd College.
THis year, the first day of the Fourth Month, about two of the clock in the
afternoon, the Lord caused a great and terrible Earth quake, which was
general throughout all the English Plantations; the motion of the Earth was
such, that it caused diverse men (that had never known an Earth quake before)
being at work in the Fields, to cast down their working-tooles, and run with
ghastly terrified looks, to the next company they could meet withal; it came
from the Western and uninhabited parts of this Wilderness, and went the
direct course: this brood of Travelers came, the Ministers of Christ many of
them could say at that very time (not from any other Revelation, but what the
word holds forth) that if the Churches of New England were Gods house, then
suddenly there would follow great alterations in the Kingdoms of Europe.

This year the civil government proceeded to censure the residue of thofe
sinful erroneous persons, who raised much commotion in this little
Commonwealth; who being banished, resorted to a place more Southward, some of
them sitting down at a place called Providence, others betook them to an
Island about 16. miles distant from the former, called Rode Island, where
having Elbow room enough, none of the Ministers of Christ, nor any other to
interrupt their false and deceivable Doctrines, they hampered themselves foully
with their own line, and soon showed the depthlesse ditches that blind
guides lead into; many among them being much to be pittyed, who were drawn
from the truth by the bewitching tongues of some of them being, very ignorant
and easily perverted: and although the people were not many in all, yet were
they very diverse in their opinions, and glad where they could gain most
Disciples to hear them; some were for every day to be a Sabbath, and therefore
kept not any Sabbath Day at all; others were some for one thing, some for
another; and therefore had their several meetings, making many a goodly piece
of Preachment; among whom there were some of the female sex (who deeming the
Apostle Paul to be too strict in not permitting a room to preach in the
public Congregation) taught, notwithstanding they having their call to this
office, from an ardent desire of being famous, especially the grand Mistress
of them all, who ordinarily prated every Sabbath day, till others, who thirsted
after honor in the same way with her self, drew away her Auditors, and then
she withdrew her self, her husband, and her family also, to a more remote
place; and assuredly, although the Lord be secret in all the dispensation of
his providence, whether in judgment or mercy, yet much may be learned from
all, as sometimes pointing with the finger to the lesson; as here these persons
withdrawing from the Churches of Christ (wherein he walks, and is to be found
in his blessed Ordinances) to a first and second place, where they came to a
very sad end; for thus it came to pass in the latter place, The Indians in
those parts forwarned them of making their abode there; yet this could be no
warning to them, but still they continued, being amongst a multitude of
Indians, boasted they were become all one Indian: and indeed, this woman, who
had the chief rule of all the roast, being very bold in her strange
Revelations and mis-applications, tells them, though all nations and people
were cut off round about them, yet should not they; till on a day certain
Indians coming to her house, discoursing with them, they wished to tie up her
dogs, for they much bit the man, not mistrusting the Indians guile, did so;
the which no sooner done, but they cruelly murdered her, taking one of their
daughters away with them, and another of them seeking to escape is caught, as
she was getting over a hadge, and they drew her back again by the hair of the
head to the stump of a tree, and there cut off her head with a hatchet; the
other that dwelt by them betook them to boat, and fled, to tell this sad news;
the rest of their companions, who were rather hardened in their sinful way,
and blasphemous opinions, than brought to any sight of their damnable Errors,
as you shall after hear; yet was not this the first loud speaking hand of God
against them; but before this the Lord had poynted directly to their sin by a
very fearful Monster, that another of these women brought forth, they striving
to bury it in oblivion, but the Lord brought it to light, setting forth the
view of their monstrous Errors in this prodigious birth. This year, although
the estates of these pilgrim people were much wasted, yet seeing the benefit
that would accrue to the Churches of Christ and Civil Government, by the Lords
blessing, upon learning, they began to erect a College, the Lord by his
provident hand giving his approbation to the work, in sending over a faithful
and godly servant of his, the reverend Mr John Harverd, who joining with the
people of Christ at Charles Town, suddenly after departed this life, and gave
near a thousand pound toward this work; wherefore the Government thought it
meet to call it Harverd College in remembrance of him.

Ip Harverd had with riches here been taken,
He need not then through troublous Seas have past,
But Christ's bright glory has thine eyes so waken,
Naught can content, thy soul of him must taste:
Ohtast and tell how sweet his Saints among,
Christ ravished has thy heart with heavenly joys
To preach and pray with tears, affection strong,
From hearts delight in him who thee imployes.
Scarce have thou had Christ's Churches here in eye,
But thou art called to eye him face to face;
Earths scant contents death draws thee from, for why?
Full joy thou would that is only in heavens place.
CHAP. XIII. Of the coming over of the honored Mr. Pelham, and the planting of
the seaventeenth Church of Christ at the Town of Hampton.
THis year 1639. John Winthrope Esquire was chosen Governor, and Thomas Dudly
Esquire. Deputy Governor, the number of freemen added were about 83. This year
came over the much honored Mr. Herbert Pelham, a man of a courteous behavior,
humble, and heavenly minded.

HArbertus, hye on valiant, Why lingerst thou so long?
Christ's work has need of hasty speed, his enemies are strong:
In wilderness Christ does thee bless with virtues, wife, and seed,
To govern thou, at length did bow to serve Christ's peoples need;
To thine own soil thou back do toil, then cease not lab ring there,
But still advance Christ's Ordinance, and shrink no where for fear.
Much about this time began the Town of Hampton, in the Country of Northfolk,
to have her foundation stone laid, situate near the Seacoast, not far from
the famous River of Merimeck, the great store of salt marsh did entice this
people to set down their habitations there, for as yet Cowes and Cattle of
that kind were not come to the great downfall in their price, of which they
have about 450. head; and for the form of this Town, it is like a
Flower-de-luce, two streets of houses wheeling off from the maine body thereof,
the land is fertile, but filled with swamps, and some store of rocks, the
people are about 60. Families; being gathered together into Church covenant,
they called to office the reverend, grave, and gracious Mr. Doulton, having
also for some little space of time the more ancient Mr. Bachelor (of whom you
have heard in the former Book) to preach unto them also; here take a short
remembrance of the other.

DOulton does teach perspicuously and sound,
With Wholesome truths of Christ thy flock do feed,
Thy honor with thy labor does abound,
Age crowns thy head in righteousness, proceed
To batter down, root up, and quite destroy
All Heresies and Errors, that draw back
Unto perdition, and Christ's folk annoy;
To war for him thou weapons do not lack:
Long days to see, that longed for day to come
Of Babels fall, and Isreal's quiet peace:
Thou yet may live of days so great a sum
To see this work, let not thy warfare cease.
CHAP. XIV. Of the planting the eighteenth Church of Christ at the Town of
Salsbury.
FOr further perfecting this Wildernesse-work; not far from the Town of
Hampton was erected another Town, called Salsbury, being brought forth as
Twins, sometime contending for eldership: This being seated upon the broad
swift torrent of Merrimeck, a very goodly River to behold, were it not block^
up with some sudden falls through the rocks; over against this Town lies
the Town of Newberry, on the Southern side of the River a constant Ferry being
kept between; for although the River be about half a mile broad, yet, by reason
of an Island that lies in the midst thereof, it is the better passed in
troublesome weather: the people of this Towns have of late, placed their
dwellings so much distanced the one from the other, that they are like to
divide into two Churches; the situation of this Town is very pleasant, were
the Rivers Navigable far up, the branches thereof abound in fair and goodly
meadows with good store of stately Timber upon the uplands in many places, this
Town is full as fruitful in her Land, Chattell, and Inhabitants, as her
Sister Hampton; the people joined in Church* relation or brotherhood, nere
about the time the other did, and have desired and obtained the reverend and
graciously godly, M. Thomas Woster to be their Pastor.

WIth mickle labor and distressed wants,
Woster, thou have in desart's depth remained
Thy chiefest days, Christ's Gospel there to plant,
And water well, such toil shall yield great gain.
Oh happy day! may Woster say, that I
Was singled out for this great work in hand;
Christ by distress does Gold for's Temple try:
Thrice blessed are they may in his Presence stand,
But more, thou art by him reserved yet,
To see on earth Christ's Kingdom's exaltation:
More yet, thou art by him prepared fit
To help it on, among our English Nation.
CHAP. XV. Of further supply for the Church of Christ at Waterton. And a sad
acceidnt fell out in Boston Town.
THe Lord intending to strengthen his poor Churches here, and after the
overthrow of these damnable Errors, to trample Satan under their feet; he
manifests his mindefulness of them, in sending over fresh suplpyes again and
again: although weak and sorry men in themselves, yet strong in the Lord, and
the power of his might, the last that this year is to be named, is the
reverend, judicious, and godly-affected, Mr, John Knowles, who was desired of
the Church of Christ at Waterton, to be a twofold cord unto them, in the
office of a teaching Elder, with the reverend Mr. Phillips, of whom you have
heard in the former Book.

WIth courage bold and arguments of strength,
Knowles does apply Gods word his stock unto,
Christ furnished has (to show his bountyes length)
Thee with rich gifts, that thou his work may do:
New England is too scant, for thy desire
Inkindled is, Christ's truths abroad to spread,
Virginia may his grace to them admire,
That thee through Seas for their instruction led;
Thy labors Knowles are great, far greater he,
Not only thee, but all his valiant made,
Forth sinful dust, his Saints and Warriers be;
He thee upheld, thy strength shall never fade.
John come thou forth, behold what Christ has wrought
In these thy days, great works are yet behind,
Then toil it out till all to pass be brought,
Christ crown will thee, thou then his glory mind.
To end this year 1639. the Lord was pleased to a send a very sharp winter,
and more especially in strong storms of weekly snows, with very bitter blasts:
And here the Reader may take notice of the sad hand of the Lord against two
persons, who were taken in a storm of snow, as they were passing from Boston
to Roxbury, it being much about a mile distant, and a very plain way, One of
Roxbury sending to Boston his servant maid for a Barber Surgeon, to draw his
tooth, they lost their way in their passage between, and were not found till
many days after, and then the maid was fonnd in one place, and the man in
another, both of them frozen to death; in which sad accident, this was taken
into consideration by diverse people, that this Barber was more then ordinary
laborious to draw men to those sinful Errors, that were formerly so frequent,
and now newly overthrown by the blessing of the Lord, upon the endeavor of
his faithful servants with the word of truth) he having a fit opportunity, by
reason of his trade, so soon as any were set down in his chair, he would
commonly be cutting of their hair and the truth together; notwithstanding some
report better of the man, the example is for the living, the dead is judged of
the Lord alone.

CHAP. XVI. The great supply of godly Ministers for the good of his People in
New England.
FOr to govern and rule this little Common wealth, was this year chosen the
valiant Champion, for the advance of Christ's truh, Thomas Dudly Esquire. and
Richard Bellingham Esquire. Deputy. Governor; the freemen added to the former were
about 192. this year the reverend Mr. Burr (a holy, heavenly-minded man, and
able gifted to preach the Word of God) was exercised therein for some space of
time, in the Church of Christ at Dorchester, where they were about calling him
to the office of a teaching Elder; but in a very littie time after his coming
over he departed this life, yet mind him you may in the following Meetre

WEll did thou mind thy Work, Which caused thee vonter
(Through Ocean large) thy Christ in's Word to preach,
Exhorting all their faith on him to center,
Souls ravished are by him in thy sweet speech,
Thy speech bewrayes thy heart, for heaven does look,
Christ to enjoy, Burr from the earth is taken,
Thy words remain, though thou have us forsook,
In dust sleep sound till Christ thy body waken.
There are diverse others of the faithful Ministers of Christ that came over
for to further this his work; somewhat before this time, as the godly and
reverend Mr. Rayner, who was called to office in the Church of Christ at
Plimoth, and there remains preaching the Word instantly, with great pains and
care over that flock, as also the reverend and faithful servant of Christ
Jesus, Mr. William Hook, who was for some space of time at the Church in
Taunton, but now remains called to office in the Church of Christ at Newhaven,
a man, who has received of Christ many gracious gifts, fit for so high a
calling, with very amiable and gracious speech laboring in the Lord; and here
also the Reader may mind how the Lord was pleased to reach out his large hand
of bounty toward his N. England people, in supplying them abundantly with
Teachers, able and powerful to break the bread of life unto them, so long as
their desires continued hot and zealous; but after here grew a fullness in
some, even to slight, if not loath the honey comb; many returned for England,
and the Lord was pleased to take away others by death, although very few,
considering the number; but let N. England beware of an after-clap, and provoke
the Lord no longer. But seeing this year proved the last of the years of
transportation of Gods people, only for enjoyment of exercising the Ordinances
of Christ, and enlargement of his Kingdom (there being hopes of great good
opportunity that way at home) it will be expediene only to name some others in
the Southwest parts, among the lesser Colonyes, and so pass on to the story:
And first, not to forget the reverend Mr. Eaton, a man of love and peace, and
yet godly zealous, he came over with those who planted the Colony of Newhaven,
spending his labors in the Lord with them in Plimoth Plantation: also here is
to be minded the reverend Mr. Chancie, a very able Preacher, both learned and
judicious; as also the reverend, able, and pious M. Huet, who came over this
year, or rather, as I suppose, the year before, who did spend his time and
labor with a people that came over with him; at length the greatest part of
them they settled down in the Government of Canecticoe, where they planted the
Town of Windsor, and Church of Christ there, where this gracious servant of
Christ continued in his labors, till the Lord laid him in his bed of rest:
somewhat before this time came over the reverend Mr. Smith, being another of
that name, beside the former, he labored in the Word and Doctrine with a
people at Withersfield in those parts also; Mr. Henry Whitefield, another
Minister of the Gospel of Christ, of reverend respect, who being returned for
England, the latter of his labors, the Lord assisting, will sufficiently
testify his sincerity, for the truth and labors of love in the Lord: here may
also be named the reverend Mr. Peck, Mr. Saxton, and Mr. Lenten, the residue
will be spoken of in the ensuing story to those that yet remain. Of these
persons named the Author does tender this following Meetre.

WHen reasons Scepter first 'gan sway your hearts,
Through troublous Seas, this Western world to enter
Among Christ's Soldiers, here to act your parts;
Did not Christ's love on you cause him to center?
All those strait lines of your inflamed desire
Unto his truths, 'cause him in them you find;
From wilderness, not from his truths retire;
But unto death this wondrous work you will mind,
No place can claim peculiar interest in
Christ's worship, for all nations are his own;
The day's at hand down falls that man of sin,
And Christ's pure Gospel through the world is blown;
Harvest is come, bid case and sleep adieu,
What, trifle time when Christ takes in his Crop?
A Harvest large of Gentil and of Jew
(You) filled of Christ, let his sweet Doctrine drop.
CHAP. XVII. Of the planting of Long Island. And of the planting the nineteenth
Church in the Mattachusets government, called Sudbury.
THis year came over diverse godly and sincere servants of Christ, as I
suppose, among whom came over the reverend godly M. Peirson: This people
finding no place in any of the former erected Colonies to settle in, to their
present content, repaired to an Island, severed from the continent of Newhaven,
with about 16. miles off the salt Sea, and called Long Island, being about 120.
miles in length, and yet but narrow: here this people erected a Town, and
called it South Hampton, there are many Indians on the greatest part of this
Island, who at first settling of the English there, did much annoy their Cattle
with the multitude of Dogs they kept, which ordinarily are young wolves
brought up came, continuing of a very ravening nature. This people gathered
into a Church, and called to office Mr. Peirson, who continued with them about
7, or 8. years, and then he, with the greatest number of the people, removed
farther into the Island; the other part that remained invited Mr. Foordum, and
a people that were with him, to come and join with them, who accordingly did,
being wandered as far as the Dutch plantation, and there unsettled, although he
came into the Country before them.

This year the Town and Church of Christ at Sudbury began to have the first
foundation stones laid, taking up her station in the Inland Country, as her
elder Sister Concord had formerly done, lying farther up the same River, being
furnished with great plenty of fresh marsh, but it lying very low is much
indammaged with land-flouds, insomuch that when the summer proves wet, they
lose part of their hay; yet are they so sufficiently provided, that they take
in Cattle of other Towns to winter: these people not neglecting the chief
work, for the which they entered this wilderness, namely, to worship the Lord
in the purity of his Ordinances, and according to the rule of his Word, entered
into covenant with him, and one with another professedly to walk together in
Church Fellowship; and according to the same rule they called to the office of
a Pastor the reverend, godly, and able Minister of the Word, Mr. Edmond Brown,
whose labors in the Doctrine of Christ Jesus has hitherto abounded, wading
through this wildernesse-work with much cheerfulness of spirit, of whom as
follows:

BOth night and day Brown cease not to watch
Christ's little flock, in pastures fresh them feed,
The worrying wolves shall not thy weak lambs catch;
Well do thou mind in wilderness their breed;
Edmond, thy age is not so great but thou
May yet behold the Beast brought to her fall,
Earth's tottering Kingdom show her legs gin bow,
Thou' among Christ's Saints with prayers may her mawle;
What signs would have faith's courage for to rouse?
See Christ triumphant has his armies led,
In wilderness prepared his lovely Spouse,
Caused Kings and Kingdoms his high hand to dread:
Thou see his Churches daily are increasing,
And thou thy self amongst his worthyes warring,
Hold up thy hands, the battel's now increasing,
Christ's Kingdom's ay, it is past all mortall's marring.
This Town is very well watered, and has store of plow-land, but by reason of
the oaken roots, they have little broke up, considering, the many Acres the
place affords; but this kind of land requires great strength to break up, yet
brings very good crops, and lasts long without mending; the people are
industrious, and have increased in their estates, some of them, yet the great
distance it lies from the Mart Towns makes it burdensome to the Inhabitants,
to bring their corn so far by land; some Gentlemen have here laid out part of
their estates in procuring farms, by reason of the store of meadow: this Church
has hitherto been blessed with blessings of the right hand, even godly peace
and unity: they are not above 50. or 60. families, and about 80. souls in
Church fellowship, their Neat-heard about 300.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the planting of the twentieth Church of Christ at a Town
called Braintree.
ABout this time there was a Town and Church planted at Mount Wollestone, and
named Braintree, it was occasioned by some old planters and certain Farmers
belonging to the great Town of Beston; they had formerly one Mr. Whelowright to
preach unto them, (till this Government could no longer contain them) they many
of them in the mean time belonging to the Church of Christ at Boston, but after
his departure they gathered into a Church themselves; having some enlargement
of Land, they began to be well peopled, calling (...) office among them, the
reverend and godly Mr. William Tompson, and Mr. Henry Flint, the one to the
office of a Pastor, the other of a Teacher; the people are purged by their
indu^try from the sour leven of those sinful opinions that began (...) spread,
and if any remain among them it is very covert, (...) the manner of these
Erronists that remain in any place, is (...) countenance all sorts of sinful
opinions, as occasions serves, ^^th in Church and Commonwealth, underpretence
of Li^^^ty of Conscience, (as well their own opinion as others) (...) this
Symbol they may be known in Court and Country. his Town has great store of
Land in tillage, and is at pre^^t in a very thriving condition for outward
things, although (...) of Boston retain their Farms from being of their Town,
(...) do they lie within their bounds, and how it comes to pass ^^ow not; their
Officers have somewhat short allowance, ^^y are well stored with cattle and
corn, and as a people re^^es, so should they give: And Reader, I cannot but
mind (...) of the admirable providence of Christ for his people in (...), where
they have been in a low condition, by their liberty they have been raised to
much in a very little time: again, in withdrawing their hands have had their
plenty ^^d: The reverend Mr. Tompson is a man abounding in zeal the propagation
of the Gospel, and of an ardent affecti^^ in so much that he is apt to forget
himself in things that concern his own good, both him, and the like gracious M.
Flint is here remembered.

WIth twofold cord does Flint and Tompson draw
In Christ's yoke, his fallow ground to break,
Wounding men's hearts with his most righteous Law,
Cordials apply to weary souls and weak.
Tompson thou have Christ's folk encouraged
To war, their warfare putting them in mind,
That Christ their King will make his sons the drond,
The day's at hand when they shall mastery find.
Flint be a second to this Champion stout,
In Christ's your strength, while you for him do war,
When first does faint, a second helps him out,
Till Christ renew with greater strength by far.
From East to West your labors lasted have,
The more you toil, the more your strength increases,
Your works will bide, when you are laid in grave.
His truth advance, whose Kingdom never coaseth.
CHAP. XIX. Of the first promation of learning in New England, and the
extraordinary providence that the Lord was pleased to send for furthering of
the same.
TOward the latter end of this Summer came over the learned, reverend, and
judicious Mr. Henry Dunster, before whose coming the Lord was pleased to
provide a Patron for erecting a College, as you have formerly heard, his
provident hand being now no less powerful in pointing out with his unerring
finger, a president abundantly fitted this his servant, and sent him over for
to manage the work; and as in all the other passages of this history, the
Wonder-working Providence of S^^ns Savior has appeared, so more especially in
this work, the Fountains of learning being in a great measure stopped in our
Native Country at this time, so tha^ the sweet waters of Shilo's streams must
ordinarily pass into the Churches through the stinking channel of prelatical
pride, beside all the filth that the fountains themselves were daily encumbered
withal, insomuch that the Lord turned aside often from them, and refused the
breathings of his blessed Spirit among them, which caused Satan (in these
latter days of his transformation into an Angel of light) to make it a means
to persuade people from the use of learning altogether, that so in the next
generation they might be destitute of such helps, as the Lord has been pleased
hitherto to make use of, as chief means for the conversion of his people, and
building them up in the holy faith, as also for breaking down the Kingdom of
Antichrist; and verily had not the Lord been pleased to furnish N. E. with
means for the attainment of learning, the work would have been carried on very
heavily, and the hearts of godly parents would have vanished away with
heaviness for their poor children, whom they must have left in a desolare
wilderness, destitute of the means of grace.

It being a work (in the apprehension of all, whose capacity could reach to the
great sums of money, the edifice of a mean ^olledg would cost) past the reach
of a poor Pilgrim people, who had expended the greatest part of their estates
on a long voyage, traveling into Foreign Countries, being unprofitable to any
that have undertaken it, although it were but with their necessary attendance,
whereas this people were forced to travel with wifes, children, and servants;
besides they considered the troble charge of building in this new populated
desert, in regard of al kind of workmanship, knowing likewise, that young
Students could make but a poor progress in learning, by looking on the bare
walls of their chambers, and that Diogenes would have the better of them by
far, in making use of a Tun to lodge in, not being ignorant also, that many
people in this age are out of conceit with learning, and that although they
were not among a people who counted ignorance the mother of devotion, yet were
the greater part of the people wholly devoted to the Plow, (but to speak
uprightly, hunger is sharp, and the head will retain little learning, if the
heart be not refreshed in some competent measure with food, although the gross
vapors of a glutted stomach are the bane of a bright understanding, and brings
barrenness to the brain) but how to have both go on together, as yet they know
not; amidst all these difficulties, it was thought meet learning should plead
for it self, and (as many other men of good rank and quality in this barren
desert) plod out a way to live: Hereupon all those who had tasted the sweet
wine of Wisdoms drawing, and fed on the dainties of knowledge, began to set
their wits a work, and verily as the whole progress of this work had a farther
dependency then on the present eyed means, so at this time chiefly the end
being firmly fixed on a sure foundation, namely, the glory of God, and good of
all his elect people, the world throughout, in vindicating the truths of
Christ, and promoting his glorious Kingdom, who is now taking the heathen for
his inheritance, and the utmost ends of the earth for his possession, means
they know there are, many thousands uneyed of mortal man, which every days
Providence brings forth; upon these resolutions, to work they go, and with
thankful acknowledgment, readily take up all lawful means as they come to hand,
for place they fix their eye upon New-Town, which to tell their Posterity
whence they came, is now named Cambridg, and withal to make the whole world
understand, that spiritual learning was the thing they chiefly desired, to
sanctify the other, and make the whole lump holy, and that learning being set
upon its right object, might not contend for error instead of truth; they chose
this place, being then under the Orthodox, and soul-flourishing Ministry of
Mr. Thomas Shepherd, of whom it may be said, without any wrong to others, the
Lord by his Ministry has saved many a hundred soul: The situation of this
College is very pleasant, at the end of a spacious plain, more like a bowling
green, then a Wilderness, near a fair navigable river, environed with many
Neighboring Towns of note, being so near, that their houses join with her
Suburbs, the building thought by some to be too gorgeous for a Wilderness, and
yet too mean in others apprehensions for a College, it is at present in larging
by purchase of the neighbor houses, it has the conveniences of a fair Hall,
comfortable Studies, and a good Library, given by the liberal hand of some
Magistrates and Ministers, with others: The chief gift toward the founding of
this College, was by Mr. John Harnes, a reverend Minister, the Country being
very weak in their public Treasury, expended about 500. l. toward it, and for
the maintenance thereof, gave the yearly revenue of a Ferry passage between
Boston, and Charles Town, the which amounts to about 40. or 50. l. per annum.
The Commissioners of the four united Colonies also taking into consideration,
(of what common concernment this work would be, not only to the whole
plantations in general, but also to all our English Nation) they endeavored to
stir up all the people in the several Colonies to make a yearly contribution
toward it, which by some is observed, but by the most very much neglected; the
Government has endeavored to grant them all the privileges fit for a
College, and accordingly the Governor and Magistrates, together with the
President of the College, for the time being, have a continual care of ordering
all matters for the good of the whole: This College has brought forth, and
nursed up very hopeful plants, to the supplying some Churches here, as the
grrcious and godly Mr. Wilson, son to the grave and zealous servant of Christ
Mr. John Wilson, this young man is Pastor to the Church of Christ at
Dorchester; as also Mr. Buckly, son to the reverend M. Buckly of Concord; (...)
also a second son of his, whom our Native Country has now at present help in
the Ministry, and the other is over a people of Christ in one of these
Colonies, and if I mistake not, England has I hope not only this young man of
N. E. nur^^ng up in learning, but many more, as M. Sam. and Natha^^^l Mathers,
Mr. Wells, Mr. Downing, Mr. B^rnard, Mr. Al^^^, Mr. Bruster, Mr. William Ames,
Mr. Jones: Another of the first fruits of this College is employed in these
Western parts at M^vis, one of the summer Islands; beside these named, ^^me
help has been had from hence in the study of Physic, (...) also the godly Mr.
Sam. Danforth, who has not only stu^ed Divinity, but also Astronomy, he put
forth many Alma^^ks, and is now called to the office of a teaching Elder in the
Church of Christ at Roxbury, who was one of the fellows of this College; the
number of Students is much increased of late, so that the present year 1651. on
the twelfth of the sixth month, ten of them took the degree of Batchelors of
Art, among whom the Sea-born son of Mr. John Cotton was one, some Gentlemen
have sent their sons hither from England, who are to be commended for their
care of them, as the judicious and godly Doctor Ames, and diverse others: This
has been a place certainly more free from temptations to lewdness, then
ordinarily England has been, yet if men shall presume upon this to send their
most exorbitant children, intending them more especially for Gods service, the
Justice of God does sometimes meet with them, and the means does more harden
them in their way, for of late the godly Governors of this College have been
forced to expel some, for fear of corrupting the Fountain, wherefore the
Author would ye should mind this following verse.

You that have seen these wondrous works by Sions Savier don,
Expect not miracle, left means thereby you overrun;
The noble Acts Jehovah wrought, his Israel to redeem,
Surely this second work of his shall far more glorious seem;
Not only Egypt, but all Lands, where Antichrist does reign,
Shall from Jehovahs heavy hand ten times ten plagues sustain^
Bright shining shall this Gospel come, Oh glorious King of Saints
Thy blessed breath confounds thy foes, all mortal power faints,
The rattling bones together run with self-same breath that blows
Of Isreal's sons long dead and dry, each joint there sinew grows,
Fair flesh does cover them, and veins (life's feuntain) takes there plat^
Smooth seamless coats does cloth their flesh, and all their structure grace.
The breath of Life is added, they no Antinomians are,
But loving him who gives them life, more zealous are by far
To keep his Law, then formerly when righteousness they sought,
In keeping that they could not keep, which then their dowuf^ brought.
Their ceremonies vanished are, on Christ's all their desires,
Their zeal all Nations does provoke, inkindled are loves fires:
With have on horseback, bringing hometheir sons and daughters, they
Rejoice to see this glorious sight, like Resurrections day;
Up and be doing, you young plants, Christ calls his work unto
Polluted lips, touched with heavens fire, about this work shall go.
Prostrate in prayer parents, and you young ones on Christ call,
Suppose of you he will make use, whereby that boast shall fall:
So be it Lord thy servants say, who are at thy disposing,
With outward word work inward grace, by heavenly truths disclosing.
Awake stand up from death to life, in Christ your studies enter,
The Scriptures search, bright light bring forth, upon this hardship venture.
Sound doctrine shall your lips preach out, all errors to confound
And rid Christ's Temple from this smoke, his glory shall abound;
Precipitant does D^gon fall, his triple head off out,
The Beast that all the world admires, by you to death is put:
Put hand to mouth, with vehement blast your silver Trumpets sound,
Christ calls to mind his peoples wrongs, their foes he will now confo^nd:
Bestrong in God, and his great might, his wondrous works do tell,
You raised are unwonted ways observe his workings well.
As Jordans streams congealed in heaps, and Jerico's high walls
With Rams horns blast, and Midians Host, with pitcher breaking falls;
Like works your faith, for to confirm in these great works to come,
That nothing now too hard may seem, Jehovah would have don.
The rage of Seas, and hunger sharp, wants of a desert Land,
Your noble hearts have overcom, what shall this work withstand?
Not persecutors pride and rage, strong multitudes do fall,
By little handfuls of least dust, your Christ confounds them all,
Not S^tan and his subtle train with seeming show reforming,
Another Gospel to bring forth, brings damned errors swarming:
Your selves have seen his paint waesht off, his hidden poisons found,
Christ you provides with Antidotes, to keep his people sound:
There Is naught remains but conquist now, through Christ's continued power,
His hardest works have honors most attend them every hour.
What greater honor then on earth, Christ's Legate for to bo,
Attended with his glorious Saints in Church fraternity.
Christ to behold adorning now his Bride in bright array,
And you his friends him to attend upon his Nuptial day,
With crowned heads, as Conquerors triumphant by his side;
In's presence is your lasting joy, and pleasures ever bide.
Mr. Henry Dunstar is now President of this College, fitted from the Lord for
the work, and by those that have skill that way, reported to be an able
Proficient, in both Hebrew, Greek, and Latin languages, an Orthodox Preacher
of the truths of Christ, very powerful through his blessing to move the
affection; and besides he having a good inspection into the well-ordering of
things for the Students maintenance (whose commons has been very short
hitherto) by his frugal providence has continued them longer at their Studies
then otherwise they could have done; and verily it is great pity such ripe heads
as many of them be, should want means to further them in learning: But seeing
the Lord has been pleased to raise up so worthy an instrument for their good,
he shall not want for encouragement to go on with the work, so far as a
rustical rhyme will reach.

COuld man presage prodigious works at hand,
Provide he would for's good and ill provent,
But God both time and means has at's command,
Dunster in time to his N. E. has sent.
When England 'gan to keep at home their guides,
N. E. began to pay their borrowed back,
Jndustrious Dunster, providence provides,
Our friends supply, and yet our selves no lack:
With restless labor thou do delve and dung,
Surculus set in garden duly tended,
That in Christ's Orchard they with fruit full hung,
May bless the Lord, thy toil gone, them expended,
Thy constant course proves retrograde in this,
From West to East thy toil returns again,
Thy husbandry by Christ so honored is,
That all the world partaketh of thy pains.
CHAP. XX. Of the planting of the one and twentieth Church of Christ at a Town
called Gloucester, and of the Church and Town of Dover, and of the hardships
that befell a certain people, who thirsted aftor large liberty in a warm Country.
FOr the Government of this little Commonwealth, this year was chosen for
Governor Richard Belingham, Esquire, and John Endiout Esquire for Governors;
the number of Freemen added this year, were about 503.

There was another Town and Church of Christ erected in the Mattachuset
Government, upon the Northern-Cape of the Bay, called Cape Ann, a place of
fishing, being peopled with Fishermen, till the reverend Mr. Richard Blindman
came from a place in Plymouth Patten, called Green-Harbor, with some few people
of his acquaintance, and settled down with them, named the Town Gloucester, and
gathered into a Church, being but a small number, about fifty persons, they
called to office this godly reverend man, whose gifts and abilities to handle
the word, is not inferior to many others, laboring much against the errors of
the times, of a sweet, humble, heavenly carriage: This Town lying out toward
the point of the Cap^, the access thereunto by Land becomes uneasy, which was
the chief cause it was no more populated: Their fishing ^^^de would be very
beneficial, had they men of estates to manage it; yet are they not without
other means of maintenance, having good timber for shipping, and a very
sufficient builder, but that these times of combustion the Seas throughout has
hindered much that work, yet have there ^^en Vessels built here at this Town of
late: Their reverend Elder is here remembered.

THou have ^ky prime and middle age here spent,
The best is not too good for him that gave it,
When thou did first this Wilderness frequent,
For Sious sake it was, that Christ might save it.
Blinman be blithe in him, who thee has taken
To feed his Flock, a few poor scattered sheep,
Why should they be of thee at all forsaken,
Thy honor's high, that any thou may keep.
Wait patiently thy Masters coming, thou
Have hitherto his peoples portions dealt,
It matters not for high preferment; now
Thy crown's to come, with joys immortal felt.
About this time the people inhabiting the Town of Dover, although they lay out
of any of these Colonies mentioned, (yet hearing and seeing with what sweet
harmony, both in Churches and civil Government, the Mattachusets peopled patten
was carried on prosperonsly) desired greatly to submit unto the same, by
putting themselves under their protection; and for that end they petitioned
their General Cort to admit of them, and administer Justice as occasion served,
by the hands of their godly Magistrates, which accordingly was granted, and
they have been partakers of the benefit hitherto, having also the benefit of
some one Minister to preach unto them, till it pleased God to fit stones by the
continual hewing of his word for his Temple-work, and they gather a Church
according to the rule of the word, and called to office of a Pastor one M.
Maude, both godly, both godly and diligent in the work: This Town is situate
upon Puscataque river, lying to the Northeast of Boston, which river although
it be not nigh so broad as Merrinaeck river, yet i^ it navigable, being very
deep, and her banks in many place filled with stately timber, which has caused
one or two Saw Mills to be continued; there they have a good quantity o^ Meddow
Land, and good ground for India corn. To end the year 1641. the Lord was
pleased to send a very sharp Winte^ in so much that the Harbor where Ships
ordinarily Anchor, wa^ frozen over of such a thickness, that it became
passeable, bot for horse, carts, and oxen, for the space of five weeks. An here
the Reader must be minded of the wonder-working providence of Christ for his
poor Churches, in altering the ve^^ season for their comfort, to the wonder of
English and Ind^ans, the Winter and Summer proving more moderate, both for heat
and cold, unmasking many by this means, it being a frequent thing with some,
that after the novelties of a new la^d began to be stale with them, and the
sweet nourishment of the soul by the presence of Christ in the preaching of his
Word, began to dry up through the hot heady conceit of some new conceived
opinion: Then they wanted a warmer country, and every Northwest wind that blew,
they crept into some odd chimney-corner or other, to discourse of the diversity
of Climates in the Southern parts, but chiefly of a thing very sweet to the
palate of the flesh, called liberty, which they supposed might be very easily
attained, could they but once come into a place where all men were chosen to
the office of a Magistrate, and all were preachers of the Word, and no hearers,
then it would be all Summer and no Winter: This consultation was to be put in
practice speedily, as all headstrong motions are, but the issue proved very
sad, both to these and others also; for thus it befell, when the time of the
year was come that a sea-voyage might be undertaken, they having made sale of a
better accommodation then any they could afterward attain unto, prepare for the
voyage with their wifes and children, intending to land them in one of the
Summer Islands, called the Isle of Providence, and having wind and seas
favoring them, as they supposed, or to speak more proper, the provident hand
of the most high God directing it, they were brought so near the shore for
convenient landing, that they might have heaved a Biscuit cake on land; their
Pilate wondering he could not see the English colors on the Fort, he began to
mistrust the Island was taken, and more especially, because they saw not the
people appear upon the shores as they usually did when any Vessel was a coming
in, but now and then they saw some people a far off wasting to them to come in,
till they were even come to an Anchor, and then by the hoising up and down the
heads of those on shore, they were fully confirmed in it, that the Island was
taken, as indeed it was by the Spaniards, who as soon as they tackt about to
be gone, made shot at them, and being in great fear they made all the fail they
could, but before they could get out of shot, the Master of the Vessel was
slain, the main sail shot through, and the Barque also; the people some of them
returned back again for New England, being sore abashed at this providence that
befell them, that they would never seek to be governed by liberty again to this
very day; yet others there are were so strongly bent for the heat of liberty,
that they endured much pinching penury upon an uninhabited Island, til at
length meeting some others like-minded with themselves, they made a voyage to
another Island, the chiefest part of their Charter of Freedom was this, That no
man upon pain of death should speak against another Religion where they
continued, till some of them were famished, and others even forced to feed on
Rats, and any other thing they could find to sustain nature, till the provident
hand of God brought a Ship to the place, which took them off the Island, and
saved their lives: But upon this the Winters discourse ceased, and projects for
a warmer Country were hushed and done.

CHAP. XXI. Of the sudden and unexpected falt of Cattle, and the great
blessing of God in giving plenty of provision.
FOr this year 1642. John Winthrope Esquire was chosen Governor, and John
Endicut Esquire Deputy Governor: The number of Freemen added were about 1232.
This Spring Cowes and Cattle of that kind (having continued at an excessive
price so long as any came over with estates to purchase them) fell of a sudden
in one week from 22 l. the Cow, to 6.7. or 8. l. the cow at most, insomuch that
it made all men admire how it came to pass, it being the common practice of
those that had any store of Cattle, to sell every year a Cow or two, which
clothed their backs, filled their bellies with more varieties then the Country
of it self afforded, and put gold and silver in their purses beside. Here the
Reader it desired to take notice of the wonderful providence of the most high
God toward these his new-planted Churches, such as was never heard of, since
that Jacobs sons ceased to be a people, that in ten or twelve years planting,
there should be such wonderful alteration, a Nation to be born in a day, a
Commonwealth orderly brought forth from a few Fugitives, all the Foreign
plantations that are of forty, fifty, or a hundred years standing, cannot
really report the like, although they have had the greatest encouragements
earth could afford, Kings to countenance them, staple commodities to provoke
all manner of Merchants to resort unto them, silver, gold, precious stones, or
whatever might incice the eye or ear to incline the motion of man toward them,
his remove, rocky, barren, bushy, wild-woody wilderness, a receptacle for
Lions, Wolves, Bears, Foxes, Rockoones, Bags, Bevers, Otters, and all kind of
wild creatures, a place that never afforded the Natives better then the flesh
of a few wild creatures and parch't Indian corn incht out with Chestnuts and
bitter Acorns, now through the mercy of Christ become a second England for
fertilness in so short a space, that it is indeed the wonder of the world; but
bring already forgotten of the very persons that taste of it at present,
although some there be that keep in memory his mercies multitude, and declare
it to their childrens children.

First to begin with the increase of food, you have heard in what extreme
penury these people were in at first, planting for want of food, gold, silver,
raiment, or whatsoever was precious in their eyes they parted with (when ships
came in) for this their beast that died, some would stick before they were
cold, and sell their poor pined flesh for food, at 6.d. per pound, Indian Beans
at 16.s. per bushel, when Ships came in it grieved some Master to see the
urging of them by people of good rank and quality to sell bread unto them. But
now take notice how the right hand of the most high has altered all, and men
of the meaner rank are urging them to buy bread of them, and now good white and
wheaten bread is no dainty, but even ordinary man has his choice, if gay
clothing, and a liquerish tooth after sack, sugar and plums lick not away his
bread too fast, all which are but ordinary among those that were not able to
bring their own persons ever at their first coming; there are not many Towns
in the Country, but the poorest person in them has a house and land of his
own, and bread of his own growing, if not some cattle: beside, flesh is now no
rare food, beef, pork, and mutton being frequent in many houses, so that this
poor Wilderness has not only equalized England in food, but goes beyond it in
some places for the great plenty of wine and sugar, which is ordinarily spent,
apples, pears, and quince tarts instead of their former Pumpkin Pies, Poultry
they have plenty, and great rarity, and in their feasts have not forgotten the
English fashion of stiring up their appetites with variety of cooking their
food; and notwithstanding all this great and almost miraculous work of the
Lord, in providing for his people in this barren desert, yet are there here (as
in other places) some that use these good creatures of God to excess, and
others to hoard up in a wretched and miserable manner, pinch themselves and
their children with food, and will not taste of the good creatures God has
given for that end, but cut Church and Commonwealth as short also: Let not such
think to escape the Lords hand with as little a stroke, as the like do in other
places.

Secondly, For raiment, our cloth has not been cut short, as but of late years
the traders that way have increased to such a number, that their shops have
continued full all the year long, all one England; besides the Lord has been
pleased to increase sheep extraordinarily of late, hemp and flax here is great
plenty, hides here are more for the number of persons then in England; and for
cloth, here is and would be materials enough to make it; but the Farmers deem
it better for their profit to put away their cattle and corn for clothing,
then to set upon making of cloth; if the Merchants trade be not kept on foot,
they fear greatly their corn and cattle will lie in their hands; assuredly the
plenty of clothing has caused much excess of late in those persons, who have
clambered with excess in wages for their work, but seeing it will be the theme
of our next discourse, after the birds are settled, it may be here omitted.

Further, the Lord has been pleased to turn all the wigwams, huts, and hovels
the English dwelt in at their first coming, into orderly, fair, and well built
houses, well furnished many of them, together with Orehards filled with goodly
fruit trees, and gardens with variety of flowers: There are supposed to be in
the Mattachusets Government at this day, near a thousand acres of land planted
for Orchards and Gardens, besides their fields are filled with garden fruit,
there being, as is supposed in this Colony, about fifteen thousand acres in
tillage, and of cartel about twelve thousand neat, and about three thousand
sheep: Thus has the Lord in couraged his people with the increase of the
general, although many particulars are outed, hundreds of pounds, and some
thousands, yet are there many hundreds of laboring men, who had not enough to
bring them over, yet now worth scores, and some hundreds of pounds; to be sure
the Lord takes notice of all his talents, and will call to account in time:
This brief survey of things will be of good use when time serves, in mean time
you shall understand,

CHAP. XXII. Of the manner of planting Towns and Churches in N. E. and in
particular of the Church and Town at Wooburn, being the three and twentieth
Church of Christ in the Mattachusets Government.
THere was a Town and Church erected called Wooburn, this present year, but
because all the action of this wandering people meet with great variety of
censures, the Author will in this Town and Church see down the manner how this
people have populated their Towns, and gathered their Churches, that the
reverend Mr. Rathbone may be better informed, then when he wrote his book
concerning the Churches of N. E. and all others that are experienced in the
holy Scriptures, may lay the actions of N. E. to the Rule, and try them by the
balance of the Sanctuary, for assuredly they greatly desire they may be brought
to the light, for great is the truth, and will prevail, yet have they their
errings as well as others, but yet their imperfections may not blemish the
truths of Christ, let them be glorified, and these his people will willingly
take shame to themselves, wherein they have miscarried: But to begin, this
Town, as all others had its bounds fixed by the General Court, to the contenese
of four miles squa^, (beginning at the end of Charles Town bounds) the grant is
to seven men or good and honest report, upon condition, that within two year
they erect houses for habitation thereon, and so go on to make a Town thereof,
upon the Act of Court; these seven men have power to give and grant out lands
unto any persons who are willing to take up their dwellings within the said
precinct, and to be admitted to al common privileges of the said Town, giving
them such an ample portion, both of Meadow and Upland, as their present and
future stock of cattle and hands were like to improve, with eye had to others
that might after come to populate the said Town; this they did without any
respect of persons, yet such as were exorbitant, and of a turbulent spirit,
unfit for a civil society they would reject, till they come to mend their
manners, such came not to enjoy any freehold: These seven men ordered and
disposed of the streets of the Town, as might be best for improvement of the
Land, and yet civil and religious society maintained; to which end those that
had land nearest the place for Sabbath assembly, had a lesser quantity at home,
and more farther off to improve for corn, of all kinds; they refused not men
for their poverty, but according to their ability were helpful to the poorest
sort, in building their houses, and distributed to them land accordingly; the
poorest had six or seven acres of Meadow, and twenty five of Upland, or
thereabouts: Thus was this Town populated, to the number of sixty families, or
thereabout, and after this manner are the Towns of New England peopled, the
situation of this Town is in the highest part of the yet peopled land, near
upon the head-springs of many considerable rivers, or their branches, as the
first rise of Ipswitch river, and the rise of Shashin river, one of the most
considerable branches of Merrimeck, as also the first rise of Mistick river and
ponds, it is very full of pleasant springs, and great variety of very good
water, which the Summers heat causes to be more cooler, and the Winters cold
makes more warmer; their Medows are not large, but lie in diverse places to
particular dwellings, the like does their Springs; their Land is very fruitful
in many places, although they have no great quantity of plain land in any one
place, yet does their Rocks and Swamps yield very good food for cattle; as also
they have Mast and Tar for shipping, but the distance of place by land causes
them as yet to be unprofitable, they have great store of iron over, their
meeting house stands in a small Plain, where four streets meet, the people are
very labotious, if not exceeding some of them.

Now to declare how this people proceeded in religious matters, and so
consequently all the Churches of Christ planted in New England, when they came
once to hopes of being such a competent number of people, as might be able to
maintain a Minister, they then surely seated themselves, and not before, it
being as unnatural for a right N. E. man to live without an able Ministry, as
for a Smith to work his iron without a fire; therefore this people that went
about placing down a Town, began the foundation-stone, with earnest seeking of
the Lords assistance, by humbling of their souls before him in days of prayer,
and imploring his aid in so weighty a work, then they address themselves to
attend counsel of the most Orthodox and ablest Christians, and more especially
of such as the Lord had already placed in the Ministry, not rashly running
together themselves into a Church, before they had hopes of attaining an
Officer to preach the Word, and administer the Seals unto them, chosing rather
to continue in fellowship with some other Church for their Christian watch over
them, till the Lord would be pleased to provide: They after some search meet
with a young man named Mr. Thomas Carter, then belonging to the Church of
Christ at VVater-Town, a reverend godly man, apt to teach the sound and
wholesome truths of Christ; having attained their desires, in hopes of his
coming unto them, were they once joined in Church Estate, he exercising his
gifts of preaching and prayer among them in the mean time, and more especially
in a day of fasting and prayer. Thus these godly people interest their
affections one with the other, both Minister and people: After this they make
ready for the work, and the 24. of the 6. month 1642. they assemble together
in the morning about eight of the clock; After the reverend Mr. Syms had
continued in preaching and prayer about the space of four or five hours, the
persons that were to join in Covenant, openly and professedly before the
Congregation, and messengers of diverse Neighbor Churches, among whom the
reverend Elder of Boston, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Wilson, Mr. Allen of Charlestown,
Mr. Shepherd of Cambridg, Mr. Dunster of VVater-Town, Mr. Knowles of Deadham,
Mr. Allen of Roxbury, Mr. Eliot of Dorchester, Mr. Mather: As also it is the
duty of the Magistrates (in regard of the good and peace of the civil
Government) to be present, at least some one of them (not only to prevent the
disturbance might follow in the Commonwealth by any, who under pretense of
Church Covenant, might bring in again those cursed opinions that caused such
commotion in this and the other Colony, to the great damage of the people) but
also to countenance the people of God in so pious a work, that under them they
may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty; for this
cause was present the honored Mr. Increase Nowel, the persons stood forth, and
first confessed what the Lord had done for their poor souls, by the work of his
Spirit in the preaching of his Word, and Providence, one by one; (and that all
might know their faith in Christ was bottomed upon him, as he is revealed in
his Word, and that from their own knowledge) they also declare the same,
according to that measure of understanding the Lord had given them; the Elders,
or any other messengers there present question with them, for the better
understanding of them in any points they doubt of, which being done, and all
satisfied, they in the name of the Churches to which they do belong, hold out
the right hand of fellowship unto them, they declaring their Covenant, in words
expressed in writing to this purpose.

The Church Covenant.
WE that do assemble our selves this day before God and and his people, in an
unfeigned desire, to be accepted of him as a Church of the Lord Jesus Christ,
according to the Rule of the New Testament, do acknowledge our selves to be the
most unworthy of all others, that we should attain such thigh grace, and the
most unable of our selves to the performance of any thing that is good,
abhorring our selves for all our former defilements in the worship of God, and
other ways, and resting only upon the Lord Jesus Christ for atonement, and
upon the power of his grace for the guidance of our whole after course, do here
in the name of Christ Jesus, as in the presence of the Lord, from the bottom of
our hearts agree together through his grace to give up our selves, first unto
the Lord Jesus as our only King, Priest and Prophet, wholly to be subject unto
him in all thing, and therewith one unto another, as in a Church-Body to walk
together in all the Ordinances of the Gospel, and in all such mutual love and
offices thereof, as toward one another in the Lord; and all this, both
according to the present light that the Lord has given us, as also according
to all further light, which he shall be pleased at any time to reach out unto
us out of the Word by the goodness of his grace, renouncing also in the same
Covenant all errors and Schisms, and whatsoever by-ways that are contrary to
the blessed rules revealed in the Gospel, and in particular the inordinate love
and seeking after the things of the world; every Church has not the same for
words, for they are not for a form of words.

The 22. of the 9. month following Mr. Thomas Carter was ordained Pastor, in
presence of the like Assembly. Hfter he had exercised in preaching and prayer
the greater part of the day, two persons in the name of the Church laid their
hands upon his head, and said, We ordain thee Thomas Carter to be Pastor unto
this Church of Christ; then one of the Elders Priest, being desired of the
Church, continued in prayer unto the Lord for his more especial assistance of
this his servant in his work, being a charge of such weighty importance, as is
the glory of God and salvation of souls, that the very thought would make a man
to tremble in the sense of his own inability to the work: The people having
provided a dwelling house, built at the charge of the Town in general, welcomed
him unto them with joy, that the Lord was pleased to give them such a blessing,
that their eyes may see their Teachers: After this there were diverse added to
the Church daily; after this manner the person desirous to join with the
Church, comes to the Pastor, and makes him acquainted therewith, declaring how
the Lord has been pleased to work his conversion, who discerning hopes of the
Persons faith in Christ, although weak, yet if any appear, he is propounded to
the Church in general for their approbation, touching his godly life and
conversation, and then by the Pastor and some brethren heard again, who make
report to the Church of their charitable approving of the person; but before
they come to join with the Church, all persons within the Town have public
notice of it, then publicly he declares the manner of his conversion, and how
the Lord has been pleased by the hearing of his Word preached, and the work of
his Spirit in the inward parts of his soul, to bring him out of that ^^tural
darkness, which all men are by nature in and under, as also the measure of
knowledge the Lord has been pleased to indue him withal. And because some men
cannot speak publicly to edisication through bashfulness, the less is required
of such, and women speak not publicly at all, for all that is desired, is to
prevent the polluting the blessed Ordinances of Christ by such as walk
scandalously, and that men and women do not eat and drink their own
condemnation, in not discerning the Lords body. After this manner were many
added to this Church of Christ, and those 7. that joined in Church Fellowship
at first, are now increased to 74. persons, or therabout; of which, according
to their own confession, as is supposed, the greater part having been converted
by the preaching of the Word in N. E. by which may appear the powerful efficacy
of the word of Christ in the mouth of his Ministers, and that this way of
Christ in joining together in Church Covenant, is not only for building up of
souls in Christ, but also for converting of sinness, and bringing them out of
the natural condition to be ingrafted into Christ, for if this one Church have
so many, then assuredly there must be a great number comparatively throughout
all the Churches in the Country. After this manner have the Churches of Christ
had their beginning and progress hitherto, the Lord continue and increase them
the world throughout: The Pastor of this Church has much increased with the
encreasings of Christ Jesus, of whose labors in the Lord as follows.

CArtor, Christ has his ways thee taught, and them,
Have not withheld his Word, but unto all,
With His word of power do cause stout souls to bow,
And meek as Lambs before thy Christ to fall:
The ancient truths, plain paths they fit thee best,
Thy humble hear all haughty acts puts by,
The lowly heart, Christ learns his lovely hest,
Thy meekness shows thy Christ to thee is nigh;
Yet must thou show Christ makes his bold to be,
As Lions, that none may his truths tread down,
Pastoral power he has invested thee
With, it maintain, least he on thee do frown:
Thy youth thou have in this New England spent,
Full sixteen years to water, plant, and prune,
Trees taken up, and for that end here sent,
Thy end's with Christ, with his Saints his praises tune.
This year the General Court made an order about preparing houses for
Saltpeter, that there might be powder made in the Country, but as yet it has
not gone on.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the uniting of the four English Colonies in N, E. and the
battle fought between the Narragansets, and Mawhiggins.
THe year 1653. the honored John Winthrop Esquire was chosen Governor again,
and John Endicut Esquire Deputy Governor; the free men added were about 87.
this year, the four Colonies, the Mattachusets, Plimoth, Canectico, and
New Haven, taking into consideration the many Nations of Dutch, Zewes, and
French, that were on either side of them; as also how apt they were to lay
claim to lands they never had any right unto, but only a paper possession of
their own framing; and further, that the inhumane and barbarous Indians would
be continually quarrelling and contending, could they see any hopes of
prevailing, together with the contestion begun in our Native country, and
withal, that although providence had cast them into four several Colonies, yet
Religion had already united them, coming over all for one and the same end.
Hereupon by Commissioners sent from the several colonies, they concluded a firm
confederation to assist each other in all just and lawful war, bearing an equal
proportion in the charge, according to the number of persons inhabiting each
colony; but herein the Mattachuset had the worst end of the staff, in bearing
as much, or more charge, then all the other three, and yet no greater number of
Commissioners to negotiate and judge in transacting of affairs concerning peace
and war, then the least of the other, and any one of the other as l^kely to
involve them in a chargeable war with the naked Natives, that have neither
plunder, nor cash to bear the charge of it, nay hitherto the most has risen
from the lesser colonies, yet are the Mattachusets far from deserting them,
esteeming them highly, so long as their Governments maintain the same purity in
Religion with themselves, for indeed this is that they have spent their whole
travel for, and therefore if Plimoth, or any of the other shall draw back
herein, the chiefest end of their confederacy would be lost; for should it come
to pass (that in venturing their persons and estates so far for purity in the
Ordinances and Discipline of Christ) they should lose the purity in doctrine,
all their cost and labor were lost: This confederacy being finished, there
came in certain Indian Sachims, and submitted to the English Government, as
Pomham, and Soecana^^^^h to the Mattachusets; also Miantonemo and Vncas; but
between these two latter Princes arose a very hot quarrel, the English seeking
by all means to quench it, but could not, it being, as is supposed, fomented by
a small company of vacabond English, who were then for their crimes banished
from their own accomplices at Rhode Island, the Ringleader of them, being one
Samuel Gorton, by whose mean they were drawn into damnable errors,: These
Gortonists, as is said, lent Miantonenemo a Corslet for safeguard of his own
person in the following fight, and he promised each of them a Mawchiggin
papoose, which was the people. Vneas was Prince of For, although Miantonemo
were the more potent Prince by far, and a very anstere man, yet did he choose
rather to take Vncasses life away by treachery if he could; and to that end
hired a young man of the Pegod Nation to murder him, as is supposed, for in an
evening, when it was very near dark, this Sachim passing without any of his
Retinue, from one wigwam to another, was suddenly shot through the arm with an
arrow, seeing not whence it came; but yet recovering the Palace he was passing
unto, without receiving any more shot, he had the arrow drawn forth, and the
wound cured in a short time after; the young man, who was suspected to have
done the fact, having great store of Wampumpeage, about this time being
questioned how he came by it, could give no good account, which increased the
suspicion the more, that he had received it as hire from Miantonemo for this
fact; and hereupon the young man fled unto him, which caused Vneas to complain
to the English, who having the hearing of the case at a General Co^^^ holden at
Boston, at the same time Miantonemo coming thither with his attendance, and
sending one of his Counselors to follow the matter in hand, the young man was
examined in presence of Miantonemo, being, as is supposed, tutored by him, he
told this tale, that while he was in Vncasses Court, on a day traveling alone
by a thick swamp, Vncas called him out of the swamp, charging him to be true to
him, in declaring to the English what he required to him, which was, that he
should say he had been hired of Miantonemo to kill him, and to make his matter
good, quoth the young man, he then cut his arm on the top, and underneath with
the flint of his Gun, to make men think he had been shot through with an
arrow: This tale made the English more to suspect Miantonemo then before; and
therefore desired to examine the young man alone, which he was very unwilling
they should do; but upon further examination alone, they did verily believe
this young man had done the fact, yet for present they let him depart with
Miantonemo, advising him to send him home to Vncas, but by the way, he instead
of returning him home, cut off his head, and forthwith gathered an army of
about a thousand men to fight with Vncas, who feared not to meet him in the
field with half the number; the battle being come within shot one of another,
with a great hubbub they let their long shafts fly one at another, and after
came to a close with other weapons, till the Narrowgansets multitude being
forely distressed by the Mawhiggins valor, they began to cry out Wem-meck,
which is to say, enough: Vncas like a stout commander, with others of his
bloud-royal that were about him, sought to perfect his victory, by possessing
himself with the person of their Prince, which he effected, by putting his
Lifeguard to flight, and taking hold on the Sachim himself, carried him
victoriously away to the Town of Hartford, near the which he kept his residence
at this time, and then made the English acquainted there with his noble design,
and desired to have the advice of the united colonies what to do with his
prisoner; the Narrowgansets sought to ransom him home, being much abashed, that
so mean a Prince as Vncas was should escape scotfree with such a victory; but
the honered Commissioners have had proof of Miantonemo's treachery, both toward
this Prince that had him in possession, and toward the English in falsisying
his promise with them; they advised Vncas to put him to death, but withal,
that he should forbear to exercise my barbarous cruelty toward him, as their
manner is, and by this means the English prevented another war, both with
English and Indians, which was very near joining in battle. Not many years
after, the Indian Sachim upon this advise, caused Miantonemo to be led forth,
as if he would remove him to a more safer place of custody, and by the way
caused him to be executed; the Indians, his kindred and subjects, were much
grieved at his death, yet took it quietly at present, but the lesser Princes,
his Neighbors, rather rejoiced, he having tyrannized over them, and enforced
them to subject to his will, right or wrong.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the proceeding of certain persons called Gortonists, against
the united Colonies, and more especially against the Matrachusets, and of the
hlasphemous doctrines broached by Gorton, deluding a company of poor ignor ant
people therewith.
FOr not long before, those persons that we spoke of, who encouraged Miantonemo
to this war, and with the help of him enforced Pomham and Socananocho to set
their hands to a writing which these Gortonists had framad, to take their land
from them; but the poor Sachems, when they saw they were thus gulled of their
land, would take no pay for it, but complained to the Mattachusets Government,
to whom they had subjected themselves and their lands: As also at this time
certain English inhabiting those parts, with the Indians good leave and liking,
desired to have the benefit of the Mattachusets Government, as Dover formerly
had done, to whom this Government con^escended, in hope they might increase to
such a competent number of godly Christians, as that there might be a Church of
Christ planted, the place being capable to entertain them in a comfortable
measure for outward accommodation, but hitherto it has been hindered by these
Gortonists, and one of Plimoth, who forbad our people to plant there: These
person thus submitting, came at this time also to complain of certain wrongs
done them by these Gortoxists, who had thus in croached, and began to build on
the Indians land; upon these complaints, the Governor and the honored Mr. Dudly
issue forth their Warrant, to summon them to appear, they being then about five
or six persons, without any means for instructing them in the ways of God, and
without any civil Government to keep them in civility or humanity, which made
them to cast off most proudly and disdainfully any giving account to man of
their actions, no not to the chiefest in authority, but returned back most
insolent, scornful, scurrilous speeches. After this, the Government of the
Mattachusets sent two messengers on purpose to persuade them to come and have
their cause heard, assuring them like justice in their cause with any other;
but Samuel Gorton being the ringleader of the rout, was so full gorged with
dreadful and damnable errors, (the which he had newly ensnared these poor souls
with) that soon after the departure of the messenger, he lays aside all civil
justice, and instead of returning answer to the matter in hand, he vomits up a
whole paper full of beastly stuff, one while scoffing and deriding the
ignorance of all beside himself, that think Abraham, Jsaac, etc. could be saved
by Christ Jesus, who was after born of the Virgin Mary, another while mocking
at the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, in an opprobrious manner,
deriding at the Elements Christ was pleased to institute them in, and calling
them Negromancers that administer them at all; and in a word, all the
Ordinances of the Gospel abominable Idolatry he called, and likened them to
Molock, and the Star of the Idol Rempham; his paper was thrust full of such
filthiness, that no Christian ear could hear them without indignation against
them, and all was done by him in a very scornful and deriding manner,
upbraiding all that use them; in the mean time magnifying his own glorious
light, that could see himself to be personally Christ, God-Man, and so all
others that would believe as he did: This paper he got to be subscribed, with
about twelve or thirteen hands, his number of Disciples being increased, for
assuredly the man had a very glosing tongue, but yet very deceitful, for when
he had but a few with him, then he cried out against all such as would rule
over their own species, affirming, that the Scripture terms such to be Gods
of the world, or devils; but after his return from England, having received
some encouragement from such as could not look into the depth of his deceits,
being done at so large a distance, he getting into favor again with those, who
had formerly whipped him out of their company, turns devil himself; the godly
Governors of the Mattachusets seeing this blasphemous Bull of his, resolved to
send forty persons well-appointed with weapons of war for apprehending of him,
who accordingly, with some waiting, did apprehend him and the rest of his
company, except two or three which ran away without any hurt to any person,
although he gave out very big words, threatening them with blood and death so
soon as they set foot on the ground, and yet this brazenface'd deceiver
published in print the great fear their women were put unto by the soldiers,
whereas they came among them day by day, and had it not been that they intended
peaceably to take them, they would never have waited so long upon their
worships as they did, but being apprehended, and standing to that they had
written (yet would they willingly have covered it with some shifts if they
could) the greatest punishment they had, was to be confined to certain Towns
for a few months, and afterward banished; but to be sure there be them in N.
E. that have Christ Jesus and his blessed Ordinances in such esteem, that the
Lord assisting, they had rather lose their lives, then suffer them to be thus
blasphemed if they can help it; and whereas some have favored them, and
endeavored to bring under blame such as have been zealous against their
abominable doctrines, the good God be favorable unto them, and prevent them
from coming under the like blame with Ahab, yet they remain in their old way,
and there is somewhat to be considered in it to be sure, that in these days,
when all look for the fall of Antichrist, such detestable doctrines should be
upheld, and persons suffered, that exceed the Beast himself for blasphemy, and
this to be done by those that would be counted Reformers, and such as seek the
utter subversion of Antichrist.

To end this year, or rather at the beginning of it, the Lord caused another
Earthquake, much less then the former, it was on the fifth of the first month
called March in the morning.

CHAP. XXV. Of the planting the twenty fourth Church of Christ at the Town of
Readding, and the twenty fifth Church of Christ in the Mattachusets Government,
called Wenham.
THis year was chosen to the place of Governor John Endicut Esquire, and John
Winthrope Esquire Deputy Governor; the number of freemen added about 145. this
year.

The Town of Readding had her foundation stone laid about this time, this and
the Town of Wooburn were like the twins in the womb of Tamar, Readding
thrusting forth the hand first, but Wooburn came first to the birth, this Town
is well watered, and situate about a great pond, besides it has two mills,
the one a Saw-mill, the other a (...)-mill, which stand on two several streams;
it has not been ^o fruitful for children as her Sister has, her habitation is
fallen in the very center of the country, they are well stocked with cattle,
for the number of people they have they gathered into a church, and ordained a
Pastor from among themselves at the same time, a young man of good abilities to
preach the Word, and of a very humble behavior, named Mr. Green, he having
finished his course, departed this life not long after, whose labors are with
the Lord; after him succeeded in the place one Mr. Hoph, a young man, one of
the first fruits of N. E. a man studious to promote the truths of Christ, they
are both remembered in this following verse.

ON earths bed thou at noon have laid thy head,
You that for Christ (as Green) here toy I have taken,
When nature fails, then rest it in earths dead,
Till Christ by's word with glory thee awaken.
Young Hoph thou must be second to this man,
In field encounter, with Christ's foes shall thou
Stand up, and take his bright sword in thy hand,
Error cut down, and make stout stomachs bow;
Green's gone before, thy warfare's now begun,
And last it may to see Romes Babel fall;
Byweakest means Christ mighty works has done,
Keep footing fast, till Christ thee hence do call.
The next Town and church of Christ planted in this colony, was between Salem
and Ipswitch, Salem the eldest of all the Sisters was very helpful to this her
little Sister, nourishing her up in her own bosom, till she came of age, being
beneficial to her besides, in giving her a good portion of Land; this Town is
called Wenham, and is very well watered, as most in land Towns are, the people
live altogether upon husbandry, New England having trained up great store to
this occupation, they are increased in cattle, and most of them live very well,
yet are they no great company; they were some good space of time there before
they gathered into a Church-body, the godly and reverend Mr. John Fisk went
thither with them, at first setting down as a planter among them, yet withal he
became helpful in preaching the Word unto them, when they were but a few in
number, they afterward called him to the office of a Pastor, with whom he now
remains, laboring in the Word and Doctrine, with great industry of whom, it
may be thus said:

TO wade through toil of Wilderness, thou have
D^ubled thy work, thy wages troble are,
Christ has thee called, and in his vineyard placed,
He Will bear thee up above all sai^ting far.
Sions strong Mount must now again be built,
Thy faith, oh Fisk, the Lord has helped much;
With dreadful sigh^ the P^^lars power has spilt,
All pride he will stain by his almighty touch.
His truths unstained by liberty keep thou,
To please the most, authority must fall,
What Christ has given, if safely keep with you,
Till he to thee for thine account do call.
CHAP. XXVI. Of the military affairs, the forts of Bostoa, and Charles, the
Castle erected anew by the six nearest Towns, with the manner of putting the
Country in a posture of war, to be ready upon all occasions.
THese soldiers of Christ Jesus, having made a fair retreat from their Native
country hither, and now being come to a convenient station, resolved to stand
it out (the Lord assisting) against all such as should come to rob them of
their privileges, which the Lord Christ had purchased for them at a very high
rate, and now out of the riches of his grace was minded to give them, yet would
he have them follow him into this Wilderness for it: although the chiefest work
of these select bands of Christ, was to mind their spiritual warfare, yet they
knew right well the Temple was surrounded with walls and bulworks, and the
people of God in re-edifying the same, did prepare to resist their enemies with
weapons of war, even while they continued building: This people no less
diligent to make use of such means as the Lord afforded them, ordered and
decreed, That all the soldiers belonging to the 26. bands in the Mattachusets
Government, should be exercised and drilled eight days in a year, and
whosoever should absent himself, except it were upon unavoidable occasion,
should pay 5. s. for every days neglect, there are none exempt, unless it be a
few timorous persons that are apt to plead infirmity, if the Church choose them
not for Deacous, or they cannot get to serve some Magistrate or Minister; but
assuredly the generalicy of this people are very forward for feats of war, and
many have spent their time and estates to further this work; the Town of Boston
has afforded many active, Charles Town has not been inferior, unless it be
in number: This year the Court appointed certain persons to spend their skill
in putting the people possessing this desolate desert in a ready posture of
drawing their forces together, upon any sudden accident that might befall
them, to manage, guide, order, and direct all things, as may be best for the
good of the whole, they being a poor and mean people, labored to avoid high
titles, yet order they knew was necessary, therefore ordained they only one
General Officer in time of war, under the name of Major General, the Governor
and Magistrates for the time being are the standing Council for peace or war,
and either they or the General Court may appoint any to the office of a
General; the first Major General was the much honored Tho. Dudly Esquire, whose
faithfulness and great zeal and love to the truths of Christ, caused the people
to choose him to this office, although he were far stricken in years; the
Government is divided into four Counties, which to show, they would their
posterity should mind whence they came, they have named, Suffolk, Middlesex,
Essex, and Northfolk, each containing a Regiment, over whom, the chief
Commander is only a Serjeant-Major; the first chosen to this office over the
Regiment of Suffolk, was Major Edw. Gibbons, who has now the office of
Major General also, he is a man of a resolute spirit, board as a Lion, being
wholly tutored up in N.E. Discipline, very generous, and forward to promote all
military matters; his Forts are well contrived, and batteries strong, and in
good repair, his great Artillery well mounted, and cleanly kept, half Canon,
Culverins and Sakers, as also fieldpieces of brass very ready for service, his
own company led by Capt. Lieutenant Sarag, are very complete in their arms, and
many of them disciplined in the military garden, beside their ordinary
trainings; the Captains under him, are Caps. Humphry Atherton, of the Band of
Dochester; a very lively courageous man, with his stout and valiant Lieutenant
Clapes, strong for the truth; of the Band of Roxbury, Capt. Prichard, and
Ensign Johnson; of the Band of Waymoth, Capt. Perkins, and his proper and
active Lieutenant Torry; of the Band of Hingham, Capt. Be^an Allen; of the Band
of Deadbam, Capt. Eliazer, Lusher, one of a nimble and active spirit, strongly
affected to the ways of truth; of the Band of Braintree, Capt. william Tinge,
these belong to the Regiment of Suffolk; the first Serjeant-Major chosen to
order the Regiment of Essex, was Major Rebert Sedgwick, stout and active in all
feats of war, nursed up in Londons Artillery garden, and furthered with fifteen
years experience in N. E. exact theory, besides the help o^ a very good
headpiece, being a frequent instructor of the most martial troops of our
Artillery men; and although Charles Town, (which is the place of his own
companies residence) do not advantage such o're-topping batteries as Boston
does, yet has he erected his to very good purpose, insomuch that all shipping
that comes in, either to Boston or Charlestown, must needs face it all the
time of their coming in; the cost he has been at, in helping on the Discipline
of his Regiment has profited much; his own company are led by the faithful
Capt. Lieutenant Francis Norton, (a man of a bold and cheerful spirit) being
well disciplined, and an able man; the companies under his service have not all
Captains at present, VVater-Town Band was led by Capt. Ienings, who is supposed
to be now in England, his Lieutenant remains Hugh Mason; the band of Cambridg
led by Capt. George Cook, now Colonel Cook in the wars of ireland, but now led
by Capt. Daniel Gookin, a very forward man to advance Marshal discipline, and
withal the truths of Christ; the Band of Concord led by Capt. Simon Willard,
being a Kentish soldier, as is Capt. Goggin; the Band of Sudbury lately led by
Capt. Pelham, who is in England at present, his Lieutenant remains, Edw.
Goodinow; the band of Wooburn led by another Kentish Captain; the Band of
Reading led by Lieutenant Walker; the Band of Malden, being as yet a young
Town, who have not chosen their Officers, are led by Mr. Joseph Hill: These
belong to the Regiment of Middlesex, the two Counties of Essex and Northfolk
are for present joined in one Regiment, their first Major, who now commands
this Regiment, is the proper and valiant Major Daniel Denison, a good soldier,
and of a quick capacity, not inferior to any other of these chief Officers,
his own company are well instructed in feats of warlike activity, his Capt.
Lievtenane departed this life some few years since, a godly and faithful man,
which is indeed the fountain of true validity; named Mr. VVhitingam; the Band
of Salem led by the bold and worthy Capt. William Hautborn, a man of an
undaunted courage, with his Lieutenant Lothrope; the Band of Lyn led by the
honored and much respected Capt. Robert Bridges, who is also a Magistrate,
being endued with able parts, and forward to improve them for the glory of God
and his peoples good; the Band of Nuberry led by Capt. Gerish, with his ancient
and experienced Lieutenant Greendife; the Band of Rowly led by Capt. Brigham;
the Bands of Gloucester, VVenham and Andover, have not yet made choice of
Superior Officers, being in their minority; these are the Bands of the
Regiment of Essex, to the which are joined the three Bands of the County of
Northfolk, Salsbury, Hampton, and Havorhil: there are none chosen to office in
any of these Bands, but such as are freemen, supposed to be men endued with
faith in Christ Jesus, wherefore let all that truly love the Lord Christ say
with Deborah, My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered
themselves willingly among the people, their Officers are chosen by the major
Vote of the soldiers, being installed into their place by the Major of their
Regiment: There are of late a very gallant horse-troop listed, it being a
frequent thing with the Officers of the foot companies, to turn Troopers, (when
their own Regiment is not in exercise) for encouragement of others, the
Regiments are exercised once a year by turns; they are also very observant to
keep their arms in good order; each soldier is to keep constantly by him
powder, bullet, and match, besides every Town is enjoined to have a common
stock in like manner, as also the country have their ammunition exactly looked
unto, by Surveyor General Johnson, one very well qualified for the work, ready
at all times to put the General Court in mind of keeping their store renewed by
fresh supply, and to say right, some particular persons may be penurious in
laying out their estates upon ammunition, but the general of Officers and
soldiers are very generous that way; the reverend Doctor Wilson gave
bountifully for the furthering this Wilderness-work, the which was expended
upon great Artillery, his gift being a thousand pound, beside many persons that
came over, the Lord was pleased to indow with a large portion of the things of
this life, who were not backward liberally to dispose of it, to procure means
of defense, ann to that end there was a castle built on an Island, upon the
passage into the Mattachu-Bay, wholly built at first by the country in general,
but by reason the country affords no Lime, but what is burnt of Oyster-she is,
it fell to decay in a few years after, which made many of the Towns that lay
out of the defense thereof to desert it, although their safety (under God) was
much involved in the constant repair and well-mannaging thereof; hereupon the
next six Towns take upon them to rebuild it at their proper cost and charges,
the rest of the country upon the finishing thereof gave them a small matter
toward it; upon this there was a Captain ordained, and put in possession
thereof by the country, having a yearly Stipend allowed him for himself and his
soldiers, which he is to keep in a constant readiness upon the Island, being
about eight acres of ground; the Castle is built on the North-East of the
Island, upon a rising hill, very advantageous to make many shot at such ships
as shall offer to enter the Harbor without their good leave and liking, the
Commander of it is one Captain Davenport, a man approved for his faithfulness,
courage and skill, the Master Canoneer is an active Ingineer; also this Castle
has cost about four thousand pounds, yet are not this poor pilgrim people
weary of maintaining it in good repair, it is of very good use to awe any
insolent persons, that putting confidence in their ship and sails, shall offer
any injury to the people, or contemn the Government, they have certain signals
of alarums, which suddenly spread through the whole country; were there but
one Town more erected in this Government, which were one and thirty, it would
join all the Towns in the same neighbourly together, excepting Spring-field.
Thus are these people with great diligence provided for these days of war,
hoping the day is at hand wherein the Lord will give Antichrist the don-christ
the double of all her doings, and therefore they have nursed up in their
Artillery garden some who have since been used, as instruments to begin the
work; but that which gives the greatest hope concerning this particular, is
this, that these times afford more soldiers depending on the Lord Christ
through faith for deliverance and true valor, then any age since Antichrist
began to fall, without which, all these preparations were but as so many traps
and snares to catch a people in, and to the which these Commanders and
soldiers are daily exhorted, and therefore let all people know that desire the
downfall of New England, they are not to war against a people only exercised in
feats of war, but men who are experienced in the deliverances of the Lord from
the mouth of the Lion, and the paw of the Bear; and now woe be to you, when the
same God that directed the stone to the forehead of the Philistine, guides
every bullet that is shot at you, it matters not for the whole rabble of
Antichrist on your side, the God of Armies is for us a refuge high. Shela.

VVonder working Providence OF Sions SAVIOR in New England.
BOOK III.
CONTAINING The passages of Gods providence toward this wandering Race of
Jaacobites in these latter seven years, from the year 1645. till toward the
latter end of 51.
CHAP. I. Of planting the twenty sixth Church of Christ at the Town of
Haverhil, and of preparation for a second war with the Indians.
THis year that ancient, honored and trusty soldier of the truth, Thom. Dudly
Esquire was chosen Governor, and the honored John Winthrop Esquire was chosen
Deputy Governor, John Endicut Esquire to the office of Major General. You have
heard in the former book of the fortifying of the Castle, and placing a Captain
therein, which was not finished till this year; the number of freemen added was
56. The Town of Haverhil was built much about this time, lying higher up then
Salisbury, upon the fair and large river of Merrimeck: the people are wholly
bent to improve their labor in tilling the earth, and keeping of cattle, whose
yearly increase incourages them to spend their days in those remote parts, the
constant penetrating farther into this Wilderness, has caused the wild and
uncouth woods to be filled with frequented ways, and the large rivers to be
over-laid with Bridges passeable, both for horse and foot; this Town is of a
large extent, supposed to be ten miles in length, there being an over-weaning
desire in most men after Meadow land, which has caused many towns to grasp more
into their ^ands then they could afterward possibly hold; the people are
laborious in the gaining the goods of this life, yet are they not unmindful
also of the chief end of their coming hither, namely, to be made partakers of
the blessed Ordinances of Christ, that their souls might be refreshed with the
continual income of his rich grace, to which end they gathered into a
Church-body, and called to office the reverend M. Ward, son to the former
named M. Ward of Ipswitch,

WIth mind resolved run out thy race at length,
Yound Ward begin whereas thy father left,
Left has he not, but breaths for further strength,
Nor thou, nor he, are yet of hope bereft:
Fruit of thy labors thou shall see so much,
The righteous shall hear of it, and rejoice
When Babel falls by Christ's almighty touch,
All'^ folk shall praise him with a cheerful voice.
They prosper shall that Sions building mind,
Then Ward cease not with toil her stones to lay,
For great is he thee to this work assigned,
Whose pleasure is, heavens Crown shall be thy pay.
This year, although diverse Indian Sachems not long before had desired to
subject themselves and lands unto this Government, yet the sons of old
Canonicus having not inherited their fathers prudence, with his subjects and
land, fell to hot contention with their own neighbors and native inhabitants,
although they were forbidden by the united Colonies, and prosecuted so, that
they would not stick to wage war with the English also, which the Commissioners
perceiving, they raised an Army of horse and foot out of the Colonies, and
appointed as Commander in chief over them Major General Edward Gibbons; the
reverend Mr. Tompso^, one of the Elders of the Church at Braintree was to
accompany them, and to preach the Word of God unto them, during the time of the
war; but the Indians hearing of this preparation against them, sent a certain
number of their chief Nobility to treat with the Commissioners of the united
Colonies about a peace, who then sitting at Boston gave them audience, the
Indians coming into their presence, could speak no more English, but peace,
peace; the English were very desirous of an opportunity to show them mercy, and
yet would they should not despise them, in gaining it upon such easy terms, as
might cause them to move war again, and therefore allotted them to pay some
part of the charge of the war intended, and therefore appointed them to give
four of their sons for hostages till they had wholly paid it; the Indians
gladly accepted of the terms, and accordingly brought their children. Here the
Reader should be minded of the admirable acts of the Lord Christ in awing these
multitudes of Heathens, for they were the most populous of any that are in
these parts; but it is reserved for another place in this history, the Indians
being slow in their performance, had their hostages returned home before the
Wapom was paid, yet their two Princes Posicus and Mexanimo, did upon the
sending certain armed men to demand the remainder, send the sum demanded.

CHAP. II. Of the planting of the twenty seventh Church of Christ at the Town
called Springfield, and of the earnest seeking the the Lord by all the Churches
of N. E. for his gracious assistance in the work of Reformation.
ABout this time one Mr. Pinchin, sometime a Magistrate, having out of desire
to better his estate, by trading with the Indians, settled himself very remote
(from all the Churches of Christ in the Mattachusets Government) upon the river
of Canectico, yet under their Government, he having some godly persons
resorting unto him, they there erected a Town and Church of Christ, calling it
Springfield, it lying upon this large navigable river, has the benefit of
transporting their goods by water, and also fitly seated for a Bever trade with
the Indians, till the Merchants increased so many, that it became little worth,
by reason of their out-buying one another, which has caused them to live upon
husbandry; this Town is mostly built along the river side, and upon some little
rivelets of the same: There has of late been more then one or two in this Town
greatly suspected of witchcraft, yet have they used much diligence, both for
the finding them out, and for the Lords assisting them against their witchery,
yet have they, as is supposed, bewitched not a few persons, among whom two of
the reverend Elders children: These people inhabiting this Town, having
gathered into a Church-body, called to the office of a Pastor the reverend M.
Moxon, who remains with them at this very day, of whom as follows.

AS thou with strong and able parts art made,
Thy person stout with toil and labor shall,
With help of Christ through difficulties wade,
Then spend for him, spare not thy self at all.
When errors crowd close to thy self, and friends
Take up truths sword, trifle not time for why
Christ called his people hither, for these ends,
To tell the world that Babels fall is nigh;
And that his Churches through the world shall spread,
Maugre the might of wicked men and devils,
Then Moxon thou need'st not at all to dread,
But be avenged on Satan for his evils,
Thy Lord Christ will under thy feet him tread.
This year the great troubles in our native country encreaseing, and that
hearing profane Esau had mustered up all the Bands he could make to come
against his brother Jacob, these wandering race of Jacobites deemed it now high
time to implore the Lord for his especial aid in this time of their deepest
distress, and the rather being encouraged hereunto from former deliverances and
wonderful mercies received, the which they now presented before the Lord with
the several branches, and enlarged bounties thereof to refresh their frozen
affections, and move a melting heart in their barren breasts, that began to dry
up with a lazy lethargy, and therefore thrusting themselves on to the work by
the loving invitation of that godly Government the Lord in his mercy had
peaceably placed among them, each Church in their own proper place meeting
together in days of solemn seeking of the Lords pleasing countenance in Christ
(the Lord in his mercy helping them) after a serious acknowledgment of their
own unworthiness, by reason of their sinful provocations of the Lord to anger
against them aggravated, in that they were committed immediately upon the
receipt of a multitude of mavelous mercies, they acknowledge unto the Lord in
the audience of the great Congregation the manner of his wonderful providence
extended toward them, that as Jacob professes, I came over this Jordan with my
staff, and now have I gotten two Bands; so they came over this boisterous
billow-boyling Ocean, a few poor scattered stones newly raked out of the heaps
of rubbish, and thou Lord Christ have now so far exalted them, as to lay them
sure in thy Sion, a building, to be the wonder of the world, orderly are they
placed in five and forty several Churches, and that in a Wilderness, where
civility scarce ever took place, much less any Religion, and now to the Lord
earnestly they cry to be delivered from the cruel hands of those that would
destroy both young and old, the bird and her young together, and as Jacobs fear
was, the seed of Christ's Church in the posterity of Israel should be cut off,
and therefore pleaded the promise of the Lord in the multiplying of his seed;
so these people at this very time, pleaded not only the Lords promise to
Israel, but to his only Son Christ Jesus; Lord, have thou not said, Ask of me,
and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost ends
of the earth for thy possession; and now Lord, are not these the Churches of
Christ which thou have planced for his possession; and that as Rachel and Leah
built the house of Israel, so now shall these and the like Sister-churches
spread the whole earth, the Lord Christ reigning as King and Lord for ever over
them; Then why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing, seeing
the rhyme of the Lords arising to have mercy upon Sion is come, ^ea his
appointed time is at hand; and he who walks in the midst of his golden
Candlesticks, whose eyes are as a flaming fire, will not suffer his Churches to
be trodden under feet of that Antichristian Lordly prelacy any longer, nor yet
defiled with any transformed Saint-seeming Angels of light with their painted
doctrines. Thus did this poor people plead with the Lord, not only for
themselves, but for their dearly beloved brethren in England, I and all that
are Christ's chosen people the world throughout; and although they were not
unmindful from day to day of them, yet this year 1645. the Lord was pleased to
stir up their affections in more then an ordinary manner, what success their
prayers have had, let all (that love and long to behold the beauty of Christ
shining on and in his beloved Bride) declare the loving kindness of the Lord
toward his Churches, and let all the Churches of Christ, though never so ^^
more the one from the other, yet joined together in one ^hith and one Christ,
be frequent in prayer one for another, ^ongregate together at the Throne of the
Lord, be present in spirit, though absent in body; these Mew-England Churches
^^^ near one hundred miles distant one from another, and yet communicate,
counsel, care, love, joy, grieve with, and for ^ne another, dismiss some, and
commend others (as occasi^n serves) to the Christian care and watchfulness,
from one Church to another, and why may not this be practiced the world
throughout, even from Jerusalem, and round about to Illyricum?

CHAP. III. Of the opposition the Government of the Mattachusets Colony met
withal, by certain persons, under the name of Petitioners.
IN place of Governor was chosen for this year John Winthrop Esquire, and for
Deputy Governor Thomas Dudly Esquire, the number of freemen were about 72. At
the Court of Election there was a Petition drawn, and presented to the Court by
a Doctor of Physic, with seven hands to it, the persons were of a Linfiwolsie
disposition, some for Prefacy, some for Presbytery, and some for Pl^bsbytery,
but all joined together in the thing they would, which was to stir up the
people to dislike of the present Government, one while envving against the
constitution of the Government as not popular enough, another while against the
Laws or orders of this little Commonwealth as two strict, and then to provoke,
at least the p^^^^^ous, they tell them of great expense of the public
Treasury, and intolerable taxations; the matter they petitioned for, was a
bottom to build their quarrel upon, under the name of a Presbyterian
Government, and this they supposed would suit well with their Bill of
complaint, which they intended for England, not that they cared for a
Presbyterian Church, for had they so done, they might have found out one in the
country before they petitioned, but because they supposed that the Parliament
in England would establish that way only and therefore bore themselves bold
upon it, that although their seditious and scandalous words and practices
should incur a penalty (as none could deem any other, unless it be such as are
all for liberty, and nothing for Government) yet they might bear men in hand,
it was for petitioning for a Presbyterian Church Government, according to this
te^or; the Court being some what flow in censuring them, they prepare^ a plot,
wrapping in some few persons more with them, lay ing very gross matters to the
charge of this Government in their Bill of complaint, but being suspected by
the honored Magistrates of this Government, their plot was found out, and
writing publicly read unto them, for all which they had a small penalty laid
upon them, hardly countervail the charge they put the country unto; but
assuredly it was the Lords gracious goodness to quell their malice against his
people, and indeed the proud Bishops sped no better, or not so well, especially
some of them, nor have any other hitherto prospered, who have ma^igned these
poor Churches of Christ, yet because the Gortonist painted over a far worser
cause, that those honorable personages in England, who had the hearing thereof
could not discern the Government, thought meet to send over this year the
honored M. VVinslow to manifest and declare the naked truth of things, having
full power and commission from this Government to deal for them in all matters
wherein they may be concerned; and verily the chief Gortonian might have
returned from England hither, to have triumphed in his blasphemies over the
Churches of Christ; and all the united colonies, had not the devil showed his
horns in that book he printed, wherein he takes upon him a monstrous
interpretation of the words of our Lord Christ in John, Except ye eat my flesh,
and drink my blond, etc. had the book been well perused before their coming
over, surely they had never returned with so large a commission as they boast
of, for the Parliament have punished diverse persons for their blasphemies, and
very like these should not have escaped scotfree.

CHAP. IV. Of the second Synod holden at Cambridg in N. E. and the images of
the Son that appeared.
THis year the General Court of the Mattachusets Government taking into
consideration the many (...) in point of doctrine that were daily broached by
some of our English Nation, although the churches of Christ, and the people
under this Government were free, at least in open profession; yet to declare to
all the world, and render an account of their faith and profession wherein they
walk, it was thought meet, that the churches of Christ should meet together in
a Synod, by their Elders and Messengers to hold forth the doctrine and
discipline of Jesus Christ, according to the rule of the New Testament, with
the grounds of Scripture from which they hold the same; and further to make
trial of them by the said rules and none other: accordingly at the time
appointed they assembled together, their disputation was plain and easy to be
understood of the meanest capacity, clearing up those points that were most
dubious, they having agreed on all matters, with a full concurrence of the
assembly, did appoint them to be put in print, that they might be the better
scanned and tried of every particular person in the several congregations or
churches, many churches approving thereof for the generality, others there be
that have not yet fully viewed the same, the books are extant, and show that
the churches of Christ in N. E. are not ashamed to make confession of their
faith to all the world, and are yet ready to receive any further light shall be
made known unto them from the Word of God, and none other, nor do they receive
this because a Synod has said it, but because the Lord has spoken it by his
Spirit, and witnessed by the same Spirit to their souls that he has so done;
some sorts of persons have been much opposite to this Synod, first those that
are so inured with the broad beaten path of liberty, that they fear to be
confined in the straight and narrow path of truth; the second are such as have
their wills wedded to some singular rare conceited opinion, for which they have
been admired of many, and now they fear their gain will be gone, if this spirit
be cast out; the third and last sort are more honest then the two former, and
only scared with their big words, who tell them of the Popish and Prelatical
Synods, what a deal of trash and cannon Laws they have brought in, and that if
they will full to receiving books once, they shall have more and more thrust
upon them: As also if any shall say its only to declare the doctrine and
discipline the churches of N. E. hold, its enough, quoth they, that our faith
concerning these things is contained in the Bible, and this is all the account
we need to give to any; but for all these scare-crows, N.E. has through the
blessing of the Lord received much peace and truth from the former Synod, we
wish our countrymen and our selves may receive the like, and much more from
this, which ended not with this year.

This year, about the later end thereof, appeared two Parelii, or Images of the
Sun, and some other strange apparitions of light about her, like a Rainbow,
with the heels upward, which unwonted sights have been interpreted by the
provident passages since showed, among those who have had an outside of
profession and name, to be singular for understanding the mind of God, who
would overthrow all the Ordinances of Christ, under the name of New-light, and
that there can be no restoration of Religion, till new Apostles come: This
desperate opinion does so fitly resemble these wonderful apparitions, that
seemed to be another Sun, yet indeed had no light in them, but vanished away no
man knew how; so these opinionists would make men believe they had found out
another Sea from their fantastical revelations.

CHAP. V. Of the great pains and care taken by those in Authority, for the
compiling of Laws for this little Commonwealth.
THis year the General Court appointed a Committee of diverse persons to draw up
a Body of Laws for the well-ordering of this little Commonwealth; and to the
end that they might be most agreeable with the rule of Scripture, in every
County there was appointed two Magistrates, two Ministers, and two able persons
from among the people, who having provided such a competent number as was meet,
together with the former that were enacted newly amended, they presented them
to the General Court, where they were again perused and amended; and then
another Committee chosen to bring them into form, and present them to the Court
again, who the year following passed an Act of confirmation upon them, and so
committed them to the Press, and in the year 1648. they were printed, and now
are to be seen of all men, to the end that none may plead ignorance, and that
all who intend to transport themselves hither, may know this is no place of
licentious liberty, nor will this people suffer any to trample down this
Vineyard of the Lord, but with diligent execution will cut off from the city of
the Lord the wicked doers, and if any man can show wherein any of them derogate
from the Word of God, very willingly will they accept thereof, and amend their
imperfections (the Lord assisting) but let not any ill affected persons find
fault with them, because they suit not with their own humor, or because they
meddle with matters of Religion, for it is no wrong to any man, that a people
who have spent their estates, many of them, and ventured their lives for to
keep faith and a pure conscience, to use all means that the Word of God allows
for maintenance and continuance of the same, especially they having taken up a
desolate Wilderness to be their habitation, and not deluded any by keeping
their profession in huggermug, but print and proclaim to all the way and course
they intend, God willing, to walk in, if any will yet notwithstanding seek to
justle them out of their own right, let them not wonder if they meet with all
the opposition a people put to their greatest straits can make; as in all their
undertaking, their chiefest aim has been to promote the Ordinances of Christ,
so also in contriving their Laws, Liberties, and Privileges, they have not
been wanting, which has caused many to malign their civil Government, and
more especially for punishing any by a Law, that walk conrrary to the rule of
the Gospel, which they profess, but to them it seems unreasonable, and savours
too much of hypocrisy, that any people should pray unto the Lord for the
speedy accomplishment of his Word in the overthrow of Antichrist, and in the
mean time become a Patron to sinful opinions and damnable errors that oppose
the truths of Christ, admit it be but in the bare permission of them.

CHAP. VI. Of the Lords wonder-working Providence, in fitting this people with
all kind of Manufactures, and the bringing of them into the order of a
Commonwealth.
ON the day of Election for Governor and Magistrates, (which are new chosen
every year) the honored John Winthrope Esquire was chosen Governor, and the
like honored Thomas Dudly Esquire Deputy Governor, John Endicut Esquire was
chosen Major General, which is an Officer the Freemen make a yearly choice of,
all other Military Officers stand for (...) of life, unless any be put out for
misdemeanour; the member of freemen added this year were about 85. the Land
affording very good ^^on, stone, diverse persons of good ^ack and quality in
England, were stirred up by the provident hand of the Lord to venture their
estatee upon an hon work, which they began at Braintree, and profited the
owners little, but rather wasted their stock, which caused some of them to tell
away the Kmainder, the chief reason being the high price of labor, which
ordinarily was as much more as in England, and in many things treble; the way
of going on with such a work here, was not sudd^inly to be disterned, although
the Steward had a very able eye, yet experience nath out-stript learning here,
and the most quick-sighted in the Theory of things, have been forced to pay
pretty mundly to Lady Experience for filling their heads with a sittle of her
active after-wit; much hope there is now, that the owners may pick up their
crumbs again, if they be but made partakers of the gain, in putting off England
commodities at N. E. price, it will take off one third of the great price they
gave for labor, and the price of their iron; it is supposed another third is
taken of the abundance of wood had for little, will surely take off the
residue, besides land at easy rates, and common land free for their use; it
were to be desired that those Gentlemen who have undertaken the work, would
consider the place where their works are, namely in N. E. where the Lord Christ
has chosen to plant his Churches in, to hide his people under the covert of
his wings, till the tyranny of Antichrist be over-passed, and any that have
disbursed pence for the furthering of his work, shall be repayed with
thousands: Besides, the Gentlemen that govern this Colony are very desirous to
be helpful in what they may, and had rather take any burdens upon themselves
and the Inhabitants, that in justice they ought, then that those Gentlemen
should be any ways damnified: The Lord is pleased also to complete this
Commonwealth abundantly beyond all expectation in all sorts of needful
occupations, it being for a long time the great fear of many, and those that
were endued with grace from above also, that this would be no place of
continued habitation, for want of a staple-commodity, but the Lord, whose
promises are large to his Sion, has blessed his peoples provision, and satisfied
her poor with bread, in a very little space, every thing in the country proved
a staple-commodity, wheat, rye, oats, peace, barley, beef, pork, fish, butter,
cheese, timber, mast, tar, soap, plank-board frames of hous^s, clabboard, and
pipestaves, iron and lead is like to be also; and those who were formerly
forced to fetch most of the bread they eat, and beer they drink a hundred
leagues by Sea, are through the blessing of the Lord so increased, that they
have not only fed their Elder Sisters, Virginia, Barbados, and many of the
Summer Islands that were preferred before her for fruitfulness, but also the
Grandmother of us all, even the firtil Isle of Great Britain, beside Portugal
has had many a mouthful of bread and fish from us, in exchange of their
Madeara liquor, and also Spain; nor could it be imagined, that this Wilderness
should turn a mart for Merchants in so short a space, Holland, France, Spain,
and Portugal coming hither for trade, shipping, going on gallantly, till the
Seas became so troublesome, and England restrained our trade, forbidding it
with Barbados, etc. and Portugal stopped and took our ships; many a fair ship had
her framing and finishing here, besides lesser vessels, barques, and ketches,
many a Master, beside commoa Seamen, had their first learning in this Colony,
Boston, Charlestown, Salem, and Ipswitch; our Maritan Towns began to increase
roundly, especially Boston, the which of a poor country village, in twice seven
years is become like unto a small City, and is in election to be Mayor Town
suddenly, chiefly increased by trade by Sea, yet of late the Lord has given a
check to our traffic, but the reason may be rendered hereafter; nor has this
Colony alone been actors in this trade of venturing by Sea, but New Haven also,
who were many of them well experienced in traffic, and had good estates to
manage it, Canectiso did not linger behind, but put forth to Sea with the
other; all other trades have here fallen into their ranks and places, to their
great advantage; especially Coopers and Shomakers, who had either of them a
Corporation granted, enriching themselves by their trades very much, Coopers
having their plenty of stuff at a cheap rate, and by reason of trade, with
foreign parts abandance of work, as for Tanners and Shomakers, it being
naturalized into these occupations, to have a higher reach in mannaging their
manifactures, then other men in N. E. are, having not changed their nature in
this, between them both they have kept men to their stander hitherto, almost
doubling the price of their commodities, according to the rate they were sold
for in England, and yet the plenty of Leather is beyond what they had, their
counting the number of the people, but the transportation of Boots and Shoes
into foreign parts has vented all however: as for Tailors, they vave not come
behind the former, their advantage being in the nurture of new-fashions, all
one with England; Carpenters, Joyners, Glaziers, Painters, follow their trades
only; Gun-smiths, Lock-smiths, Black-smiths, Naylers, Cutlers, have left the
husbandmen to follow the Plow and Cart, and they their trades, Weavers,
Brewers, Bakers, Costermongers, Feltmakers, Braziers, Pewterers, and Finkers,
Ropemakers, Masons, Lime, Brick, and Tilemakers, Cardmakers to work, and not to
play, Turners, Pumpmakers, and Wheelers, Glovers, Fellmungers, and Furriers,
are orderly turned to their trades, besides diverse sorts of Shopkeepers, and
some who have a mystery beyond others, as have the Vintners.

Thus has the Lord been pleased to turn one of the most hideous, boundless,
and unknown Wildernesses in the world in an instant, as 'twere (in comparison
of other work) to a well-ordered Commonwealth, and all to serve his Churches,
of which the Author intends to speak of three more, which came to be gathered
in the compass of these years.

CHAP. VII. Of the three last Churches that were gathered in the compass of
these years, namely Haverhil, Mal^en, and another Church gathered in the Town
of Boston.
THis year 1648. John Winthrope Esquire was chosen Governor, and Thomas Dudly
Esquire Deputy Governor, and John Endicut Esquire Major General, all three as
they were the former year, the number of freemen added were about 94. about
this time there was a Town founded about one or two mile distant from the place
where the goodly river of Merrimeck receives her branches into her own body,
hard upon the river of Shawshin, which is one of her three chief heads; the
honored Mr. Simon Broad street taking up his last settling there, has been a
grrat means to further the work, it being a place well fitted for the
husbandmans hand, were it not that the remoteness of the place from Towns of
trade, brings some inconveniences upon the planteas, who are enforced to
carry their corn far to market; this Town is called Andover, and has good
store of land improved for the bigness of it, they soon gathered into a Church,
having the reverend Mr. Whodbridg to instruct them in the ways of Christ, till
he returned to England, and since have called to office the reverend Mr.
Deynes, for whose further encouragement the promises of the Lord for
protecting, providing, increaseing, and continuing, even the very least of his
Churches going on, according to his precepts, are abundantly manifested in his
Word.

THon Sister young, Christ is to thee a wall
Of flaming fire, to hurt thee none may come
In stipp'ry paths, and dark ways shall they fall,
His Angels might shall chase their countless sum.
Thy Shepherd with full cups and table spread,
Before thy foes in Wilderness thee feeds,
Increasing thy young lambs in bosom bred,
Of Churches by his wonder-working deeds:
To countless number must Christ's Churches reach,
The day's at hand, both Jew and Gentle shall
Come crowding in his Churches, Christ to preach,
And last for aye, none can cause them to fall.
About this time the Town of Malden had his first foundation stones laid by
certain persons, who issued out of Charlestown, and indeed had her whole
structure within the bounds of this more elder Town, being severed by the broad
ipreading river of Mistick the one from the other, whose troublesome passage
caused the people on the North side of the river to plead for Town-priviledges
within themselves, which accordingly was granted them; the soil is very
firtile, but they are much straightened in their bounds, yet their neerness to the
^hief Market Towns, makes it the more comfortable for habitation, the people
gathered into a Church some distance of ^ime before they could attain to any
Church Officer to admi^ister the Seals unto them, yet in the mean time at their
Sab^th assemblies they had a godly Christian named M. Sarjant, who did preach
the Word unto them, and afterward they ^ere supplied at times with some young
Students from the ^olledg, till the year 16^0. one Mr. Marmaduke Mathews,
^oming out of Plymouth Patten, was for some space of time ^ith a people at the
Town of Hull, which is a small Port^own peopled by fishermen, and lies at the
entrance of the ^ays mouth, where this Mr. Mathews continued preaching, ^he
lost the approbation of some able understanding men, ^ong both Magistrates and
Ministers, by weak and unsafe ^pressions in his teaching, yet notwithstanding
he was cal^ to the office of a Pastor by the brethren of this Church of ^rist
at Maldon, although some Neighbour-churches were satisfied therewith, for it is
the manner of all the Churches Christ here hitherto, to have the approbation of
their Si^-churches, and the civil Government also in the proceedings of this
nature, by the which means Communion of Churches is continued, peace preserved;
and the truths of Christ sincerely acknowledged, yet the Author will not miss
to mind him in the following Meeter.

MAthews! thou must build gold and silver on
That precious stone, Christ cannot trash endure,
Unstable straw and stubble must be gone,
When Christ by fire does purge his building pure.
In seemly and in modest terms do thou
Christ's precious truths unto thy folk unfold,
And mix not error with the truth, lest thou
Soon leave out sense to make the truth to hold:
Completing of Christ's Churches is at hand,
Mathews stand up, and blow a crrtain sound,
Warriors are wanting Babel to withstand,
Christ's truths maintain, 'twill bring thee honors crowned
The last Church that completed the number of 30. was gathered at Boston, by
reason of the popularity thereof, being too many to meet in one assembly; the
North-east part of the Town being separated from the other with a narrow strea^
cut through a neck of land by industry, whereby that part i^ become an Island,
it was thought meet, that the people in habiting the same should gather into a
Church-body, an^ build a Meeting House for their assembly, the which they have
already done, but not as yet called any one to office; for sin^^ the people of
Christ in some other places, both in Englan^ and elsewhere, have through the
goodness of God obtain like liberty with our selves, the Ministers of Christ
have ha^ their labors taken up in other places as well as her^ which has
caused this Church as yet to be destitu^ the beginning of this year was sad to
the people of N. ^^ by reason of the death of their honored Governo^^ John
Winthrope Esquire, whose indefatigable pains in the Wilderness-work is not to
be forgotten, nor indeed ^^ it be, his Funeral was very sadly and solemnly
performe^ by a very great concourse of the greater part of this Colo^ whose
mournful looks and watery eyes did plainly demonstrate the tender affection and
great esteem he was in with the people.

CHAP. VIII. Of the death of diverse personages, who were in great este em with
the people of New England, famous for their godliness, and ominent parts, both
for Magistracy and Ministry, and of the correcting hand of the Lord upon his
N. E. people.
A His year, after the death of this godly Governor, was chosen to succeed in
the place 10. Endicut Esquire. and Tho. Dudly Esquire. to be Deputy Governor, to the
place of Major General Edw. Gibbons; and seeing that the Lord is pleased to
call this people to mourning, the Author will proceed to relate what further
occasion this people have had to lament their miscarriages, that have caused
the rod to be stretched out toward them, for of a truth they are no
Antinomians: The next loss was the death of that famous Preacher of the Lord M.
Hooker, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Hartford, and M. Philips, Pastor of
the Church of Christ at Watertown, and the holy heavenly, sweet-affecting and
soul-ravishing Minister M. Tho. Shepherd, Pastor of the Church of Christ at
Cambridg, whose departure was very heavily taken by all the people of Christ
round about him, and now N.E. that had such heaps upon heaps of the riches of
Christ's tender compassionate mercies, being turned off from his dandling knees,
began to read their approaching rod in the bend of hi^ brows and frowns of his
former favorable countenance toward them; their plenty of all things, which
should have cheared their hearts and quickened their spirits in elevating both
soul and body to a thankful frame, through the work of his blessed Spirit; on
the contrary, it brought a fullness on many, even to loath the very honeycomb,
insomuch that good wholesome truths would not down, yet had the Lord those that
were precious unto him, who were not wanting to help one another out of this
distemper, and with more warmer affections exhort one another, Come let us go
up unto the house of the Lord, and he will teach us his ways: Also the Lord
was pleased to awaken us with an Army of caterpillars, that had he not
suddenly rebuked them, they had surely destroyed the husband man's hope, where
they fell upon trees, they left them like winter-wasting cold, bare and naked;
and although they fell on fields very rarely, yet in some places they made as
clear a riddance, as the harvest man's hand, and uncovered the gay green Meadow
ground, but indeed the Lord did by some plats show us what he could have done
with the whole, and in many places cast them into the high ways, that the
Cart-wheels in their passage were painted green with running over the great
swarms of them; in some fields they devoured the leaves of their pease, and
left the straw with the full crop, so tender was the Lord in his correction;
this minded all these Jacobites of the end of their coming over, but chiefly
the husbandman, whose over eager pursuit of the fruits of the earth, made some
of them many times run out so far in this Wilderness, even out of the sweet
sound of the silver Trumpets blown by the laborious Ministers of Christ,
forsaking the assembly of the Lords people, to celebrate their Sabbaths in the
chimney-corner, horse, kine, sheep, goats, and swine, being their most indeared
companions to travel with them to the end of their pilgrimage, or otherwise to
gather together some of their nearest neighbors, and make a preachment one
unto another, till they had learned so much, that they could away with none
other teaching: As also the Lord was pleased to command the wind and Seas to
give us a jog on the elbow, by sinking the very chief of our shipping in the
deep, and splitting them in shivers against the shores; a very goodly Ship
called the Seaforce was east away, and many N. E. people put to hard shifts for
their lives, and some drowned, as the godly and dearly beloved servant of
Christ, Mr. Tho, Coitmire, a very able Seaman, and also a good Scholar, one who
had spent both his labor and estate for the helping on of this
Wilderness-work: as also another ship set forth by the Merchants of New Haven,
of which the godly Mr, Lamberton went Master, neither ship, persons, nor goods
ever heard of; another ship also built and set forth by the inhabitants of
Cambridg, split and cast away near the same place where the Seaforce was loft;
as also another Barque mostly set forth by Dorchester men, sank in the Sea, and
never heard of the manner how; with diverse others which might be here inserted;
this seemed the sorer affliction to these N. E people, because many godly men
lost their lives, and abundantly the more remarkable, because the Lord was
pleased to forbid any such things to befall his people in their passage hither;
herein these people read, as in great capital letters, their sudden
forgetfulness of the Lords former received mercy in his wonderful preservation,
bringing over so many scores of ships, and thousands of persons, without
miscarriage of any, to the wonderment of the whole world that shall hear of it,
^ut more especially were the Merchants and traders themselves sensible of the
hand of the Lord out against them, who were in some of the ships, and had their
lixes given them for a prey; as also Vintners, and other men of trade, whose
gain is increased by Merchants men, being so taken up with the income of a
large profit, that they would willingly have had the Common wealth tolerate
diverse kinds of sinful opinions to entice men to come and sit down with us,
that their purses might be filled with coin, the civil Government with
contention, and the Churches of our Lord Christ with errors, the Lord was
pleased after all this, to let in the King of Terror among his new-planted
Churches.

FOr this year 1650. Tho. Dudly Esquire was chosen Governor, and John Eudicut
Esquire Deputy Governor, Major General Edward Gibbous continned in his office
still; the number of freemen added were about 55. Their year was the first noted
year wherein any store of people died, the ayt and place being very healthy
naturally, made this correction of the Lord seem the greater, for the most that
died were children, and that of an unwonted disease here, though frequent in
other places, the Lord now smiting many families with death in them, although
there were not any families wherein more then one died, or very rare if it were
otherwise, yet were these pilgrim people minded of the sudden forgetfulness of
those worthies that died not long before, but more especially the little regard
had to provide means to train their children up in the knowledge of learning,
and improve such means as the Lord has appointed to leave their posterity an
able Minister; as also to stir them up to prepare for the great work of the
Lord Jesus in the overthrow of Antichrist, and calling of the Jews, which in
all likelihood is very suddenly to be performed; as also in stirring up all
the young ones that remain, to consider for what and the Lord has spared their
lives, when he cut off others by death, namely, to prosecute the work that he
has given them to do in the power of his might, with the greater zeal and
courage.

THis year the honored and much desired servant of Christ, John Endicut Esquire
was chosen to be Governor of the English, inhabiting the Colony of the
Mattachusets, and the ancient honored and long continued Champion for the
truth, as it is in Jesus, Tho. Dudly Esquire was chosen Deputy Governor, by
the major Vote of these wandering Jacobites, with heart and good will the
honored Major General Edward Gibbous continued in place this year, the
Government showed their desire to be assisting to the State of England, in
making orders for establishing their Edict for these Western parts of the world
among out N. E. people; the Lord in his infinite wisdom saw meet to continue
his correcting hand among his N. E. Churches, somewhat more then ordinary in a
sore disease, of which many (in comparison of what used to do) and yet not so
many as ordinarily use to do in other plantations of this Western world; and
whereas the former year young children died most, this year those of grown
years died also, and although so small a sickness might not be taken notice of
in other places, yet the rareness of it in so healthy a country as is this,
cannot but speak loud in the ears of Gods people, who desire to hear the rod,
and who has appointed it, and perceive plainly many of them, that the Lord
will have us to know, that if his own people tread in the same steps of riot
and excess in the plenty he has given them, with the men of this world, he
will lay the same sicknesses and diseases upon them; and further they perceive,
according to the ordinary dispensation of his providence toward them, he has
some further great work to do with his N. E. people, that he is beginning again
to a waken, rouse up, and quicken them with the rod of his power: For thus they
begin to reason with themselves, when the Lord was pleased to expose them,
their wifes, and little ones to the troubles of a tempestuous Sea in so long a
voyage, and the wants of a barren Wilderness in great penury of food, he
brought forth by his mighty power, and stretched-our arm, the glorious fabric
of his New-E. Churches; and therefore now again they look for some further
extraordinary great work of his, if he shall once again be pleased to refine
them in this furnace of his, and would the Lord Christ would confirm our
brethren in England in like faith by our example, yea, and far beyond many
degrees, as the Wonder-working providence of Sions Savior toward them has
more abundantly exceeded, and that as this in three seven years is comprised,
though very weakly in this little book, there is in one seven year would require
volumes, and as this is wonderful, there is almost miraculous, and wonderful to
the whole world, as if the Lord Christ did intend to make his power known more
abundantly, then ever the sons of men saw Kings and Kingdoms strengthened, with
affinity and consanguinity, the valiant of the world, men skilled in feats of
war, as Goliath from a child, fierce and pampered horses, whose necks are
covered with strong neighing, and cunning Engeniers, men skilful to destroy
with all the terrible engines of war, together with swarms of soldiers flocking
together to swallow up the poor remnant of Gods people, all these has the Lord
caused to fall before your eyes, and our ears have heard the noise of this
great fall; and beloved countrymen, and our dear brethren in Christ, step into
the closet of your own hearts with us, and see if there will not be some things
in this following verse that may suit your condition as well as ours, that
having sown in tears, we may reap with joy the glorious harvest of our Lord
Christ, which is hard at hand, for assuredly the Lord is tied neither to us,
nor you, but may, if it please him, cast off both, and raise up new instruments
for his following work, but if he be pleased to give us melting hearts for our
former miscarriages, and renew us with a more zealous courage and earnest
contending for the faith, it is very like he has more glorious works by far
for us yet to do.

CHAP. IX. Of the wonder-working providence of Christ, wrought for his people
among our English Nation, both in our Native country, and also in N. E. which
should stir us up to mourn for all our miscarriages much the more.
FRom silent night true Register of moans,
From saddest soul consumed in deepest sin,
The consideration of the wonderful providence of Christ in planting his N. E.
Churches, and with the right hand of his power preserving, protecting,
favoring, and feeding them upon his tender knees: Together with the ill
requital of his all-infinite and undeserved mercies bestowed upon us, bath
caused many a soul to lament for the dishonor done to his Name, and sear of his
casting of this little handful of his, and the insulting of the enemy, whose
forrow is set forth in these four first staffs of verses.
From heart quite rent with sighs and heavy groans,
My wailing muse her woeful work begins,
And to the world brings tunes of sad lament,
Sounding naught else but sorrows sad relent.
Sorry to see my sorrows cause augmented,
And yet less sorrowful were my sorrows more,
The consideration of the wonderful providence of Christ in planting his N. E.
Churches, and with the right hand of his power preserving, protecting,
favoring, and feeding them upon his tender knees: Together with the ill
requital of his all-infinite and undeserved mercies bestowed upon us, bath
caused many a soul to lament for the dishonor done to his Name, and sear of his
casting of this little handful of his, and the insulting of the enemy, whose
forrow is set forth in these four first staffs of verses.
Grief that with grief, is nor with grief prevented,
Yet grief it is must ease my grieved sore;
So grief and sorrow, care but how to grieve,
For grief and sorrow must my cares relieve.
The wound fresh bleeding must be stauch'd with tears,
Tears cannot come unless some grief proceed,
The consideration of the wonderful providence of Christ in planting his N. E.
Churches, and with the right hand of his power preserving, protecting,
favoring, and feeding them upon his tender knees: Together with the ill
requital of his all-infinite and undeserved mercies bestowed upon us, bath
caused many a soul to lament for the dishonor done to his Name, and sear of his
casting of this little handful of his, and the insulting of the enemy, whose
forrow is set forth in these four first staffs of verses.
Grief comes but slack, which does increase my fears,
Fear, left for want of help I still shall bleed;
Do what I can to lengthen my life's breath,
If Christ be wanting, I shall bleed to death.
Thou deepest searcher of each secret thought,
Infuse in me thy all-affecting grace,
The consideration of the wonderful providence of Christ in planting his N. E.
Churches, and with the right hand of his power preserving, protecting,
favoring, and feeding them upon his tender knees: Together with the ill
requital of his all-infinite and undeserved mercies bestowed upon us, bath
caused many a soul to lament for the dishonor done to his Name, and sear of his
casting of this little handful of his, and the insulting of the enemy, whose
forrow is set forth in these four first staffs of verses.
So shall my work to good effect be brought,
While I peruse my ugly sins a space,
Whose staining filth so spotted has my soul,
That naught can wash, but tears of inward dole.
How soon my soul have thou the Lord forgot,
The Rod of God toward us in our Maritine affairs manifested, not only to our
own shipping, but strangers; as the Mary Rose blown up in Charles River, and
sunk in a moment, with about thirteen men slain therein: As also one Capt.
Chadwicks Pinnace, and about four men slain therein, beside what has been
formerly said touching our own shipping.
Who thee and thine through troublous Seas has lead,
On earth thy parts should praise him, sudden rot,
Why do neglect his glorious Kingdom spread.
Thy eyes have seen the Mountains moved with his hand,
And sunk in Seas to make his Sion stand.
No wonder then thy works with Eastern wind
The Rod of God toward us in our Maritine affairs manifested, not only to our
own shipping, but strangers; as the Mary Rose blown up in Charles River, and
sunk in a moment, with about thirteen men slain therein: As also one Capt.
Chadwicks Pinnace, and about four men slain therein, beside what has been
formerly said touching our own shipping.
On Seas are broke, and thy best Seamen slain,
Since, thou thy gain, and not Christ's work do mind,
Lord stay thy hand, I see my works are vain.
Our ships they shall thy Gospel forth convey,
And not bring home strange errors here to stay.
Instead of home-oppression, they shall now
Thy Saints abroad relieve, by Sea them send;
No riot shall our Merchantmen allow,
Time in exchange walks, not in Taverns spend:
Godly grief and good purpose comes from thee,
Lord Christ command, and then to work go we.
Oh thou my soul how weak's thy faith become,
With scattered seed of man and beast, thou have
Seen thy great God increase thy little sum,
Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expressed; and
also in the sudden taking away many men's estates by fire, and chiefly by a
most terrible fire which happened in Charlestown, in the depth of Winter,
1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to another, to the consuming of
the fairest houses in the Town: Under the pre^ance of being unequally rated,
many men murmr exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of
Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and
excess in apparel i^ frequent in these days, when the Lord calls his people
to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that
which is far worse, spiritual pride, to show our selves to be somebody, often
step ^ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines.
Towns close compact in desert land has placed:
In Wilderness thy table richly spread,
Thy poor therein has satisfied with bread.
While firtil lands with hunger have been pined,
Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expressed; and
also in the sudden taking away many men's estates by fire, and chiefly by a
most terrible fire which happened in Charlestown, in the depth of Winter,
1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to another, to the consuming of
the fairest houses in the Town: Under the pre^ance of being unequally rated,
many men murmr exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of
Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and
excess in apparel i^ frequent in these days, when the Lord calls his people
to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that
which is far worse, spiritual pride, to show our selves to be somebody, often
step ^ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines.
Thy harvest has with heaps on heaps come in;
Oh mourn, that thou no more thy God should mind,
His gentle rod to teach thee does begin;
Then wonder not that swarms of Locust fly,
And that earths fruits for want of moisture die.
A countless crew of Caterpillars craul,
To rob the earth of her green mantle quite;
Wolves only wont on lesser beasts to fall,
Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expressed; and
also in the sudden taking away many men's estates by fire, and chiefly by a
most terrible fire which happened in Charlestown, in the depth of Winter,
1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to another, to the consuming of
the fairest houses in the Town: Under the pre^ance of being unequally rated,
many men murmr exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of
Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and
excess in apparel i^ frequent in these days, when the Lord calls his people
to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that
which is far worse, spiritual pride, to show our selves to be somebody, often
step ^ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines.
On great ones prey by day, and eke by night:
Thy houses are consumed with much good store,
By fearful fires, which blustering winds blow over.
Lord stay thy hand, and stop my earthly mind,
Thy Word, not world, shall be our sole delight,
Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expressed; and
also in the sudden taking away many men's estates by fire, and chiefly by a
most terrible fire which happened in Charlestown, in the depth of Winter,
1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to another, to the consuming of
the fairest houses in the Town: Under the pre^ance of being unequally rated,
many men murmr exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of
Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and
excess in apparel i^ frequent in these days, when the Lord calls his people
to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that
which is far worse, spiritual pride, to show our selves to be somebody, often
step ^ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines.
Not Meadow ground, but Christ's rich pearl we will find,
Thy Saints embrace, and not large lands down plight.
Murmr no more will we at yearly pay,
To help uphold our Government each way;
Not strive who least, but who the most shall give,
Rejoice will we, our hearts enlarged are,
Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expressed; and
also in the sudden taking away many men's estates by fire, and chiefly by a
most terrible fire which happened in Charlestown, in the depth of Winter,
1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to another, to the consuming of
the fairest houses in the Town: Under the pre^ance of being unequally rated,
many men murmr exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of
Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and
excess in apparel i^ frequent in these days, when the Lord calls his people
to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that
which is far worse, spiritual pride, to show our selves to be somebody, often
step ^ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines.
Those wait on the Altar, shall on Altar live,
Nor shall our riches their good doctrine mar;
O^r pride of parts in thought of clear discerning,
No longer shall disgrace their godly learning.
Our meaner sort that metamorphos'd are,
With women's hair, in gold and garments gay,
Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expressed; and
also in the sudden taking away many men's estates by fire, and chiefly by a
most terrible fire which happened in Charlestown, in the depth of Winter,
1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to another, to the consuming of
the fairest houses in the Town: Under the pre^ance of being unequally rated,
many men murmr exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of
Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and
excess in apparel i^ frequent in these days, when the Lord calls his people
to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that
which is far worse, spiritual pride, to show our selves to be somebody, often
step ^ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines.
Whose wages large our Commonwealths work mar,
Their pride they shall with moderation lay:
Cast off their clothes, that men may know their rank,
Axd women that with outward deckings prank,
The worlds embrace our longing lust for gain,
An over-eager desire after the world has so seized on the spirits of many,
that the chief end of our coming hither is forgotten; and notwithstanding all
the powerful means used, we stand at a stay, as if the Lord had no farther work
for his people to do, but every bird to feather his own nest.
No longer shall us into corners draw,
Nor our large herds us from Gods house detain
From fellowship of Saints, who learn thy Law:
Thy righteous Judgments Lord do make me tremble,
Nor word, nor rod, but deep in this dissemble.
Two Masters, Lord, we will professed serve;
How can we Christ united be to thee,
An over-eager desire after the world has so seized on the spirits of many,
that the chief end of our coming hither is forgotten; and notwithstanding all
the powerful means used, we stand at a stay, as if the Lord had no farther work
for his people to do, but every bird to feather his own nest.
When from thy Law learned we so greatly swarve,
With watery tears unclued we will be.
From creature comforts, Christ thou art our stay,
Work will and deed in us we humbly pray.
Oh thou, my soul, and every part in me
Lament, the Lord his worthies from the earth
Takes to himself, and makes our earth to be
E A mourning place left destituke of mirth;
Are these the days wherein that Beast shall fall,
Lord leave us means, though thou be all in all.
What courage was in Winthrope, it was thine;
Shopheards sweet Sermons from thy blessing came,
The Lords taking away by death many of his most eminent servants from us,
shows, that either the Lord will raise up another people to himself to do his
work, or raise us up by his Rod to a more eager pursuit of his work, even the
planting of his Churches the world throughout. The Lord converts and calls
forth of their graves men to fight his battles against the enemies of his truth.
Our heavenly Hooker thy grace did refine,
And godly Burr received from thee his frame:
Philips did thou indue with Scripture light,
And Huet had his arguings strong and right.
Grave Higginson his heavenly truths from thee,
The Lords taking away by death many of his most eminent servants from us,
shows, that either the Lord will raise up another people to himself to do his
work, or raise us up by his Rod to a more eager pursuit of his work, even the
planting of his Churches the world throughout. The Lord converts and calls
forth of their graves men to fight his battles against the enemies of his truth.
Maveruck was made an able help to thine;
What Harver had thou gave, for's people free;
Follow Green full of grace, to work thou did assign:
Godly Glover his rich gifts thou gave,
Thus thou by means thy flocks from spoiling savest.
But Lord, why do by death withdraw thy hand
From us, these men and means are severed quite;
Stretch forth thy might, Lord Christ do thou command,
Their doubled spirit on those left to light:
Forth of their graves call ten times ten again,
That thy dear flocks no damage may sustain.
Can I forget these means that thou have used,
To quicken up my drowsy drooping soul;
Lord I forget, and have the same abused,
Which makes me now with grief their deaths condole,
And kiss thy rod, laid on with bowels tender,
By death of mine, makes me their death remember.
Lord, stay thy hand, thy Jacobs number's small,
Power out thy wrath on Antichrists proud Thrones;
Here thy poor flocks that on thee daily call,
Bottle their tears, and pity their sad groans.
Where shall we go Lord Christ? we turn to thee,
Heal our back slidings, forward press shall we.
Not we, but all thy Saints the world throughout
Shall on thee wait, thy wonders to behold;
Thou King of Saints, the Lord in battle stont
Increase thy armies many thousand fold.
Oh Nations all, his anger seek to stay,
That does create him armies every day.
CHAP. X. Of the endeavors of this people of Christ, to enlarge his Kingdom
the world throughout, and first of their preaching Christ to the Indians, among
whom they live.
THese brood of Travelers having thus through the good hand of their God upon
them, thus settled these Churches, according to the institution of Christ, and
not by the will of man; they now endeavor to be assisting to others: The
reverend Mr. Hugh Peter's, and his fellow-helper in Christ Mr. Wells steered
their course for England, so soon as they heard of the chaining up of those
biting beasts, who went under the name of spiritual Lords; what assistance the
Gospel of Christ found there by their preaching, is since clearly manifested;
for the Lord Christ having removed that usurping power of Lordly Prelates, has
now enlarged his Kingdom there, and that not only by the means of these men,
but by diverse others, both godly and eminent servants of his, who never saw
New England; and by diverse other godly Ministers of Christ, who have since gone
from hence, both young Students and others, to the number of twenty, or
thereabout, in the whole; besides some who were eminent in the civil Government
here, both gracious and godly servants of Christ, and some who have been
Magistrates here, to the number of five or six, the Lord Christ grant they may
all endeavor the advancement of his truths, both in Churches and civil
Government: But before the Author cease to speak of England, he is bold to say,
that the Lord Christ will overturn, overturn, overturn, till he has caused
such a Government to be set up, as shall become nursing fathers to his
new-planted Churches.

The Indian people in these parts at the English first coming, were very
barbarous and uncivilized, going for the most part naked, although the country
be extreme cold cold in the winter-season: they are only clothed with a Deers
skin, and a little bit of cloth to cover their privy part. The Women for the
most part are very modest, although they go as naked as the Men: they are
generally very laborious at their planting time, and the Men extraordinary
idle, making their squawes to carry their Children and the luggage beside; so
that many times they travel eight or ten mile with a burden on their backs,
more fitter for a horse to carry then a woman. The men follow no kind of labor
but hunting, fishing and fowling, in all which they make use of their Bow and
Arrows to shoot the wild creatures of the Trees, as Squirrells, gray and
black Rockoones: as for Deer, they ordinarily catch them in traps, with a pole
bent down, and a Cord at the end, which flies up and stays their hasty course.
Bever, Otter, and Moose they catch with Traps also: they are very good
marks-men, with their Bow and Arrows. Their Boys will ordinarily shoot fish
with their Arrows as they swim in the shallow Rivers, they draw the Arrow
half way putting the point of it into the water, they let fly and strike the
fish through; the like they do to Birds lesser and great: only the Geese and
Turkies being strong of wing, sometimes flee away with their Arrows sticking in
them; this is all the trade they use, which makes them destitute of many
recessaries, both in meat, drink, apparel and houses.

As for any religious observation, they were the most destitute of any people
yet heard of, the Devil having them in very great subjection, not using craft
to delude them, as he ordinarily does in most parts of the World: but kept them
in a continual slavish fear of him: only the Powawes, who are more conversant
with him, then any other, sometimes recover their sick folk with charms,
which they use, by the help of the Devil; and this makes them to adore such;
one of them was seen as is reported to cure a Squaw that was dangerously sick,
by taking a snakes skin and winding it about her arm the which soon became a
living snake crawling round about her arms and body; another caused the sick
patient for healing, to pass bare footed through many burning coals; those that
cannot cure them, they call Squantams powwons: but if the patient live, he is
had in great admiration, and then they cry, Much winnit Abbamocho, that is,
very good Devil: for Squantam is a bad Devil, and Abbamocho is their good
Devil. It has been a thing very frequent, before the English came, for the
Devil to appear unto them in a bodily shape, sometimes very ugly and terrible,
and sometimes like a white boy, and chiefly in the most hideous woods and
swamps: they report that sometimes he has come into their wigwams, and carried
away diverse of them alive: and since we came hither, they tell us of a very
terrible beast for shape and bigness, that came into a wigwam toward the
North-east parts, remote from any English plantations, and took away six men at
a time, who were never seen afterward. The English at their first coming did
assay and endeavor to bring them to the knowledge of God: and in particular
the reverend, grave, and godly Mr. John Wilson, who visited their sick, and
instructed others as they were capable to understand him. But yet very little
was done that way, till in process of time they by continual coming to the
English, became better able to understand them; and now of late years the
reverend Mr. Eliot has been more then ordinary laborious to study their
language, instructing them in their own Wigwams, and Catechizing their
Children. As also the reverend Mr. Mayhewe, one who was tutored up in N. Eng.
and called to office by the Church of Christ, gathered at a small Island called
Martins Vineyard: this man has taken good pains with them: but the particulars
of our godly Ministers labors, together with the good hand of our God upon
their endeavors, being already published, no further need be spoken. Aso Mr.
William Leveriry Pastor of Sandwich Church, is very serious therein, and with
good success.


CHAP. XI. Of the gracious goodness of the Lord Christ, in planting his Gospel
in the purety of it, in Virginia: and of the first Church gathered there
according to the rule of the Gospel.
ABout the year the Lord was pleased to put it into the hear of some godly
people in Virginia, to send to N. E. for some of the Ministers of Christ, to be
helpful unto them in instructing them in the truth, as it is in Jesus. The
godly Mr. Philip Bennit coming hither, made our reverend Elders acquainted with
their desires, who were very studious to take all opportunities for enlarging
the kingdom of Christ: and upon serious consideration, the reverend Mr. Knowls
of Watertowne, and Mr. Tompson of Braintree were sent unto them, who ariving
there in safety, preached openly unto the people for some good space of time,
and also from house to house exhorted the people daily, that with full purpose
of heart they would cleave unto the Lord; the harvest they had was plentiful
for the little space of time they were there, till being opposed by the
Governor and some other malignant spirits, they were forced to return to N.
E. again. It were much to be desired, that all people would take notice of the
hand of God against this people, after the rejection of these Ministers of
Christ: and indeed it was none other but the thrusting Christ from them; and
now attend to the following story, all you Cavaliers and malignant party the
world throughout, take notice of the wonderworking providence of Christ toward
his Churches, and punishing hand of his toward the contemners of his Gospel.
Behold ye^ dispisers, and wonder. Oh poor Virginia* do thou send away the
Ministers of Christ with threatening speeches? No sooner is this done, but the
barbarous, inhumane, insolent, and bloody Indians are let loose upon them, who
contrive the cutting them off by whole Families, closely carrying their wicked
counsels till they had effected their desires, their bloody design taking
place for the space of 200 miles up the River: the manner of the English
Plantations there being very scattering quite contrary to N. E. people, who for
the most part desire society. The manner of the Indians proceeding was thus,
they divided themselves into several companies, and beset the English houses a
little before break of day, waiting for the first person that should open the
door and come forth, whom they cruelly murdered, beating out their brains, and
then forthwith entered the house and slew all they found within, sometimes
firing the houses, and leaving the living children miserably to be consumed
with their dead Parents in the fearful flames; some people fleeing from this
barbarous massacre, as they passed by a fired house heard a pitiful outcry of
a poor Child, crying, I burn, I burn: although they could willingly have made
haste away, yet the miserable outcry of this poor babe, caused them to haft to
the house, and rescue it forth the flames, that was even almost ready to scorch
it: this cruel and bloody work of theirs put period to the lives of five or
six hundred of these people, who had not long before a plentiful proffer of
the mercies of Christ in the glad tidings of peace published by the mouth of
his Ministers, who came unto them for that end: but choosing rather the
fellowship of their drunken companions, and a Priest of their own profession,
who could hardly continue so long sober as till he could read them the relics
of man's invention in a common prayer book; but assuredly had not the Lord
pitied the little number of his people among this crooked generation, they had
been consumed at once for this is further remarkable in this massacre, when it
came toward the place where Christ had placed his little flock, it was
discovered and prevented from further proceeding, and the Lord by this means
did so allay their spirits of malignity toward his people, they gathered in a
Church in presence of the very governor himself, and called to office one Mr.
Harrison, who could not long continue among them, by reason of their fresh
renewed malignity, who had formerly an evil eye toward them, and could no
better refrain from oppressing them, then Pharaoh after he had rest from the
plagues under which he was. After the departure of Mr. Harrison, one Mr. Duren
became an help unto them; but he and his people also were forced to remove many
hundred miles up into the country, where they now remain; but assuredly the
Lord has more scourges in store, for such as force the people to such
sufferings: and therefore let this Church of Christ continue in the way of his
truth according to the rules of his Gospel, and without doubt the Lord will
preserve and continue them, let the adversaries of his Truth be never so
potent. As also about this time, the Lord was pleased to gather a people
together in the Isle of Bermoodas, whose hearts being guided by the rule of the
word, they gathered into a Church of Christ according to the rules of the
Gospel, being Mr. Nathaneel White, Mr. Patrick, Copeland, Mr. William Golding.
provided with able persons, endued with gifts from the Lord to administer unto
them the holy things of God; and after they began to be opposed, their reverend
elder Mr. Goulding came into these parts, and from hence he went to England:
but this little flock of Christ not long after being banished from thence, went
to one of the Southern Islands, where they endured much hardship; and which the
Churches of Christ in these parts understanding, about six or eight of them
contributing toward their want, gathered about 800 l. to supply their
necessity: the which they shipped in a small vessel hired for that end and
sent by the hands of two brethren both corn and other necessaries: they
arriving in safety by the blessing of God upon their labors, were well
welcomed by their brethren, who abundantly blessed the Lord for them, and with
godly and gracious expression returned a thankful acknowledgement of the
present good hand of the Lord Christ, in providing for them: so that as this
book began with the wonderworking providence of Sions Savior, in providing so
wonderful graciously for his Churches the World throughout; so it here ends
with the same; and it were to be desired, that the Churches of Christ in Europe
would gather up the wonderful providence of the Lord toward them also, and
more especially those in our native Country: for assuredly it would make much
for the magnifying of his glorious works in this day of his power: and although
the malignant and antichristian party may say, they can show the like wonders
(as Jannes and Jambres that with-stood Moses) yet were the work of Christ for
his poor Churches, within these few years, gathered together by some able
instrument whom the Lord might be pleased to stir up for that end, and laid
open the view of all, they would be forced to confess, this is the very finger
of God, and no doubt but they would be a great strengthening to the faith of
those, who are appointed of the Lord for the overthrow of Antichrist (the Lord
helping) for assuredly the time of his having mercy upon Sion is come.

CHAP. XII. Of the time of the fall of Antichrist, and the increase of the
Gentile Churches, even to the prevoking of the twelve Tribes to submit to the
kingdom of Christ.
IT has been the longing expectation of many, to see that notable and
wonderful work of the Lord Christ, in casting down that man of sin who has
held the whole world (of those that profess any Christ) under his Lordly power,
while the true professors of Christ have hardly had any appearance to the eye
of the world; first, take notice the Lord has an assured se^ time for the
accomplishment of this work, which is set down in his word, although more
darkly to be under stood; wherefore the reverend Ministers of Christ, for these
many years have studied Rev. 17.14.
and labored for the finding it out, and that holy man of God Mr. John Cotton,
among many other, has diligently searched for the Lords mind herein, and has
declared some sudden blow to be given to this blood-thirsty monster: but the
Lord Christ has unseparably joined the time, means, and manner of this work
together, and therefore all men that expect the day, must attend the means: for
such has been and is the absurdity of many, that they make semblance of a very
zealous affection to see the glorious work of our Lord Christ herein, and yet
themselves uphold, or at least side with those that uphold some part of
Antichrists kingdom: and therefore the lordly Prelacy may pray for his fall
till their lungs are spent, and their throats grow dry. But while they have a
seeming show (and hardly that) to oppose his doctrines, they themselves in the
mean time, make use of his power to advance themselves to honor: a^ also in
these days there are diverse desperate, blasphemous, and erroneous persons,
whose consciences and their own self-will are unseparable companions; these are
very hot in their own apprehensions to prosecute the work; but in the mean
time, they not only batter down the truths of Christ, and his own Ordinances
and Institutions, but also set up that part of Antichrists kingdom, which has
formerly had a great blow already, even his deceiveable and damnable doctrines:
for as one badg of the beast is to be sull of blasphemies, so are they, and
these take unto themselves seven spirits worse then the former, making the
latter and worse then the beginning, as this story may testify: and some
stories in our native country much more. But to come to the time of Antichrists
fall, and all that expect it may depend upon the certainty of it: yea it may be
boldly said that the time is come, and all may see the dawning of the day: you
that long so much for it, come forth and fight: who can expect a victory
without a battle? the lordly Prelates that boasted so much of these great
atcheivements in this work, are fled into holes and corners: Familists,
Seekers, Antinomians and Anabaptists, they are so ill armed, that they think it
best sleeping in a whole skin, fearing that if the day of battle once go on,
they shall fall among Antichrists Armies: and therefore cry out like cowards,
If you will let me alone, and I will let you alone: but assuredly the Lord
Christ has said, He that is not with us, is against us: there is no room in
his Army for toleratorists. But some will say* We will never believe the day i^
come till our eyes behold Babylon begirt with Soldiers. I pray be not too
hasty; has not the Lord said, Come out of her my people? etc. surely there is
a little space left for this, and now is the time, seeing the Lord has set up
his standerd of resort: now, Come forth of her, and he not partakers of her
sins: now is the time, when the Lord has assembled his Saints together; now
the Lord will come and not tarry. As it was necessary that there should be a
Moses and Aaron, before the Lord would deliver his people and destroy Pharaoh
lest they should be wildred indeed in the Wilderness; so now it was needful,
that the Churches of Christ should first obtain their purity, and the civil
government its power to defend them, before Antichrist come to his final
ruin: and because you shall be sure the day is come indeed, behold the Lord
Christ marshalling of his invincible Army to the battle: some suppose this
only to be mystical, and not literal at all: assuredly the spiritual fight
is chiefly to be attended, and the other not neglected, having a near
dependancy one upon the other, especially at this time; the Ministers of Christ
who have cast off all lording power over one another, are created
field-Officers, whose Office is Yea every Officer has his own proper Regiment.
extravagant in this Army, chiefly to encourage the fighting Soldiers, and to
lead them on upon the enemy in the most advantageous places, and bring on fresh
supplies in all places of danger, to put the sword of the spirit in their
Soldiers hands: but Christ (who is their general) must only enable them to
use it aright: to give every Soldier in charge that they watch over one
another, to see that none meddle with the execrable things of Antichrist, and
this to be performed in every Regiment throughout the Army: and not one to
exercise dominion over the other by way of superiority: for Christ has
appointed a parity in all his Regiments, etc. let them beware that none go
apart with rebellious Korah. And further, behold, Kings, Rulers, or Generals of
Earths Armies, does Christ make use of in this day of battle, the which he
has brought into the field already also; who are appointed to defend, uphold,
and maintain the whole body of his Armies against the insolent, beastly, and
bloody cruelty of their insatiable enemies, and to keep order that none do his
fellow-Souldier any wrong, nor that any should raise a mutiny in the hosts.
Notwithstanding all this, if any shall say, they will not believe the day is
come till they see them engage battle with Antichrist; Verily, if the Lord be
pleased to open your eyes, you may see the beginning of the fight, and what
success the Armies of our Lord Christ have hitherto had: the Forlorn hopes of
Antichrists Army, were the proud Prelates of England: the Forlorn of Christ's
Armies, were these N. E. people who are the subject of this History, which
encountering each other for some space of time, ours being overpowered with
multitude, were forced to retreat to a place of greater safety, where they
waited for a fresh opportunity to engage with the main battle of Antichrist,
so soon as the Lord shall be pleased to give a word of Command. Immediately
upon this success, the Lord Christ was pleased to command the right Wing of his
Army, to advance against the left Wing of Antichrist: where in his former
forlorn hopes of proud Prelates lay: these by our right Wing had their first
pay (for that they had done to our forlorn before) being quite overthrown and
cut in pieces by the valiant of the Lord in our right Wing, who still remain
fighting. Thus far of the battle of Antichrist, and the various success; what
the issue will be, is assuredly known in the general already. Babylon is
fallen, the God of truth has said it; then who would not be a Soldier on
Christ's side, where is such a certainty of victory? nay I can tell you a
farther word of encouragement, every true-hearted Soldier that falls by the
sword in this fight, shall not lie dead long, but stand upon his feet again,
and be made partaker of the triumph of this Victory: and none can be overcome,
but by turning his back in fight. And for a word of terror to the enemy, let
them know, Christ will never give over the raising of fresh Forces, till they
are overthrown root and branch. And now you ancient people of Israel look out
of your Prison grates, let these Armies of the Lord Christ Jesus provoke you to
acknowledge he is certainly come, I and speedily he does come to put life into
your dry bones: here is a people not only praying but fighting for you, that
the great block may be removed out of the way, (which has hindered hitherto)
that they with you may enjoy that glorious resurrection-day, the glorious
nuptials of the Lamb: when not only the Bridegroom shall appear to his Churches
both of Jews and Gentiles, (which are his spouse) in a more brighter array then
ever heretofore, but also his Bride shall be clothed by him in the richest
garments that ever the Sons of men put on, even the glorious graces of Christ
Jesus, in such a glorious splendour to the eyes of man, that they shall see and
glorify the Father of both Bridegroom and Bride.

OH King of Saints, how great's thy work say we,
Done and to do, poor Captives to redeem!
Mountains of mercy makes this work to be
Glorious, that grace by which thy works are seen.
Oh Jesu, thou a Savior unto thine,
Not works but grace makes us this mercy find.
Of sinners chief, no better men they be,
Thou by thy work have made thy work to do:
Thy Captains strength weak dust appears in thee,
While thou art brought such wondrous works unto.
Then Christ does all, I all is done for his
Redeemed ones his only work it is.
Does Christ build Churches? who can them deface?
He purchased them none can his right deny:
Not all the world, ten thousand worlds, his grace
Caused him once them at greater price to buy.
Nor marvel then if Kings and Kingdoms he
Destroyed, when they do cause his folk to flee.
Christ is come down possession for to take
Of his deer purchase; who can hinder him?
Not all the Armies earthly men can make:
Millions of spirits, although Devils grim:
Can Pope or Turk with all their mortal power,
Stay Christ from his inheritance one hour?
All Nations band your selves together now,
You shall fall down as dust from bellows blown:
How easy can our King your power bow?
Though higher you in men's account were grown.
As drop in bucket shall those waters be,
Whereon that Whore does sit in high degree.
Christ's wrath is kindled, who can stand before
His anger, that so long has been provoked?
In moment perish shall all him before,
Who touched Mount Sinai, and it soundly smoaked.
New England Churches you are Christ's you say,
So sure are all that walk in Christ's way.
No such need fear fury of men or Devils,
Why Christ among you takes his daily walk:
He made you gold, you keeps from rusting evils,
And hid you here from strife of tongues proud talk.
Amongst his he for their defense does bide,
They need no more that have Christ on their side.
Man be not proud of this thy exaltation:
For thou wast dung and dogs filth, when Christ wrought
In thee his work, and set thee in this station
To stand, from him thy strength is daily brought,
Yet in him thou shall go triumphant on:
Not thou but Christ triumphs his foes upon.
You people whom he by the hand did lead
(...) Seas with watery wall:
Apply your selves his Scriptures for to read:
In reading do for eyes enlightened call,
And you shall see Christ once being come is now
Again at hand your stubborn hearts to bow.
Though scattered you, Earths Kingdoms are throughout,
In bondage brought, chief by those make some show
Of Jewish rights, they Christ with you cast out:
Christ well their Cords for you in sunder hew.
Through unbelief you were to bondage brought:
Believe that Christ for you great work has wrought.
He will your heart not member circumcise:
Oh search and see, this is your Jesus sure,
Refuse him not, would God you were so wise:
None but this King can ought your hope procure.
Once doting on an Earthly Kingdom you
Mist of your Christ; be sure be wiser now.
The day's at hand he will you wiser make
To know Earths Kingdoms are too scant and base
For such a price, as Christ paid for your sake:
Kings you shall be, but in a higher place;
Yet for your freedom Nations great shall fall,
That without fear of foes, him serve you shall.
You are the men that Christ will cause subdue
Those Turkish Troops, that joined Jews have been:
His Gentile Churches cast down Babels crew:
Then you that brood of Mahumetts shall win,
Destroy his seed amongst Persians, Turks and Moors,
And for poor Christians open the Prison doors.
Your Nation proved too scant for his possession,
Whose precious blood was made a price for sin:
And Nations all who were in like transgression;
Some of the whole Christ to his Crown will win,
And now makes way for this his work indeed,
That through the world his Kingdom may proceed.
Now Nations all I pray you look about,
Christ comes you near, his power I pray embrace:
In's word him seek; he is found without all doubt:
He does beseech with tears, Oh seek his face:
Yet time there is, the Battel's but begun;
Christ call thy folk that they to thee may run.
Place them in thy strong Armies newly gathered,
Thy Churches Lord increase and fill withal:
Those blessed ones are given thee by thy Father,
The wickeds Rod off from their backs recall.
Break off their yokes, that they with freedom may
Tell of thy works, and praise thee every day.
Lord Christ go on with thy great wonders working
Down headlong cast all Antichristian power:
Unmask those men that lie in corners lurking,
Whose damned doctrines daily s^ates advance.
For why, thy Folk for this are daily longing,
That Nations may come in thy Churches thronging.
What greater joy can come thy Saints among,
Then to behold their Christ exalted high?
Thy Spirits joy with ravishment stirs strong
Thy Folk, while they thy Kingdoms glory eye.
Angels rejoice because their waiting is
In Saints assembly, where thy name they bliss.
Thy works are not in Isreal's Land confined,
From East to West thy wondrous works are known:
To Nations all thou have thy grace assigned,
Thy spirits breathings through the World are blown.
All Languages and tongues do tell thy praise,
Dead hear thy voice, them thou do living raise.
Oh blessed days of Son of Man now seen,
You that have longed so sore them to behold,
March forth in's might, and stoutly stand between
The mighties sword, and Christ's dear flock infold.
Undaunted close and clash with them; for why?
Against Christ they are, and he with thee stands by.
No Captive thou, nor Death can on thee seize,
Fight, stand, and live in Christ thou daily do
He long ago did lead as Captives these,
And ever lives to save thee where thou go
His Father still, and Spirit shall with thee
Abide, and crown thy Head with lasting glee.
For thy words sake, and according to thine own heart, have thou done all these
great things, to make thy servant know them, 2 Samuel 7. 21.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed for Nathaniel Brook, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornehill.
1. TImes Treasury, or Academy for Gentry; excellent grounds both Divine and
humane for their accomplishment in arguments of discourse, habit, fashion; with
a Ladies love-Lecture, and Truths triumph, summing up all in a character of
Honor, by Ri. Braithwait Esquire

2. Morton of the Sacrament, in folio.

3. Physiogmony, and Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, the Symmetricall proportions, and
signal Moles of the body, the subject of Dreams, to which is added the Art of
Memory, by Ri. Sanders Student: folio.

4. Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum, containing several poetical pieces of our
famous English Philosophers, which have written the Hermetique mysteries in
their ancient Language, by Elias Ashmole Esquire

5. Chiromancy, or the Art of Divining by the lines engraven in the hand of man
by dame Nature, Theologically practically, in 19. Genitures; with a learned
discourse of the soul of the World, and universal spirit thereof, by Geo.
Wharton Esquire

6. Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councels and
ancient Fathers, Modern writers, both ecclesiastical and civil, in answer to
Dr. Vane's Lost Sheep returned home, by Ed. Chiseuhall Esquire

7. Planometria, or the whole Art of Survey of Land showing the use of all
Instruments, but especially the plain Table; whereunto is added an Appendix to
measure regular Solids, as Timber, Stone; useful for all that intend either to
sell or purchase.

8. An Arithmetic in number and species, in two Books: 1. Teaching by precept
and example the operation in Numbers, whole and broken by Decimals, and use of
the Logarithms, Napyers bones. 2. The great Rule of Algebra in Species,
resolving all Arithmeticall questions by supposition, with a Canon, of the
powers of numbers, fitted to the meanest capacity, by Jonas Moore late of
Durham. 8.

9. Tactometrica, or the Geometry of Regulars after a new, exact, and
expeditious manner in Solids, with sundry useful experiments: Practical
Geometry of Regular-like Solids, and of a Cylinder body, for liquid vessel
measure, with sundry new experiments never before extant, for gauging; a work
very useful for all that are employed in the Art Metrical, by John Wiberd,
Doctor in Physic.

10. An Astrologicall discourse, with Mathematical Demonstrations, proving the
powerful and harmonicall influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon
Elementary Bodies, in justification of the Validity of Astroligy, by Sir
Christopher Heydon, Knight.

11. Magic and Astrology vindicated, in which is contained the true
definitions of the said Arts, and the justification of their practice, proved
by the authority of Scripture, and the experience of ancient and modern
Authors, by H. Warren.

12. An Astrologicall judgment of Diseases from the Decumbiture of the ficke:
also the way of finding out the cause, change and end of a disease: also
whether the sick be likely to live or die, by N. Culpeper.

13. Catastrophe Magnatum, or the downfall of Monarchy, by N. Culpeper.

14. Ephemerides for the year 1652. being a year of wonders, by N. Culpeper.

15. Lux veritatis, or Christian Judicial Astrology vindicated, and
Daemonology confuted; in answer to Nath. Holmes, Dr. D. by W. Ramsey, Gent.

16. The History of the Golden Ass.

17. The Painting of the Ancients, the beginning, progress, and consummating of
that noble Art; and how those ancient Artificers attained to their still so
much admired excellency.

sraels redemption, or the prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
earth, by Robert Matton, of Exon Colledgo in Olcon. 8.

18. An Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the
Original of the Soul, at a Dispute held in the School at Cambridg at the
Commencement March 3. 1646. by Charles Hotham, Fellow of Peter-house. 12.

19. Teratologia or a discovery of Gods wonders, manifested in the former and
modern times by bloody rain and waters, by I.S.

20. Foos Lachry marum, or a fountain of Tears, from whence does flow Englands
complaint, Jeremiahs Lamentations, with an Elegy upon that Son of Valor Sir
Charles Lucas, by John Quarles. 8.

21. Oedipus, or a resolver, being a Clew that leads to the chief Secrets, and
true resolution of amorous, natural, moral and political Problems by G. M.

22. The celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul from the depth of
everlasting Darkness to the height of eternal Light, by Tho. Fettisplace.

23. Nocturnall Lucubrations, or Meditations divine and moral, with Epigrams
and Epitaphs, by Robert Chamberlain.

24. The unfortunate Mother, a Tragedy, by Tho. Nabs.

25. The Rebellion, a Comedy, by T. R.

26. The Tragedy of Messalina by Not. Richards. 8.

27. The remedy of Coffeehouse, or a Treatise of contentation in whatsoever
condition, fit for these sad and troublesome times, by Joseph Hall late B. of
Exon and Norwich. 12.

18. The Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup
from the Laity at the Lords Table, by the late reverend, Daniel Featly D. D. 4.

29. The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error Enmity Atheism and Profaneness, or a
most hopeful way to Grace and Salvation, by R. Young. 8.

30. A bridle for the Times, tending to still the Murmuring, to settle the
Wavering to stay the Wandering to strengthen the Fainting, by John Brinsley
Minister of Gods Word at Yarmouth.

31. Comforts against the fear of Death, wherein are several evidences of the
work of Grace by John Collins of Norwich.

32. Jacobs seed, or the excellency of seeking God by prayer, by Jeremiah
Buroughs, Minister of the Gospel to the two greatest Congregations about
London, Stepney and Cripplegate.

33. The Zealous Magistrate, a Sermon, by Tho Threscot.

34. Britannia Rediviva, or a Soverain Remedy to cure a sick Commonwealth,
preached in the Minster at York before the Judges, August 9. 1649. by J. Shaw
Minister of Hull.

35. The Princess Royal, preached in the Minster in York before the Judges,
March 24. 1650. by John Shaw Minister of Hull.

36. Anatomy of Mortality, divided into eight Heads. 1. The Certainty of Death.
2. Meditations of Death. 3. Preparations for Death. 4. The right behavior in
Death. 5. The Comfort in our own Death. 6. The comfort against the Death of
Friends. 7. The Cases wherein it is lawful or unlawful to desire Death. 8. The
glorious Estate of Gods Children after Death, by George Stronde.

37. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, August 1651.

38. Mirror of Complements fitted for Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars and
Strangers, with forms of speaking, and writing of Letters most in fashion,
with witty Poems: and a Table expounding hard English words.

39. Cabinet of Jewels, discovering the nature, virtue value of precious
Stones: with infallible Rules to escape the deceit of all such as are
adulterate or counterfeit by Tho. Nicholls.

40. Quakers Cause at second hearing being a full answer to their Tenets.

41. Divinity no Enemy to Astrology, a sermon intended for the Society of
Astrologers for the year 1653. by Dr. Tho. Swadlin.

42. Historical Relation of the first planting of the English in New England
in the year 1628. to the year 1653. and all the material passages happening
there. Exactly performed.


